Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Why Should We Question the Resurrection?"

It was mentioned that I did some work in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, in engineering. I think one of the experiences I had there taught me or brought to mind a firm and rigid demonstration of one of the sound principles of the gospel. I remember in engineering work we had to go into a private, small classroom with a sloped floor and benches, with an oak table and a blackboard at one end. With about twenty-five of us in the room, they closed the door and put a guard at the outside to see that nobody listened through the keyhole. Then they would give us instructions on the development of the process of the atomic energy work there.

I remember on a number of occasions the head scientist or physicist who came to talk to us would pound that oak table with his fist to emphasize the fact that nothing can be destroyed. The Prophet Joseph Smith told us that a long time ago, and we have it recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants that the elements of the earth are eternal. (D&C 93:33.)

To me this is a very sound principle because it follows through various other principles of the gospel, without which there would be no resurrection, and many other things would have to be different than they are now.

They proved that in their work in Oak Ridge. I remember on one occasion, as I was doing some checking around the plant, there was a group of men gathered. I inquired as to what was going on. There was a little excitement there. There was a group of men gathered around a wooden box about a cubic yard in size. They broke this box open and it was full of hacksaw blades. I was told that in the process, from one stage to another, they were losing inventory. They knew they could not lose inventory of the element they were working with, which was uranium, of course.

So this crew of men came in with their hacksaws and cut out all the piping between one stage and the other in the process—cut these pipes into short lengths, cut them open lengthwise, put them through a chemical recovery process, and brought their inventory up to where it was supposed to have been, because the elements had been coating the inside walls of the pipe. They knew it had to be somewhere, and they had traced down all other sources, so that by process of elimination, I suppose, they found that it had to be within those pipes. So they went to the expense of tearing out the pipes and building it up again.

They had a beautiful floor-scrubbing machine. I think Brother Bishop will remember this one. I was just talking to him a few minutes ago. The floors in the production buildings there were a smooth concrete, not painted, because they were constantly scrubbed with this beautiful chrome floor-scrubbing machine. This machine could carry its own supply of water and soap and was electrically operated. They would just push it along, and it would scrub the floor and gather up everything and dry it as it went along, all in one process. All that the machine gathered up, and the machine itself was put into an acid bath and a chemical recovery process so that if in moving the units around, there was any of the material that ever got on the floor, they would be able to gather it up and recover it. Even though it might be a very small, minute particle, it was still recoverable, and they had to recover it in order to keep their inventory up because they knew it could not be destroyed. There were several other demonstrations that I saw of that same principle.

If this principle is true—and we know it is—then why should we question the resurrection, for instance? Even though this body goes into the grave and is decomposed, or if it is burned or if it is lost at sea—no matter what is done to this body after death—the elements of this body are elements of the earth and cannot be destroyed. We have learned through this process of smashing the atom, and so forth, that we can break up the particles of the elements of the earth. We have learned some principles of restoring them again. A simple example is that of water. If you heat it, it goes to steam. If you keep it under control and condense it and cool it, you bring it back to water again.

I believe that is true of all the elements of the earth. We can break them down, and if we knew the law and had the power to put the law into operation, we could reunite them again and restore them as they were.

(Speeches of the Year, "Exaltation," March 10, 1964, pp. 2-3.)
