Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"This Is Priesthood Order"

In the beginning, God said: "It is not good for man to be alone."

One of the fundamental purposes of this life is to have experiences whereby we may learn to be perfect. Man is not perfect without the woman, nor is the woman perfect without the man.

Priesthood and motherhood go hand in hand. Neither is complete without the other. Both are eternal. A perfect family requires the proper fulfillment of both. This life is to help us fulfill these two responsibilities, that we may exercise them through eternity.

Priesthood is patriarchal, which means "of the fathers." A married man is the patriarch of his home and is responsible to bless members of his family. The exercising of this privilege could be a means of preventing many broken homes. We think of a priesthood holder as one who should bless his children, baptize and confirm them, and perform the other ordinances of the gospel in behalf of members of his family. His responsibility is not only to bless his children, but his wife is an important member of his family too. Yes, we think of blessing the wife when she is sick, but if the relationship between husband and wife becomes a bit strained, wouldn't it be a good thing for the husband to give his wife a blessing for the purpose of increasing the unity and love for each other?

I remember an experience I had when a good sister who wanted a special blessing came to my office. When I asked her why she wanted a special blessing, she refused to tell me. I learned from her that her husband was a member of the Church and held the Melchizedek Priesthood, so I spent considerable time trying to teach her the principle of priesthood order, where the father in the home should bless the members of the family, and concluded a long discussion of teaching her this principle by having her go home to get her blessing from her husband instead of from me.

Sometime later she returned to my office, refreshed my memory of this experience, and said she left my office very resentful. Here I thought I had done a good job in teaching her this principle of priesthood order, so I had to ask more questions to find out what had happened.

She said the reason she refused to tell me why she wanted a blessing was that she wanted the blessing because there wasn't the proper relationship between her and her husband, and then I had sent her home to get a blessing from her husband. So naturally she was a little bit resentful.

Then she added, "That was one of the finest things that ever happened." She said she went home, she prayed about it, she thought about it, and then finally she mustered enough courage to ask her husband for the blessing. Of course it shocked him, but she was patient; she let him think it over a bit, ponder about it, and pray about it; and finally he gave her a blessing. Then she added, "There has never been such a fine relationship in our home in all our lives as we have had since he gave me that blessing."

I could see what had happened. This is a two-way street. First, she had to clean her side of the slate and humble herself. Then she asked him for the blessing, and he had to humble himself and clean his side of the slate. Then he sealed the blessing upon her which they had fulfilled by living the law upon which the blessing was predicated. This is priesthood order.

(Conference Report, April 1965, pp. 114-15.)
