Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Thanks for the Lesson"

You know you can get great experiences with money. I recall that when I came home from my mission my first objective was to get a job. My parents and I apparently didn't think that it was necessary to go to college in those days.

Jobs were scarce. It was the beginning of the depression, and I asked my father, "Where can I get a job?"

He said, "I don't know; I will keep my ears open."

He was in the bishopric. At a bishop's meeting they had a committee meeting; and one of the men came in there, and my dad asked, "Do any of you know where my son can get a job?"

The one fellow said, "Yes, I happened to hear that a feed yard out in West Ogden needs a bookkeeper."

My father gave me that information, and I went out there, and I got the job. I walked four miles to get it.

When I got there, the man said, "Can you keep books?"

I said, "I think so."

He said, "Go to work. At the end of the day I will let you know whether you are any good or not." At the end of the day, he said, "You are all right. Come back in the morning."

In the morning I got up early and walked another four miles. In the evening I walked back four miles. That was a little monotonous, so I enticed my brother to drive me out there for about a week. That was all right, but this put him way out of his way, so I thought, "Well, I guess I had better buy myself a car."

I went to the used-car lot, and I saw an old jitney there. The side windows were broken. There were no floor boards in it.

I said, "Does it run?"

He said, "Yes, it runs."

I said, "How much?"

He said, "$100.00."

I said, "I'll take it."

He said, "That's fine. That's $100.00, cash."

I said, "I don't have cash."

He said, "You go to a financial institution and borrow the money, and you come here with the cash, because we don't loan money."

I went to the financial institution. I said, "I would like to borrow $100.00."

He rubbed his hands, and he said, "What do you want the $100.00 for?"

I said, "I need to buy a car."

So he pulled out some papers, and he said, "You sign here and then you go home and get your father to sign the other line." Lots of fine print.

I took it home and I said, "Dad, I need a car. The only way I can get one is to buy one, and I can borrow $100.00. I've got one that I've spotted that runs."

He said, "Okay, $100.00 doesn't look like a lot of money." He didn't read the fine print, neither did I.

I went to the institution; I got my $100.00. I gave it to the used car man, and I got my car. It served quite well. Every month a notice came from the institution for me to pay so much, and I paid it. At the end of the six months, the paid note came back. I had paid my obligation. Casually I sat down and figured out how much I had paid. On that $100.00, I had repaid $140.00!

I went to the man at the institution, and I said, "Sir, you've made a mistake."

He said, "What do you mean?"

I said, "I borrowed $100.00, and I gave you back $140.00. Something is wrong."

He said, "There is nothing wrong. This is service charges and interest."

I said, "You mean 40 percent in six months, which is 80 percent annually!"

He said, "That's right."

I said, "Thanks for the lesson." That was the best lesson I ever had. I learned the power of interest, and I used that power for my own benefit after that. I never bought anything unless I could pay for it. Take care of money. Watch your money and spend it wisely, and don't buy anything that you can't take care of.

(Speeches of the Year, "What Will You Choose," February 28, 1967, pp. 8-11.)
