Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"My Dearest Father Bishopric"

Sometime ago a letter came to my desk, written by a woman investigator, which carried with it a great deal of enthusiasm and testimony, and I would like to share with you tonight the following excerpts from this letter. Her salutation was this:

My dearest Father Bishopric:

You are going to be rather surprised to hear from me, but I attended Sunday services of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today and was so inspired. . . .

I owe my gratitude to just about the finest, well-cultured, and intellectual gentlemen. . . . They graciously invited themselves into my home and explained the Mormons. . . . I just had to go to church with them on the following Sunday. The book on how Joseph Smith tells his own story was so outstanding, with great love of God for each and every human being, that my knowledge of religion certainly broadened just by meeting these two elders. . . .

On entering the church I was so astonished to see how many young people of today are attending church, and especially thrilled to see how the young mothers bring their lovely children. . . . The thing that touched me deeply is how the elders or brothers were so anxious just to be able to say, "How do you do". . . . This is something you don't see in other churches. . . .

The Aaronic Priesthood conducted the sacrament . . . which was so pure with delight, followed by the separation to classes. At this time the elders led me to the adult class. . . . Here is where I accumulated knowledge in one half hour that I did not know in a lifetime of fifty years. . . .

I also enjoyed the opening prayer . . . which put a dent in my mind that these are a group of people that have to be made more known in our United States of America. . . .

Again I say how happy I was to attend services in your Mormon Latter-day Saint Church, and how mighty proud the mission must be of the elders. They are an inspiration that many mothers and fathers today can learn the message from God to his children to make this a better world to live in like God intended it to be.

As I read this thrilling letter, I thought, what a great blessing to the elder's parents and to those missionaries, although they are unaware of the great spiritual lift that they gave to this woman. As the woman stated, "I owe my gratitude to just about the finest, well-cultured, and intellectual gentlemen." I wondered what greater honor could there be than to be so highly esteemed by one's neighbors. No doubt this experience is happening time and time again the world over.

(Conference Report, April 1962, p. 84.)
