Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"We Now Have Two Healthy Lambs"

Just the other day I received a written testimony from a mother expressing appreciation for a servant of the Lord. This servant, a home teacher, was simply following the Lord's assignment to "watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them." (D&C 20:53.) She writes:

"My husband had taken some Scouts to the Merit Badge Pow-Wow at BYU. It was a two-hundred mile drive so they had left at 4 o'clock in the morning. When I awakened, my main concern was for their safety, as it was snowing and blowing. My eight-year-old boy had already awakened and left on his bicycle for the corral, about a mile away, to do the chores. Suddenly there he was in the bedroom with a big tear in each eye.

"'Mama, we've got two little lambs out to the farm and they are wet and shaking, and I tried to call you from the service station but you had to have a dime, so I just wrapped my coat around them and rode home as fast as I could.'

"My husband had acquired a small herd of ewes only last fall as a father-son project, but my son and I were completely inexperienced in the process of 'lambing.' I knew that we had to have help from someone. Whom could we call? I don't recall which one of us thought of it first, but suddenly both of us knew it would be our home teacher.

"Within twenty minutes he was at the corral with his eight-year-old boy and mine. He stayed for three hours, working with the lambs every minute. The sheep had not been sheared, as the expected lambing date was still a month away, but he understood and did those things which needed to be done. One lamb looked quite strong, but there was not much hope for the second. Just before dinner he returned to the house with one of the lambs in a box. Would I try to get it warm? He was taking the other one to his home to work with it. He would be back within two hours to take them both back to their mother for nursing.

"I am certain that he spent over six hours that Saturday at our farm working with our sheep and our boy. As a result we now have two healthy lambs and an even more beloved home teacher. I cannot tell you how much our eight-year-old boy thinks of the home teacher who worked side by side with him through one entire day teaching by example the love that is our gospel."

(Conference Report, April 1968, pp. 46-47.)
