Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Introduction

When the Declaration of Independence was signed on July 4, 1776, a new nation was born. The colonial period was rapidly coming to an end, and a new era was beginning. The eyes of the world had for many years been focused on America, for the New World represented opportunity and freedom from the Old World traditions, customs, and tyrannies. Since Columbus's discovery of America, the entire economic and social outlook of the world had changed. Old concepts of world geography and old trade routes had to be revised, and a new concept of government was imminent. Knowledge of the new world fired the imagination of men, rousing in them a desire to migrate to this new land so rich in resources and opportunities.

Why had the Americas remained for so many centuries unidentified with the rest of the world? Perhaps there was a reason. Could there have been in the mind of the Great Creator a purpose for its obscurity? An old prophecy concerning America lends credence to such a supposition. It stated that the Lord God would raise up a mighty nation, and that this nation would become great; for it was decreed that it should remain a free nation, and those who possessed this land must either serve the God of the land, who was and is Jesus Christ, or be swept off the land. It was to be a land choice above all other lands, and was to be taken forth out of captivity and lifted up by the power of God above all other nations. [^1]

The Constitution of the United States, as later devised, provided for life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and determined that there should be no discrimination against color, race, or creed. It was a glorious standard, founded in the wisdom of God, a standard meant to be a heavenly banner to all people privileged to enjoy its protection. Indeed, this great Constitution was like a tree under whose branches men from every clime might be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. [^2]

God had preserved this vast continent of America as his peculiar treasure. [^3] Here he intended to assemble the outcasts of Israel, thereby fulfilling his promise to Abraham: ". . . I will establish my covenant . . . for an an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee" [^4] ". . . . and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed." [^5] America was destined to be blessed because of Abraham's descendants, and it was to play a role in the great spiritual drama of the last days.

After the Revolutionary War, political ties with the old world had been severed; and soon events would signal the opening of a new dispensation. Among the patriots of this infant nation were two, assigned to leading roles in the first apocalyptic scene. These two were the Smith brothers, Hyrum and Joseph, both citizens of New York State.

Subsequent happenings confirm the assumption that Hyrum and Joseph had been called in the pre-mortal world to do this special work. They were among those noble and great ones of whom the Lord had said: ". . . These I will make my rulers;. . . " [^6]

The series of miraculous visions which came to Joseph Smith initiated a movement which was to astonish the world. In these visions, ancient religious concepts were revived and new ones revealed, with the result that the true concept of God and of his relationship to man was re-established. Once again communication was established between God and man, and this close relationship made it possible for him to share his authority and sovereignty with mankind.

The earth had been without the authority of the priesthood of God for many centuries. Because of the fallacious doctrines which subtly established themselves following Christ's crucifixion, the priesthood was taken from the earth. Its loss had been preceded by a series of Christian persecutions which resulted in a loss of spiritual gifts and in an apostasy from the truth among the people. With the disappearance of the pristine church, which was complete by the end of the second century A.D., the ancient prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant ." [^7]

It was necessary, therefore, for the gospel, and the Church to be restored, if God's promise to Israel was to be fulfilled. The fulfillment of the promise was revealed to the Apostle John on Patmos; for he "saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." [^8] By the nineteenth century the time was ripe for God to restore the ancient Church with all its powers, gifts, and blessings. Sufficient preliminary preparation had been made for the first contact with man and the plan of Almighty God to save men's souls was restored to earth.

The role of Hyrum Smith in the restoration of the gospel subsequent to the organization of the Church was second only to that of his brother Joseph. The two brothers were as inseparable during many periods of trouble and crisis as they were in those less frequent times of peace and prosperity. Hyrum, the oldest living child of his father's family, early assumed the responsibility of overseer and counselor to his parents, brothers, and sisters. Seldom did the Prophet Joseph do anything of importance without first consulting Hyrum; always, when in trouble, he would seek out his older brother for help and advice.

When Joseph brought home the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, it was Hyrum who furnished the chest for their safe-keeping. At Kirtland, Ohio, Hyrum was made Counselor to Joseph in the First Presidency of the Church, and he carried his full share of important responsibilities. He was on the first building committee for the Kirtland Temple; and when Zion's Camp was organized, he recruited a number of men and joined the main camp along the way.

At Far West, Missouri, Hyrum was taken prisoner with Joseph and others and spent some six months in Liberty Jail. At the beginning of the Nauvoo period, Hyrum acted as President of the Church while Joseph went to Washington, D.C., to obtain redress for losses in Missouri. The Lord appointed Hyrum, as he had Joseph, to be a "prophet, and a seer, and a revelator" unto his Church and of him said: "Blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith; for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, . . ." [^9] Joseph's esteem for his brother was expressed in these words: "I could pray in my heart that all my brethren were like unto my beloved brother Hyrum, who possesses the mildness of a lamb and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ; and I love him with that love that is stronger than death, for I never had an occasion to rebuke him, nor he me." On another occasion Joseph said that if Hyrum could not make peace between two who were in disagreement, the angels themselves might not hope to accomplish the task. And when, about the twentieth of June, 1844, only seven days before the martyrdom, Joseph urged Hyrum to take his family to Cincinnati for safety, Hyrum answered simply, "Joseph, I cannot leave you. . . ."

Instead of going to Carthage where they had been summoned for trial on a fraudulent charge, Hyrum and Joseph crossed the Mississippi River so that they might escape to the Rocky Mountains. There, on the opposite bank of the river, they received certain messages, taunting them for deserting the flock. In a characteristic manner, Joseph turned to Hyrum and said, "Brother Hyrum, you are the oldest, what shall we do?" Hyrum said, "Let us go back and give ourselves up and see the thing out." After thinking for a few moments, Joseph said, "If you go back, I will go with you, but we shall be butchered." Hyrum said, "No, no; let us go back and put our trust in God and we shall be reconciled to our fate." [^10]

Even during the last days in Carthage Jail, Hyrum's judgment was respected by his brother Joseph. A list of prospective witnesses for their defense was crossed out by Hyrum. When asked why he did this, he replied: "They don't know enough to answer a question properly"; and Joseph responded, "That is sufficient reason." When Hyrum fell, mortally wounded, Joseph exclaimed, "Oh, dear brother Hyrum!" [^11]

The brothers died as they had lived, one in heart, one in spirit and soul. History has seldom if ever witnessed a parallel relationship of two men so willing to live and die for each other.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Book of Mormon, I Nephi 22:7; 13:30; Ether 2:10-12; 1:42.
[^2] 2. Joseph Smith, History of the Church, vol. III, p. 304.
[^3] 3. Psalm 135:4.
[^4] 4. Genesis 17:7.
[^5] 5. Ibid., 12:3.
[^6] 6. Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 3:23.
[^7] 7. Isaiah 24:5
[^8] 8. Revelation 14:6.
[^9] 9. D & C 124:15, 94.
[^10] 10. Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 549-550.
[^11] 11. Ibid., vol. II, p. 609.
