Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Foreword

Hyrum Smith, Patriarch to the Church, and at the time of his martyrdom, Associate President of the Church, held the keys conjointly with his younger brother, the Prophet Joseph Smith. Hyrum was one of the greatest men of his time and his loyalty to the Prophet Joseph Smith was unsurpassed. From the time of Joseph's birth until their martyrdom Hyrum was never separated from his prophet brother for a period of more than a few months.

Hyrum Smith had a sympathetic and congenial nature and was always solicitous and filled with anxiety for the Prophet. Throughout Joseph's life, Hyrum guarded his younger and more favored brother as tenderly as if the Prophet had been his son instead of his younger brother. It was Hyrum who helped to nurse Joseph through a serious illness in his early youth and who remained stedfastly at his side throughout his life. Frequently, when a younger son is highly honored, the elder brothers in a family manifest a spirit of jealousy and envy, resulting in discontent and open opposition; but not so with Hyrum Smith. He accepted the great mission of his brother Joseph in the most sacred and loyal spirit of humility. On one of several occasions when William Smith, the Prophet's younger brother, abused Joseph with words of violence, Hyrum came to the defense of the Prophet. This action elicited the following expression of appreciation from Joseph:

I could pray in my heart that all my brethren were like unto my beloved brother Hyrum, who possessed the meekness and humility of Christ; and I love him with that love that is stronger than death, for I never had occasion to rebuke him, nor he me, which he declared when he left me today.

On another occasion when the Prophet was recording the names of those who had been loyal to the Church and worthy of commendation for their faithfulness under the most trying and difficult circumstances, he wrote of Hyrum:

There was my brother who next took me by the hand-a natural brother. Thought I to myself, Brother Hyrum, what a faithful heart you have got! Oh, may Eternal Jehovah crown eternal blessings upon your head, and a reward for the care you have had for my soul! O how many are the sorrows we have shared together; and again we find ourselves shackled with the unrelenting hand of oppression. Hyrum, thy name shall be written in the book of the law of the Lord, for those who come after thee to look upon, that they may pattern after thy works.

It was the privilege of Hyrum Smith to be one of the eight witnesses who beheld and handled the plates whence came the Book of Mormon, likewise to be numbered among the six original members of the Church, at its organization, April 6, 1830. The greatest honor, however, that came to him, was to succeed Oliver Cowdery, who by transgression lost his place as the Second Elder of the Church. Oliver had been highly honored. To fulfil the eternal law of witnesses, it was necessary that two testators stand at the head of this dispensation, receiving the keys of authority and presidency. This great honor had previously been conferred upon Oliver Cowdery. Whenever the keys of authority and presidency had been revealed from the heavens, he had been present with the Prophet Joseph Smith to receive those keys under the hands of heavenly messengers. He had been the Associate President of the Church, and in this calling had stood preeminently distinguished ahead of Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams who were Counselors in the First Presidency. Commenting on this calling the Prophet said:

The office of Associate President is to assist in presiding over the whole Church, and to officiate in the absence of the President, according to his rank and appointment, Viz., President Cowdery, first; President Rigdon, second, and President Williams, third, as they were severally called. The office of this priesthood is also to act as spokesman, taking Aaron for an example. The virtue of the above priesthood is to hold the keys of the kingdom of heaven or the Church militant. (MS Hist. of the Church Book A. 1.)

The account of Oliver's ordination is given in this same record as follows:

After addressing the throne of mercy President Smith laid hands upon High Counselor Cowdery, and ordained him to the Presidency of the High Priesthood in the Church, saying: ("Brother in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was crucified for the sins of the world, that we through the virtue of his blood might come to the Father, I lay my hands upon thy head, and ordain thee a President of the High and Holy Priesthood, to assist in presiding over the Church, and bearing the keys of this kingdom-which Priesthood is after the order of Melchizedek-which is after the order of the Son of God.")

But because of transgression all of Oliver's authority was transferred to the Patriarch Hyrum Smith, for the Lord by revelation said:

"And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William (Law) be appointed, ordained, and anointed, as a counselor unto my servant Joseph, in the room of my servant Hyrum, that my servant Hyrum may take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right;

"That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings upon the heads of all my people,

"That whoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whoever he curses shall be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

"And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph;

"That he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph; who shall show unto him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, . . . and be crowned with the same blessing, and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery;

"That my servant Hyrum may record of the things which I shall show unto him, that his name may be had in honorable remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever." (D & C 124:91-96.)

From this time until the martyrdom, Hyrum Smith was the Second Witness, the Associate President of the Church, supplanting Oliver Cowdery who had lost that great honor. After his ordination and the conferring of keys of presidency, Hyrum Smith signed communications with Joseph Smith as a President of the Church. Had Hyrum Smith escaped martyrdom, he would have been the President of the Church and could have chosen two counselors to share the keys of that holy office with himself. However, it was just as essential that Hyrum Smith lay down his life as the Second Witness as it was for the Prophet Joseph Smith. But had Oliver Cowdery remained true, undoubtedly he, not Hyrum Smith, would have gone with the Prophet Joseph Smith to martyrdom.

This great truth does not seem to be universally known throughout the Church, but it is of utmost significance and in full accord with the divine law of witnesses.
