Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Preface

Great events—political, scientific, or religious—depend for their success upon the work of great men, men who have the character, vision, and faith which denote both physical and mental ability. Hyrum Smith had these necessary qualities of greatness. His work, blended with that of others of similar ability, has helped to make America great. His role made him a leading figure in launching a religious movement that is destined to revolutionize the thinking of the world.

The purpose of this biography is to give due recognition to a man who did much to promote an organization that has perpetuated itself by developing the brotherhood of man-a brotherhood intended to bring salvation to all humankind. The religious society he helped to organize has built a great commonwealth in western America. It has established many cities, towns, and villages in the valleys of the mountains and has made the desert blossom as a rose. It has redeemed waste places and opened nature's treasure house of natural resources. It has extended its stakes into far-off lands and continents and sent thousands of missionaries to bring the restored gospel to the world, thereby strengthening the bond of understanding and friendship between nations and peoples.

Hyrum Smith's career ended with his martyrdom, in his forty-fourth year; but his life had been filled with intense activity. He had been a patriarch, a president, a counselor, and had stood close beside his younger brother, the Prophet Joseph Smith, in organizing and developing the Church. He had suffered repeated persecutions- mobbings, imprisonment, indictments, court trials, and threats upon his life. But his unwavering love for and loyalty to his brother had secured for him an honored place among his people.

In this volume it is the desire of the writer to give adequate and proper acknowledgment to the man who was second in command, to the man whose history paralleled that of his illustrious prophet brother. It has been a pleasure and a satisfaction for the writer to make available a history of Hyrum Smith's distinctive contribution in establishing so dynamic an organization, for it can truthfully be said that he and his descendants have supported the Church throughout the long struggle for establishment and during its subsequent growth.

Since no man can be studied apart from his times, the reader of this biography will become acquainted, in part at least, with the political, social, economic, and religious conditions in America during twenty-five or thirty years of the early nineteenth century. The writer has written this work within the framework of the LDS faith and theology; and the historical incidents have been accurately and fairly stated.

To obtain a more complete and accurate history, the writer has used national, state, and local libraries and visited most of the places of historical significance in Vermont, New York, Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois. Visits were made to the nearest relatives of Hyrum Smith, in search of journals, diaries, documents, relics, pictures, newspaper articles, private collection of letters and documents. Among the more important sources were Hyrum Smith's diary and his journal, and his day-book or account book. Major sources of information were The Documentary History of the Church (seven volumes by Joseph Smith), The Journal History; Life of Joseph Smith, by his mother, Lucy Smith.
