Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter I

Heritage

Before their second child was born, the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., had voiced their desires concerning the child. If it were a girl, the mother would have a helper in the home; if it were a boy, the parents would buy more land. When the midwife announced to the anxious father that the child was a boy, he praised God and shook hands with the neighbors who shared his vigil, declaring that their child's name was to be Hyrum; and the news of the birth spread through the village of Tunbridge, Vermont. [^1]

Joseph Smith, Sr., and his wife, Lucy, had provided many comforts for the expected child, and it was well that they had, for February 9, 1800, was a bleak wintry day. Paths in the snow had been swept to the family woodpile, to the barn, and to the street. The large farm, which belonged to the family of Asael Smith, father of Joseph Smith, Sr., [^2] was among the best of the region and was the envy of many who were less fortunate in circumstance. The home, built of native lumber, was made comfortable by a cook stove and a large fireplace. The furnishings were of pioneer construction, sturdy and useful.

Not only did the Smiths have the security of a fine farm, but they had also a substantial sum of money at their disposal. Tucked away in Lucy's trunk was a thousand dollars, a wedding gift from her brother Stephen Mack and his business partner, John Mudget. Lucy and Joseph had acquired their home and furniture without the use of this gift.

At this time, Vermont, like other New England states, was a fairly well-settled region, with a population of about 154,000. But the land, having been intensively cultivated for nearly two centuries, was losing its fertility; and much of it was presently being used as grazing land for sheep and cattle. Hence the Smiths, like other farmers, had become adept at supporting themselves under pioneer conditions. Such homely tasks as spinning, weaving, killing animals and curing the meat were among their daily activities. Joseph Smith, Sr., was proud of the family farm. He had worked long hours with his father, Asael, and his brothers to clear the virgin land of timber and rocks, preparing it for the plow. [^3]

The Smiths were an industrious family, always seeking to better themselves. Their history was one of pioneering. Much of the work of four generations, back to Robert Smith who had migrated from England in 1638, had been spent in clearing land for agricultural purposes. Robert Smith had lived in Toppesfield, County Essex, England, but on coming to America he first settled in Boston, Massachusetts. It is said that his was the third house to have a cellar in that city. From Boston, he moved to Rowley, Massachusetts; and from there to Boxford in the same county, where he purchased two hundred eighty acres of land. Later he became a resident of nearby Topsfield. [^4]

The farm at Topsfield had become quite productive when the colonies rebelled against their mother country. Samuel, the son of Robert, had married well and occupied a fine home of his own. His family was prospering when his son Samuel, (Hyrum's great-grandfather) was called to fight with George Washington's army. Fortunately, at the end of the War for Independence, Samuel returned to Topsfield, a veteran, who had served his country honorably but was yet uninjured in the conflict. His having served in the army of General Washington gave him added prestige, and thereby more security for himself and his family.

Young Samuel's son, Asael, with his wife and nine of their eleven children, left the family home at Topsfield early in 1791. The two older children, Jesse and Priscilla, had married and were established in homes of their own. Another son, Joseph, Sr., was then twenty years old. He stood six foot two and like his father Asael was strong and well-built. In making the move, Joseph had helped to load the family wagons with household furnishings and supplies; and the work of organizing the family that they might assist in driving the livestock had been his chief concern.

The mother, Mary Duty Smith, rode in the wagon with her daughter, Mary, age fifteen, and Sarah, a baby nine months of age. Samuel, Silas, and John-thirteen, eleven, and nine respectively-walked most of the way, driving the animals. Susanna, seven, and Stephen, five, rode and walked periodically, taking care not to be in the way. [^5]

The journey to Tunbridge seemed short. The strangeness of the country and the new people along the way broke the monotony of travel. As soon as they arrived and selected their land, they set to work. And by June several acres of land had been cleared and planted to grain and vegetables. The family built a home of native lumber large enough to accommodate all of them. They were happy to move from the cramped quarters they had rented in the village of Tunbridge, and life soon had settled into an orderly routine.

When Joseph, Sr. married Lucy Mack, he acquired his portion of the land and with the help of his neighbors "raised" a commodious house for himself. The walls were brought to the square, and the roof went on like magic. The home resembled the ancestral house at Topsfield, with the handmade shingles, the gable at each end, the steep, English roof, and the large chimney extending midway above the ridge. And there were small windows on each side of the door. (See cut.) The homestead, nestled in the low green hills of Vermont, was a thoroughly picturesque setting for the bride and groom.

Joseph first met Lucy Mack in 1794 at the store owned by her brother Stephen. Over the years, the Smiths had been staunch friends of the Macks, who were noted for their hospitality. Joseph, Sr., had been a frequent visitor in the Mack home and had gone turkey hunting and sleigh riding with older members of the family. [^6]

When the major's [Stephen Mack] eighteen-year-old sister, Lucy, arrived from her home in Gilsum, New Hampshire, she was the object of considerable interest. Unlike many of the local girls, (who were Amazons by comparison,) she was small and slender; and her neat and comely appearance, her gentle manners, and her serene poise were all evidence of comparative wealth and culture.

When Joseph met Lucy at the Major's store, their attraction was mutual. After the first house party, Joseph was seen with her about the village and often brought her to the family farm. Her hands were too white and soft, and her arms were too slim to be strong, said his parents; but cupid had already done his work. The older people little realized what latent capacities she possessed to endure the pioneer years ahead, for contrary to family predictions Lucy was to become her husband's greatest asset.

From the time they met until they were married, they were drawn to each other despite the objections of others. Their courtship lasted a little over a year, during which time Lucy went home for a brief period. She returned in the fall of 1795, and they were married January 24, 1796, by Seth Johnson, Justice of the Peace. [^7]

Major Stephen Mack was more pleased than others with the marriage, even though Joseph was six years Lucy's senior. And shortly after their marriage, when they left for a visit to the bride's home in Gilsum, New Hampshire, the major and his business partner gave Joseph and Lucy the thousand dollars mentioned above.

Time passed quickly for Joseph and Lucy, and they were blessed with a family. Alvin was born February 11, 1798 [^8] and in due course the second son, Hyrum, was welcomed. With two sons added to their number the father became aware of the need to improve his family's economic status. Lucy's brother was doing well in the mercantile business. Why couldn't he do the same? In Randolph, a frontier town, a few miles distant, there was no store, so Joseph, Sr., decided to rent his farm and venture into business. Lucy thought it a good idea, and the family ventured upon the new enterprise early in 1802. [^9]

They could scarcely have foreseen the difficulties which lay ahead. This move was but the first of several which were to bring them reverses and severe trials. But the trials which began at Randolph and continued almost unabated thereafter found them strong and unafraid, able to bear whatever came their way.

After six months of struggle in establishing their business upon a firm footing, sickness struck the household. Mother Smith came down with a heavy cold which nothing seemed to relieve. The doctor diagnosed her symptoms and indicated that she had consumption. Lydia Gates Mack, Lucy's mother, came to help care for her daughter, but there was no apparent improvement. In later writing of these circumstances, Lucy said: "I continued to grow weaker and weaker until I could scarcely endure even a foot-fall upon the floor, except in stocking feet, and no one was allowed to speak in the room above a whisper." [^10]

When the young mother continued to lose strength, the local Methodist minister was called. From his conversation she surmised that death was imminent. And after his departure, she seemed to see a light beyond the immediate darkness, and Joseph, her husband, came to her saying, "The doctors have given you up to die." The ensuing night for her was one of contemplation about death; and she thought of heavenly things, of her unreadiness to meet God, and of her husband and children.

It was then that she made a covenant with God, promising that if he would let her live she would endeavor to serve him to the best of her ability. Shortly afterward she heard a voice say: "Seek, and ye shall find; knock and it shall be opened unto you. Let your heart be comforted; ye believe in God, believe also in me."

In a few moments, Lucy's mother came in and joyously exclaimed, "Lucy, you are better!" Whereupon, she replied, "Yes, Mother, the Lord will let me live if I am faithful to the promise which I made to him, to be a comfort to my mother, my husband, and my children." [^11]

From this moment, Lucy regained her strength. And, feeling the need to be instructed more in religious matters, she called on Deacon Davies. The deacon was so astonished at her recovery that he spent the whole of her visit asking how she was and trying to make her comfortable. She returned home disgusted and disappointed. However, her illness and healing made such an impression on her deeply religious nature that she continued to seek for information, and for some congenial spirit who would understand her feelings and help her to carry out her resolutions.

The next Sabbath she went to hear a Presbyterian minister, expecting to hear the word of life. Of this occasion she said: "When the minister commenced speaking, I fixed by mind with deep attention upon the spirit and matter of his discourse, but after hearing him through I returned home, convinced that he neither understood nor appreciated the subject upon which he spoke." [^12]

Thereafter she became convinced that the true church was not upon the earth and determined to examine the Bible more carefully, taking Jesus and his disciples for her guide. This she did for a number of years and taught her children to do the same. But believing in the necessity of baptism, she asked a preacher to baptize her without requiring that she join any of the denominations of the day; and after he granted her request, she continued to guide her life by reading the Bible.

Meanwhile, the family's mercantile enterprise at Randolph was proving to be very expensive. Soon after Lucy's recovery, another crisis developed, and more money was needed than the business was providing. Crystallized ginseng root was accepted as an effective remedy for an epidemic then raging in China. And for this reason Joseph, Sr., decided to concentrate all his means and efforts in collecting a large quantity of the herb. He refused the offer of three thousand dollars made to him by a merchant living at Royalton for his collection of the plant and went instead to New York harbor where he found a merchantman about to sail for the Orient. The captain of the vessel was contracted to sell Joseph's produce and to return the money to him. Meanwhile, the Royalton merchant, a Mr. Stevens, hearing of Mr. Smith's transaction, went to New York and made a similar agreement with the captain of the same vessel. It was also agreed that Stevens' son was to go along on the voyage to help with the business. In due time the ship returned, and Joseph was told that young Stevens had only a chest of tea as payment for the herb; there supposedly had been little market in China for ginseng.

This turn of events plunged the Smiths into debt. From his herb profits Joseph had intended to pay his Boston creditors eighteen hundred dollars he owed for merchandise. Lucy had warned him about giving so much credit on the goods he sold, and now too many bad debts forced him to sell the farm at Tunbridge-well worth fifteen hundred dollars-for only eight hundred.

Fortunately, Lucy had saved her wedding gift and with it they were able to raise the necessary eighteen hundred dollars to liquidate their Boston indebtedness. Meanwhile, Lucy's brother, Major Mack, discovered that young Stevens had sold the ginseng in China for a good price. But Stevens, fearing that Major Mack would tell Joseph, fled with the money to Canada, and Joseph was forced to abandon all hope of regaining his rightful share of the profits.

The trouble over the sale of the ginseng and the resulting loss of the farm made Lucy's approaching confinement doubly difficult. Consequently the Smiths decided to return to Tunbridge, where they remained until the birth of their daughter Sophronia, on May 16, 1803. Soon afterward they moved to Royalton, Vermont. The twelve years at Tunbridge and Randolph had held much happiness, even though misfortune seemed to stalk them; and their hearts were saddened at leaving their friends and the familiar surroundings even though they hoped that sometime they could return.

Royalton, a village not unlike that of Tunbridge, was situated in a hilly country, covered with lush vegetation. The farm they leased needed much improvement and the price was too high, so that the fall harvest was insufficient to pay the lease. After a council the family decided to rent a farm at Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, a farm belonging to Lucy's father, Solomon Mack. fn Since Sharon was situated only a short distance north of Royalton, the task of moving was not difficult.

The farm at Sharon was in good condition. Here it was possible for Joseph, Sr., to teach school in the winter as well as operate the farm. And they lived near enough to the families at Tunbridge and at Gilsum to make occasional short visits. The farm was located among rolling hills covered by a variety of trees, shrubs, and flowers; and abundance of rainfall assured good harvests; their home was comfortable; and it seemed that financial security was theirs.

Hyrum and Joseph, The Prophet

It was here, two days before Christmas in 1805, that their fourth child was born, and they named him Joseph, after his father. This child was destined to exert an influence upon the world even greater than that of the ancient prophets of Israel. His mission would not only change the lives of his family and friends but would be of importance to the entire world. But all this was yet in the future.

Hyrum Smith, (by Mahonri Young), Statue on Temple Square, Salt Lake City, Utah. (Used by permission of Church Historian's Office.)

Soon after the birth of Joseph, Jr., the home was again upset by talk of moving. But, by now, moving seemed to have become part of the regular routine of the family. The children had grown to expect a nomadic existence. Lucy Smith, in her memoirs, recorded with faithful detail the chronological events of these years of toil, moving and child-bearing. On leaving Sharon, the family gravitated to Tunbridge where employment was more abundant and education was available for the children. Being with old friends and relatives was a joy, but after a short period at Tunbridge they moved again, this time to Lebanon, New Hampshire.

During all this time, the Smiths did not subscribe to any particular religious denomination. The reason given by Mother Smith was that their belonging to a church "would offend their friends belonging to another denomination because they (the Smiths) would be considered in error, but by not belonging, the church people would say they were of the world." [^13] Nevertheless, Joseph, Sr., was deeply religious and about this time had several impressive dreams. In one of these dreams, he was told that the ancient order as established by Christ and the apostles was not upon the earth.

During these years Hyrum was an active child, adjusting to an ever-increasing family. The boys added to the family circle were named Samuel Harrison, Ephraim, and William. It was not long before the necessity of education for the older children became acute. Since Lebanon offered little opportunity for education, the family decided that Hyrum should enroll in an academy at Hanover [^14] and that the rest of the younger children were of sufficient age that they should attend the local school.

Hyrum had been at Hanover but a short time when an epidemic of typhus fever broke out and he returned home to find several of the children ill, Sophronia was in critical condition. But here again the prayers of the mother were answered and after eight days Sophronia's recovery was assured.

This crisis was no sooner passed than another developed. Joseph, age seven, while recovering from the disease was stricken with a severe pain in his shoulder. The swelling which developed was relieved by lancing, but the severe pain thereafter settled in the bone of his leg. The boy suffered intensely and Mother Smith became ill due to the strain and work of caring for him. It was Hyrum who relieved her. Of this experience she wrote:

"Hyrum, quite remarkable for his tenderness and sympathy, now desired that he might take my place. As he was a good, trusty boy, we let him do so. In order to make the task as easy for him as possible, we laid Joseph on a low bed and Hyrum sat beside him, almost day and night, for some considerable length of time, holding the affected part of Joseph's leg in his hands and pressing it between them, so that his afflicted brother might be enabled to endure the pain which was so excruciating that he was scarcely able to bear it." [^15]

Hyrum's chances for an education were never again so good as they had seemed before the epidemic. However, the limited time he had spent in study awakened in him a keen desire for education, a desire which he later satisfied through observation and consistent home study.

His compassionate nature and his concern for the welfare of the family matured the boy Hyrum beyond his years. Joseph's suffering on the above occasion elicited Hyrum's tenderest regard; and the experience they shared at this time cemented the brothers' mutual love and devotion. Hyrum's feelings found expression in his self-appointed but unassuming guardianship of his brother, which ended only when he fell mortally wounded by an assassin's bullet in Carthage Jail.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Whitney R. Cross, The Burned-Over District, Cornell University Press, (Ithaca, New York, 1950), pp. 5-6.
[^2] Lucy Smith, op. cit., p. 63.
[^3] Palmyra is a small town in western New York with a population of about 3,000. It is located on Highway 31, just twenty-three miles southeast of Rochester. On the main street in Palmyra is an intersection known as "four corners" where there are churches of different denominations on each corner of the street, typifying, even today, the different conflicting creeds which existed at the time of young Joseph's First Vision.
[^4] Lucy Smith, op. cit., p. 65.
[^5] Pomeroy Tucker, in his book,Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism states that the Smith family were shiftless and lazy, were regarded as an illiterate, whiskey drinking, irreligious race of people. Mr. Tucker, a citizen of Palmyra, when the Smiths moved to town, supports William's appraisal of the townfolks as being a little jealous of their accomplishments.
[^6] William Warren Sweet, The Story of Religion in America, Harper and Brothers (N.Y. 1930), pp. 250-251.
[^7] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 46-58.
[^8] Their first child, a daughter, died unnamed. Idem.
[^9] Lucy Smith, op. cit., p. 32.
[^10] Ibid.,p. 33.
[^11] Ibid.,p. 34.
[^12] Ibid.,p. 35-36.
[^13] 13. Solomon Mack fought as a soldier in the Revolutionary War. His children were Jason, Stephen, Daniel, Second Solomon, Louisa, Lovina, Lydia, and Lucy, in that order. Archibald Bennett, "Solomon Mack and His Family," The Improvement Era, vol. 59.
[^14] 14. Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 31.
[^15] 15. Now Dartmouth University.
