Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter II

The Revival

Hyrum, a large boy for his thirteen years, met with the family in a council to decide what was to be done. The plague of fever had left Lebanon, New Hampshire, as suddenly as it had come; and with the crisis over the family felt that perhaps the best thing to do was to move again. The farm had not produced sufficiently, and a move at this time might give them a more favorable start toward improving their financial position.

The decision to move was unanimous, and the family chose Norwich, Vermont, as the site of the new home. The routine of moving was by now well established, and soon the familiar caravan of wagons and livestock was in motion. On arriving at their destination they located a farm, the property of Esquire Moredock. The rent was reasonable, and the family once again settled to the task of wresting a living from the soil.

They arrived in plenty of time to seed the available land to grain. But the crop, after a promising start, was a failure. However, several acres of fruit trees bore in abundance. Hyrum with the others, picked the best of the fruit and sold it in the village; the windfalls and culls were stored for their own winter use. The winter that followed was severe, with deep snows. Hyrum's hopes of returning to school at Hanover were abandoned. The family needed the money, and Hyrum, even at his tender age, considered his personal desires to be secondary to the needs of his family. That winter the family felt fortunate to obtain the bare necessities, and Hyrum accepted any available opportunity for work.

The second year's crop was also a failure, and again the family had to improvise a means of livelihood. "Another year's try," thought the hopeful Joseph, Sr., after a council with his boys, "might prove a success." They were determined to persist. But as the third crop of grain neared maturity, an untimely frost destroyed it, and with that frost came famine. It seemed that bad luck dogged their very footsteps. On March 15, 1816 the household had been enlarged once more by the arrival of a ninth child—a baby boy whom they named Don Carlos. With the year's crop failure and the new birth, the situation of the family became desperate. Another move was in the offing.

Reports of abundant wheat crops in the state of New York were causing many Vermont farmers to migrate to the West. [^1] On the other hand, the thought of returning to Royalton, scene of past failure, was unendurable. The name of Palmyra, New York, came to Joseph, Sr.'s, attention again and again, but he decided to scout the New York area for a suitable location before making a final decision. Before the end of the summer he accepted an invitation to accompany a Mr. Howard to Palmyra; and soon afterward the family received word that he had made arrangements to buy a farm, and that they should begin preparations for the move.

Mother Smith took charge. Hyrum and Alvin worked early and late making ready for the arrival of the team and wagon. Their father had arranged to hire transportation and dispose of his livestock in order to pay their debts. The family was just taking what small comfort they could from the thought that all their bills were paid when several of their creditors demanded settlement.

This sudden turn made it almost impossible to leave. Two gentlemen, a Mr. Flagg and a Mr. Howard, knowing the circumstances, urged Mother Smith either to take the claims to court or to have their friends contribute to their aid. But since she was an independent person, she refused both suggestions and somehow raised the required hundred and fifty dollars to settle the claims. Then with her family and aged mother, Lydia Gates Mack, she left for Palmyra.

On their way they stopped at Royalton. Here they left grandmother Lydia with her son Daniel Mack where she made her home until her death. Mother and daughter wept at parting. Grandmother Mack had been with the family since they had moved from Vermont. But now her aged condition and the distance to Palmyra made it unlikely that they would see each other again.

As the little caravan reached a point twenty miles west of Utica, New York, their teamster, Mr. Howard, removed the load of household goods and attempted to abscond with the team and wagon. Mother Smith, when told by Alvin of this attempt, called the teamster into the inn and there, before several other guests, said: "Gentlemen and ladies, please give your attention for a moment. Now, as sure as there is a God in heaven, that team, as well as the goods, belong to my husband, and this man intends to take them from me, or at least the team, leaving me with eight children, and without the means of proceeding on my journey." Then turning to Mr. Howard she said, "You can go about your business; I have no use for you. I shall take charge of the team myself." [^2]

Mother Smith was not sorry to part with Howard's services. He had been overbearing with the children, forcing them to walk beyond their endurance. This had been particularly hard on young Joseph who was still lame. For Hyrum and Alvin, ever obedient to the wishes of their mother, to help drive the remainder of the distance to Palmyra was infinitely pleasant.

The village of Palmyra looked good to the newcomers. Its population of 2500 was rather scattered; but there was a heavily rutted main street lined with trees and board sidewalks, and several stores were doing a good business. Up the street and off to the right was a typical church, and just beyond were two similar buildings. The Presbyterians, the Baptists, and the Methodists had all become established, as the town had been settled twenty years before. [^3]

Father Smith, who had been anxiously waiting for several days, was greatly relieved when at last he saw his family plodding wearily up the main road into town. When his wife explained the cause of their long delay and the trouble encountered on the way, he almost wept.

The journey over the Adirondack Mountain Range had been a long and tiresome trek, and some of their goods had had to be sold to buy food. All that was left to them was the team, the wagon, a few boxes of personal objects, and two cents in cash. Little wonder that the town looked good to the family. Here there was a school for the children, and a friendly atmosphere prevailed.

The small frame building that Father Smith had rented east of town, on the corner of Johnson and Vienna Streets, was a welcome sight. Lucy was grateful for the roof over her head as winter soon set in. The inconveniences of the crowded home seemed trivial when they remembered that the family was together again. Lucy's was a buoyant spirit! In such a family any trouble could only be temporary, even when the autumn of 1816 proved to be but a repetition of bygone years. Once again a family council was required to devise some plan to overcome the familiar difficulties.

The older boys had little trouble finding work. Hyrum and Joseph helped their father on contract projects from which they learned the Cooper's trade (how to make barrels, splitwood chairs, baskets, birch brooms) and masonry (the digging of wells and curbing them), as well as brick-lining (cisterns, fireplaces, and stone walls). The boys marveled at their father's proficiency, and at the end of the first hard year the family was able to count a gain. It had been a year of work, of long hours spent on the rented land and, for Hyrum and Alvin, of "hiring out" to earn much needed cash after the summer and fall farm work was finished. [^4] But they had prospered in their work.

Alvin had displayed such aptitude for the carpenter's trade that he was soon in demand as a carpenter's helper on house-construction crews. Even Mother Lucy and the oldest daughter, Sophronia, went to work. They established a business, and money from Lucy's painted oilcloths aided in the purchase of their new home. A "cake and beer" business which they operated on Saturdays and holidays provided additional income.

Education on the frontier placed a poor second to agriculture. Time spent for education was time lost from the clearing of new land, the erecting of houses, the building of roads, and from food production and manufacturing, all of which were necessary to survival. The luxury of formal education could not have been enjoyed by the Smith children for more than a few months of the year. It is probable, however, that they did attend sometime during the year, for there was a log schoolhouse on nearby Durfee road. One may safely conclude that here the younger members of the Smith family learned at least the rudiments of reading, writing, and arithmetic.

The Smiths recouped their fortune during their first two years at Palmyra, and they adjusted easily to the social pattern of this frontier community, where their neighbors were the "old" settlers. There was Martin Harris, the son of Nathan Harris who was one of the original owners of this choice land. His six-hundred-acre tract just north of the village had been purchased by his father for only two shillings an acre. Near the town was Wintergreen Hill from whose summit could be seen the homes and farms and the settlers felling trees below. There were landmarks, too, such as the blockhouse which had been erected as protection against the Indians, now remaining a mute testimony of earlier struggles.

Father Smith, with the help of Hyrum and the other boys, soon began looking for a larger tract of land, one not too expensive and fairly close to town. The savings of almost two and one-half years would be sufficient to make a down payment on at least a hundred acres of unimproved land. By the fall of 1818 such a tract had been selected. It was located two or three miles south of Palmyra on the north border of Manchester Township, Ontario County, and was almost completely covered by the heaviest stand of timber the boys had ever seen. Among the various trees, there were about fifteen hundred sugar maples, which proved a good source of sugar molasses.

It did not take long for the Smith family to prepare for this move. A house had to be erected, but the hundred-acre tract was itself an excellent source of materials for its construction. A temporary, one-story, two-roomed log structure with two attic bedrooms was soon completed. Later, another bedroom of sawed slabs was added. By the following year (1819) thirty acres had been cleared for the plow, and another thirty acres were soon added.

William Smith, a brother of Hyrum, later said, "Relative to the life of the family while on the Manchester farm: We had a good place. We cleared sixty acres of the heaviest timber I ever saw. . . . We worked hard to clear our place, and the neighbors were a little jealous." [^5]

Hyrum was happy that the family finances were improved. And it was pleasant to have a part in community life. For the first time the Smiths could really hope with some security to build a larger and more commodious home. The children were growing up, and their increasing demands made greater economic independence a necessity.

New people came regularly to take up land, and, since the Smith boys had established a good reputation for being hard workers who could be depended upon to give satisfaction, they were much in demand. Hyrum and Alvin, twenty and twenty-two respectively, were near the same size by the beginning of 1820. Not only did their physical aspects correspond, but also their personalities. Both were of a kindly disposition, helpful to the younger children and considerate of their parents. Seldom, if ever, did one hear quarrelling or scolding among the members of the family. As they attained a degree of security, family affairs settled into a steady routine. Time only was needed to achieve their objectives. Although their new-found prosperity was but the prelude to an impending storm, the two and one-half years of prosperity were long enough for them to put down strong roots and enable them to survive the events to come.

The snows melted very fast in the spring of 1820; but the season, except for its precipitance, seemed much like any other. Nature burst forth in abundance. There had been little sickness during the winter, and several of the children were able to finish a term of school. They hurriedly planted the seeds for an early garden; and as the length of the workday increased, less time was left to read the Bible. The family had always enjoyed listening first to Father Joseph then to Mother Lucy read or tell favorite Bible stories.

Many times as Hyrum and his brothers were sent to the village store for supplies, they would listen to the usual gossip and gather bits of news. The store, like others of its kind, had long been a favorite meeting place for neighbors and friends. Here religion, politics, marriage, deaths and newcomers were discussed at great length and in minute detail. On the subject of religion there were great differences of opinion, for the second, third, and even the fourth generation of early immigrants had, like their ancestors, cast off formal religion like a threadbare coat.

When America had won her freedom, the way was paved for abolishment of compulsory taxes to support the church and to the elimination of inquisitions or heresy trials. In this new land man could choose his religion. The colonies had differed in their opinion over the principle of separation of the church and state. Roger Williams, Anne Hutchinson, and others had been persecuted and banished for their views. But the Old World idea of state religion was finally abandoned. Why then should free Americans find it necessary to subscribe to any tenet or sect?

The rebellion against religion by the first settlers had had its influence upon their children. Many frontiersmen were believers in God and the Bible but not in any sect. Only about five percent of the people were enrolled on church records; and because of this lack of interest in formal religion, the religious leaders of the prominent Protestant groups were extremely anxious to prevent the souls of frontiersmen from going to hell.

The early colonies had seen several religious "awakenings." They still remembered the wave of revivalism sparked by Charles A. Finney, Jonathan Edwards, and George Whitefield, in which thousands of the "unchurched" had been saved. [^6] Early in the nineteenth century particularly another wave of religious fervor developed. Renewed emphasis was placed upon the importance of religion and the necessity of revival meetings.

The Smith family had heard through friends who were members of the several congregations then established in Palmyra that there would soon be an outdoor religious revival. But not until Hyrum returned one evening from shopping at the store did they learn that the expected revival was actually to be held. This news had its effect on the Smiths. Were they in need of religion? None of them had been "saved." Of course they read and believed the Bible and were not in the category of the sinful. They were sober, honest, industrious people who believed in an all-wise Creator. Yet they felt the necessity of investigation. If a church had the power to save, they desired membership in it.

Hyrum had brought word that there would be a revival which was to have its beginning in the several church buildings of Palmyra. Whenever their work permitted, members of the Smith family and their friends attended.

The Reverend Jesse Townsend, a young Yale graduate recently assigned to the Palmyra Presbyterian pastorship, had been the first to catch the religious fervor, and it was he who had started the present revival. He had been joined by his colleague, another Presbyterian minister of East Palmyra, and they soon were joined by the local Baptist minister and two Methodist ministers of the same place. The initial crowds were large; the farmers had not yet started their spring plowing because of the late spring. The meetings began the latter part of April and ran well into May. Businessman closed shop to attend, many of them becoming self-appointed missionaries who urged others to do likewise. The thought uppermost in the minds of many people was, "What shall I do to be saved?" Therefore, the success of the revival was more than the ministers had hoped for. By the beginning of the second week in May, when many had to leave the revival to plant their crops, there had been two hundred conversions among those who had attended from Palmyra, Macedon, Manchester, Ontario, and Lyons; and by the end of that week over four hundred had confessed. Both old and young were among the "saved."

During these early years of the nineteenth century, camp meetings played an important part in western revivals. While those of the northern region were not as violent as the revivals of the south, there was manifest at Palmyra considerable agitation and emotional fervor. The magnetism of the speakers swayed the audience with their alternating loud to plaintive voices picturing heaven and hell with varying degrees of intensity exploiting the fears of a burning hell for the unrepentant sinner. The atmosphere became tense with shouting and ill-will, foreign to the true spirit of Christ, particularly when the supposed candidates left the preacher to go in an opposite direction. The manifest confusion, uncertainty, and anger all contributed to defeat the essential purpose of the revival meetings. Because of such religious hysteria, many who came to listen returned to their homes unconvinced and unsaved.

Such was the situation at the Palmyra revival when the meetings began to break up and the people separated to their respective churches. The amity, peace, and goodwill among the group turned to rivalry and contention. Hyrum, who had joined the Presbyterians, wondered why his minister was so jealous of his colleagues. All had seemed tranquil until each leader counted his disciples; and then such imprecations and shouting as followed were certainly unbecoming to the several ministers involved.

It had been very important to Hyrum that he be baptized, as had his mother, his sister Sophronia, and his brother, Samuel Harrison. He felt at the moment that others of the family exhibited far too little concern for their souls. Even Joseph, who had favored the Methodists, hesitated to declare himself.

The leaders of the Presbyterians, Methodists, and Baptists had attempted to disprove each other in doctrine and Bible interpretations. The Methodist minister, while admonishing his listeners to pray about which church to join, quoted James 1:5: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." To Hyrum this passage of scripture seemed logical; but he, like many others, felt that he had found the truth. He did not know that his brother, Joseph, had been pondering this passage from the moment he first heard the Methodist minister quote it: nor did he know that this passage had made a strong impression on his fourteen-year-old brother. [^7]

When the excitement of the revivals had died down, Hyrum was happy to have it over and to get on with his daily tasks. He had believed the convincing arguments of his minister and was content to adjust his religion to the popular concepts of the day without critical analysis or logic as to its authenticity. Sooner than he realized, however, he was to be rudely and effectively disillusioned and to have any and all settled ideas of religion rooted out.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Luck Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 71-72; Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith, 2:15-20.
[^2] Pomeroy Tucker, Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism, (Palmyra, New York, 1867), p. 15. Note—The animosity toward the Smiths was expressed in these words by Mr. Tucker: "At this period in the life and career of Joseph Smith, Jr., or Joe Smith, as he was universally named . . . the chief subject of this biography being unanimously voted the laziest and most worthless of the generation. From the age of twelve to twenty he is distinctly remembered as dull eyed, flaxen haired, prevaricating boy—noted only for his indolent and vagabondish character and his habits of exaggeration and untruthfulness," etc.
[^3] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 85.
[^4] Tucker, op. cit., pp. 34-35. The author, very prejudiced, was part owner of the Wayne Sentinel.
[^5] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 14-16.
[^6] Lucy Smith, op. cit., p. 81.
[^7] Ibid., p. 82.
