Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter III

Palmyra and a New Religion

The unsettled condition of the Smith family from the time they left Tunbridge, Vermont, until they settled in Palmyra, New York, had matured Hyrum Smith, now in his twentieth year. Perhaps the hardships, suffering, and disappointments of this period were for a good purpose; for that which lay ahead, the past had been a period of preparation. The common problems of self-preservation against hunger, sickness, and poverty, had helped to weld the family in love and loyalty. Fortunately such family devotion under many trying circumstances had proved to be a guarantee for their survival as a family.

The writer is indebted to Hyrum's mother, Luck Mack Smith, for glimpses of his early life as recorded in her book on the life of Joseph Smith. Hyrum in this book is held in worthy esteem as an older son to be relied upon—always faithful, dependable, and kind. These qualities she tenderly describes in his role in nursing Joseph during the surgical operation. Hyrum's steady nerve and patience made him equal to meet a crisis to which the mother felt unequal.

Hyrum was a product of the frontier— serious, unpolished in speech and manners; healthy, with a body of hardened muscles and a responsive reservoir of energy, with a litheness of movement in a gangling sort of way. He had suddenly grown up, tall and spindly, and the process of aging would not perceptibly make him otherwise in appearance. He would always be on the thin side, lean and tall. He was what a farmer would call a man with an appearance for hard work and dependable demeanor. His labor was always in demand. Early in life he exhibited a singleness of purpose. The long and difficult task of clearing the heavy timber from their large farm and preparing the soil for the seed reveals strength of character. Soon there would come into Hyrum's life a new type of challenge. It would be something quite different from clearing deep-rooted trees and underbrush from the stubborn soil, but an activity requiring much more will power and tenacity to succeed—the eradication of age-old traditions, superstitions carried down in men's minds from generations of the past.

Hyrum was quite unconscious at the moment of certain events which were destined to change the course of his life. As a citizen in an agrarian culture on the American frontier, there was an air of serenity, contentment, peace, and security prevailing which beckoned the Smiths. If there were any movement or undercurrent to change the status quo it could not be detected. The sameness of plowing, planting, harvesting, and clearing virgin land occupied the major portion of a hard-working people.

The tranquil existence of Hyrum, the Smiths, and the local citizens was soon to be rudely upset. Conditions over which he had no control were developing close by. Very soon after the revival another family council was announced. This one, however, was somewhat different from others pertaining to family policy and procedures. A certain member of the family, a nonconformist, had been up to something behind Hyrum's back. Hyrum had not been consulted nor had any other member of the family, but now the time had come to bring the problem out into the open because it concerned every member of the family, especially Hyrum. The atmosphere seemed to be supercharged as the hour had arrived and time for each to take his favorite place around the family living room.

With Alvin on his right, Hyrum seated himself comfortably near the large fireplace. He wanted to catch every word and facial expression of his brother, Joseph. The light from the fire cast shadows, as did the oil lamp, and Hyrum leaned closer. They little dreamed that what they were about to hear was the beginning of the most unusual story in modern times.

"This morning," Joseph began, "I felt a strong desire to ask God which of all the churches was right. I couldn't feel right about you, Hyrum, and Mother, Sophronia, and Samuel joining the Presbyterians. Even my friend, the Methodist minister, seemed confused. During the revival I felt a spirit of uneasiness and depression. No one was able to speak with authority. Even on so important a doctrine as baptism there was no agreement. Some preached immersion, some sprinkling, and others none at all, because they said, ordinances were unimportant; man was saved only by the grace of God."

Hyrum shifted uneasily in his seat as he listened, for he remembered his minister's explanation about God saving men's souls only when they were destined to be saved.

"The scripture of James," Joseph continued, "preyed on my mind, If any one lacked wisdom, let him call upon God. It seemed that I could not rest until I asked God. You remember the place where we've been cutting down trees to enlarge our corn patch? It was just beyond there, to the west, in the thickest part of the trees where I went to pray. I hope you will understand me. It was about ten o'clock; the sun was bright, but the ground was shady. At first it was hard for me to pray because I had never talked out loud to God, but I was determined to try.

As I began to pray I was pounced upon by some unseen power. It choked me so that I could not make a sound. I began to lose my senses; great gloom and darkness pressed in upon me. I became panicky and prayerinwardly for relief from this overwhelming power. Just as I was giving up to face destruction something most unusual happened.

A soothing light descended from directly over my head. As the light came nearer I gazed transfixed at it; not knowing what to expect.

As I looked upward into this light, there appeared two personages standing a little above me in the air. The light immediately around them was so bright it blinded me at first. But all alarm and excitement left when I heard a soft, intimate thrilling voice saying, (Joseph,) and he pointed to the person on his right, "This is my beloved Son; hear him!"

As I looked at the Son, I saw an expression on his face of love and kindly inquiry, as if he were saying, "What is it that you want?" I opened my mouth and began to speak and said; "Which of all the sects is right, and which shall I join?" He answered, "Joseph, you must join none of them, for they are all wrong; their creeds are an abomination in my sight. Their leaders are corrupt; they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrine the commandments of men, having a form of Godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

He reminded me again that I should join none of them. He told me many other things of great importance, which I cannot tell you now. At the end of the visit the personages departed as they had come; the heavenly light faded away, and I was left alone, looking about. I was lying on my back looking up at the blue skies through the trees. It was difficult to move for I had no strength. As I lay there pondering on all I had seen and heard, my strength gradually returned; but it was some time before I could stand on my feet. [^1]

When Joseph finished his story, there was a moment's silence. Hyrum's face was sober and thoughtful. He and Alvin, together with others of the family, sat transfixed. So intent on the story had they been that each had seemed to experience vicariously all that Joseph told them. Not one person in the room doubted the truth of a single detail. They felt as surely as if they themselves had participated in these events, that they were true.

This was a memorable evening for Hyrum. His heart was attuned to that of his younger brother Joseph. Almost at once he became aware of the significance of many peculiar happenings that had preceded this occasion. He realized that it had been the dark powers of evil which had stalked the family, settling finally on the young Joseph. "I must," thought Hyrum, "assume a share of my brother's responsibility; he will need my help for the great work ahead. " From that night on Hyrum's resolve to be always mindful of and helpful to Joseph was in effect.

The next day the Smith family awakened to the realization that they were something more than a family engaged in agricultural and business pursuits. The very air seemed charged with apprehension. A revelation from God had been given. The ancient concept of God was reestablished. Visions had not been done away with. Prayers could be literally answered, and the biblical pronouncement of the reality and power of the evil one was reaffirmed. All the sects and creeds presently upon the earth were mere machinations of men's minds. They bore no official sanction from Jesus Christ, the author of salvation.

The implications of the revelation were overwhelming. From the status of common frontiersmen, the Smiths were now thrust by a strange chain of events and a curious public into a new and strange role. A younger member of the family had unwittingly triggered the powers of heaven and unleashed a blast of knowledge and power strong enough ultimately to change the entire world.

To the tall, serious-minded Hyrum, the turn of events was both startling and exhilarating. So overwhelmed was he by his brother's story that his mind at first failed to grasp the full import of such an experience. But as the days passed, the true significance of it was borne in upon his understanding. He remembered how seriously Joseph had listened to the revivalists and how his meditations exceeded even his study of the Bible. Joseph's refusal to join any of the various sects had given offense to some, one person in particular; for someone had tried to kill him. But the bullet had missed him and lodged in the neck of a cow. Hyrum wondered what new perils would come to Joseph with the announcement of his story.

To all outward appearances the Smith family was the same—the crops were planted, more land cleared of timber, and the daily routine went on as usual through the summer and fall. But inwardly, though their actions seemed calm and natural, expectation ruled their thoughts. Gossip at the store and among church members was focused on the fourteen-year-old Joseph. Hyrum and the other members of the family became alarmed at the changing attitude of former neighbors and friends. During the evening family hour, the children told how people had stared at them and had pointed their fingers and ridiculed them with biting words which were spoken loudly enough for them to hear.

Even the friendly Methodist minister turned against Joseph. He told Joseph not to circulate his story because visions had ceased with the holy apostles, and Joseph should repudiate what he had said. Hyrum was pleased to hear Joseph say of this encounter with the minister that he had borne his testimony to the truthfulness of his experience, and that to deny such an experience would be to offend God; for he knew that he had had a vision, and he dared not deny it.

During the slack period on the farm, the older boys had usually secured jobs in the village. But now, as news of the vision became common knowledge, work became harder to get. To hire or befriend any member of the Smith family was to condone their belief in the vision. This rather sudden alienation made it necessary for the father and his sons to find some new means of supplementing their farm income. They erected a small cooper shop where they could make barrels, splitwood chairs, baskets, sap bowls, and bee guns. They also cut cordwood and made maple syrup and birch brooms to increase their saleable offering. While the men did this, the mother and girls, on public days, resumed their cake and beer business in the village. [^2] And toward fall there was demand for farm products such as vegetables, maple sugar, and molasses.

The persistent and continuous industry of the family so won the admiration of the community that antagonism began to waver. A tenth child, daughter Lucy, was born at this time; and with her advent a larger home was needed. By November of 1822, the frame of the new home was raised. The materials were put together by the help of many friendly hands. Alvin was heard to remark, "I am going to have a nice, pleasant room for father and mother to sit in and everything arranged for their comfort, and they shall not work any more as they have done." [^3] His hopes were realized more quickly than he had expected; for by the summer of the next year, the family moved in; and by contrast with the log house, the new frame structure was a mansion. The old log house was put to good use as a comfortable barn for their livestock. [^4]

There was still much work to be done on the new house when the family moved in. Wallboards had to be raised; a stairway had to be finished to the upper bedrooms; cupboards had to be built in and additional furniture purchased or built. By fall of 1823, the Smiths were quite comfortable. The boys seemed suddenly to grow up. The village prejudice, excepting for the clergymen who believed them doomed to hell, had temporarily subsided. The routine of the family had settled into a pattern of co-operative activity.

But this state of affairs was not to continue for long. The next act in the great drama of the gospel restoration was imminent. It was now nearing the end of September 1823; several frosty nights had opened nature's paint pot on the maple, oak, and birchwood trees, and had readied the crops for harvesting. The squash had to be gathered and the corn cut. The virgin soil had yielded its strength and the laborers must claim their reward. Thus, when the sun rose on the morning of September 22, it found the Smiths with much work to do. At an early hour father and sons had adjourned to the corn patch close by the house. But Joseph was to do little harvesting that day. The Lord had other plans for him.

It was an anxious day for Hyrum; he sensed the unusual happenings, and desired to know more about them. That evening the parents asked the children to finish their chores early, for there was to be a family council. As each of the family was taking his accustomed place around the open hearth, Joseph was heard to say, "No one must speak outside this family circle of the things you hear tonight."

The parents, sitting opposite Joseph and Hyrum in their easy chairs, motioned for the children to get settled. Hyrum moved his position to the opposite side of the rock fireplace, where he could better watch Joseph's face in the light of the fire. Hyrum studied the scene, and so mature beyond his years and so inspired did his young brother seem that Hyrum's heart ached for all that Joseph had suffered.

Standing in the light of the sputtering oil lamp and the flickering fire, Joseph began:

It seems just yesterday when I told you about seeing the Father and the Son. We as a family have been singled out as being different from other people. I feel that we are going to have trouble and that more changes are coming into our lives. Last night, I went to bed quite early, for it had been a hard day harvesting the crops. I felt the need to pray. I had a troubled conscience because of some foolish things I had said and done. I wanted to know where I stood with God.

It was while I was praying that I became aware that the room was filling with light. The light increased until the room was brighter than noonday, but I was not as afraid as I was when I saw the light in the grove. To my surprise I saw the figure of a man, a person glorious to look upon; for he, like the other vision, was enveloped in a soft heavenly light, the light being most intense close to his body. His bare feet did not touch the floor; and he was dressed in a robe of exquisite whiteness, opened at the neck and extending to a little above the ankles. His head and arms were bare, as were his neck and bosom. The opening in his robe below his neck made it appear that the robe was his only covering. His face was handsome and full of intelligence.

At first I was somewhat afraid; but then he said, "Joseph, I have been sent from the presence of God; my name is Moroni. I am to tell you that God has a work for you to do and that your name shall be spoken for both good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues."

Hyrum glanced at his mother and father in order to catch, if possible, their reaction to these words. It was evident to Hyrum that Joseph's story was being accepted by the rest of the family.

Joseph continued:

The angel said, "There is a book deposited, written upon gold plates, about a people who once lived upon this American continent many centuries ago. This book contains the fullness of the ever-lasting gospel as preached by the Savior. There are with the plates two stones set in silver bows. These stones are fastened to a breast plate, and are called the Urim and Thummim. God prepared these stones for the purpose of translating the book, and they were used in ancient times."

The angel then quoted and explained a number of Old Testament prophecies. From Malachi he quoted the last passages about turning the hearts of the children to the fathers. He also spoke of the days to come when the earth should burn as an oven and all the wicked would be destroyed. He quoted Isaiah 11 and Joel from 2:28 to the last. From the New Testament he quoted Acts 3:22-23.

Then he told me that in time I would obtain the hidden plates and the Urim and Thummin, but that they are not to be shown to anyone; if I disobey, I shall be destroyed. While he was telling me about the plates, I saw in vision where they are deposited.

The hour had grown late, and the room was chilly. Hyrum suggested that Samuel replenish the fire. There were some questions that he wanted to ask Joseph, but to do so would disturb the spirit and quiet, for there was more to be told; so Hyrum remained silent.

"This morning," Joseph continued, "I was so tired that I felt like staying in bed, but I knew that I had my share of the work to do. Fearful of disbelief I decided to tell no one. When I picked up the corn cutter, I was too exhausted to use it. Father noticed that something was wrong with me and told me to go home. On my way home, as I climbed through the fence, I fainted. When I came to my senses, I heard again the voice of Moroni who stood before me surrounded by light as before. He repeated again all that he had told me the night before. And then he told me to go and tell father what I had seen and heard."

Joseph related how relieved he had been to share so great a responsibility with someone else and how happy he had been to have his father understand.

He then told them of going to the place on the hill where the plates were buried. The three mile walk alone over the winding dirt road had given him time to control his feelings, and renewed excitement had made him forget his fatigue.

He said, looking at Hyrum,

As I neared the hill I knew right where to go. Do you remember where we used to go hunting, there where we could get a good view of the surrounding farms? We couldn't see our house because of the heavy trees and undergrowth but we could see others. I approached the barren top of the hill from the heavily wooded area at its base. And I went to a spot on the west side of the hill near the top, close by several sugar maples. The stone lid of the box was actually visible where the center protruded through the soil. I removed the dirt and using a pole for a lever pried up the heavy covering. I looked in and beheld some glorious golden plates, with the Urim and Thummim and the breast plate. The box was made of stone slabs cemented together. In the bottom were two narrow stones, laid crosswise to keep the plates from touching the bottom of the box.

I attempted to remove the plates from the box; but the angel appeared and forbade me to touch them, telling me to return to the spot in one year at which time he would again meet me. He told me that I was to come to this place once each year for four years, and that at the end of that time, if I was worthy, I would obtain the plates. [^5]

In the Smith living room the hour was now very late. Hyrum noted the fatigue lines in Joseph's face, the experience of the former night and day had taken a heavy toll of his brother's energies. But though the firelight had grown dim and the flame of the oil wick sputtered at its base, the famly did not stir.

It was Alvin who finally suggested that Joseph, being weary, should get his rest. "Now, brother," he said, "let us go to bed, and rise early in the morning in order to finish our day's work at an early hour before sunset; then, if mother will get our supper early, we will have a fine long evening, and we will all sit down for the purpose of listening to you while you tell us the great things which God has revealed to you." [^6]

The following evening the young Prophet continued his story. Again he warned them not to mention outside the family circle the things he was telling them; for wickedness in the world was so prevalent that if knowledge of these things was spread abroad their very lives might be in constant danger. Then if he were permitted to obtain the plates and to tell his story to the world at a future time, it would be rejected. Their very name would be thought evil by all people.

The parents continued to call the family together evening after evening to hear more of the revelations. The mother, writing of these evenings, said: "I presume our family presented an aspect as singular as any that ever lived upon the face of the earth—all seated in a circle, father, mother, sons and daughters, and giving the most profound attention to a boy, eighteen years of age, who had never read the Bible through in his life. He seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any of the rest of our children, but far more given to meditation and deep study." [^7]

As the cold of the winter approached, the new home, although not finished, was snug and comfortable, and doubly warmed by the love of a family that had faced a great responsibility with unity and harmony.

The secret of the visions was well kept for a time until a friend of the family, Martin Harris, became a confidant. Hyrum, Joseph, and the other boys had worked for Mr. Harris on his farm and had been well paid. During the summer of 1824, while Father Smith, Joseph, and Hyrum were walling up a basement and digging a well for Mr. Harris, he asked to be told more about the vision in the grove which now was common knowledge. Because of Mr. Harris's evident sincerity and interest, the father confided to him the secret of the visit of Moroni. Whereupon, Martin Harris told his wife.

Hyrum was apprehensive over this breach of confidence, especially when he learned that town gossip had again begun to spin its web about his younger brother Joseph. It was told that young Joe Smith had a curious stone whereby he could detect hidden treasures of great value—gold and silver. Joseph, so said the stories, had dug for buried treasure on the hill near his home. But "just at the moment the treasure chest was near the seer's grasp it vanished away." [^8]

Toward the middle of November, 1823, the family suffered a tragedy. Alvin, almost twenty-six, took sick with bilious colic. At two o'clock on the afternoon of November 15, he came to the house ill and asked his mother to call a doctor. The family physican not being available, she called a Dr. Greenwood, who gave Alvin a heavy dose of calomel. At first the medicine was refused, but after much persuasion he took it. It was a disastrous mistake. Three days later Dr. McIntyre, the family doctor, and four others were called for a consultation in a final effort to save Alvin's life.

Alvin, however, had a premonition that nothing would help and he called Hyrum to his side, saying to him "Hyrum, I must die. Now I want to say a few things which I wish you to remember. I have done all I could to make our dear parents comfortable. I want you to finish the house and take care of them in their old age, and do not any more let them work so hard as they are now in old age." [^9]

He then called Sophronia to his bedside and gave her similar instruction regarding his parents. Joseph was also called and urged to live righteously that he might be worthy of obtaining the record. Alvin called each of his brothers and sisters to his bedside in turn and admonished them. The baby Lucy, of whom he was especially fond, put her arms around his neck and kissed him repeatedly. At last he said: "Farewell! I can now breathe out my life as calmly as a clock." Alvin died November 19, 1823. [^10]

His mother, speaking of Alvin said: "He was a youth of singular goodness of disposition—kind and amiable, so that lamentations and mourning filled the whole neighborhood in which he resided."

With Alvin's death, Hyrum assumed more of the responsibilities of the family. Because of his desire to bolster the family fortune and secure for his folks the comforts of life, Hyrum deferred the additional responsibility of a home of his own. However, he continued to keep company with an eligible young woman of Palmyra, who had already met with the approval of his family. Jerusha Barden [^11] was known for her singular beauty and fine character, and it was she whom Hyrum courted.

All during his courtship, Hyrum was burdened with family responsibility. At this time the family received letters from Joseph, Jr., who was working for Josiah Stoal, a friend of the family at Harmony, Pennsylvania, about 150 miles south of Palmyra. Mr. Stoal had visited the Smiths in 1825 to ask for some help in mucking out an abandoned silver mine. He had also heard about some gold plates found by Joseph and supposed Joseph had a discerning eye for treasures. The Smiths' curiosity was aroused by Joseph's repeated mention in his letters of a girl named Emma Hale, the daughter of one Isaac Hale at whose home be was boarding.

Hyrum and Jerusha talked of marriage, but it was difficult for Hyrum to set a date. Alvin's death was a great loss to the family. With help scarce and Joseph away, the work load was much increased for Hyrum. And this, coupled with the social ostracism caused by gossip of visions and the family's refusal to affiliate with local church congregations, made him almost despair of ever being able to marry.

But with the consent of Mother Smith, the date of their marriage was finally set for November 2, 1826, and Hyrum made plans to secure a house for his bride. After the home wedding, Mother Smith wrote, "My oldest son formed a matrimonial relation with one of the most excellent of women, with whom I saw much enjoyment." [^12]

Shortly after Hyrum's marriage, Joseph, Jr., arrived home from Harmony. He had persuaded Mr. Stoal to give up the search for silver. He told his parents that he was lonesome and that he wished to marry Emma Hale. To his proposed marriage they gave their hearty approval and invited Joseph to bring his new bride home with him.

Since the Smiths had obtained their farm, others had moved to the section to take up land. There was a new real estate broker sent into the locality to handle a certain section called the Everson land of which the Smiths' tract had originally been a part. Only one payment remained to secure it. In order to pay this, the Smiths, having grown a great deal of wheat, signed a contract to sell their crop in the form of flour to Josiah Stoal and Joseph Knight. The money from this crop, Joseph, Sr., thought, would be ample to take care of the last payment on the place. Father Smith sent Hyrum to Canandaigua to inform the new agent that the final payment on their farm would be paid no later than December 5, 1826.

The arrangement for finally securing ownership of the farm gave the family a feeling of security and well being, but not for long. Father Smith accompanied Joseph back to Pennsylvania, leaving his wife and Hyrum to look after things. This was one of those rare periods of happiness and peace in the household.

A few days later there came three men to visit the Smiths. One of the men was a Mr. Stoddard, a carpenter who had helped build their house. Mother Smith became upset when they began to ask impertinent questions concerning the last payment on the place, and whether or not the Smiths would consider selling the place, and where Mr. Smith and Joseph had gone. She replied that arrangements had been made to make the final payment without any idea of sale. Without further words the men left the house and talked to Hyrum who was then coming up the walk. His replies reinforced those of his mother.

Whereupon the men said, "We now forbid your touching anything on this farm, and we also warn you to leave forthwith and give possession to the lawful owners."

Hearing what they said, Mother Smith fainted. However, she quickly revived and she and Hyrum talked to the men for some time, trying to dissuade them from their wicked course. Their only reply was: "Well, we've got the place, and d—n you, help yourself if you can."

Hyrum hurried to an old friend, Dr. Robinson, and related to him the whole story. That elderly gentlemen immediately sat down and wrote at considerable length concerning the character of the family, of their industry and faithful exertions to secure their home, the things he knew of the Smiths which might restore confidence in them with respect to business transactions. When he had finished writing, Dr. Robinson took the paper and went through the village. In an hour he had procured sixty subscribers. He then gave the paper to Hyrum to carry to the land agent who lived in Canandaigua.

On receiving the signed writing the agent was highly enraged. He said that the men had told him that Mr. Smith and his son Joseph had run away and that Hyrum was cutting down the sugar orchard, hauling off the rails, burning them, and doing all manner of mischief to the farm. He had believed their false accusations and had been induced to sell the place, for which he had given a deed and received the money.

Hyrum told him the circumstances under which his father and brother had left home and discussed the probability of their being detained on the road home to attend to some business. The agent directed Hyrum to address a number of letters to Mr. Smith and have them sent and deposited in public houses on the road which he would be traveling in order that one of them might reach him and bring him home more speedily than he would otherwise come. The agent then dispatched a messenger to the men who now held the deed to the Smith farm in hopes that he might compromise with them; but they flatly refused to co-operate. The agent then sent another message to them, stating that if they did not make their appearance forthwith, he would fetch them with a warrant. To this they gave heed and came without delay.

The agent tried to convince them of the disgraceful and dishonest course which they were pursuing and did his best to persuade them to relinquish their claim and let the land revert to Mr. Smith.

For sometime they said but little, except in a sneering and taunting way to the effect that they had the land and the deed, and just "let Smith help himself. Oh, no matter about Smith, he has gold plates, gold Bibles, he is rich—he don't want anything." [^13] But finally they agreed that if Hyrum could raise one thousand dollars by Saturday at ten o'clock in the evening, they would give up the deed.

It was then Thursday noon and Hyrum was at Canandaigua, which was nine miles from his home. He returned home with a heavy heart. There he found his father, who had come in a short time ahead of him. One of Hyrum's letters had reached him at a point fifty miles from home and he had hurried home with all possible haste.

The following day Mother Smith, at the request of her husband, went to see an old Quaker gentleman with whom they had been quite intimate since first acquiring their farm, a man who had always seemed to admire the farm's neat management. They hoped that he would be both willing and able to purchase the place so that they might at least have the benefit of the crops then maturing. But she was disappointed, not in his will or intention, but in his ability. He had just paid out to the land agent all the money he could spare to redeem a piece of land belonging to a friend in his immediate neighborhood. Had she arrived at his house thirty minutes earlier she would have found him with fifteen hundred dollars in his pocket.

As soon as she left, the old gentleman set out in search of someone who could afford to assist the Smiths, and hearing that night of a Mr. Durfee who might be able to assist them, he directed the Smiths to go and see what he could do for them.

Father Smith started without delay for Mr. Durfee's and arrived at his house before daylight the next morning. Mr. Durfee sent him three miles farther on to one of his sons who was high sheriff, instructing him to say to the young man that his father wished to see him as soon as possible. Mr. Durfee, the younger, was obedient to the call. Immediately after he arrived at his father's home the three set out for the Smith farm, arriving about ten o'clock in the morning. The visitors looked at the farm, and they rode on to see the agent and the unscrupulous men who held the deeds to the place.

Father Smith and the Durfees arrived in Canandaigua at half past nine o'clock in the evening. The agent sent immediately for Stoddard and his friends, and they came without delay; but in order to make things more difficult, they contended that the agreement was broken, that it was after ten o'clock. However, since this was not true, they were forced to turn over the deed to Mr. Durfee, the high sheriff, who now became possessor of the farm.

At the conclusion of this unhappy experience, the farm seemed even more dear to the family. After the trouble Joseph Sr., left with his son Joseph to resume his business activities and to see Mr. Knight and Mr. Stoal. It was now the forepart of January, 1827, and Joseph proceeded on to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to claim his bride. He and Emma Hale were married on January 18, 1827. [^14]

By this time Hyrum had established a home of his own not far from his parents. It is quite likely that the marriage of Hyrum was the culmination of an acquaintance which had lasted several years: The romance and the wedding had been heartily approved by friends and neighbors, and it was a good marriage. The material and moral support of the gardens was evidenced by their constant interest and concern, Jerusha's sisters being frequent visitors. Jerusha herself proved to be a devoted wife and mother.

Hyrum, head of his own household, took his place in the community and became a substantial citizen. He was a Presbyterian and was eligible to hold civic positions of responsibility. His plans were to live and die in this locality so rich in opportunity and natural resources: The settling of Kentucky, Ohio, Illinois, and the regions farther west held no attraction for him. His roots were firmly established, and his foremost desire was to carve a niche for himself and his family from the land in western New York.

Notes

Seth Barden, Jerusha's father, was born September 4, 1769, at Norfolk, Connecticut. Her grandfather, Seth Barden Sen., was born September 22, 1737, at Stafford, Connecticut, his father, Abraham Barden, born December 11, 1698 at Scituate, Massachusetts, was married to Priscilla Alden and later to Esther Sampson. His father was Abraham Barden, born May 14, 1647 at Barnstable, Massachusetts. His father was William Barden, born (circa) 1642 in England, his wife was Deborah Barker. The date of his migration to America is unknown. . . . Mary R. Porter, a wife of a descendant of Jerusha and Hyrum Smith.

---
Notas:
[^1] Jerusha's older sisters and brothers were: Clarissa, born March 7, 1792. Lucinda, March, 1794; Seth, December 17, 1795; Sarah, July 18, 1799; Ahira, October 28, 180 and Amass, birth date unknown.
[^2] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p.109.
[^3] This chest, the first such repository for the gold plates and the Urim and Thummim, is in the possession of Hyrum's descendants. Its inside measurements are 16Â¼"x14Â½". It has a sloping lid, attached by metal hinge to a four-inch wide strip across the back of the top side. A keyhole is located in the outside center of the lid through the wood to the metal lock. On the right of the lock craved in the inch board is the word "Alvin."
[^4] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 117-118.
[^5] Ibid., p.123-129.
[^6] It has since been conjectured that the vengeful Mrs. Harris hid the manuscript in hope of altering the wording to make any retranslation look spurious, and thus in one moment destroy its authenticity and show Joseph a false prophet. D & C 10:11-18
[^7] Lucy Mack Smith mentions only the Urim and Thummim being taken, but the Prophet Joseph said the plates were taken also. See Church History, vol. I, pp. 21-22.
[^8] Lucy, Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 133-135.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 135-137.
[^10] Date taken from Mother Smith's History of Joseph Smith, pp. 331-332, is taken as correct. His death as recorded in Church History was November 19, 1824 and November 19, 1825. Vo1. I, p. 16.
[^11] Jerusha Barden was born February 15, 1805, at Norfolk, Litchfield County, Connecticut. Her parents were Seth and Sarah Barden (Sarah's maiden name unknown), grandparents—Seth Barden and Ruth (last name unknown). Seth and Ruth moved from Stafford, Lolland County, Conn., into Norfolk when it was first settled. There Seth, Jerusha's father was born. They left Norfolk shortly after the birth of Jerusha. It is uncertain as to where they lived prior to moving to New York. One writer states he came from Canada to New York. They settled in the Newark Valley in 1840, and her father died March 16, 1844 at Barton, New York. Buried beside her father is a wife, Huldah. He probably married her after Sarah's death.
[^12] Lucy Smith, op. cit., p. 94.
[^13] Ibid., p. 97.
[^14] B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, vol. I, p. 82; Joseph Smith, History of the Church, vol. I, p. 86.
