Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter IV

The Storm Breaks

The birth of Lovina was the beginning of Hyrum and Jerusha Smith's posterity. While Jerusha was still confined, friends and neighbors called to congratulate the happy parents, and when the baby was about a week old the Barden sisters—Clarissa, Lucinda and Sarah [^1] came and were invited to stay for dinner.

While Hyrum was seated at the table enjoying this festive occasion, the visitors were alarmed by his sudden action. His young brother, Don Carlos, had run suddenly into the room just as Hyrum was raising a cup to his lips. As he saw his brother, Hyrum dropped his cup, ran through the open door into his wife's bedroom, seized a small wooden chest, turned it up-side-down scattering its contents on the floor, hoisted it upon his shoulder, and raced out of the house toward the Smith home. Jerusha calmed her astonished sisters who were exclaiming, "He must be crazy!" Laughing heartily, his wife replied, "Oh, certainly not in the least; he has just thought of something which he has neglected; and it is just like him to fly off on a tangent when he thinks of something that way." [^2]

Hyrum had agreed to deliver the chest [^3] to Joseph as soon as the plates were brought home from their hiding place in the old birch log at the foot of the hill, perhaps not realizing how soon it would be needed. The added work and concern over the new baby made him forget. Since Lovina's birth on September 16, 1827, Hyrum had not been fully aware of what was going on at his parents' home. He soon learned that Joseph had kept his appointment with the Angel Moroni at the hill and had received possession of the records. Mother Lucy told him how Joseph and Emma had gone at night to the designated place and had returned the next morning with them.

The four years since Moroni's first visit to Joseph had been a period of development for Hyrum as well as for his brother. Hyrum had matured religiously, for he had sat in the family gatherings to hear Joseph tell the story of his many meetings with Moroni and other angels. The experience had been something like a four-year academic course, under the tutelage of a heavenly teacher who was endowed with the Holy Spirit. In some ways the gold plates were a diploma, signifying the success of the pupil. Hyrum in turn had been Joseph's pupil, and an apt one, for he gave his utmost attention and readily learned the basic concepts of God and the gospel.

Joseph had told the family how on his first visit at the hiding place, Moroni had instructed him concerning the safety of the plates. Joseph had been shown the forces of evil mustered against him. The angel had warned him again concerning his responsibility for the safekeeping of the plates. If he, through his carelessness, should let them fall into evil hands he would be destroyed.

Hyrum Smith's birthplace, Tunbridge, Vermont. Photograph taken by Elders W. D. Brinkerhoff and Alma S. Clark, July 30, 1914. (Published-Liahona, Elders Journal. Independence, Missouri, September 15, 1914. Vol. 12 - No. 12.)

Smith ancestral home-Topsfield, Massachusetts

Sometime during the following December, 1827, Joseph came to say goodbye to Hyrum and Jerusha. It was difficult for Hyrum to see his brother go as far away as Harmony, Pennsylvania, over snow-covered country roads. Alva Hale, Emma's brother, had come at Joseph's request to help them move. For the Smith family, the past several months had been full of apprehension and excitement. They had been beset by curiosity seekers. The gold plates had had several close calls by the enemy, once when hidden behind a stone in the fireplace, and once when they were hidden in the old cooper shop across the way. Warrants had been presented permitting search for stolen goods, as a pretext to find the plates. A company of armed men had surrounded the house, and Joseph and the family had used the stratagem of his grandfather Mack to disperse them. Joseph banged open the door and rushed out, shouting commands and instructions in every direction, as if he had a legion at hand; the mob sneaked away in confusion.

A portion of Hyrum Smith's diary with his signature. (Courtesy of Ralph Smith).

Because of such constant molestation there had been no time to translate the record; hence, Joseph and Emma planned to move to the more friendly community where Emma's folks lived, in hope of some quiet and seclusion in which to work.

The Smith family had wondered where Joseph could get enough money to make the trip and were happy to hear that Martin Harris, a well-to-do farmer, had given Joseph fifty dollars with which to do the Lord's work. [^4]

When the heavily loaded sleigh pulled away early on December 27th, they little realized the danger to the gold plates, for no sooner did the sleigh with its fast-trotting team get beyond the village than a sheriff's posse stopped them under the pretext of searching for stolen goods. But the "posse" failed to search at the bottom of a barrel of beans and thus failed to secure the plates.

For the next three months the household of Hyrum Smith was one of peace and tranquility. The source of excitement had been removed from Palmyra, New York to Harmony, Pennsylvania. Several letters had been received from Joseph and from these it was learned that he had purchased a small house and a few acres of land from his father-in-law. He and Emma had also accepted the hospitality of her family until they could move. Meantime Joseph's friend and benefactor, Martin Harris, went to act as scribe for Joseph.

It was gratifying to know that at last Joseph was beginning to reveal the hidden meaning locked in the curiously engraved characters which appeared on the plates. It had taken much study and effort on the part of the young seer to obtain the English equivalents even with the aid of the Urim and Thummim.

The work of translating the record from the gold plates became the most important concern of the Smith family. While Joseph was exerting every effort to fulfil his heavenly assignment, Hyrum at the head of his household and aiding his parents and his brothers and sisters in the task of providing the necessary physical comforts of life, stood by to aid Joseph if or when the necessity occurred.

It is quite probable that Hyrum shared the worry and anxiety of Joseph's trouble with Martin Harris who had become Joseph's first scribe. Mr. Harris had been sent to New York City with a copy of the characters from the sacred record for verification of their authenticity. He had failed to obtain a certificate from Professor Anthon but his visit succeeded in convincing him that the characters were authentic. Soon afterward, to pacify his wife, who had opposed his support of Joseph Smith, he asked the prophet to allow him to take 116 pages of translated manuscript home to show to his wife and others.

The manuscript was not returned to Joseph because Mr. Harris failed to keep his word and permitted certain unauthorized persons to see the manuscript. Thus in attempting to avoid trouble more trouble was created. Joseph, not hearing from Harris, decided to journey to Palmyra to make an investigation. On June 15, 1828, a few days prior to his departure his wife, Emma, gave birth to their first child, a son, who died the day he was born. The death of his child and the concern over the manuscript made the trip one of great travail. He rode a stage most of the way; the last few miles were on foot through a forest. A stranger with whom he had become acquainted accompanied him to his home. They arrived early in the morning, the stranger after breakfast left without divulging his identity. Hyrum was shocked to see Joseph in such a state of despondency and gloom which was in contrast to his natural sunny and cheerful disposition.

Word was sent for Mr. Harris to come to the Smith home. After several hours' delay the dejected man arrived. Having waited breakfast until noon to have their guest eat with them, they immediately sat down to the table. Mr. Harris sat motionless, drew the attention of Hyrum who exclaimed, "Martin, why do you not eat, are you sick?" At these words Mr. Harris pressed his hand to his temples, and cried out in a tone of deep anguish, "Oh, I have lost my soul!"

Joseph sprang from his chair exclaiming, "Martin, have you lost the manuscript?"

"Yes, it is gone," replied Martin, "And I know not where." [^5]

Mr. Harris then related in detail his effort to recover the lost pages. The household was enveloped in gloom as Joseph walked the floor crying and sobbing, not knowing what would befall him. The entire family was in a state of grief. His mother attempted to comfort him, but she felt her work was ineffectual. The next morning he set out for his home with a heavy heart. It seemed that all that the family had so fondly anticipated, all that had been the source of so much secret satisfaction, had in a moment fled forever. [^6]

Joseph's departure was one of sadness and deep humiliation. Nor was his journey home free from forebodings. Hyrum, anxious to share Joseph's trouble, wanted to accompany his brother. But his place was at home since in July the farm required constant attention and labor.

Joseph, then in his twenty-second year, was being educated for a greater role, and his lesson was a hard one. He had to learn to become as clay in the hands of the Great Sculptor. But he was an apt student, quick to learn from each problem and crisis as it developed.

It is not known just when Moroni, the heavenly messenger, came for the Urim and Thummim and the record [^7] except that soon after Joseph arrived in Harmony, sometime in July, 1828. The angel came as Joseph was pouring out his soul in supplication to God for forgiveness and mercy. He declared that Joseph had sinned in delivering the manuscript into the hands of a wicked man and that he would have to suffer the consequences of his indiscretion. Moroni then told Joseph to return the Urim and Thummim into his (Moroni's) hands.

As Joseph handed them to the angel, he was told that if he remained humble and penitent he might have them returned to him again on the twenty-second of the following September. [^8]

On September 22, the seer stones were restored to Joseph by the angel, who told Joseph that the Lord would send him a scribe. He was told that he must pray always in order to be successful in his work, for Satan had tried and would continue to try to destroy him.

When the Smiths arrived from Palmyra to visit Joseph, some time in February, 1829, the household of their son Joseph was in a happy state of routine activities. Progress on the record had been slow but steady. Until a new scribe could be secured, Emma had been writing for Joseph, but the work was often interrupted because of her household duties.

The Smiths became acquainted with Emma's father, Isaac Hale, and his wife Elizabeth, and their sons Jesse, David Alva, Isaac Ward, and Reuben, and daughters Phoebe and Elizabeth. As Mother Smith later wrote: "They were an intelligent and highly respectable family, pleasantly situated, and living in good style in the town of Harmony on the Susquehannah River, within a short distance of the place Joseph resided. The time of our visit with them we passed very agreeably, and returned home relieved of a burden which was almost insupportable, and our present joy far over-balanced all our former grief." [^9]

The trip had been beneficial both to Joseph and to his parents, but trouble awaited them at home. Upon their arrival, Hyrum met them at the door with the news that both Sophronia and Samuel were very ill and that he (Hyrum) had quit his business to spend his full time taking care of affairs.

The life of Hyrum Smith during the early New York period was closely interwoven with that of his father's family; the decisions and activities of the family reveal much about his character and personality. It is quite probable at this time there was a period of expectancy and waiting by the Smiths for any eventuality. In the meantime there was work to be done on the farm and a living to be made. This was Hyrum's responsibility, otherwise he would have been with Joseph at Harmony. However, this first separation was only temporary, for within a few months his interest and presence would be associated with certain events at Harmony, Pennsylvania.

Notes

Joints are dove tail construction, and the floor of the chest is one piece of inch lumber.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Lucy Smith, History of Joseph Smith, (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1945), p. 139.
[^2] See Ibid., p. 139.
[^3] Ibid., p. 141.
[^4] B. H. Roberts, op. cit., vol. I, p. 120.
[^5] According to the Prophet Joseph's account Samuel did not come to Harmony until the latter part of May.
[^6] Joseph Smith, op.cit., vol. VII, p. 216.
[^7] D&C 11.
[^8] See entire section 11.
[^9] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 143-146.
