Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter V

The Translation

Hyrum Smith, with the other members of the school board of Palmyra, was in meeting to discuss the availability of a suitable schoolteacher for their locality when a knock came at the door. It was Lyman Cowdery who had conferred with Hyrum the day before about the teaching job. After he was asked several questions he was hired, but the next day he notified Hyrum that he would be unable to accept the position. That evening the trustees were again summoned to a meeting, and they chose Lyman's brother Oliver to take his place.

The new teacher, who came to board at the Smiths, soon heard about the golden plates. The story seemed to him fantastic, and yet it intrigued and fascinated him. Being a stranger, he was not completely trusted at first, and he had difficulty piecing together the facts of the narrative. But he won the confidence of Joseph Smith, Sr., who then told him Joseph's story.

Oliver Cowdery was deeply impressed by what he heard. To Mr. Smith, he said: "Since hearing about the plates I have been in deep study upon the subject all day, and it has been impressed upon my mind that I should yet have the privilege of writing for Joseph. Furthermore, I am determined to make him a visit at the close of school." [^1]

When Oliver learned from the family that Samuel was leaving for Harmony, he questioned whether or not Samuel, who was recovering from a recent illness, was sufficiently strong to make the journey alone and to endure through the spring with Joseph. He then requested permission to go with Samuel to Joseph's home. It had been impossible for Oliver to get the subject off his mind: "It is working," he remarked to the family, "in my very bones." He made the journey a matter of prayer and became convinced that it was the will of the Lord that he should go. So absorbed was he in the subject of the record, that he could scarcely talk about anything else. [^2]

It was sometime in March, 1829, that litigation involving the Smith property was finally resolved, and the family was forced to move. The details leading up to this event are missing, but we know that with the loss of their home the family moved in with Hyrum and Jerusha until another house could be obtained. Oliver Cowdery was advised that he should look for another place to board and room, but he begged Mother Smith, "Let me stay with you, for I can stay in any log hut where you and Father live, but I cannot leave you, so do not mention it." [^3]

It was something of a relief to Hyrum to have Oliver Cowdery and Samuel leave for Harmony. The winter had been long, their house overcrowded; and there had been the usual sickness during the cold weather.

By the latter part of May, Samuel returned feeling much improved in health, and overjoyed at the progress made by Joseph. While with Joseph, Samuel had obtained a testimony of the truth of Joseph's work and had been baptized.

Hyrum listened carefully to all that Samuel had to say of his journey. The road had been miserably muddy and rough, in places almost impassable. Joseph had been delighted at their arrival, having again had a premonition of their coming. Joseph and Oliver had gone right to work for it was urgent that the translation of the plates be completed. Therefore, on April 7, 1829, the second day [^4] after Oliver's and Samuel's arrival the important work got underway again. [^5]

The story of Samuel's conversion and baptism left no question in Hyrum's mind about the importance of baptism; but when Samuel told about the visit of John the Baptist, who had appeared in his resurrected state to confer the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, Hyrum wondered. However, he thought, such an occurrence was quite reasonable. If the divine authority of the gospel had been taken from the earth, then at some time God would surely restore it.

Samuel explained the details of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. [^6]

Samuel's story so greatly impressed Hyrum that plans were made immediately for Hyrum to depart for Harmony. Samuel agreed to take Hyrum's place in looking after things at home. Hyrum's journey to see Joseph was one of great anticipation. He needed to have a serious visit with his prophet brother, for there were several questions to be answered; and he felt a great concern over what his own work was to be.

The roads had dried out, the countryside had donned its spring attire, and the air was warm and balmy. The change from the confining routine work of the winter was exhilarating, and Hyrum's mount seemed to sense his carefree mood, for the miles to Harmony were covered in record time.

When he arrived, the brothers exchanged warm handclasps and hugged each other affectionately; it had been months since they last had seen each other. And then they talked and talked.

They agreed that certain ordinances were necessary for one's salvation. They discussed baptism. Had not the Savior told Nicodemus, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God"? (John 3:5.) They talked about authority. Hyrum knew that Joseph had not acted of his own volition but had been called as had Moses and Aaron. And John the Baptist had been sent under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who in turn had been ordained by Jesus Christ. Thus Joseph's authority could be traced directly to the Savior himself.

Hyrum's one remaining question concerned his place in the great work of restoration, and the answer to that question came from the Lord through the Urim and Thummim:

Behold thou art Hyrum, my son; seek the kingdom of God, and all things shall be added according to that which is just.

Build upon my rock, which is my gospel;

Deny not the spirit of revelation; nor the spirit of prophecy, for woe unto him that denieth these things;

Therefore treasure up in your heart until the time which is in my wisdom that you shall go forth. . . .

Behold I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I am the light and life of the world.

I am the same who came unto my own and my own received me not;

But verily I say unto you, that as many as receive me, to them will I give power to become the sons of God, even to them who believe on my name. [^7]

The Lord advised Hyrum to seek not for riches but for wisdom; telling him that the mysteries of God should be unfolded unto him, and that he should be made rich inasmuch as he that has eternal life is rich.

He was to say nothing of this revelation but was to declare repentance unto this generation, and keep the commandments, and he would be blessed.

Hyrum was not to declare God's word until he sought to obtain that word; then his tongue would be loosed, and he would receive the power of God to the convincing of men. He was to study the word of God, both the word that had gone abroad and the words which were being translated, until he had obtained all which God would grant unto the children of men in this generation. [^8]

There was now no doubt left in Hyrum's mind as to the truth of God's work. He pondered over and over the things the Lord had told him. He was to seek the kingdom of God, to deny not the spirit of revelation, and to thrust in his sickle (do missionary work). He had been introduced to Jesus Christ the Son of God, and told what Christ's relationship was to the world and how he had been rejected by his own.

Hyrum returned home imbued with enthusiasm for Joseph's work. Like his brother Samuel, he was fully convinced of the truth of all that Joseph had told him. But no sooner had he returned, than reports of trouble began to pour in upon him. Joseph had told him how the people of Harmony were beginning to oppose his work and that much of this opposition was led by ministers of the various Protestant groups. And for Hyrum there was added to the trouble in Harmony that in Palmyra. Mrs. Martin Harris had been busy. She had succeeded in getting signed affidavits proclaiming Joseph Smith to be dishonest and had then gone before a magistrate of Lyons, New York, and arranged for court proceedings. [^9]

Mrs. Harris sent Lyman Cowdery, who may have been a county official, to Pennsylvania to have Joseph imprisoned. When the time came for the trial and the witnesses for the defense had left Harmony for Palmyra, Hyrum was asked by Mother Smith what could be done.

"Why, Mother," he replied, "we can do nothing except to look to the Lord: in Him is all help and strength; He can deliver from every trouble." [^10]

At his words Mother Smith's face brightened. She had never neglected her prayers, and now she decided to petition God to help them during this critical hour."

That evening the court convened and after several witnesses had taken the stand, Martin Harris was called to testify. "I can swear," he said in his testimony, "that Joseph Smith never got one dollar from me by persuasion, since God made me. . . . This I can pointedly prove; and I can tell you, furthermore, that I have never seen in Joseph Smith a disposition to take any man's money, without giving him reasonable compensation for the same in return. And as for the plates which he professes to have, Gentlemen, if you do not believe it, but continue to resist the truth, it will one day be the means of damning your souls." [^11]

The magistrate told the court that there would be no more witnesses. He took the written testimonies that had been given and tore them to pieces, telling the witnesses to go about their business and trouble him no more with such ridiculous folly. [^12]

In Harmony, the forces of evil continued to crowd in upon Joseph and Oliver as they labored to finished the translation of the plates. The clergy of the community spread rumors that young Joe Smith was a deceiver and was mentally unbalanced, that he was perpetrating a great fraud upon society, and that something should be done to stop him. And added to these unfair accusations was the gnawing anxiety over a dwindling food supply. Their labors left them no time to work for their daily bread.

Fortunately, about this time, an old friend of the family, one Joseph Knight of Colesville, New York, had heard of Joseph's work of translating the records at Harmony, and he felt impressed to take some supplies to help the young man out. As a youth, Joseph had worked for Mr. Knight on his farm. This kindly old friend, in his anxiety over the young Prophet, inquired about their circumstances and, discovering their need, soon returned with more supplies. Thus the work of translating was able to continue. [^13]

The revelation from the Lord to Hyrum had been a call to the ministry, but the time was not yet ripe. The Book of Mormon was yet to be published and the Church to be organized. Until that time he must be content to remain at home and prepare himself to answer the call when it came.

He kept himself informed on the progress of the translation. The news of Joseph's and Oliver's move from Harmony, Pennsylvania, to Fayette, New York, greatly concerned him. Enemy pressure had caused a second delay, and precious time had been spent in moving and finding a suitable place to live. The Peter Whitmer family had been most kind in offering room and board. This family had been friendly ever since they had heard of Joseph and his work from Father and Mother Smith who had stayed with them overnight while on their trip to Harmony. [^14] David Whitmer, a son of Peter, had met Oliver Cowdery and Samuel Smith when they were on their way to see Joseph. [^15] This chance encounter had prompted Oliver to write a letter to David, and that letter proved providential. David responded to Oliver's request, and thus relief was afforded in a difficult situation. A Whitmer family council decided that David should take his team and wagon and bring Oliver, Joseph, and family to Fayette.

It was the latter part of June, 1829, that the work of translation began in Fayette. Long uninterrupted hours were spent, and the work progressed rapidly. Soon Hyrum received word that Joseph was coming to Palmyra for an important occasion. Joseph explained that there were to be witnesses to the truth of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Hyrum was overjoyed to learn that he was to be one of the eight witnesses to be called with his father and Samuel.

The day before Joseph and several others arrived at Palmyra, the three witnesses (as prescribed in Ether 5:2-4) had been chosen, and Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and David Whitmer had seen the plates at the hands of the Angel Moroni and had heard the voice of the Lord commanding them to testify to the reality of the record and of the power by which it was brought forth.

According to a revelation it was necessary also that eight witnesses see and handle the plates. From the Whitmers and the Smiths the following were chosen: Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer Jr., John Whitmer, (all sons of Peter Whitmer), Hyrum Page (Peter Whitmer's son-in-law), and Hyrum, Samuel H., and Joseph Smith, Sr.

The twenty miles from Fayette to Palmyra had been covered in record time and the business at hand was not delayed. In a secluded place where the Smith family were in the habit of offering up their secret devotions to God, eight men were shown the plates at the hands of Joseph the Prophet. [^16] The solemnity and spirit of the occasion made Hyrum feel like weeping. That the plates were real they knew, for they lifted them as they turned the leaves which were about six by eight inches in size and fastened together with three metal rings.

The plates looked ancient and strange. The fine hieroglyphic figures were symmetrical and beautifully engraved. To Hyrum it was a never-to-be forgotten occasion; before the eight witnesses stood Joseph, his brother, so young; and yet it was with the power and authority of a seer that he spoke. As Hyrum listened, a spirit of peace and joy came over him and it seemed that he was experiencing a foretaste of heaven.

Following this significant occasion, the group rejoiced. It was a time of triumph and success in the midst of evil and opposition. Hyrum noticed how happy Joseph was and heard him remark that now others had seen the plates and knew for themselves that he did not go about deceiving mankind. [^17] The burden had been almost too much for Joseph to bear alone, and now there were others to share his responsibility.

The translation of the Book of Mormon was soon completed and a copyright obtained. After Joseph and the others had conferred with several publishers, E. B. Grandin, owner and manager of the Wayne Sentinel, agreed to print the book, although his binding equipment was inadequate for such a job. A contract was signed August 25, 1829, for an edition of five thousand copies. [^18]

When all arrangements were made for printing the book, Joseph returned to his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania. Oliver had been instructed to write a duplicate copy as a precautionary measure, before the printing began.

Oliver acted as companion and bodyguard to Hyrum in delivering to the printer a daily supply of copy. Peter Whitmer, Jr., was stationed on guard at Hyrum's home to protect the manuscript. The work of printing continued from August 1829, until March 30, 1830.

Mr. John H. Gilbert, Esquire, adviser to E.B. Grandin in printing the Book of Mormon, remembered Hyrum Smith, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and the Prophet Joseph Smith coming to the place of Mr. Grandin. Part of his description is as follows:

When the printer was ready to commence work, Harris (Martin) was notified, and Hyrum Smith brought the first installment of manuscript, of 24 pages, closely written on common foolscap paper— he had it under his vest, and vest and coat closely buttoned over it. At night Smith came and got the manuscript, and with the same precaution carried it away. The next morning with the same watchfulness, he brought it again, and at night took it away. This was kept up several days. The title page was first set up, and after the proof was read and corrected, several copies were printed for Harris and his friends. On the second day Harris and Smith (Hyrum) being in the office—I called their attention to a grammatical error, and asked whether I should correct it. Harris consulted with Smith a short time, and turned to me and said: "The Old Testament is ungrammatical, set it as it is written. . . ."

After working a few days, I said to Smith on his handing me the manuscript in the morning: "Mr. Smith, if you would leave this manuscript with me, I would take it home with me at night and read and punctuate it." His reply was, "We are commanded not to leave it." A few mornings after this, when Smith handed me the manuscript, he said to me:—"If you will give your word that this manuscript shall be returned to us when you get through with it, I will leave it with you." I assured Smith that it should be returned all right when I got through with it. For two or three nights I took it home with me and read it, and punctuated it with a lead pencil. This will account for the punctuation marks in pencil, which is referred to in the Mormon Report, an extract from which will be found below.

Martin Harris, Hyrum Smith, and Oliver Cowdery were very frequent visitors to the office during the printing of the Mormon Bible. The manuscript was supposed to be in the handwriting of Cowdery. Every Chapter, if I remember correctly, was one solid paragraph, without a punctuation mark, from beginning to end. . . .

Cowdery held and looked over the manuscript when most of the proofs were read. Martin Harris once or twice, and Hyrum Smith once, Grandin supposing these men could read their own writing as well, if not better, than any one else; and if there are any discrepancies between the Palmyra edition and the manuscript these men should be held responsible.

Joseph Smith, Jr., had nothing to do whatever with the printing or furnishing copy for the printers, being but once in the office during the printing of the Bible, and then not over 15 or 20 minutes.

Hyrum Smith was a common laborer, and worked for any one as he was called on.

Cowdery taught school winters—so it was said—but what he done summers, I do not know. [^19]

During the long months of printing, serious threats were made by the enemy who wanted to stop the work. One Sunday, Hyrum felt uneasy and persuaded Oliver to accompany him to the printer's. There they discovered a Mr. Cole busily inserting perverted portions of the Book of Mormon into his weekly paper called Dogberry Paper on Winter Hill. When he was accused of illegal use of copyright material, he wrathfully defended himself; and it was necessary to send for Joseph before he could be made to desist.

Another attempt was made to stop the press. The enemy circulated a rumor that Martin Harris, who had underwritten the cost of printing, was unable to raise the money. Further rumor stated that when the book was published no one would buy it.

Mr. Grandin stopped the press, and it was all Joseph could do to persuade him to continue.

Deacon Beckwith, with members of a committee who aimed to steal the manuscript of the Book of Mormon and destroy it, called at Hyrum's house. When Mother Smith received them, the deacon as spokesman began:

"Mrs. Smith, we hear you have a Gold Bible; we have come to see if you will be so kind as to show it to us?"

"No, Gentlemen," she replied, "we have no Gold Bible, but we have a translation of some gold plates, which have been brought forth for the purpose of making known to the world the plainness of the gospel, and also to give a history of the people which formerly inhabited this continent." [^20]

She explained in part what the Book of Mormon contained, dwelling particularly upon some of the principles of religion and pointing out the similarity between these principles and those taught by Jesus Christ in the New Testament.

"Notwithstanding all this," she said, "the denominations are very much opposed to us. The Universalists are alarmed lest their religion should suffer loss, the Presbyterians tremble for their salaries, the Methodists also come, and they rage, for they worship a God without body or parts, and they know that our faith comes in conflict with this principle." [^21]

After hearing her through, the gentlemen said, "Can we see the manuscript then?"

"No, sir," she answered, "you cannot see it. I have told you what it contains and that must suffice."

He made no reply to this, but said instead, "Mrs. Smith, you and most of your children have belonged to our church for some length of time, and we respect you very highly. You say a good deal about the Book of Mormon which your son has found, and you believe much of what he tells you, and they do wish—I wish—that if you do believe those things, you would not say anything more upon the subject. I do wish you would not."

"Deacon Beckwith," she replied, "if you should stick my flesh full of faggots, and even burn me at the stake, I would declare, as long as God should give me breath, that Joseph has got that record, and that I know it to be true."

Turning to his companions the deacon said, "You see it is of no use to say anything more to her, for we cannot change her mind." Then turning back to Mother Smith, he continued, "Mrs. Smith, I see that it is not possible to persuade you out of your belief; therefore I deem it unnecessary to say anything more upon the subject."

"No, sir," she said, "it is not worth your while."

Bidding Mrs. Smith goodbye, they left the house and meeting Hyrum, Deacon Beckwith said:

"Mr. Smith, do you not think that you may be deceived about that Record which your brother pretends to have found?"

"No, sir," Hyrum answered firmly, "I do not."

Beckwith: "Well, now, Mr. Smith, if you find that you are deceived, and that he has not got the Record, will you confess the feet to me?"

Hyrum: "Will you, Deacon Beckwith, take one of the books when they are printed and read it, asking God to give you an evidence that you may know whether it is true?"

Beckwith: "I think it beneath me to take so much trouble; however, if you will promise that you will confess to me that Joseph never had the plates, I will ask for a witness whether the book is true." [^22] And without further ceremony the three gentlemen left.

In June of 1829 Hyrum's household had been blessed by the addition of a second baby girl whom they named Mary. These June days were days of comparative peace and calm while Hyrum waited for his call to assist Joseph in the work of the ministry. He was not yet ready to declare God's word, for according to the revelation the Lord had advised him to get wisdom and not to deny revelation from heaven. There should be no doubt about the objective of his mission which was to build up God's kingdom here upon the earth. Hyrum's twenty-ninth year was a period of new and significant experiences. The potential of his intellect and emotional powers were being exploited to their maximum capacity. The ground work for Hyrum's place beside Joseph had been well laid.

Perhaps, among the many qualities of character favoring Hyrum were his humility and teachableness, coupled with a deep sense of family loyalty, love, and devotion. He had been an apt pupil of Joseph in theological matters. There were no disagreements between them relative to the priesthood, its powers and method of restoration. In regard to the reality of God's revelation it was not necessary for him to accept only a metaphysical explanation or proof thereof, for he had actually beheld with his eyes and felt with his hands the gold plates which had been written and preserved by the power of God. Every means had been used to give him the certainty and assurance of the absolute truth that this was God's work.

A precedent was being established when Joseph put Hyrum in charge of seeing the Book of Mormon through the press, for this was the beginning of shifting a major responsibility from the shoulders of the younger brother to those of the older, and is an indication of the confidence and complete trust Joseph had in the judgment and trustworthiness of Hyrum. The pressure of evil influences had weighed heavy on the Prophet during the exacting period of translation. There is no doubt that to have a person of Hyrum's caliber assume the responsibility of completing final work of publication was a great relief to Joseph.

Fortunately, Hyrum, Oliver Cowdery, and Peter Whitmer, Jr., were successful in their assignment which took more than six months to complete, notwithstanding the stratagem of their enemies, particularly Squire Cole and Deacon Beckwith, to destroy the project. How Hyrum was regarded by the citizenry of Palmyra was revealed when Esquire Gilbert spoke of him as "a common laborer, and worked for any one he was called on." This appraisal was partly true at the moment, but it could not portend the future for Hyrum Smith.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, The American Prophet, (1934, Macmillan, Co. N.Y.), p. 52.
[^2] "Latter-day Saints," by revelation was added in 1838. In the Prophet's story he gives the full name.
[^3] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, p. 79. Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials of Church History, Deseret Book Co. (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1922), p. 92.
[^4] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 168.
[^5] Warren Sweet, The Story of Religion in America, Harper Brothers, (N.Y., 1939), pp. 373-411.
[^6] D&C 107.
[^7] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 84-86.
[^8] Asael died October 31, 1830.
[^9] Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography, (N.Y. 1874), Fourth Edition, p. 54.
[^10] Joseph Smith. op. cit., vol. I pp. 119.
[^11] Ibid., p. 146.
[^12] ldem.
[^13] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, p. 47
[^14] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 149.
[^15] B. H. Roberts, op. cit., vol. I, p. 120. Oliver met David Whitmer in Palmyra.
[^16] Ibid., vol. I, p. 147.
[^17] 17. Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 152.
[^18] 18. Joseph Smith, op. cit.,vol. I, p. 71
[^19] 19. Wilford Wood, Joseph Smith Begins His Work, (Copyright 1958), Wilford Wood, Publisher in the United States of America. From unnumbered pages in the front of the book from memoranda made by John H. Gilbert, Esquire, Sept. 8, 1829 at Palmyra, N.Y.
[^20] 20. Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 160.
[^21] 21. Ibid., p. 161.
[^22] 22. Ibid, pp. 162-163.
