Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter VI

Christ's Church Restored

When Hyrum Smith read of the publication of the Book of Mormon in the Wayne Sentinel for Friday, March 26, 1830, he was greatly relieved. The notice was headed the Book of Mormon and read:

"The above work, containing about 600 pages, large duodecimo, is now for sale, wholesale and retail at the Palmyra Bookstore by E. B. Grandin."

Hyrum remembered a preview of the book published by the same firm on Friday June 29, 1829—almost a year before. It had read in part: "It is generally known and spoken of as the 'Golden Bible.' Most people entertain an idea that the whole matter is a result of gross imposition, and a grosser superstition. . . ."

The announcement of the new volume of scripture was the signal for renewed opposition and persecution. Nearby newspapers joined in the denunciation. On April 2, 1830, the Rochester Telegraph said:

The Book of Mormon has been placed in our hands. A viler imposition was never practiced. It is an evidence of fraud, blasphemy and credulity, shocking both to Christians and moralists. The author and proprietor is Joseph Smith Jun., a fellow who by some hocus pocus acquired such influence over a wealthy farmer of Wayne County that the latter mortgaged his farm for $3,000.00 which he paid for the printing and binding of 5,000 copies of the blasphemous work. The volume consists of about 600 pages and is divided into the books of Nephi, of Jacob, of Mosiah, of Alma, of Mormon, of Ether, of Helaman. Copyright secured.

The style of the work may be conjectured from the preface, and testimonials, which we subjoin.

After nearly three months the sentiment against the Book of Mormon was unabated. The Palmyra Reflector, on June 20, 1830, said:

The age of miracles has again arrived, and if the least reliance can be placed upon the assertions daily made by the "Gold Bible" apostles (which is somewhat doubtful), no prophet, since the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, has performed half so many wonders as have been attributed to that spindle-shanked ignoramus: Joe Smith. This fellow appears to possess the quintessence of impudence, while his fellow laborers are not far behind in a greater or lesser degree,—denouncing dire damnation on such as may withhold their approbation from one of the most ridiculous impostures ever promulgated.

To Hyrum, Joseph, Oliver Cowdery, and friends, the vituperations of the press, clergy, and citizens against the new movement only confirmed what Moroni had told the Prophet seven years before—that Joseph Smith's name would be know for good and evil throughout the world. Prophecy was being fulfilled. The negative publicity, although hard to bear, acted like a double-edged sword: Some people sensed the exaggerations and the prejudice underlying the fantastic statements of the enemy and were led to investigate. There were those among the frontier people of New York and Pennsylvania who listened, read, and discovered the truth. The book never lacked for friends and supporters; and like a smoldering forest fire, the everlasting gospel which it contained would yet burst into a flame of good, never again to be smothered.

With the coming forth of the book, the work of the Lord gained a foothold in the earth, and the prelude scenes were finished: the keys of the priesthood had been restored, the Book of Mormon (the ancient record as scripture) had been translated and printed, and strong men of character had been converted to supply the personnel. The time for the organization of Christ's Church had arrived.

This event would be most significant for it would signal the beginning of missionary work and provide an opportunity for all mankind to partake of the blessings which would lead to eternal life. That the powers of evil did not underestimate the gravity of this new development, God's servants were well aware. They recognized the persecution and the unfavorable publicity for what they were, attempts by the evil one to thwart God's purposes.

Until this time, the Prophet Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, and others had formed an undeclared organization based on a natural and spiritual relationship. But in order to gain legal recognition and thus be able to own property, license missionaries, and buy and sell property for the Church, it was expedient that a formal organization be made. Civil law demanded the presence of a minimum of six persons to initiate a religious organization. And in order to fulfill this requirement Joseph called a meeting of the brethren for April 6, 1830, at the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr., in Fayette, New York. Hyrum was one of those requested to be present.

This journey from Palmyra to Fayette, was for Hyrum one of joy and anticipation. He remembered the thrilling, never-to-be forgotten experience of the year before when he had seen the plates containing the ancient record. And as he rode along it seemed to him that the setting was perfect for the restoration of the true Church.

It was balmy spring weather, and spring for Hyrum symbolized the truth and light which the world was expectantly awaiting. Nature was emerging from a winter's sleep, and the swelling buds and fragrant blossoms denoted for Hyrum a time of beginning, a time of reawakening.

The ten years of preparation for the organization had matured Hyrum. He had witnessed the gradual change in the social status of his father's family. Joseph's visions had re-oriented his religious thinking. His experience as a witness to the Book of Mormon and his participation in its publication gave him a deep conviction of the truth of the work. But he had been admonished to curb his impatience and wait awhile before he set out to do missionary work.

When the meeting was at last called to order, a modern reporter might have described it as the meeting of a group about to organize a young men's club. The oldest, Hyrum Smith, had just turned 30; David Whitmer was 25; Joseph Smith, 24Â½; Oliver Cowdery, 23Â½; Samuel H. Smith, 22; Peter Whitmer Jr., 20. Their average age was 24. Others were present—the elder Whitmers, Hyrum's parents, and perhaps Martin Harris, all of whom were farmers except for Oliver Cowdery, who was a teacher. [^1]

After a solemn prayer the Prophet Joseph asked the brethren present if they would accept him and Oliver Cowdery as their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God. If the brethren were willing to do this they could proceed to organize the Church according to the commandments of the Lord. The brethren unanimously consented. Joseph then ordained Oliver an elder in The Church of Jesus Christ: [^2] and Oliver, in turn, ordained Joseph. The Sacrament was then administered to those who had previously been baptized and had hands laid on their heads for the reception of the Holy Ghost. Some of those present enjoyed the gift of prophecy, and all rejoiced exceedingly. Of the six charter members, Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith Jr. had baptized each other in the Susquehanna River on May 15, 1829, and Samuel H. Smith, May 25. They had baptized Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, and Peter Whitmer Jr. June 29, 1829, in Seneca Lake. (Hyrum and David by the Prophet and Peter by Oliver Cowdery.)

During the day of the organization meeting (April 6, 1830) all were baptized into the Church, as were Hyrum's parents, Martin Harris, and Orrin Porter Rockwell. [^3] When Father Smith came up out of the water, Joseph, standing on the shore, took him by the hand and exclaimed with tears of joy, "Praise to my God, that I live to see my own father baptized into the true Church of Jesus Christ." [^4]

The period of time between the adoption of the Federal Constitution and 1830 is usually called the Era of Nationalism; and with equal appropriateness, the period from 1830 to the opening of the Civil War may be termed the Era of Sectionalism. This division held true in both politics and religion.

The first period was characterized by a spirit of Nationalism fanned by an intense insistence of individual freedom. Old Royalist traditions, religious dogma, and the idea of the divine right of kings were discarded. The Industrial Revolution, shortly to come, would create a new order, raising individual man to new heights of personal dignity. With the rise of sectionalism—the North versus the South, slavery versus freedom, High Church versus Low Church—the old religious orders were breaking up. [^5]

A young nation, on the threshold of world power, was pushing westward where a virgin land waited settlement. Here industries would flourish; here natural resources, undreamed of, waited discovery.

Into the maelstrom was swept a new religion, destined to play an important role in the westward movement in America. From Fayette, Seneca County, New York, this obscure movement would roll westward, influencing the lives of millions not only religiously, but also socially, politically, and economically.

Foundation stones of the Church were being laid. A new body of holy writ had come into existence, and others were to come. A democratic lay organization had been formed which would fit into the new scheme of political life guaranteed by the national Constitution. The principles of the new Church emphasized the importance of the human personality-man was God's greatest creation, a veritable son of God. All those who made contact with these new ideas were elevated from the role of the innately depraved, suffering, and forgotten individual to an eminence second only to that of Deity. For if man is the literal offspring of God, then reasonably he may in time become like his Heavenly Sire. This new doctrine of eternal progression lodged in the hearts of many, but others clung tenaciously to their traditional religious concepts.

The revolutionary doctrines of the restored Church seemed to marshal the forces of truth and to set themselves against the powers of darkness and error. The odds were, at that moment, against this infant organization; and it seemed for a time that it could never survive. However, its success, even during the lifetime of Hyrum and Joseph Smith, was phenomenal.

The continued success of this brave new organization depended much upon the kind of leadership it would be able to draw to its ranks. Fortunately, the right leaders emerged at the right time and at the right place to give the movement the forward thrust it needed. Our narrative, centering around Hyrum Smith, must consider the contribution of others associated with him to make it complete.

From a humble beginning the church organization was soon strengthened. It was revealed that Joseph Smith was to be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, and an elder of the church, walking in all holiness, in patience, and faith. The keys of authority had been given to direct the affairs of the Church. To one man, God would give revelation for the guidance of the Church and to that man would go the power to officiate. From him to all male members who were worthy would go the priesthood, from the deacon to the apostle. [^6]

On April 11, 1830, the Sunday following the organization of the Church Hyrum and his family traveled to Fayette to attend its first Sabbath meeting. A unique pattern of worship was begun. The presiding elder called the meeting to order and announced the hymn to be sung. Following the congregational singing an extemporaneous prayer was reverently offered, followed by another song. The bread and the wine were blessed and passed to all baptized members. The prayer on the Sacrament had been revealed to the Prophet Joseph and was repeated in exact form. Oliver Cowdery arose and with inspiration and power preached the first sermon. A closing hymn was sung, and following the benediction a baptismal service was held. Six converts were made members by Oliver Cowdery.

This simple and humble meeting of hardworking frontier farmers, dressed in their homespun, established a precedent in worship. The religious devotion was manifest by a lay (nonprofessional) participation much like the congregational church polity indigenous with America. The collection plates were conspicuously absent. There was no ministerial peculiarity of dress to set the clergy apart. The membership of the Church was subject to be called upon to render voluntary service without pay. From this humble beginning men and women from a wide range of occupations would be called upon to teach, lead, and proselyte.

This new Church was destined to be like the one established by Jesus and spoken of in the New Testament. It was to be primarily a missionary church. The presence of the Book of Mormon, the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and a desire to share the glad tidings became a powerful motivation to spread the word.

Hyrum Smith was among the members of the Church who met in conference for the first time on Sunday, June 9, 1830, at the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr. It was a happy occasion. The meeting was opened with singing and prayer, and the Sacrament was administered. Those who had been recently baptized were confirmed members of the Church, and others were ordained to the priesthood.

The sanctity of the occasion was intensified by the realization that they were following the pattern set by the holy apostles of old. The solemnity of these proceedings, the powers of the priesthood, the gifts and blessings of the Holy Ghost, and the goodness and condescension of a merciful God, all combined to create within them a sensation of rapturous gratitude and to fill them with fresh zeal and energy in the cause of truth. [^7]

At this conference Samuel H. Smith was ordained an elder by Oliver Cowdery, and Joseph Smith Sr., and Hyrum Smith were each ordained to the office of priest. They were seated in the conference according to the order of licenses—Hyrum with the priests.

The entire Smith family from Hyrum to the youngest became active in the Church. All the male members, even Don Carlos, who was then only fourteen years of age, were ordained to the ministry, and Samuel was called to be the church's first missionary. Taking several copies of the Book of Mormon, he went to nearby Livonia to preach, and if possible, to sell the books.

The press of mounting church business made it very difficult for Hyrum to make a living. Evenings and week ends found him traveling to Fayette where the Prophet and Oliver now were, to aid in teaching, counseling, and answering questions of investigators. The new volume of scripture (the Book of Mormon) roused the people, either to a defense or a condemnation of Joseph, Hyrum and the Church.

The time would soon arrive for Hyrum to be called as a missionary. In the meantime Samuel, who was better situated to leave home, had taken advantage of the opportunity to be the first one to spread the gospel message, and when he returned from his mission Hyrum was depressed in spirit by the news that the mission had been a near failure. He scarcely realized how difficult it would be to plant the gospel seed in such stubborn soil.

The spirit of missionary work was ever present in Hyrum's home. Members of his household, including not only Samuel but also Father and Mother Smith, were missionaries. Samuel had left a Book of Mormon with one Reverend John P. Greene which eventually converted the reverend and his kinsmen.

Father Smith and Mother Lucy paid a visit to Father Smith's brothers and sisters. They found Jesse Smith, the oldest brother, extremely bitter against the new religion. John and Silas, however, had been favorably impressed. Father Asael said he had felt that some manifestation would come which would make known the true gospel. [^8] Joseph and Lucy left copies of the Book of Mormon with all the members of the family, except Jesse who refused to read the book or listen to anything concerning the gospel, and then returned home to Palmyra, to find crises developing at both Palmyra and Colesville.

While Hyrum Smith maintained a home at Palmyra for his parents and brothers and sisters, the Prophet Joseph, with his wife Emma, Oliver Cowdery, and John and David Whitmer went to visit Mr. Joseph Knight at Colesville. The friendliness of the place had instilled in them the hope of building up the membership of the Church. For a time this hope was justified, but success was soon succeeded by bitter persecution, just as it had been in Palmyra and Harmony and as it would be in other places yet to come.

During the weeks that followed the organization of the Church the enemy had openly attacked it. Several charges which required a court action were made against Joseph Smith. But with the help of his family and friends he was acquitted and left for his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania.

Conditions at Palmyra rapidly became unbearable for Hyrum and his family. He planned to move his family to a more friendly community. Also Father Smith decided to move to Waterloo, not far from Colesville, and there prepare a place for his family.

* * *

It was about this time that Parley Parker Pratt, a Campbellite preacher from Ohio and a descendant of the 1639 settlers of Hartford, Connecticut, knocked one day at the door of the Smith family and inquired for the Prophet Joseph Smith. He had heard of the Book of Mormon at Newark, New York, while on his way to the city of New York and had lost no time in making his way to the Smith home.

Concerning this incident Parley P. Pratt, later had this to say:

I overtook a man who was driving some cows and inquired of him for Mr. Joseph Smith, the translator of the Book of Mormon. He informed me that he resided in Pennsylvania, some one hundred miles distance. I inquired for his father, or for any of the family. He told me his father had gone on a journey; but that his residence was a small house just before me; and, said he, "I am his brother." It was Hyrum Smith. I informed him of the interest I felt in the book, and of my desire to learn more about it. He welcomed me to his house and we spent the night together for neither of us felt disposed to sleep. We conversed most of the night, during which I unfolded to him much of my experience in my search for truth.

Hyrum presented Mr. Pratt with a copy of the Book of Mormon. After traveling thirty miles to keep an appointment, he returned to Hyrum's place demanding baptism and remained overnight. Next day Hyrum accompanied him twenty-five miles to Mr. Whitmer in Seneca County arriving in the evening. He was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake, September 1, 1830. [^9]

On his return he stopped in Columbia County, New York, to visit with his brother Orson. So strong was his testimony and so great was the Spirit of the Lord in him that he succeeded in baptizing his nineteen-year old brother. They then planned to return to the conference to be held at Fayette, September 26, 1830, [^10] a conference called for the purpose of consolidating the position of the Saints against their enemies.

The two youthful Pratt brothers, caught in the gospel net, were destined to play a major role as stalwart exponents and defenders of the restored Church.

The difference between mediocrity and superiority is often determined by the ability a person has to follow the direction of his convictions, particularly when the principal basis for his security is threatened. The greater the treasure the greater the desire to cherish and protect it against all hazards. From all indications Hyrum was balancing himself on a perpetual edge of disaster, for he had neither economic, social, nor political security. When he, with his family, moved from Palmyra, once again the old pattern of "moving" was resumed, thus flaunting material gain as a sanctuary of rest. It was now a move toward an uncertain future with only the hope of direct intervention of God's power which was based on hope and faith. Apparently these qualities were not lacking in Hyrum, for there is no evidence of discouragement during this crucial move. He had put his hand to the plow never to look back.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] At this time, in the state of New York, people could be imprisoned for debt. Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 180.
[^2] Lucy Smith, op. cit., p.181.
[^3] Ibid., pp.183-186.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 185-187.
[^5] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 115-118.
[^6] Journal History, op. cit., October, 1830. From Newel Knight's Journal.
[^7] D & C 34.
[^8] Journal History, op. cit., December 1830. Hyrum Smith labored as a missionary with Newel Knight and Orson Pratt in the fall of 1830.
[^9] Jared Carter, Private Journal, J. H., February, 1831.
[^10] Idem.
