Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter VII

The Smiths Move West

In the early fall of 1830, Hyrum Smith settled his business in Manchester in order to be at liberty to do the Lord's work. His brother, Joseph, arrived from Harmony, Pennsylvania, to confer with Hyrum and decide on plans to cope with the enemy. Threats had been made to take the lives of Hyrum and his father. At Hyrum's request Joseph inquired of the Lord for a revelation on the matter. The answer given was for Hyrum to take his family and move to Colesville; his father with his family was to move to Waterloo.

The next day, Hyrum and Joseph took affectionate leave of each other, Joseph going to Macedon and Hyrum to Colesville. Jerusha and the baby Mary, and Lovina, accompanied Hyrum, leaving Father and Mother Smith and Lucy alone at home.

When Hyrum and his family had departed for Colesville about 10:00 a.m., the neighbors took notice and decided to make trouble. They began to call, one after another, inquiring very particularly for Hyrum. The parents knew that these people had no business with Hyrum. Knowing that there could be no valid reason for these visits, they were thrown into a state of tense anxiety. That night Father Smith became ill under the pressure of extended worry, and when morning came he was unable to eat breakfast. About ten o'clock, Mother Smith prepared him some porridge, but before she could serve it a Quaker gentleman called, asking to see Mr. Smith.

The Quaker had purchased a twelve-dollar note owed by Father Smith and had come that morning to collect the money. He threatened to force Mr. Smith's arrest on failure of immediate payment. Joseph, Sr., offered him six dollars cash and the payment of the balance in produce at a later date, but the Quaker refused the offer and running toward the fireplace made violent gestures toward the fire, crying: "If thou wilt burn up those Books of Mormon I will forgive thee the whole debt."

"That I shall not do," answered Joseph, Sr.

"Then thou shalt go to jail."

Mother Smith interrupted, offering in payment her gold beads. Again the Quaker refused the offer: "Unless the money is paid," he replied, "thy husband shall go straightway to jail."

To which she replied: "You have come here to distress me by taking my husband to jail, and you think by this that you will compel us to deny the work of God and destroy a book which was translated by the gift and power of God, but, sir, we shall not burn the Book of Mormon, nor deny the inspiration of the Almighty."

The Quaker then stepped to the door and called a waiting constable. The constable came forward and laying his hands on Father Smith's shoulder said, "You are my prisoner." [^1]

The officer refused both Mother Smith's plea that she be allowed to get someone for her husband's security and that Joseph, Sr., be permitted to eat the porridge prepared for him. He was forced to sit in the burning sun, faint and sick, with the Quaker standing guard over him, while the unprincipled officer returned to the house and ate the food Mother Smith had prepared for her husband.

Of this Mother Smith later wrote: "Any human heart can imagine how I felt. But verily, verily, those men shall have their reward." [^2]

The next morning she walked several miles to secure the assistance of Abner Lackey, who went without delay to the magistrate's office and had papers prepared to insure Joseph, Sr.'s, release from his jail cell. However, he was still confined to the jail yard.

Soon after Mrs. Smith returned home, a young man came to the house inquiring for Hyrum. When told he had gone to Colesville, the visitor said that Hyrum owed Dr. McIntyre a small bill, and since the doctor was away, he had been ordered to collect the bill for him. Mother Smith told him the bill was to be paid in corn and beans and that she would send it over the next day.

The following day a man was hired to deliver the produce to the doctor's house. When the man returned, he informed Mother Smith that the clerk had agreed to erase the account. This business prevented Mother Smith from doing anything to relieve her husband who was still in jail. She decided therefore, to wait until the next day, hoping that in the meantime some of her family would return.

As night came on, Mother Smith was lonely; the darkness oppressed her; even the familiar objects in the room were scarcely discernible as she sat contemplating her condition and that of her family: Her loving husband was in a debtor's cell, and where were her children? Alvin, dead because of a quack physician, was at peace; Hyrum had been forced from his home by a combination of plots against him; Joseph had only recently escaped from his tormentors; Samuel had gone without purse or scrip to preach the gospel and was in return as much despised and hated as had been the ancient disciples. With William away, Mother Smith found herself quite alone. Unlike Naomi, she had not even a daughter-in-law to comfort her heart in her affliction.

While she was thus meditating, there came a heavy rap on the door which brought her to her feet. A stranger, at her invitation, entered and asked in a hurried manner, "Where is Hyrum?" She gave the usual reply. Just then a second person came in and was told by the first, "Mrs. Smith says her son is not at home." The second stranger replied that while he had been at a neighbor's home he had seen Hyrum arrive. This Mother Smith denied. But the stranger insisted, adding: "We have a search warrant, and if you won't give him up we'll take what belongs to him!" Finding some corn stored in the chamber above the room where Hyrum had lived, they declared their intention to take it, but Mother Smith forbade their touching it.

At this instant a third stranger entered, then a fourth. The last one, looking about, gave the excuse that he had come to light his candle. In response to this Mother Smith complained that she didn't know what to think but had been given little reason to consider herself safe day or night. She asked them what their business was, and for what cause they were seizing her property.

One replied that it was for the debt Hyrum owed Dr. McIntyre. When told that the debt had been paid that very day, he disputed her word and ordered the men to take the corn. As they climbed the stairs, Mother Smith glanced out the window and caught a glimpse of the approaching lights of two candles and a pair of carriage lamps. The forms of men appeared from every direction, some on foot, some on horseback, and still more in wagons.

No longer cherishing any illusion of fair play, Mother Smith determined that no troop of ribald blacklegs would seize so much as a particle of her household goods while she sat unresistingly by. She knelt before the Lord and begged that he would not let her children fall into these evil hands, and that these men might be satisfied by material plunder without taking life.

As she prayed, William bounded into the house. "Mother," he cried, "in the name of God, what is this host of men doing here? Are they robbing or stealing? What are they about?" She told him that they had taken his father to prison and had come after Hyrum, but that not finding him, they were plundering the house. Hearing this, the outraged William seized a handspike, sprang up the stairs, and in one instant cleared the scoundrels out of the chamber. They scampered downstairs where he flew at them. Bounding into the midst of the crowd, he brandished his handspike exclaiming, "Away from here, you cutthroats! Instantly! or I will be the death of every one of you!"

The lights were immediately extinguished, yet he continued to harangue them vigorously until he discovered that his audience had slipped away. The mob, taking him at his word, had fled in every direction. [^3]

Between twelve and one o'clock Calvin Stoddard and his wife Sophronia joined the Smiths. They stated that they had been impressed to come. Within an hour Samuel also came, tired and ill. But after a little nursing and a good meal he felt better, and in the morning went to Canandaigua where his father was being held in jail. Because it was Sunday the jailer refused to liberate Father Smith. Samuel found his father confined in a dungeon with a man who had been committed for murder.

I shuddered when I first heard these heavy doors creaking upon their hinges, but then I thought to myself, I was not the first man who had been imprisoned for the truth's sake, and when I should meet Paul in the Paradise of God, I could tell him I too, had been in the bonds for the Gospel which he had preached. And this had been my only consolation.

After four days in the damp, crowded room, without food except for a pint basin of weak broth, he was allowed to work out his indebtedness at a copper shop in the jail yard. And during his thirty day's imprisonment, through his Sunday preaching, he converted and baptized two persons. [^4]

During Hyrum's visit to Colesville, he decided after careful consideration not to settle there, but to move with his parents to Waterloo. There was available for rent a commodious house which would accommodate meetings. When the day arrived for them to leave Manchester, the Smiths were happy to go.

Having endured the fatigue and the accompanying inconveniences of travel, they found great promise in the warmth of new neighbors. They moved into a house belonging to a Mr. Kellogg and had scarcely unloaded their goods when one of their neighbors, a Mr. Osgood, came to invite them to drive their stock and team to his barnyard. He insisted that they could be fed from his barn free of charge until further arrangements could be made. Many of the neighbors came to welcome the Smiths to Waterloo, among them a Mr. Hooper, a tavern keeper, whose wife came along, bringing delicacies for the Smith table.

The commodious quarters made it possible for Hyrum to have his father's family live with him. The new home also permitted a church group of twelve to twenty members to meet regularly for singing and prayer. Shortly after his arrival, Hyrum became the leader of this branch of the Church.

There was much to be done to encourage and instruct the new members in the gospel. When time permitted, Hyrum would visit Colesville and Fayette to hold meetings and perform ordinances of baptism and confirmation.

The six months since the organization of the Church had gone rapidly and new members had been added. The Smiths journeyed early to Fayette, New York, for the conference to be held on Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, September 26, 27, 28, 1830. When the meeting opened there were thirty members in attendance. Thirty-two members had joined the Church since June 9.

As the conference convened, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was administered; then the presiding officers confirmed and ordained those who were ready. The power of God was manifest among them; peace, faith, charity, and hope filled their hearts. With such harmony prevailing, the business of the Church was settled satisfactorily, and the members felt keenly the spirit of their mission to go forth and labor with all their powers in promulgating the truth of the gospel. Many new members were baptized during the conference.

The future role of Hyrum Smith in the Church was determined very largely by what happened at this conference. Certain developments drew the attention of the Saints to the west. In the Book of Mormon, Ether 13:8, is a prophecy concerning the establishment of a holy city: "Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come, when the earth shall pass away." This city of "Zion" was first discussed at the September conference. [^5]

Prior to the conference a revelation had been made public. This revelation called for men to go on missions. Oliver Cowdery was instructed to fill a mission to the Lamanites (Indians) and to preach the gospel to them. This was a direct fulfilment of a prophecy found in the Book of Mormon; for on the flyleaf of that book is a passage clearly stating that the Book of Mormon, containing a fulness of the gospel, was first to be taken to the Lamanites, who were a remnant of the house of Israel.

Hyrum held a meeting October 14 at the home of Hezekiah Peck, an uncle of Newel Knight's. Of this meeting Brother Peck later wrote: "Brother Hyrum had great liberty of speech and the spirit of the Lord was poured out upon us in a miraculous manner. . . ." After the meeting Hyrum stayed with Newel's uncle. During the night, Newel, by request of Mr. Peck, healed Mrs. Peck by casting out the evil one. In closing his account of the incident, he wrote: ". . . She believed and stretched forth her hand and cried unto me, and Satan departed from her." [^6]

As the news of the Church and of the Book of Mormon spread, persons impressed with the new teachings made their way to inquire further of the growing movement. On November 4, Orson Pratt, the brother of Parley, arrived at the Prophet's home after a journey of two hundred miles. He had received a testimony of the Prophet's mission and requested Joseph to ask the Lord what he should do. In Peter Whitmer's house, in the room where the Church had been organized, Orson Pratt was favored by a revelation. John Whitmer acted as scribe.

The lad was told to repent because the second coming of the Lord was near and to raise his voice in warning to the people to repent. If he would do this, he was promised that he could prophesy and enjoy the power of the Holy Ghost. [^7]

Then on Wednesday, December 1, 1830, Orson Pratt was sent on a mission to Colesville, New York. Here he met Hyrum and with him and the members of the Colesville Branch, he received his first experience preaching the gospel. Toward the end of the month he returned to Fayette with Hyrum.

As the presiding officer over the Fayette and Colesville branches, Hyrum assisted the Prophet Joseph in the selection and direction of new volunteers to preach the gospel and do missionary work. Soon the effects of the western mission were felt. In December, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge from Kirtland, Ohio, came back to visit the church founders. The Smith brothers were thrilled to hear from these potential leaders the story of their conversion by Parley P. Pratt and his companions. Pratt, a former colleague of Rigdon, had presented him with a Book of Mormon. This Campbellite preacher and his wife, convinced of the truth of this unusual history, were baptized November 4, 1830.

Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, both of whom were eight years Hyrum's senior, had come to Fayette to obtain a testimony and to further confirm their faith in Mormonism. In this search they were not disappointed. The new Church attracted strong leaders, men of character and ability. Rigdon was to become the Prophet Joseph's counselor, and Partridge the first bishop of the Church.

Like Hyrum, who had asked the Prophet to inquire of the Lord what he was to do, others did the same. In each case the Lord promised them great blessings. To Sidney Rigdon he said in part: ". . . Behold thou wast sent forth even as John, to prepare the way before me. . . ." To Edward Partridge: ". . . Preach the gospel as with a trump; cry repentance to this untoward generation. . . ."

At the close of 1830, Hyrum Smith's name was listed with those called as missionaries: Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Samuel H. Smith, Joseph Smith Sr., Don Carlos Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Newel Knight, Richard Ziba Peterson, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, John Murdock, and Orson Pratt, were listed. [^8]

During the last nine months of 1830, 100 members were baptized in New York state and 150 in Ohio. Branches at Kirtland, Geauga County, Ohio, and Warrensville, Cayohoga County, Ohio, had been organized and were presided over by Sidney Rigdon and John Murdock respectively.

It had been a busy year for Hyrum and there was always much to do. Soon he would have to bid farewell to Joseph, for already a letter had come from Ohio. It was known that Joseph had received a revelation to move to Kirtland, Ohio. Joseph had been warned of the evil intentions of the enemy to take his life and that this move would be for his own sake and for the sake of his friends. This meant that the Prophet would have to cease the revision of the Bible and move his family.

The weather was bitter cold when the little flock met in the last conference (January 2, 1831 ) prior to Joseph's departure. At this meeting a new revelation was given. The Lord spoke of the city of Enoch and of the wickedness of the world, of Christ's coming to reign as king, of true riches that consisted of eternal life-rich and poor alike belonged to him. The Lord told the Saints that the covenant they had made would entitle them to possess the land as their inheritance and that they were to look after the poor and the needy. The minutes contain no exact record of the happenings of this conference.

With the conference over, Joseph departed for Ohio the last week in January, accompanied by his wife, Emma, Sidney Rigdon, and Edward Partridge. The snow lay deep as they bade Hyrum and the others good-bye, and the team pulled the sleigh with difficulty.

As he watched the company out of sight, Hyrum wondered how long he would have to remain behind. But sooner than he had dared hope he received a letter from Joseph which told him to prepare the Saints of the Colesville Branch to move west and to bring with them Joseph, Sr., and his family.

There was much to be done before they could all leave. Property had to be disposed of—either sold, rented or traded, and means of travel had to be provided. The news of Joseph's departure increased the desire of the Saints to be on their way. Hyrum's folk at Waterloo planned to be among the Waterloo Saints when they moved.

Until spring came Hyrum continued to do missionary work and to look after the branches under his charge. Jared Carter came to Colesville to learn more about Mormonism. John Peck had told the astonished Carter about the Book of Mormon. Carter, after reading parts of it and praying earnestly, was convinced that it was a revelation from the Lord. At first his wife opposed him but finally gave her consent for him to visit the Saints in Colesville. Experiences with enemies of the Church, who intended to steer him from the young Prophet's following, only convinced him that such people, if not themselves wicked, were wickedly deluded. After each meeting, he visited with the Saints and soon determined to apply for baptism. It was a thrilling experience to have Hyrum Smith baptize him, even in the freezing waters of February. Of his baptism he wrote:

As I was being immersed I felt the influence of the spirit of God upon me, for as I stepped out of the water I was enraptured in the Spirit of God, both spirit and body, so that the chill of the water was taken entirely from me and I walked a half a mile and felt no more cold than if I had not been in the water at all. This I knew to be a new world. The next day Brother Hyrum Smith told me many things of a prophetic nature. [^9]

When Jared Carter returned home, he began immediately to bear his testimony of the restored gospel. His family and friends opposed him. Thinking he suffered from a delusion, Mrs. Carter turned against him. The miraculous healing of their sick child, however, made her reevaluate her husband's new faith. The next day Hyrum Smith visited the family and bore a strong and powerful testimony to the truth of Mormonism. These things softened the heart of Mrs. Carter, yet she could not make up her mind to go West with the Colesville Branch. But Brother Carter, who had overcome many influences, made up his mind to take his family and his wife and go with the Saints. [^10]

Meanwhile, the Prophet Joseph was anxious that his brother Hyrum should wind up his affairs in New York and hasten to Ohio. Joseph had, since arriving in Ohio, missed the companionship and counsel of his older brother. There were problems in Kirtland that demanded Hyrum's personal help. Therefore, a little over a week after his arrival, Joseph wrote Martin Harris, Palmyra, Wayne County, N. Y. "I send you this to inform you to come here as soon as you can, in order to choose a place to settle on which may be best adapted to the circumstances of yourself and brethren in the East. You may choose a place that may suit yourself anywhere in this part of the country so as to be as compact as possible; and as you will be better able to make choice than we, it is better for you to come before the rest of the brethren so that when they come they may have places to go. You will also bring, or cause to be brought, all books (meaning, undoubtedly the Book of Mormon), as the work here is breaking forth on the East, West, North, and South.

You will also inform the elders who are there in New York State that all of them who can be spared should come here without delay, if possible, and this by the commandment of the Lord, as he has a great work for them all in this our inheritance. We have received the "Laws of the Kingdom" [^11] since we came here and the disciples in these parts have received them gladly.

You will see that Father Smith's family are taken care of and sent on. You will send to Colesville and have either Hyrum Smith or Newel Knight come immediately or both of them if they can be spared. You will not sell the Books (the Book of Mormon) for less than ten shillings.

Signed—

Joseph Smith [^12]

But it was not possible for Hyrum to leave as Joseph had suggested, and when over a week elapsed without his having heard anything, Joseph wrote directly to Hyrum:

Kirtland, Geauga Co. Ohio

March 31, 1831

Bro. Hyrum,

Safe arrival—busy regulating the church here. Disciples numerous—devil has made attempts to overcome. Serious job but the Lord is with us; have overcome and all things regular.

Work breaking forth on right and left—good call for Elders here. (Here the Prophet copies a letter from Oliver Cowdery inserted under its proper date and continues by addressing Hyrum as follows: )

My dearly beloved brother Hyrum, I have had much concern about you, but I always remember you in prayers, calling upon God to keep you safe in spite of men or devils. I think you better come to this country immediately, for the Lord has commanded that we call the Elders together in this place as soon as possible.

Mar. 4, this morning, after being called out of bed in the night to go a small distance, I went and had an awful struggle with Satan, but being armed with the power of God, he was cast out, and the woman is clothed in her right mind. The Lord worketh wonders in this land. I want to see you all.

May the grace of God be and abide with you all, even so, amen.

Your brother forever, Joseph Smith, Jr.

P. S. If you want to write to Oliver, direct letter to Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. Samuel Harrison Smith and Orson Pratt arrived here Feb. 27. They left our folks well. David Jackway had threatened to take father with a subpoena writ.

You had better go to Fayette and take father along with you. Come in a one horse wagon if you can. Do not come through Buffalo, for they will lie in wait for you. God protect you.

I am, Joseph. [^13]

The letter from Joseph signaled another move for Hyrum. His first thought was that here was a chance to escape the mounting pressure of the enemy. But this impulse was soon overshadowed by the urge to do the Lord's will. During the sixteen years since leaving Vermont the roots of the Smiths had sunk deep into the soil of New York. But the good life Hyrum hoped to achieve was immediately abandoned in favor of being near his brother Joseph.

Hyrum lost no time in making arrangements to take his wife and family to Kirtland, Ohio. Prior to his own departure, he laid plans for a company of Saints at Colesville, New York, to move West. During the latter part of February 1831, the branch met and decided to go by boat on the Erie Canal to Buffalo and thence to Kirtland on the south shore of Lake Erie.

Thus it was that, ragged and worn under the mounting persecution, Hyrum and the other Saints turned hopefully to the West. The New York period was rapidly closing. Pressure from the enemy neutralized the nostalgia which might have possessed Hyrum's family at their leaving. This was their home—the land where they had grown up and shared the tribulations of a pioneer life.

The journey of Hyrum and his father to Ohio was uneventful. Taking Joseph's advice, they avoided Buffalo and arrived without notable incident. No doubt the depression felt at leaving friends and neighbors was eased by knowing that many of them would soon follow. Hyrum worried about his mother and brother William who remained behind at Colesville to come later.

To Hyrum, Kirtland was much like the country of western New York. [^14] There were rolling hills interspersed with gulches, and deep water courses lined with native trees and shrubs. He felt that it was a goodly land. The friendly people of the village warmly welcomed them, and this seemed a good omen. However, the scarcity of houses to rent created an immediate problem, for in a few days others would be arriving.

The latter part of March, the Colesville Branch arrived at Fairport on Lake Erie. The company, numbering sixty to eighty souls, had been detained on the way at Buffalo, New York. Their canal boat became blocked by ice. Mother Lucy Smith, who was in charge of the company, was hard pressed to maintain the morale of the passengers. When the gloom was at its height, prayers were offered, and the ice broke with a terrifying crash, parting just enough to allow the vessel to pass through the harbor before the bewildered and frightened company was astounded to see the gap in the ice close behind the boat. [^15]

The safe arrival of the Colesville Branch was to Hyrum and Joseph an act of divine providence. Mother Smith delineated the trials and hardships they had encountered. Many had come with insufficient food and clothing, expecting to be taken care of by those who had plenty. There were periods of seasickness and complaints about their safety. Mother Smith had had to scold the young women for flirting with strange men when the boat made periodic stops along the canal and to warn certain of the young men not to leave the boat and run the risk of being left behind.

It had been a comfort to know that the boat's captain was a friend of Lucy's brother, Major Mack. This friendship had made the captain most helpful and co-operative. When the boat departed from Buffalo, the onlookers feared that because of so many passengers aboard the vessel would sink. The stern was so low in the water that the local paper, assuming that the people would be drowned, published an account of the boat's loss. Later the Saints read the account of their own deaths.

While Hyrum was preparing a place for his family, Samuel and Joseph went to greet their mother at the wharf. Samuel had been told in a dream to meet the company and had feared that some disaster had befallen them. They were all happy to learn that their mother was well despite the heavy burden of responsibility which had been hers on the journey.

It seemed good to Hyrum to be united with his family once again, and for them to resume once more the old custom of regular family councils to discuss such problems as adequate housing and farm acreage for a comfortable living.

The quiet town of Kirtland came suddenly to life with the arrival of the Saints. There was an urgency to get things done: to get acquainted with the new members who had been converted from the Disciples Church by Parley P. Pratt and his missionary companions, and to establish the Church. The prayers of Joseph in Hyrum's behalf had been answered. It gave Joseph a feeling of assurance and satisfaction to have his older brother again nearby.

When the Smiths arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, a new era for church growth began. Pressure from their enemies was lessened which allowed time to lay the foundation of the Church. The urgency and magnitude of the work evidenced in the Prophet's urgent appeal for Hyrum to come to Kirtland at the earliest possible moment presaged a role Hyrum was to occupy in the councils and the ministry of the Ohio period. In temperament and spirit he was prepared. His effectiveness as a leader of influence was declared by the new members of the Church, Hezekiah Peck and Jared Carter: "Hyrum had great liberty of speech and the spirit of the gospel was poured out upon us in a miraculous manner." Not only did he have great liberty of speech but liberty of action and thought uninhibited. [^16] No doubt he realized the importance of his position and work in the ministry.

Notes

There was a New York State Law forbidding imprisonment for debt less than $25.00.

---
Notas:
[^1] John Whitmer, History of the Church. Francis Kirkham, Source Material concerning the Book of Mormon.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, p. 176.
[^3] lbid., pp. 186-188.
[^4] Idem.
[^5] Archibald Bennett, The Improvement Era "Solomon Mack and His Family," vol. 58, 59. General Mack was one of the first merchants at Detroit, also at Pontiac, Michigan; when he died he left his family an estate of fifty thousand dollars
[^6] Lucy Mack Smith, op.cit., pp. 213-214.
[^7] John Murdock Journal J. H.: Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City Utah.
[^8] Idem.
[^9] Brigham H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1921), vol. I, p. 320.
[^10] Far West Record No. 6, Church Historians Office, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^11] D & C, 42. Many basic instructions—Joseph's work, ten commandments, sickness, church trials, and death, remuneration for bishops, etc.
[^12] Joseph Smith, Letter J. H., February, 1831 (Original document on file).
[^13] The above letter was addressed to Hyrum Smith, Harpersville, Broome County, New York. (Original on file.)
[^14] A small town in the rolling hills of western Ohio which had a population of 6,018 in 1830. . . . It was comparable to the nearby towns of Painesville, Hiram, and Warren. The people of the community were nearly all farmers. . . . The area had been settled by westward movement along the shore or on the newly opened Erie Canal, by people from Connecticut, then later from New England, New York, and Pennsylvania. Willis Thornson, "Gentile and Saints at Kirtland," The Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Quarterly, January, 1954, vol.1 p.8.
[^15] An account of the miraculous passage of the river boat out of the harbor at Buffalo N.Y., was printed in the Niles Register, a weekly newspaper, dated July 16, 1831. Reflecting the general attitude, it read: Certain knaves started a new religion, 1000 souls joined-recruited from among the lazy and worthless class of society. They say that a miracle was worked in their behalf by clearing a passage through the ice at Buffalo. Some of them affect a power even to raise the dead and perchance (such is the weakness of human nature) really believe they can do it. The chiefs of these people appear to exempt themselves from labor and herein is, probably the grand object for which they have established their new religion.
[^16] Supra.
