Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter VIII

The Settlement in Ohio and Missouri

For Hyrum Smith and his family, the spring of 1831 was a time of getting settled and adjusted in a new locality. The knowledge of the successful arrival of Mother Lucy Smith and the Colesville Branch filled all of them with a spirit of well-being and happiness, and Hyrum assumed the responsibility of locating a house for his parents and brothers and sisters. The Colesville members settled sixteen miles northeast of Kirtland at a place called Thompson.

Hyrum himself became a member of a co-operative plan, in which he and those of the Colesville Saints who joined agreed to have all property in common and to place all surplus in a fund for needy families and missionaries. This co-operative organization was called Consecration and Stewardship.

Through a revelation (D & C 51) to the Prophet Joseph in May 1831, the Lord appointed Edward Partridge to organize the Saints into the Society of Consecration and Stewardship and gave instructions for regulating the relationships of its members. This organization, thriving and active in its initial stage, was doomed to failure when the branch moved to Missouri.

A few weeks after Hyrum was settled in Kirtland, he realized the full meaning of Joseph's statement about the "work of the Lord breaking forth on every hand." On June 3, 1831, he planned to attend a general conference of the Church to be held at Kirtland. Parley P. Pratt had brought astonishing news from Western Missouri. His effort to take the gospel to the Indians had failed, but his observations of that goodly land had succeeded in attracting Joseph, Hyrum, and the Saints. Perhaps the Lord was preparing his people for the future westward migration.

When the conference convened Friday morning, facilities were inadequate to seat the two thousand members and investigators in attendance. Hyrum, who sat near the speaker's stand, observed the congregation. He saw the missionaries who had been called in from the field for the conference, among whom were his brothers Samuel and William, and Parley Pratt, Newel Knight, John Whitmer, David Whitmer, Jared Carter, Edward Partridge, Sidney Gilbert, Newel K. Whitney, and Sidney Rigdon. Their presence gave an additional spirit of urgency to the important business of the conference. The increased frequency of new revelations coming to Joseph Smith made it mandatory that he make them known to the people.

In addition to the members and the returned missionaries, many nonmembers were present. The sudden influx of Mormons into that part of Ohio had aroused the curiosity of many citizens; and such a meeting, being the first of its kind in Ohio, provided an opportunity for the people to see the leaders of this new religion. When Joseph called the meeting to order all eyes were upon him. The skeptical and radical element tried to discover the secret of his influence over his followers and were astonished by the gentlemanly bearing of this youthful man with the prominent eyebrows, heavy light brown hair, and meticulous grooming. Their curiosity was partially satisfied, for Joseph looked like a man of influence. He was large in stature and had a natural dignity and poise which marked him as a leader.

As Hyrum and each of the other leaders were called upon to participate, a similar critical appraisal was made. Onlookers noticed that Hyrum was much like Joseph, a large man (six foot two) of light complexion and lowered sideburns whose thin face had as its most notable feature a rather prominent nose. A cordial, relaxed air radiated from his friendly countenance.

During the course of the conference, the Prophet preached a powerful sermon. He was moved upon by the Holy Ghost to prophesy concerning the last days, the gathering of Israel, the second coming of Christ, and the fate of the wicked. He declared that many would suffer martyrdom for the sake of the religion of Jesus Christ. [^1]

Other speakers, moved by inspiration from the Lord, propounded words of tremendous power. Some of the missionaries were then ordained elders in the Melchizedek Priesthood. Lyman Wight, after being ordained, prophesied concerning the coming of Christ and God's great work in the last days. [^2]

The day following the conference Joseph received a revelation to send twenty-eight elders by twos into the western country to preach along the way until they reached Missouri, a land consecrated to the remnants of Jacob and all other heirs, according to the covenant. [^3]

The Colesvllle Saints had arrived in Ohio during the first week of May 1831, and by June were preparing to continue their emigration to Missouri. Their departure was hastened by the bad faith of one Leman Copley, a Shaking Quaker, who had previously joined the Church and agreed to sell a large tract of land to the Colesville Branch at a fraction of its worth. Later he apostatized and broke his agreement, bringing considerable confusion and disappointment to the Saints who had counted on the land for homes. Edward Partridge, the bishop in charge of the United Order, appealed to the Prophet for advice. The Prophet inquired of the Lord and was told in revelation that the New York group should proceed at once to Missouri, lest their enemies come upon them. [^4]

Under the leadership of Newel Knight, the group set out for Missouri. The twelve-hundred-mile journey to Independence took them through rough, partially settled country. Frontier towns and villages lined the rivers and waterways, which were used for traffic and transportation. The roads, little more than muddy pioneer trails, gave scant aid to the travelers. Streams had to be forded or ferried. Traveling was tedious, laborious, and time consuming. But they finally ended their journey at a point twelve miles west of Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, on the edge of the prairie in Kaw Township (now a part of Kansas City), where they established a settlement.

Such difficulties as distance and rough terrain had little adverse effect upon Hyrum Smith and his companions—John Murdock, Lyman Wight, and John Corrill—as they left Kirtland for the west. To be a missionary, thought Hyrum, was the most acceptable way to please the Lord. When he took affectionate leave of his family on June 14, 1831, he realized that his ambition to be a missionary was about to be fulfilled. This was the beginning of a church service for Hyrum which would continue for an extended period of time.

When Mother Lucy Smith learned that Hyrum's missionary itinerary included Detroit, Michigan, she decided to take her niece Alvira Mack and accompany the missionaries there to visit her brother, General Stephen Mack [^5] and his family. The overnight trip over Lake Ontario on the steamer William Penn was a pleasant one.

Since the hour was late when they arrived at Detroit, Hyrum suggested going to a tavern for the night rather than to the home of their relatives. The next morning the missionaries were anxious to be about their business, but Mother Smith insisted that they call on Aunt Lovisa Cooper—AIvira's sister—whom they found sick in bed. Alvira asked her sister if Aunt Lucy, who waited in the front room, could come to her bedside. Grudgingly, Mother Smith was permitted to enter the room.

After the usual greetings, Mother Smith said, "Lovisa, I have with me four of my brethren, one of whom is your cousin Hyrum; if I stay, my son and his companions must be invited also."

"Oh, no, no, I never can consent to it!" she exclaimed. "Why aunt, I am so nervous I am scarcely able to see any company."

"Now, Lovisa," Mother Smith replied, "do you know what ails you? I can tell you exactly what it is. There is a good spirit and an evil one operating upon you, and the bad spirit has almost got possession of you. When the good spirit is least agitated, the evil one strives for the entire mastery and sets the good spirit to fluttering because it has so slight a foothold. But you have been so for a long time, and you may yet live many years. These men who are with me are clothed with the authority of the Priesthood, and through their administration you might receive a blessing. Even though you may not be healed, do you not wish to know something about your Savior before you meet him? Furthermore, if you refuse to receive my brethren into your house, I will leave it myself." [^6]

The missionaries were invited in and given a sumptuous dinner. They spent most of the day there and in the name of the Lord and by the laying on of hands administered to the sick woman. In the afternoon they left for Pontiac; and when Lovisa learned that they wouldn't be back, she was greatly distressed because she had not urged them to stay and preach.

John Corill and Lyman Wight did not stop at Pontiac but continued on, taking the northern route to Missouri. Hyrum and his companion tried during the day to secure a place to hold a meeting in Pontiac. But failing to do so they wiped the dust of that city from their feet and left for Chicago by way of Pigeon Prairie, Michigan, and on to Peking, where they arrived on June 16. Here they preached six times.

In accordance with instructions from Joseph that they preach the gospel at every opportunity, Hyrum and John remained in the vicinity of Peking for six days. On the last day, a Methodist minister challenged them to prove from the Bible that baptism by immersion was required, and before an assembled group they proceeded to do so. During the debate, the minister became very angry and tramped out of the house in a rage.

Leaving their friends the next day (Thursday) they traveled in three days a distance of seventy-six miles. They preached on Sunday, and on Monday walked thirty-six miles, wading across several large streams of water. They continued to preach as they journeyed through White Pigeon Prairie in St. Joseph County, Michigan, southwest of Detroit. On the following Friday they lodged with some Pottawatamie Indians, taking supper and breakfast with them. For their kindness, the Indians were given some articles which the missionaries had brought with them.

On July 3, Hyrum and his companion arrived at New London which appeared to be a wide-open, very wild place. Here John Murdock came down with a cold, and they took lodging in a tavern. To protect themselves against marauders, Hyrum slept on the outside of the bed, holding his hand over their clothes which hung on a chair. During the night someone seized his wrist. Hyrum cried out, "Who is there?" at the same time wrenching his wrist free and waking Elder Murdock. They later heard the bedstead in the next room squeak, which was an indication to them that their unwelcome visitor had gone back to bed. [^7]

Continuing their journey the next day they reached Salt River where they remained for seven days. Elder Murdock again was ill so they hired William Ivie to take them to Chariton, seventy miles away. For the ride Elder Murdock gave his watch as payment. At Chariton the two missionaries remained a week. During this week their flagging spirits were revived by a meeting with the Prophet Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, David Whitmer, and Harvey Whitback, who were returning from a visit to the Saints at Independence. While they were all together they decided that their group should contribute enough money to purchase a pony for Elder Murdock to ride, and this enabled him and Hyrum to proceed on their way. The ailing Elder Murdock rode the pony fifty miles to Lexington, located on the Missouri River. At Lexington, Hyrum and Elder Murdock slept in an unfinished building where only half the floor was laid. During the night Elder Murdock, suffering from a high fever, attempted to get to an open window on the opposite side of the room. In doing so he stepped off the floor and fell across the uncovered joints. Hyrum, hearing the crash and the groans which followed, sprang from his bed and assisted his companion back to the floor and into bed. [^8]

Despite their trials as they pressed westward, Hyrum and his companion followed the command of the Lord to preach the gospel at every opportunity. In the villages, towns, cities, and frontier homes they found a heterogeneous people: some righteous, some believers, some cultured, and some exactly opposite to all of these. The missionaries often were depressed in spirits over the conditions of wickedness, ignorance, and priestcraft they met on all sides. However, they continued to sow their seed and found that some of it fell on fertile soil. There were people who listened, investigated, and received a conviction of the truth.

When at last they reached Independence, Missouri, these two now-seasoned missionaries met the Saints who had preceded them with a great feeling of rejoicing, which manifested itself in tears of joy.

Little progress had been made by the missionaries who had been sent the previous winter to this frontier region. Oliver Cowdery in a letter to Joseph Smith dated May 7, 1831, stated among other things: . . . "I have nothing to write concerning the Lamanites. . . . Brother Ziba Peterson and myself went into the east country forty miles . . . we called on the people to repent. . . . I pray they may find the precious treasure, for it seems to be wholly fallen in the streets."

Independence, Missouri, was a typical frontier village, an outfitting post for western fur traders. On the town square were a five-year-old log courthouse, "two or three stores, and fifteen or twenty houses, mostly of logs." The census for Jackson County in 1830 was 2,823 people, a scattered population living mostly on farms. The town designated as the central place of Zion was located among rolling hills, which alternated with prairie and woodland, about three or four miles south of the Missouri River in the northern part of Jackson County. It lay between two small rivers which flowed northward into the Missouri. The river on the west was called the Big Blue and the one on the east Little Blue. [^9]

The rolling, verdant country of Jackson County was unlike the green of New York and Vermont. In this part of the Great Mississippi Basin there were no extensive forests, only the strips of trees one-half to three miles in width which lined the water courses. A hospitable and friendly folk inhabited the shores of the tree-lined waterway and offered food and lodging, in welcome, to occasional travelers.

On August 9, the Prophet, after holding a conference and dedicating the temple site, accompanied by ten elders, returned to Kirtland. Before Hyrum and his companion returned to Kirtland another conference was held in Jackson County, Missouri. Hyrum discoursed on Zion and the gathering of the Saints there and read part of Psalm 102. [^10] There remained no doubt that God would redeem Zion. This sudden realization overwhelmed Hyrum.

Upon his departure for the return trip to Kirtland, Hyrum found it difficult to leave his friends. He assured them that he would return at the first opportunity. The thought of leaving so few Saints, surrounded by primitive nature and a hostile human element, melted his heart. A thousand miles or more would separate them. Only God, he felt, could oversee things for their best good. He realized, to some degree, the problems of settling such a country, and that the keys for the successful building of Zion were obedience, co-operation, and brotherhood. He wondered if the hearts and minds of the members were mature and experienced enough in the gospel to surmount growing obstacles. The implication of such a project was tremendous! Zion in all her glory was to be established—the ancient prophecies of Isaiah concerning the New Jerusalem were about to be fulfilled. Hyrum was sobered and humbled as he pondered the greatness of the project. He was now able to appraise objectively the work that must be done and his responsibility to help guarantee its success.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, 236.
[^2] Ibid., p.220.
[^3] See cut.
[^4] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 215-216. Ezra Booth, the first apostate, published material against the Church.
[^5] Hyrum Smith's Diary, in possession of his descendants. Manuscript appears as in the original except for minor corrections in spelling.
[^6] ldem.
[^7] Hyrum Smith, op. cit.
[^8] Idem.
[^9] Brigham H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1921), vol. I, p. 320.
[^10] Far West Record No. 6, Church Historians Office, Salt Lake City, Utah.
