Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter IX

Hyrum The Missionary

It was late in September when Hyrum Smith arrived home in Kirtland from his long and arduous journey to western Missouri. His family rejoiced and gave thanks to the Lord for his safe return. Harvest time seemed a favorite time for the Smith family to meet together. At their gathering, Hyrum narrated his experiences as ample proof of the Lord's blessings, and those who remained at home briefed him on the town news and on the employment of the family members. Mother Smith had even taken in boarders.

Hyrum was often seen with his brothers—in groups of two, three, or four—walking down Kirtland's main thoroughfare, with the townspeople crowded around them. The admiring Saints eagerly anticipated hearing the experiences, advice, and counsel of the kindly Hyrum.

With the announcement that Zion was to be established, many began to formulate plans for the trek west. Each week brought an increasing number of strangers into Kirtland, investigators bent on determining for themselves the truth of the gospel message. Hyrum made himself available to explain the doctrines of the new church and to supply information about the gathering to the land of Zion.

Several problems had to be met during the fall and winter of 1831: first, the settling of Jackson County, Missouri; second, the establishing of facilities at Kirtland for the headquarters of the Church; and third, the developing a canon of scripture by making certain revisions and corrections of the Bible and making available new scripture. The new scripture included revelations pertaining to such local problems as investigators coming to Kirtland expecting a sign or a miracle to confirm their faith. The status of such people and the iniquitous implications thereof were given in a revelation known as section 63 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The miraculous events leading to the establishment of the Church such as the visions and the bringing forth of the gold plates were not to be considered in the same category as a person seeking a sign from heaven.

In the records Hyrum's name is listed with others who attended a conference at John Johnson's home October 11th, for the purpose of instructing the elders of the Church in the proper procedure of conducting a meeting, and to decide on a policy of which leaders of the Church should be reimbursed. Among those who were giving full time to the Church were as follows: Joseph and Hyrum Smith; Peter, Christian, and Jacob Whitmer; Samuel, and Don Carlos Smith, and Joseph's scribe, Sidney Rigdon. [^1]

Two weeks later another conference was held at Orange which included twelve high priests, seventeen elders, four priests, three teachers, and four deacons, together with a large congregation. During the two days, Tuesday and Wednesday, October 24, 25, 1831, part of the business transacted was the enlargement of the finance committee on which Hyrum was called to serve with Simeon Carter, Orson Hyde, and Emer Harris.

Many of the brethren expressed themselves as willing to consecrate their all to the cause. The following expression may well apply to Hyrum when he heard his brother Joseph say, "I have nothing to consecrate to the Lord of the things of the earth, yet I feel to consecrate myself and family, and am thankful that God has given me a place among his Saints, and I am willing to labor for their good." Joseph speaking of those who should receive material aid from the Church said: "The Lord held the Church bound to provide for the families of the absent Elders while they were proclaiming the Gospel." [^2]

Later—November 1, 1831—another conference was held in order that important business might be transacted. The need for new scripture was acute, especially for the missionaries. It was announced that the revelations were to be published in book form. This would help correct many false ideas on religion. The Lord had revealed the preface for the proposed book which was to be titled The Book of Commandments. Three thousand copies were to be printed at Independence, Missouri.

The great press of business necessitated another conference at Hiram, Ohio, November 12th. Among the several problems to be considered was a report from Hyrum on the work of the finance committee. He spoke of being anxious that missionaries be called to work where they were most needed. Aside from business, such meetings provided an opportunity to develop the spirit of brotherhood and acted as a school to teach the gospel. The leaders felt that there was need of such occasions for learning, contemplation, and spiritual uplift. Each conference also marked giant steps in the development of the church organization.

Beginning in November, Hyrum resolved to keep a journal. He was aware of the advice and instruction to all missionaries to keep a daily journal. Accordingly, he obtained a notebook from which he cut about sixty blue-lined sheets 3Â½ x 4Â½ inches in size and fitted them into a black oilcloth cover decorated on the outside with red and yellow hand-painted flowers. With a needle threaded with flax string, he sewed the pages along the crease to the oilcloth back. [^3]

The brief jottings of Hyrum reveal the strength of his faith and his determination as a missionary. The fading ink obscures some of the words, but the first entry reads:

On November the 18th, 1831, George S. Gaimes ordained an Elder of the Church of Christ under the hand of Elder Hyrum Smith.

David Eliot was ordained Priest the 20th of November in the year of our Lord 1831 under the hand of Joseph Smith, Senior.

I, Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon the disciples of Jesus Christ being called and chosen of God in these the last days to preach the Gospel, which is to be proclaimed to all nations before the end shall come. I, Hyrum, having traveled through the various parts of the continent which is the Continent of America—even up to Zion and through the mercy of God have returned to my place of residence whence I started from and often resting for a short time and traveling and proclaiming in these regions, I Hyrum and Reynolds on the 13th of December in the year 1831, the second year of the rise of the Church of Christ—started to journey eastward—the first day of our journeyings called for an opportunity to proclaim in the town Concord but no admittance; traveled till night in the town of lavory (sic).

Stopped and labored with a sectarian Priest but his heart was hard and unpenetrable and mocked the truths of God but we bore testimony against him to his own destruction if he did not repent.

From thence to the town of (Thompson) and labored with the members of the church at (Thompson) the best part of two days and found but little or no success. Labored with David and the son-in-law of P. Copley. They expressed their desire to remain in the church after exhorting them to faithfulness left them and journeyed eastward to the town of Rome. Held meeting at the house of James Balwin (sic) on the Sabbath day—on Monday visited the house of Joseph Scott and labored with them in the Gospel. Consenting to their request and held a meeting on Monday evening—after baptized Hannah Shover—On Tuesday visited the house of a brother and labored with them and blessed their children—Wednesday, labored with a Baptist priest and bore testimony against him with power and (indistinct).

Started from thence to go to the town of Bloomfield. Stayed all night labored with the family. They were formerly from Connecticut. They spurned at offered Mercy—On the morning of the 24th started on our journey. Passed through the town of Farmington and labored with Brother Bee and from thence to the town of Hiram and the 25th and 26th went to Savanah and heard the exposition upon Booth's letters [^4] delivered by Brother Sidney. From thence to Hiram and from thence to Weatherfield. Labored and bore testimony unto them of the works of God in these the last days and from thence to Kirtland to our own homes to rest from our laboring for a little season. [^5]

Prior to Hyrum's assignment with Brother Cahoon he had been ordained a high priest and had accompanied Elder Orson Hyde on a mission to Elyria, Loraine County; and Florence, Erie County, Ohio. They were privileged to convert and baptize many and to organize these new members into three branches of the Church. Several sick persons were brought to them and were healed by the power of faith and the priesthood. On their return Elder Hyde wrote in his journal: "I found Hyrum a pleasant and agreeable companion, a wise counsellor, a father, and a guide." [^6]

In spite of the cold winter weather, Hyrum was constantly on the move as a missionary and as an officer in the Church. His earnest application made it possible for the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon at Hiram, Ohio, to continue their work on the scriptures without interruption.

It is quite likely that Hyrum spent Christmas and the New Year holiday with his wife, Jerusha, and their two little girls, Lovina and Mary. During this season they visited with friends and cared for his parents who were occupying a part of his home. After catching up on his business affairs, he continued his missionary labors, recording his activities:

Saturday the 14th of January (1832) after resting a few days from my labors started again for the visit [to] the churches in the regions westward stopped at the house of a disciple in the town of Uclet in order to labor with the people—a congregation was called but the wicked raged in such a manner that we could not keep order and were obliged to dismiss the meeting. We adjourned to Cleveland and from thence three miles south of Cleveland and labored with some old acquaintances but little or no success—from thence to Flourance passing through Amherst, held a meeting at Brother Moses Dayly's on the 19th of January—having the good pleasure through the mercy of God of meeting a goodly number of our Brothers and Sisters from New London—the 19th visited Brother Blackman he being sick he called upon myself and Elder Hyde to pray for and lay our hands upon him—accordingly we did—and he began to recover from that time forth. We left the house of Brother Blackman on the morning of the 20th. Visited a neighbor two miles south-east and held a meeting in the evening on the 22nd being on the Sabbath day. Held a meeting in the forks of the Vermillion river and in the evening of the same day at the house of Brother John Dayly's and from thence to Brother Armean Carters in Amherst. On the evening of the 24th arrived at Brother Gideon Carters—on the 25th attended conference—on the 26th-27th returned home to Kirtland—28th commenced at home in temporal concerns for a little season.

February the 2nd in the year of our Lord 1832—it being the 2nd month—

Labored in a conference meeting with Calvin—(indistinct) which was called in consequence of his open rebellion against the laws of God. Attended meeting in the evening of the same day and ordained Brother (Asa Dada) to the High Priesthood of the holy order of God.

February the 7th 1832

Attended meeting in the evening and baptized Harriet by the laying on of the hands.

On the evening of the 10th of February held council with the bishops and brother Cahoon in Kirtland, to counsel concerning the hiring the Mourley farm and also concerning idlers and diverse things.

Was ordained an assistant for the Bishop and also was Reynolds Cahoon.

On the Evening of the 11th held a council with brother Roberts concerning the Tavern stand—February 21st called for to lay hands upon Sister Huggard she being sick—Other elders were called Elders Fredric Williams, Reynolds Cahoon, Lincoln Hoskins was baptized by Brother Cahoon and confirmed by my own hand on the same day—the 21st of Feb. 1832.

On Monday on the 2nd month on the 27th day of the month Reynolds and myself were called to brother Dick Bless to lay our hands on a sick child accordingly we went but to no avail. On Wednesday of the same month myself called to preach a funeral sermon. . .who both departed this life a few days before. Held a council on the first day of the third which is called March, with the bishop and then Joseph, Sidney, Reynold's father and go myself.

March 10th 1832, brother Titus Billings ordained an Elder under the hands of brother Thomas Marsh. And also . . . to take the lead of the Kirtland Church while traveling to the land of Zion. March 13th held a meeting at Kirtland for the purpose of covenanting all to God. On the evening of the same day the Saints of God that are going to Zion covenanted to consecrate their properties to the bishop of Zion after their arrival.

March 23, labored for to find a place Biglow, Let Sister Marsh have two of potatoes 4/50 March 21st—shoed sister Marshes oxen—$1. April of the 3rd and 4th went to Hiram and returned with a brother Reynolds Cahoon for a wise purpose in God.

Monday 9th sold 12 books to brothers Gideon Carter and Sylvester Smith, elders in the Church of Christ.

Sister Marsh, Dr to 1-bu potatoes 2/25 April 10 do two bushel.

April 11 4/50 Sister Marsh Dr. plowing 75.

April 22, myself and Reynolds went to Mayfield and labored with the church. 23rd held a conference and tried the case of brother Thayer and B-rbigs. . (indistinct) both became penitent.

April 25 received of Ansonclions (?) 1.00 for the Evening and Morning Star. [^7]

His diary reveals an intimate, day-by-day account of his ministry. Periodically be returned home to look after his temporal affairs. He was versatile in applying himself to many different situations. He could shoe an ox, plow, sell books, trade potatoes, preach a funeral sermon, try a case, administer to the sick, ordain, rebuke the wicked, give counsel, aid the poor, perform ordinances, and preach the gospel.

He considered himself called and chosen of God, a disciple of Jesus Christ, to perform an important work in the last days. He and his missionary companion were ordained assistants to the bishop. His mission field was to be in various parts of the continent of America. His first mission was to Zion, and he acknowledged the mercy of God on his safe arrival home from the mission field. He did not consider the Missouri Mission by itself a complete fulfillment of his call. He spoke of his home as a place "from whence I started from, often resting for a short time and traveling and proclaiming in these regions."

There was to be no set time for Hyrum to complete his mission. It was to be a continuous one with various companions. Before the year ended he had taken Reynolds Cahoon with him into the eastern region.

Nothing was recorded about what his stipend might be from the Church nor that of the others who were eligible for such consideration. His diary reveals a kind and altruistic nature, particularly in helping the poor and the widows and in counseling his friends and neighbors. Great courage was demonstrated in debating with ministers and preachers and bearing witness of the truth and divinity of Jesus Christ. The years of 1830 and 1831 was a period of spiritual and mental growth for Hyrum Smith. He had, like Paul of old, been set on fire with the spirit of his new calling, for the inspiration of his words were impressive to those who listened to him. He spoke in the vernacular of the times with power and authority and was developing into a person with a missionary zeal, an individual in his own right endowed with transcendent qualities of character.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hiram, Ohio, was located about 35 miles southeast of Kirtland, Ohio.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, p. 261.
[^3] Hyrmn Smith, Journal.
[^4] Niles Register, op. cit., September 8, 1832.
[^5] Joseph Smith, op.cit., vol. I, p. 297.
[^6] Scraps of Biography, Tenth Book Faith Promoting Section, Juvenile Instructor Office, (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1883).
[^7] Hannah Grinnels, Margaret Bryon, Jane Wilson, and George Miles were a few that made their home with Hyrum.
