Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter X

A Shepherd of the Flock

When the year 1832 dawned, it was apparent to Hyrum Smith that he was to be a shepherd of the flock at Kirtland, Ohio. The second year in the life of the Church revealed the need of someone who could personally administer the affairs of the organization. More important work such as receiving and recording new revelations, revising the Bible, planning and holding conferences, and directing the missionary work, occupied most of the Prophet Joseph's time. During the spring and summer months he planned another visit to Jackson County, Missouri. Hyrum agreed to take care of affairs at home.

The intensification of the missionary program was creating new problems. Hyrum and Joseph spent many hours together conversing on them. Often the Smiths as a family would meet together. Their united spirit gave the infant Church strength and stability.

The task of setting up a new Church and teaching new doctrines in the presence of prevailing organizations with their set works was a considerable one. The initial success of the new Church offended the members of other churches. Proselyting among such an "enlightened" Christian folk was to place the converted in the "unsaved," "heathen," category. However, many of those who were disgruntled and dissatisfied in traditional churches were converted to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The church leaders were well aware of such reaction among contemporary religious groups. The influence of Hyrum Smith with his kindness and understanding was felt by the investigators, for often it was the expression of love and sincerity more than logic of the scriptures and reason that brought about conversion. The diversity of personalities drawn as by a magnet into an orbit of new and strange beliefs created a perplexing problem. Many were like children who came to be taught a new way of life. Others had deep-seated beliefs or philosophies based on old creeds which must be erased before they could accept new ideas. This was most difficult for some, a few of whom refused to make a clean break with the past. The new theological beliefs were radically different from those of human depravity and predestination—they were different from salvation through the sacraments or sudden regeneration. The idea of a personal God, a Father of our spirits who could communicate his will to man was hard to accept. New revelation impugned the Bible. Some reasoned that if the Bible contained all of God's word what need was there for new scripture? But the power of reason supported the missionaries. If God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, why would he favor generations past with knowledge and cease giving needed knowledge to those since Bible times?

The task of amalgamating a wide diversity of personalities into a new society required a strong and confident leadership. There had to be a meeting of minds on vital issues. When situations arose needing immediate attention, the Prophet would seek counsel. His brother, Hyrum, was among the first to whom he would turn. There was no precedent to follow.

The Church, as revealed to Joseph Smith, was radically different from all existing churches. Its doctrines were fascinating to contemplate and satisfying to the soul.

* * *

Hyrum Smith had been a missionary long enough to realize the great importance of scripture. People of the frontier believed in their Bible. The dearth of literature and an abundance of time had favored the good book as a source of intellectual stimulation. Therefore, it became necessary that the scriptures in as pure a form as possible be made accessible to the missionaries.

The church looked toward Hiram, Ohio, [^1] for more new scripture. Already the word of the Lord in pamphlet form was distributed among the missionaries. The Book of Doctrine and Covenants was being created but not yet under that name; and its revelations were being written in the vernacular and adapted to the times. The book contained principles of the gospel which were as ancient as Adam, but the language expressing them was new.

In the seclusion of the Johnson home at Hiram, the young seer, Joseph Smith, and his scribe, Sidney Rigdon, had made much progress in the work on the scriptures. Hyrum had taken the role of leader at Kirtland to shield his younger brother from the press of daily church affairs; but the privacy at Hiram was only temporary, for with the breaking up of winter and the drying of the roads, the leaders would soon be on the move again. Plans for increased activity were laid well in advance for the year 1832.

Near the end of March, rumors were heard of enemy action against Joseph. Such information, via the grapevine, was discounted until more tangible evidence appeared. On his last visit to the village of Hiram, Hyrum had mentioned the rumor to Joseph. There were several enemies who had made threatening remarks. A few enemies were later identified as Olmsted, Eli, Edward, and John Jr., sons of John Johnson. In addition, there were apostates Ezra Booth and Simonds Ryder, former ministers of the Methodist and Campbellite churches. Ryder, who had been an elder, turned against the Prophet when he discovered his name misspelled by Joseph in a letter. Instead of "Ryder" it was "Rider." Ryder claimed that if God's prophet failed to spell correctly, he could not be a true prophet. [^2]

Joseph returned to Kirtland from a trip to Missouri and made his report. The success of the recent trip to Zion was evidenced in the reports of Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and Newel K. Whitney. The Lord had given more light on the importance of righteous living and on the seriousness of failing to live up to the commandments. Where much is given, he told the Saints, much was expected. Every man was told to improve his talents, and to be equal in claim on the management of the stewardship according to his wants and needs, as long as his wants were just.

Hyrum Smith's home at Kirtland, Ohio. (Photo taken in 1954 by P. H. Corbett.)

Soon after Joseph's return from Missouri, Hyrum and Jerusha suffered the loss of their little Mary, born June 29, 1829, at Palmyra, New York; but their oldest daughter, Lovina, almost five, helped to assuage their sorrow, and they were further comforted by the birth on September 22, of a baby boy whom they named John. This boy was destined to succeed his father as patriarch to the Church.

Jerusha Barden Smith, wife of Hyrum Smith. (Courtesy of Patriarch Eldred G. Smith.)

Hyrum expressed his feelings of sorrow and anguish in his journal:

I, Hyrum, on the 28th day of January after returning home from conference went to work with mine hands for the support of my family. I and also in Churches whenever an opportunity permitted not suffering much tribulation until the 29th day of May, then I was called to view a scene which brought sorrow and mourning. Mary was called from time to eternity on the 29th day of May. She expired in my arms—such a day I never before experienced, and oh may God grant that we may meet her again on the great day of redemption to part no more. [^3]

During the summer of 1832, Hyrum continued to keep his journal, recording sundry transactions. Money was scarce and much of the trading was done in kind. It will be noted how the Book of Mormon was used as an object of barter.

Continuing in his diary Hyrum recorded:

June 7, 1832, Elder Thayer Dr. (debtor) took four Books of Mormon. June 7 went to Parkem with Brother Parley Pratt and baptized three and confirmed them, from thence to the town of Hiram.

Pheeleresill (Indistinct) and bought nineteen sheet of Brother Follet and paid eight books which is ten dollars and paid ten dollars toward cows I bought of Slina.

June 7, carried Joseph's calf skin to the tanners to be tanned. June 11th carried my calf skin to the tanners the 18th one more skin to the tanners the 30th one for Joseph to be tanned.

June 30, 1832, received of brother Dibble $3 for the assistance of the poor and also of Reynolds Cahoon 1 bus. corn for the poor.

Pd to the poor 1 bus. corn for /.50 ditto 16 lbs veal - 3 cents per lb. 48 cents June 27—sold 2 books to Joel Johnson July 4, received of Joel Johnson 3 dollars. Joel Johnson, Dr. (debtor) Book of Mormon July 12, 1832 Gilbert and Company Dr. 2 days and 2/3 of a day 20—$2.50 July 10, 1832 Reynolds Cahoon Dr. to 4 Books of Mormon $5—to $1 cash July 16, 1832 to Reynolds Cahoon—cow $12.

Diana Blanchard took away from here July 8, 1832—kept Sister Blanchard 2 w'ks and 4 children—July 1832, July 8th took Sister Blanchard to keep. July 27, 1832 bought of Zebedee Coltrin one horse saddle and bridle $28. Paid to Zebedee one watch $18 and 16 Books of Mormon which books he left in my charge. The said books he is to receive himself on order.

/s/ Hyrum Smith

July 22 visited the Mayfield Church held a meeting and preached to them. July 27th a conference of High Priest were called for the purpose of ordaining Zebedee Coltrin to the High Priest to the Holy Order of God. He was ordained by my hands this by the voice of the conference

President

Newel K. Whitney

/s/Reynolds Cahoon

H. Smith

July 27, 1832 - Brother Sherman Dr. 8 Books of Mormon received of brother Sherman $4 in advance for the books.

July 28, 1832 brother Sydney was ordained to the high Priesthood for the second time.

July 30, bought (Indistinct) one horse saddle and bridle—Paid for it 52 dollars and 75 cents. Paid 10 dollars in cash and 35 of the Books of Mormon.

Aug. 6th, 1832, pd Zebedee Coltrin 6 Books of Mormon out of the 16 I was to pay for the horse I bought of him.

August 21, 1832 baptized Fannie Simmons.

August 21, 1832 Thomas and Simmons Dr. to 1 Book of Mormon $1.25.

August 26, 1832—went to Painsville with horses and wagon to Sister Vienny and Sister Gray . . mger. Grovenner and group went on the 29th and brought the remainder of her goods. September 9, 1832 sat in conference of High Priests and ordained Joseph Wood and David Patten High Priests by my own hand. Their place of residence Michigan.

Joseph Smith Dr. to me September 1832 to one horse $55 2 cows $25. 1 heifer $7 18 sheep $55 1 plow $7 16 pigs $8 2 hogs $13 due me on settlement.

September 1, 1832 James Angel was baptized into the church of Christ by the hand of Zebedee Coltrin 24 September and was confirmed by the hand of Hyrum Smith 25 September.

John Smith was born September 22, 1832 and was confirmed or blessed the 8th day in the evening by the hand of his grandfather, Joseph.

September 7, 1832 I baptized David Clough into the Church of Christ and was confirmed by the hand of Joseph Coe.

William Cowdery Dr. October 14, 1832 toÂ½ Bu. Corn 25 cents—to one peck of potatoesÂ½ bu. corn in the ear 2/25 toÂ½ bu corn shelled 2/25 to one Book of Mormon one dollar.

I Hyrum on the tenth month of the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred thirty two, baptized Lucy Hodges in the name of the Lord Jesus unto the Church of the living God.

William Cowdery, December 29, 1832 11 lbs. pork @ 6 cents a lb.

Here Hyrum discontinued his entries. He kept no journal until the following spring. He failed to mention any of Joseph's difficulties at Hiram or the trouble with Sidney Rigdon, except to say that Rigdon had been ordained a high priest for the second time. Perhaps the Prophet had dropped him from the priesthood for disciplinary measures and had later reinstated him.

The miscellaneous activities of Hyrum recorded in his diary afford a glimpse into his private affairs. Because of the shortage of circulation medium (money) accounts of various transactions had to be carefully kept of various commodities, whether labor, produce, books, or items such as watches, saddles, etc.

While attending to his temporal affairs, he did not neglect the work of the ministry. He visited at various places, called meetings, and "preached to them." In order to attend to official duties he called a conference for the purpose of ordaining a man to the office of high priest. He wrote, "He was ordained by my hands this by the voice of the conference." He baptized and confirmed members, "in the name of the Lord Jesus unto the Church of the living God."

He took a mother and her four children into his home for two weeks, and then helped her on her way; and another person as a charity case, for he wrote, "took Sister . . . to keep." On another occasion he went to "Painesville with horse and wagon to Sister . . . and . . . and brought the remainder of her goods."

Hyrum's altruism was demonstrated when he took a calfskin and one for Joseph to be tanned. Also, his account with Joseph indicated he owed him for itemized list of livestock, including one horse, two cows, one heifer, 18 sheep, 16 pigs (small) and two hogs; he listed also one plow, a total of appraised value of $174 "due me on account." He carefully discriminated between business and charity in his transactions where property was exchanged and monetary value was recorded, even with his brother, Joseph.

During July Hyrum received the first issue of the Evening and Morning Star which contained a number of revelations and topics of spiritual truth to gratify and enlighten the humble inquiries of the Saints and investigators. The brethren at Kirtland were delighted with the work and that so small a band of Saints had grown so strong in so short a time as to be able to issue a paper of their own.

Toward fall the missionaries began returning from their missions. From their various fields of labor they reported their successes and failures, giving an account of their stewardship where property of the Church was in their hands. Many new members had been baptized and many new branches organized, all of which caused Hyrum to rejoice.

The missionary work in the east was making satisfactory progress. On September 8, 1832, in the Niles Register, appeared the following: "Two preachers visited Boston and baptized fifteen converts. Certain of these converts gave considerable sums of money into stock and were to depart for the promised land in Jackson County, Missouri—the precious spot having been lately discovered." [^4]

The favorable reports were offset by worry and anxiety over the progress of the Church in Missouri. Because of unrighteousness among the new members then converging on Zion, all was not going well. All were not joining the United Order, others who had joined the Church were apostatizing.

On November 6, the day after Joseph had returned from a six-week mission to New York and Boston, Joseph's household, like that of Hyrum's, was blessed with the birth of a baby boy whom they named Joseph Smith, III.

While Hyrum and Joseph were rejoicing over their new sons, a horse and wagon pulled up in front of Father Smith's home with three serious-faced gentlemen from New York. One was Joseph Young, a former Methodist preacher; one was his younger brother, Brigham, age thirty, also a former Methodist; and the third was their friend, Heber C. Kimball, who was driving his own outfit and was an ex-Baptist of Irish descent, also just thirty years old. They had arrived in Kirtland a few hours earlier and had spent a few minutes visiting with the John P. Greene family who had moved into Kirtland a few days before. The Greenes had first introduced Brigham Young to the Book of Mormon, an act which had resulted in his conversion.

One of the three knocked at the door and inquired for Joseph. Upon being told that Joseph, with Hyrum and his brothers, was cutting wood nearby, the men lost no time in finding the Smith brothers who were getting in their winter's fuel supply. Of this occasion Brigham Young later wrote: "Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God and receiving the sure testimony by the spirit of prophecy that he was all that any man could believe him to be a true prophet." [^5]

The conversion of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball to the Church added great strength to the governing body. Their talents, skills, and versatility were immediately in demand. They became apt pupils of Joseph, Hyrum Smith, and others in the work of the ministry, and in time filled their particular niche and performed a work beyond the province and possibility of the present leaders.

During December the indefatigable Hyrum took a Miss Tyler two miles on an ox sled to Lake Erie, cut a hole through the ice, and baptized and confirmed her. The ordinance could have been performed earlier in the year had it not been opposed by her father. [^6]

At the close of the year 1832, Hyrum Smith was greatly worried over conditions among the Saints in Missouri. He met often in council meetings giving suggestions on the course of action. His little family was his main concern, and he feared for their material comfort and for the welfare of the widows and orphans, to whom he gave what aid he could. Out of the kindness of his heart, he took people into his own family, [^7] at the same time realizing his own inability to support them. The financial help voted by the council was insufficient to meet the needs of his growing family, for he wrote in his journal, "I worked with mine hands for the support of my family." [^8]

But there developed no rancor or malice in the man, even though he had to toil for his necessities. This new society was to be built on a foundation of love, faith, and service, not on the basis of economic advantage.

The building of Kirtland revealed the character of Hyrum Smith. He had set himself like flint against adversity, and he exhibited a complete dedication of purpose. He had a mission to fill.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The home is located on Joseph's street in Kirtland, Ohio, Route 2, Willowby Street (present address). The house was purchased by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints from Mrs. Dora McFarlane, a neighbor. The author visited the home in 1954. The former owner pointed out a medium-sized room located in the center of the ground floor with a door in the center of each of the four walls. The doors were convenient for escape if the occupants were suddenly attacked. It was in this room that Joseph Smith spent much of his time on the revision of the Bible.
[^2] See text of blessing chapter 12.
[^3] End of entries in diary until 1835.
[^4] D&C 95:3, 11.
[^5] Lorenzo D. Young, Journal, J. H. June, 1833.
[^6] Journal History, July, 1833. Also Joseph Smith, History of the Church.
[^7] Memoirs of George A. Smith, President's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah, p.10.
[^8] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, p. 319.
