Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XI

A Citizen of Kirtland

The year 1833 was an important one for Hyrum Smith. He was thrust into several roles which increased his stature as a leader in the community of Kirtland, Ohio. Because of the demands upon his time and his responsibility to his growing family, there were several things which had to be done that weighed heavily on his mind.

One of the problems from the beginning of his sojourn at Kirtland, Ohio, was adequate housing. The converging of the Mormons on this western village created an acute need for places to live. The Smiths had had to share one home when they first arrived from New York State, but as the building of new houses got underway the situation was relieved. It may be supposed that Hyrum at this time acquired a home. The records are silent as to whether he built or purchased it ready for occupancy. The home he and his family occupied is still in an excellent state of preservation. It was constructed from native timber, two stories high, with an architectural appearance typical of those times. [^1](See cut.)

No doubt the home gave Hyrum added security and enabled him to conduct his business and fulfil his social obligations. There was need for extra accommodations for overnight guests and charity cases he frequently took into his home. If his capacity was limited to take care of a worthy person he made every effort to find aid and support among the membership of the Church.

Hyrum's blessings were constantly acknowledged as he addressed the Saints, in his prayers, both public, private, and in the family circle. In his journal appears a diversity of accounts of certain people who may have been in his personal employment. The thoughts he expresses about Joseph, his brother, his place of birth and the acknowledgment of his blessings, indicate the things uppermost in his mind, and no doubt these sentiments were often expressed and referred to among the people with whom he associated.

The journal, after a lapse of time, is continued:

April 18, 1833, Harvey Stanley Foreman on account labor by the month-for eight months to the 14th of November. H. Stanley Dr. (debtor) to met pair of shoes, calf skin topping boots 50 cents, to two by six pense cash.

The remainder of his journal records his business transactions and journal notes.

Accounts: Ezra Thayer

Sidney Rigdon

Silas Smith

F.G. Williams

Joseph Smith, Senior

William Smith

H. Smith was born in Tunbridge, Orange County, State of Vermont.

I, Hyrum Smith received a blessing under the hands of my father Joseph Smith, Senior, [^2] President Rigdon, my brother Joseph Junior, the Prophet of the Living God who was raised up in the last days: I was blessed with the privilege of obtaining the desires of my heart in all things.

Sold to Simeon Carter 2 books, 2 to Brother Sherman, May 31, 1832.

Jenkins Salisbury, Dr. to me one book 10 lines $1.25 May 31, 1832. July 30, 1832, Sister Blanchard to me one Book of Mormon.

Jenkins Salisbury another Book of Mormon. Took Sister Marsha's cow to keep March 21, 1832. Pasturage on the cow.

Note: The dates on entries in the diary are not chronological, they may have been added as an afterthought, among the 1833 entries.

March 3, 1832, Sold to a peddler 6 Books of Mormon and received pay as follows:

6 yards calico

13 yards cotton cloth

4 yards calico

4 tin pans

Sieve tin

One cheese weighing 6 lbs. 5 ounces

1 paper of tins (pins)

January 31, 1832

Presented to William McKlevin 8 copies of Book of Mormon $10

To Samuel H. Smith, Dr. 8 copies of Book of Mormon $10

Ezra Thayer (to) two Books of Mormon $2.50 [^3]

Hyrum's journal also reveals how he obtained some of his household necessities and the price of the Book of Mormon.

It is probably at this time that with a steady increase in population and new homes and buildings being erected that the Smith family was beginning to feel more secure. Most of the church leaders had homes of their own and it was time now to build the Lord's house. The Prophet Joseph had received a revelation concerning the building of a temple or a house of the Lord at Kirtland but had as yet failed to take action. Perhaps the unstable condition of the Mormons in Missouri indirectly contributed to the delay.

The construction of such an edifice would require hard work and sacrifice. When the meeting was held to plan methods of erecting the proposed structure, there was no one as well situated and endowed as Hyrum to work as chairman of the building committee. On June 1, 1833, the committee which included Reynolds Cahoon and Jared Carter drew up a circular to stress the necessity of such a building and to remind the membership of the need of their faith, prayers, labor, and money, for this building was to be a meetinghouse, a temple, and a school all in one. Despite the prompt action of the building committee, the Saints were slow in getting started on the building; and so urgent was the need for a temple that their tardiness brought a rebuke from the Lord:

For ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin, in that ye have not considered . . . in all things, that I have given unto you concerning the building of mine house; . . . it is my will that you should build a house. [^4]

This rebuke stirred immediate action. Hyrum and his committee met in a meeting called by the Prophet and listened attentively to a discussion of the architectural plans for the building. The size and the dimensions had been revealed by the Lord. They agreed with Joseph that a house of the Lord should not be built out of lumber or logs as was suggested, and a careful outline was made as to what should be done. At the close of the meeting a site was selected for the building. They chose the northwest corner of a wheat field which was part of the farm where the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., was then living. It had been sown by Hyrum and his brothers the previous fall.

The fence was removed and the standing grain was leveled to prepare a place for the building. Hyrum, with Reynolds Cahoon, broke the ground. With their own hands they commenced digging a trench for the wall on June 5, 1833, and completed it that same day, Hyrum having declared that he would strike the first blow on the house. On the following Monday, the brethren went to work on the house with great ambition; and though only thirty families of Saints now remained in Kirtland, they did not permit the work to stop until the building was completed.

With building stone available at a quarry near Kirtland, Lorenzo D. Young hitched up his team and took Hyrum, Joseph, Brigham Young, and Reynolds Cahoon to see whether or not the right quality of stone could be obtained there and if the amount would be sufficient. They decided that the stone would do, and after putting part of a load on the wagon they returned to town where the rock was put on the temple site. [^5]

The days that followed were busy ones for Hyrum. On July 23rd, he with five elders laid the cornerstone of the temple [^6] amidst an atmosphere of solemnity which made the occasion memorable. Hyrum's enthusiasm was similar to that of the others present, and unitedly they felt the urgency of constructing the temple at once. This building project was a forerunner for the building of other temples in this the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, a period when God would restore all important principles and ordinances for the benefit of mankind.

No doubt Hyrum felt keenly his responsibility as chairman of the building committee. He was aware that he must solicit the co-operation of everyone. He, therefore, urged the Saints to make the temple their first consideration, telling them that labor on the farms had to be shared with that on the house of the Lord. His plea brought a gratifying response, and fortunately, under his leadership there developed a spirit of unity and sacrifice sufficient to soon make their dreams a reality.

With the arrival of Uncle John Smith and his family from Potsdam, New York, more willing hands were added to the work. Uncle John's fifteen year-old son, George Albert, who was destined to play an important part in the growth of the Church, went immediately to work. Since Uncle John was the first of Hyrum's paternal relatives to join the Church, there was double cause for rejoicing at their arrival at this time. Of this occasion George A. Smith wrote:

Arrived at Kirtland, Ohio, May 25, 1833. We were greeted with a hearty welcome from my cousin, Joseph. He conducted us to his father, who lived in a large log house, spending the summer quarrying and hauling rock for the temple. It was built of bluish sandstone, and the basement story, corner, window-caps and sills, were of neatly cut stone, and afterwards cemented and finished off to match the basement. The first two loads of rock taken to the Temple grounds were hauled June 5th from the standard quarry by Harvey Stanley and myself. [^7]

On September 22-23, 1832, Hyrum sat in conference with the brethren. During the conference period, a special meeting of the twelve high priests was called to consider a letter from Brother Sidney Gilbert, W. W. Phelps, and John Corrill of Jackson County, Missouri. Grave problems had arisen among the Saints in Zion, problems such as too many poor people; not enough saintliness due to pride, jealously, and a lack of co-operation; and the well-to-do who hesitated to consecrate their property into the new social order known as the "United Order."

When the letter was read, it was observed that the Missouri brethren expressed hope that there (Missouri), the church headquarters soon would be established. The letter stated that the little branch needed the presence of Joseph, Hyrum, and the other brethren. At the moment this was not possible because the proximity of Kirtland to the larger centers of population to the east and north provided better opportunity for missionary work. For the time being, contact with Missouri could be maintained only by frequent letters and visits.

Two months later came another letter from Sidney Gilbert, this one a gloomy message dated December 10, and followed on December 15 by one from W. W. Phelps which contained—as the leaders expressed it—"low, dark, and blind insinuations which were not received from the fountain of light," (Sidney Gilbert,) and "which betrayed a lightness of spirit that ill becomes a man (W. W. Phelps) placed in the important and responsible station he is placed in." [^8]

A reply had to be written to meet the growing crisis. The council agreed that Hyrum Smith was the man to write it and appointed Orson Hyde to assist him. On January 14, 1833, Hyrum sat down and wrote the following: "Kirtland Mills, fn Geauga Co., Ohio, From a conference of Twelve High Priests, to the Bishop, his Council and the Inhabitants of Zion." The epistle contained several passages from revelations to show the importance of humility and obedience to the commandments of the Lord. It admonished the Missouri Saints to read the revelations and the Book of Mormon and to abide by their teachings, telling them that unless they repented the judgments of God would fall upon them. It also stated that Brother Joseph did not seek monarchial power and authority but was striving to magnify the high office and calling which were his by the command of God and the united voice of the Church. If the people of Zion did not repent, the Lord would seek another place and another people. Continuing, Hyrum said, "We have the best of feelings and feelings of the greatest anxiety for the welfare of Zion: We feel more like weeping over Zion than we do like rejoicing over her, for we know that the judgments of God hang over her, and will fall upon her except she repent. . . . We now say to Zion, this once in the name of the Lord, Repent! Repent! Awake! Awake! put on thy beautiful garments. . . ." [^9]

At the close Hyrum mentioned the opening of the School of the Prophets—"If the Lord will, in two or three days,—that all were in good health, the cause of God was advancing rapidly in the eastern country; the gifts are beginning to break forth so as to astonish the world."

Hyrum Smith met regularly with the brethren as one of the twelve high priests. [^10] A conference of the high priests was called on January 22, 1833. The services were conducted with the gift of tongues, and all present bore testimonies and greatly rejoiced at the outpouring of the gifts of the Spirit.

In March, the Prophet was given Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams as his Counselors to hold and share equally in the keys of the high priesthood, and more missionaries were called to the eastern country. Plans were made to establish a stake of Zion [^11] at Kirtland. Also seven high priests (Oliver Cowdery, W. W. Phelps, John Whitmer, Sidney Gilbert, Bishop Partridge, and his two Counselors) were sent from Kirtland and were appointed to stand at the head of the Church in Zion (Missouri). These officers were to be submissive to the constituted authority and to engage actively in bringing the people together from the ends of the earth to the place the Lord had appointed.

A conference of about eighty officials was held April 6, 1833, at the ferry on Big Blue River near the western limits of Jackson County in the land of Zion. Soon after this conference a mob of about three hundred old settlers met at Independence, Missouri, to devise a plan for the removal or immediate destruction of the Church in Jackson County. A few of the elders met and prayed that the designs of the mob would be frustrated. The mob, after a day of fruitless effort to unite on a scheme for "removing the Mormons out of their diggings," became a little worse for their liquor and broke up in a regular Missouri "row." [^12]

The letter Hyrum wrote in January, 1833, to the Missouri Saints, had had little effect in stemming the pressure that had been building up among them. Like the July heat the flames of mobocracy broke out in Missouri. While Hyrum, Joseph, and others were laying the foundation of the temple, reports from August until December grew progressively worse.

The dark days of Missouri mobocracy were increasing in intensity. At this time the future of the western church was obscure. The details of the Mormon expulsion from Jackson County is well known. The critical reverses in this frontier country helped to shape the destiny of Hyrum Smith and also the other leaders of this new movement. Quite probably the older brother of the Prophet Joseph had in mind alternatives of action to help meet the crisis. He no doubt thought of armed intervention under the protection of the Federal Government, particularly when citizens were forcibly dispossessed of their property. The atrocities committed by the mob-element of Jackson County weighed heavy on Hyrum's mind. He had given his consent and support to the plan that had placed the Mormons in such unfavorable circumstances. When he heard the particulars of what happened he wept.

The failure of the Church in Jackson County, Missouri, placed a great strain on Hyrum Smith and his associates in the ministry. The responsibility to organize the resources of the little band of Mormons at Kirtland to begin construction of the temple was heavy and no doubt at times, frustrating. The enthusiasm for the building up of Kirtland was blunted by the suffering in Missouri. Nevertheless, they knew the new edifice must be built; not to do so would bring the displeasure of the Lord.

How did Hyrum react during intermittent crises? He did not resign his position nor move away. Rather, he exhibited great faith in the Church and remained steadfast as it successfully met the challenge of adversities. In his journal he expressed his faith in the divine calling of his brother Joseph, and a spirit of gratitude: "I was blessed with the privilege of obtaining the desires of my heart in all things." He cherished his patriarchal blessing from his father. His attitude was the same as was his mother's at the time Joseph was charged with dishonesty by Mrs. Martin Harris: "We can do nothing except look to the Lord." He was willing to pay the price no matter the cost—whether it was in the privation of personal comforts to himself and family, or the enduring of threats, slander, and the loss of time and money. His success in overcoming each obstacle bode well and there awaited him greater ones in the not-too-distant future.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1921,) vol. 1, pp. 321-322.
[^2] The first sheets of the reprint Evening and Morning Star were struck off since it was decided to continue the periodical in Kirtland until the press could be restored in Independence.
[^3] OIiver Cowdery, holding jointly the keys of the priesthood with Joseph, gave a number of patriarchal blessings.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials of Church History, (Salt Lake City, Deseret Book Co., 1935), p. 168-169.
[^5] Joseph Smith. op. cit., vol. II, pp. 1-3.
[^6] Idem.
[^7] D & C 103:15, .
[^8] P. 38.
[^9] Journal History, op. cit., June 8, 1834, (Elijah Fordham's Journal). There were eleven women (wives) and seven children in Zion's Camp. History of the Church vol. II, p. 185.
[^10] Joseph Smith, vol. II, pp. 87-88. 185.
[^11] Hosea Stout, Utah Pioneer Statesman, Wayne Stout, pp. 79-80.
[^12] Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1888), pp. 79-80.
