Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XII

A Shaft in the Hands of God

The mobbings and persecutions in Missouri cast a deep gloom over the membership of the Church and particularly the leaders. The foreboding of Hyrum Smith concerning the Jackson County Saints since his visit there was being confirmed.

The missionaries observed that the "precious treasure," meaning the gospel, seemed to be wholly fallen in the street. [^1] Perhaps this was due to what the Prophet Joseph wrote: ". . . there were present here representatives of all the families of the earth: Shem, Ham, Japheth, a number of respectable negroes . . . and the balance made up of citizens representing themselves as pioneers of the west."

Hyrum Smith did not underestimate the seriousness of the trouble in Missouri nor was he able at the present to understand the implications or the true purposes of such extreme tribulation. There was danger of the green twig, the beginning of the growth of a mighty oak tree (the Church) being permanently singed by the white heat of persecution. The recuperative power of this infant organization was soon to be put to the test. The pattern of Satan in fighting the Church was becoming well established. While severe losses occurred of homes, land, and liberty, the valiant Saints were becoming inured and strong in their determination and faith. The events which occurred demonstrated the indominable spirit of the brethren. There was no time to mourn over their losses, immediate action must be taken; they gathered up the broken pieces and moved ahead. God had not forsaken them, even though the Saints in Missouri, like ancient Israel, had been driven from their holy land—he would still forgive and bless them.

It was during this distressing time that Joseph met with Hyrum and a number of elders in the office of the printing press in Kirtland to dedicate the printing press to the Lord. [^2]

This occasion was a significant one. The first patriarchal blessings given in this dispensation were given by Joseph the Prophet, December 18, 1833. [^3] In addition to Hyrum he blessed his father and mother, his two younger brothers, Samuel Harrison and William, also, Oliver Cowdery. Not only did he give blessings, he also ordained his father Joseph Smith, Sr., the first presiding patriarch of the Church. [^4]

The heart of Hyrum melted as he heard the voice of his prophet brother pronouncing blessings on him and on others at this time. A spirit of peace soothed the troubled feelings of the brethren.

If the distress of persecutions in Jackson County, Missouri, had begun to wane, it was just beginning in Kirtland. The citizens of Kirtland had grown more and more to resent the work on the temple and the things for which it stood. Scarcely had the year 1834 begun when, on the night of January 8, Hyrum and his family, along with the rest of the Kirtland Saints, were awakened by the booming of a cannon. The enemy had converged on a hill about a half mile northwest of Kirtland and fired thirteen rounds of shot, not to destroy but to terrorize the already worried Saints. The threats of the mob against building the temple increased, making it necessary, all through the fall and winter, for the brethren to be on constant guard. Day laborers on the temple were kept busy at night also, protecting the walls they had laid during the day. For weeks the workmen were not permitted to take off their clothes and were forced to sleep with guns in their arms. [^5]

The Church, in its poverty and distress, seemed destined to failure. The wisdom necessary for the solution to these problems, like that for those which had come and gone before and like that for those yet to come, was sought through the medium of united prayer. The brethren went before the Lord in fervent prayer on the evening of January 11th. In the several petitions was the expressed hope that the Lord would deliver Zion and gather in his scattered people to possess it in peace . . . that they perish not from hunger or cold. [^6]

Governor Daniel Dunklin of Missouri had told the Mormons that if they could organize themselves he would raise volunteers to assist in their being restored to their homes in Jackson County, and also, that the firearms taken from them would be restored.

On February the twenty-fourth, the Lord gave a plan to the brethren through a revelation which promised the restoration of Zion and which read in part: "Behold, I say unto you, the redemption of Zion must needs come by power; . . .

"But I say unto you: Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time yet shall possess the goodly land." [^7]

Just how this was to be done the Lord further explained: "It is my will that my servant Parley P. Pratt and my servant Lyman Wight should not return to the land of their brethren until they have obtained companies to go up unto the land of Zion, by tens, or by twenties, or by fifties, or by an hundred, until they have obtained the number of five hundred of the strength of my house." [^8]

Immediately after receiving this revelation, Joseph called the brethren for a consultation. Hyrum agreed that Joseph the Prophet should be the commander-in-chief of the expedition, and prepared to leave his family for another extended absence. When he told his faithful wife that he had been chosen to go with Frederick G. Williams on a volunteer-and-contribution-raising mission for the Missouri journey, she supported her husband as was her customary response.

In a few days Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight arrived from Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, to make a report of the true situation in Zion. Hyrum and Joseph met with them and the high council (organized for the first time in Kirtland, February 17, 1834) in the Prophet's home on February 24th to hear the report. Hyrum took the place of John Smith, a member of the council, who was absent. It was gratifying to the Prophet and to Hyrum to hear the visiting brethren report the friendliness of the people in Clay County—how they had taken the exiled Saints into their communities and supplied them with food, clothing, and employment, and had endeavored to make them comfortable in every way.

After much discussion, Joseph arose and said, "I am going to Zion to assist in redeeming it." A vote was called which unanimously affirmed his going, and forty volunteered to accompany him.

In company with Lyman Wight, Hyrum Smith went East to contact the branches of the church for the support of this expedition to Zion which was to be known as "Zion's Camp." The Prophet, with Parley P. Pratt, went into other branches, recruiting aid. After two months of intensive travel and countless appearances, over a hundred volunteers gathered at Kirtland to begin the westward trek. With the addition of new recruits at intervals during the journey, the little army was finally doubled.

With the loss of skilled workmen gone on the expedition to Zion, the problem of building the temple at Kirtland was intensified. Many of the volunteers had to depend upon their wives and children to run their farms and operate their businesses. The money required for clothing, food, ammunition, wagon, and teams for the expedition was a serious burden to the struggling Saints. This call, added to threats and persecution, required a sacrifice which proved the stability and faith of the members of the new organization.

Soon after Hyrum's return he bade a final goodbye to his wife Jerusha and parents before leaving to accompany Lyman Wight on another trek, this time to Michigan to recruit volunteers for Zion's Camp. It was a trial for Hyrum to leave his wife, still in childbed after the birth of their second son—young "Hyrum." Hyrum had spent most of his time at home since the April birth. Lovina, seven years old, was a great help, and three-year old John, the pride of his parents, saved many steps by running errands. The leavetaking, always difficult, was eased and made beautiful by the genuine affection and prayers of the family.

By Monday, May 5, 1834, Hyrum and Brother Wight had been organizing a company of fourteen, mostly from Pontiac, Oakland County, Michigan, and the little group started their journey to Missouri. By coincidence they departed the same day the Prophet Joseph left Kirtland with the main body of militia men.

The brethren had agreed that Hyrum's company would meet the main group at Salt River, Missouri, where a branch of the Church was located. [^9] Orders had been issued that the company arriving first was to wait for the others. [^10]

A quarrel was started in the camp when some of the brethren insinuated that one couple had not done their full share of the work. This seemingly insignificant incident, stimulated by travel-weary bodies and frayed nerves, grew to alarming proportions, until Hyrum Smith called them together for advice and counsel. The company readily acknowledged the error, felt humble, confessed their faults before each other and to God with uplifted hands, and covenanted to forgive and forget all that had passed and find fault with each other no more. They were then three miles into Indiana Territory.

On Sunday, May 25, they stopped at Pleasant Grove Branch, presided over by Brother Rich. Hosea Stout who lived near the mouth of crow creek (exact location unknown) wrote as follows:

Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, and others passed by here on their way up to Jackson County and staid several days during which time they preached several times here.

The effect of their preaching was powerful on me and when I considered that they were going up to Zion to fight for their lost inheritance under the special direction of God it was all that I could do to refrain from going. James and I let them have one yoke of oxen. Elder Charles C. Rich went with them. [^11]

The travelers joined the congenial congregation in morning and evening worship service. The next day the sisters washed their clothing. Brother Wight held a meeting in a nearby village and purchased a large wagon and a yoke of cattle. On Thursday they took leave of the brethren and traveled to Pekin, Lazewell County, Illinois, on the Illinois River. A wheel on the large wagon broke and was repaired by a man at Pekin.

Then the company of Michigan Saints under Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight continued their journey toward Quincy (Illinois), now over good road, and camped at the junction of the Mormon and Quincy Roads. They traveled through Quincy, a settlement with about seventy houses, two inns, nine stores, and an open square in the center. Here they purchased some lead for six cents a pound and also, for the first time, saw the Mississippi River which was about a mile wide, full of islands, with a strong current of roily water. As they were ferried over they noted that Quincy, also, had a saw and grist mill. Camp was made that night in Missouri.

Heber C. Kimball wrote:

At Salt River we were joined by Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight with another company. The camp now numbered two hundred and five men, all armed and equipped. It was a delight to see the company, for they were all young men with one or two exceptions, and all in good spirits. [^12]

On Monday the sisters washed the clothes, after which they moved to the general camp and pitched their tents. [^13]

It was Thursday, June 12, when the combined camp moved again toward western Missouri. During the four days rest, the company of two hundred five men organized themselves into squads of twelve, with a captain over each squad. The Prophet Joseph was named commander-in-chief; a bodyguard of twenty men with Hyrum Smith as captain was set near him, and George A. Smith was named arms bearer. Lyman Wight was elected as a general of the camp. After a half-day's strenuous drill led by General Wight, some had aching muscles. Their firelocks were inspected, and they fired them by platoons at targets.

George A. Smith, the son of Uncle John Smith, then a lad of fifteen, had been elected by the Prophet to make this journey. His father had outfitted him with a musket, a pair of pantaloons made of bed-ticking, two cotton shirts, a straw hat, cloth coat and vest, a blanket, a pair of new boots, an extra shirt, and a pair of pantaloons which his mother packed in a knapsack. He was large for his age and had weak, inflamed eyes. The first day out he blistered his feet in walking twenty-seven miles. Joseph gave him a pair of his boots, and he continued the trek with ease. He served at first in the quartermaster corps, helping with the rations; then he was made an arms' bearer.

Young George, when on the march through towns and villages, would be assigned to walk a few paces behind the company, where curious citizens would try to inveigle information from him, thinking he was a straggler, with his crumpled straw hat, his baggy pantaloons worn to shreds between the legs, and his sore eyes and simple look. He would give humorously evasive answers because the real purpose of their mission could not be divulged.

When asked where they were going he would answer, "To the West." In answer to "Where did you come from?" "From the East." "Who's your leader?" First one and then another," etc.

George Albert later recalled that on May 30, when they were camped about three miles from Springfield on Spring Creek, a brother came to see them with the news that George's cousin, Hyrum, had passed westward the day before, about thirty miles north of them. The man said, "He has a fine company and they all looked mighty pert." On Saturday, May 31, after an hour on the road, the brother who had given them the news of Hyrum Smith's company the day before rode into camp and gave Joseph $100 and said he was sorry he couldn't give more.

While this well-organized army was nearing its objective, the Saints at Clay County were negotiating with Governor Daniel Dunklin of Missouri to return the fifty-two guns and one pistol taken from them some time previously under false pretenses.

Hyrum Smith organized his guard to protect the Prophet night and day, and kept himself near at all times. For security reasons Joseph was called "Squire Cook," and Father Parker gave him a large watch dog. [^14] The next two weeks would see their mission completed with events crowding in to make history. Hyrum was happy to hear reports that the people of Salt River had great respect for the company as evidenced by the large number accompanying them for several miles.

Thanks are due Elijah Fordham, the camp historian, for his detailed description of Hyrum's company. The success of the project reflects the kind of leadership found in the persons of Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, and Samuel Bent. The personnel of the company manifested a high degree of faith and loyalty. They were willing to submerge their personal feelings for the good of the group. Without complaining they endured stormy weather, frequently slept cold at night because of insufficient bedding, and when their food ran low they were content to do without or to eat a very simple menu. They made friends along the way and seemed always able to obtain food. Evening and morning prayers were part of the rigid organizational schedule, and when a visitor came and talked too long the prayer period was deleted, rather than causing any offense or discourtesy. During the Sabbath no opportunity was lost to preach to the local citizenry.

There prevailed a spirit of co-operation and gratitude, and each campsite, much like ancient Israel traveling through the wilderness, they gave a name having a particular meaning which described a blessing, e.g., they named this place "Ezengeber" because here they were blest of the Lord with much instruction and with the Holy Spirit. When sickness occurred everything was done to bring relief, even through faith and prayer and the laying on of hands.

The five week journey from the Huran Branch in Michigan to the Allred settlement on Salt Creek in Monroe County, Missouri, covered approximately seven hundred miles. When they arrived the day after the main camp, Charles C. Rich had been added to their company which totaled seventeen.

Already Hyrum could point to fulfilment of several parts of his patriarchal blessing. His name had proved a blessing to his little company of recruits as the difficult trek through a strange and primitive section of the country had been highly successful. And he was emerging as a shaft in the hands of his God to execute judgment upon his enemies. The blessings of ancient Israel were upon Zion's Camp, and the patriarchal blessings were being fulfilled.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 103:20.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 97-98.
[^3] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 103-105.
[^4] Ibid., p. 106.
[^5] Idem.
[^6] Niles Register, op. cit.
[^7] Idem.
[^8] Idem.
[^9] Idem.
[^10] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 118-120.
[^11] Idem.
[^12] Ibid., vol. II, p. 108.
[^13] Joseph Holbrook, The Life of (Diary) Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^14] George A. Smith, Memoirs, President's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah.
