Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XIII

An Experiment

It was quite natural for Joseph Smith to have his brother, Hyrum, in charge of his bodyguard. Not only would it be possible for Joseph to have full confidence of maximum security, but he would have the companionship of his older brother, whose counsel and advice would be available at any time. It was no doubt a great comfort and satisfaction to Joseph to have Hyrum once again with him, for there was great need for such relationship because all was not well with Zion's Camp. Joseph had on an occasion called the company together and warned them about dissension, faultfinding, and evil speaking, and that unless it ceased a terrible sickness would come upon them.

When the company ferried across the Mississippi River, they were in enemy territory. Rumors of their coming had preceded them and the people of Jackson County, Missouri, were alerted and mobilizing for war. Zion's Camp was placed on a twenty-four hour alert, and every precaution was taken against a surprise attack. There could be no trifling with the rules and regulations of this military expedition; even though it was small in number it was mighty in power, for the Lord has said, "Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land." [^1] It was very important that nothing stand in the way to thwart their efforts in redeeming Zion.

The mob militia of Jackson County, realizing that the Mormons were marching upon them, hastened to place guards at ferries, roads, and waterways. At this time many of the houses formerly owned by the Mormons, in which the mob were then living, were burned to the ground. Some blamed the Mormons, thereby exciting the wrath of their neighbors. John Corrill and A. S. Gilbert had replied to their legal counsel that the Saints would never sell their property in Jackson County to promote peace because they (the Mormons) were American citizens under the Constitution, having the right to own property without molestation.

On June 3, 1834, Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt returned from Jefferson City, Missouri, with a message from Governor Dunklin that he would not reinstate the exiles on their land in Jackson County. Governor Dunklin had written to the Saints earlier that he would call out the state militia to reinstate them on their land if they (the Mormons) would return, but he had changed his mind on the grounds of impracticability.

This information was a severe blow to the hopes of Zion's Camp and to the Saints scattered in Clay County. While the camp journeyed toward Northern Missouri, Judge Ryland called an important meeting which was held at Liberty, Clay County, Missouri.

There were eight hundred to a thousand souls present, including the Mormon leaders, and a deputation from Jackson County which presented a proposition. The principal terms of the proposal were that a committee of arbitrators would appraise the Mormon lands, would then add 100 percent to the appraised value and pay the Mormons within thirty days. The same proposition would also apply if the Mormons desired to purchase the old citizens' property.

The offer was obviously insincerely made because it would be impossible in thirty days to raise sufficient money to make the deal either way.

Following the reading of the proposed agreement, Samuel Owen's spokesman from Jackson County made a flaming war speech and General Doniphan, an officer at Far West who later defended Joseph, Hyrum, and others, replied on the side of peace. A Rev. Mr. Riley, Baptist Priest, spoke hotly against the Mormons. He said: "The Mormons have lived long enough in Clay County and they must either clear out or be cleared out!"

Mr. Turnham, the moderator of the meeting, answered in a masterly manner saying, "Let us be republicans; let us honor our country and not disgrace it like Jackson County. For God's sake don't disfranchise or drive away the Mormons. They are better citizens than many of the old inhabitants."

General Doniphan exclaimed, "That's a fact, and as the Mormons have armed themselves, if they don't fight they are cowards. I love to hear they have brethren coming to their assistance. Greater love can no man show than he who lays down his life for his brethren." [^2]

Following the meeting, the Mormons answered the proposition by saying that they were not authorized to say whether their brethren would agree, and asked that they be given until the next Saturday or Monday to reply. Their great desire was to bring about a permanent peace as freeborn citizens of these United States. They pledged themselves to have no designs on the hospitable people of Clay County as a people or to commence hostilities against the aforesaid citizens of Jackson County or any other people. As a postscript they would use their influence to prevent any of the Mormons then moving to Jackson County from going there until they received an answer to the proposition.

Zion's Camp was depressed by the primitive condition of this new country with its virgin forests, streams, and rolling plains, all accentuated by the primitive urges of man's nature to hate, destroy, and kill his fellow man. Rumors began to come in more regularly about the enemy preparing to attack them. They crossed the Wakenda and looked for a place to camp. Ahead lay twenty-three miles of prairie without timber or palatable water to drink.

The camp was informed that a party of men was gathered together on the Missouri to attack them at night. Some of the men wanted to make camp near a strip of timber and were about to pitch their tents when Joseph decided that they should carry water and timber to a campsite on the prairie. Lyman Wight and Sylvester Smith opposed the Prophet by persuading about twenty men to remain with them for the night. Hyrum Smith said, in the name of the Lord, that he knew that it was best to go on to the prairie. His brother Joseph concurred with him by saying: ". . . and as he was my elder brother, I thought best to heed his counsel." The main company moved on eight miles and camped. They had little food, and the water carried in an empty powder keg was unfit to drink. At eleven o'clock the next day, Lyman Wight, with his company, arrived. The Prophet called them together and reproved them for their contrary actions. He told Lyman Wight never to act thus again. Whereupon, Lyman promised to stand by Joseph forever and never forsake him again.

That morning they traveled seventeen miles without breakfast. The Prophet was so sick he had to ride, leaving the affairs with Lyman Wight. They crossed a slough a half a mile wide through which most of the brethren waded waist deep in mud and water. General Lyman Wight, who had traveled from Kirtland without stockings on his feet, carried Brother Joseph Young through on his back. Their breakfast consisted of corn meal mush or hasty pudding.

Wednesday, June 18, they camped on a small prairie surrounded by a thicket of hazel brush, having passed within one mile of Richmond, Ray County. The Prophet bringing up the rear saw the danger of the mob attacking them from the thickets and went aside to pray. He was assured that Zion's Camp would be safe for the night. Early the next morning they marched about nine miles and stopped for breakfast. While passing through Richmond, they were warned by a black woman that a company of men were lying in wait there to kill them.

The camp halted on an eminence near a farmhouse for breakfast. The farmer gave them enough milk to add relish to their bacon and corn dodger which their commissary had obtained that morning. The farmer refused to take money for the milk saying, "If I had known you had been coming, I would have let you have more." The farmer reminded them that they had many enemies about here and said that it was a shame that every man couldn't enjoy his religion without being molested. Near noon, when they finished their breakfast, they moved on, determined to go on to Clay County. After going a short distance a wagon broke down and the wheels rolled from off others. It seemed impossible to speed their way. That night they pitched camp on an elevated piece of land between the Little Fishing and Big Fishing Rivers.

As they were making camp, five armed men with guns rode into camp and told them that they would "see hell before morning," a remark which was accompanied with oaths indicative of the malice of demons. They were told that sixty men were coming from Richmond, Ray County, and seventy more from Clay County to join the Jackson County mob who had sworn their utter destruction. During the day about two hundred of Zion's Camp made arrangements to cross the Missouri River to be ready to meet the Richmond mob near Fishing River Ford.

While the five men were in their camp, swearing vengeance, the wind, thunder, and rising clouds indicated an approaching storm, and a short time after they left the rain and hail began to fall.

"The storm was tremendous," wrote the Prophet. Wind and rain, hail and thunder met them in great wrath and soon softened the mobsters' determination and frustrated all their designs to "kill Joe Smith and his army." Instead of continuing a cannonading which they commenced when the sun was about an hour high, they crawled under wagons, into hollow trees, and filled an old shanty till the storm was over; then their ammunition was soaked.

Very little fell in our camp, but from a half mile to a mile around the stones or lumps of ice cut down the crops of corn and vegetation generally, even cutting limbs from trees while the trees themselves resembled witches as they were twisted by the wind. The lightning flashed incessantly which caused it to be so light in our camp throughout the night we could discern the most minute objects. The roaring of the thunder was tremendous. The earth trembled and quaked; the rain fell in torrents and united. It seemed as if the mandate of vengeance had gone forth from the God of battles to protect His servants from the destruction of their enemies, for the hail fell on them and not on us and we suffered no harm . . . while our enemies had holes made in their hats . . . even the breaking of their rifle stocks and the fleeing of their horses through fear and pain.

Many of my little band were sheltered in an old meetinghouse through the night. In the morning the water in Big Fishing River was about forty feet deep where the previous evening it was no more than to our ankles. Our enemies swore that the water rose thirty feet in thirty minutes in the Little Fishing River. They reported that one of their men was killed by lightning and that another had his hand tore [sic] off by his horse drawing his hand between the logs of a corn crib while he was holding him on the inside. They declared that if that was the way God fought for the Mormons, they might as well go about their business. [^3]

The next morning, Friday, June 20, Zion's Camp drove five miles on to the prairie where they prepared food for themselves and their horses. While camped here, Saturday June 21, Colonel Sconce with two others from Ray County, came to see them, desiring to know what their intentions were, "For," said he, "I see that there is an almighty power that protects this people, for I started from Richmond with a company of armed men, having a fixed determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm and was not able to reach you."

"When he entered our camp," wrote Joseph later, "he was seized with such a trembling that he was obliged to sit down to compose himself, and when he had made known the object of their visit, I arose and addressed them, gave a relation of the sufferings of the Saints in Jackson County, and also our persecutions generally, and what we had suffered by our enemies for our religion; that we had come one thousand miles to assist our brethren, to bring them clothing, etc., and to re-instate them upon their own lands; that we had no intention of molesting or injuring any people, but only to administer to the wants of our afflicted; that the evil reports circulated about us were false and got up by our enemies to procure our destruction. When I had closed a lengthy speech, the spirit of which melted them into compassion, they arose and offered me their hands and said they would use their influence to allay the excitement which everywhere prevailed against us. They wept when they heard of our afflictions and persecutions and learned that our intentions were good." [^4]

The sheriff of Clay County, Cornelius Gillum, came to see Joseph Smith. The company of brethren were marched to a grove and placed in a circle to hear the sheriff. Upon his desiring first to know which one was their leader, Joseph arose, this being the first time he had made himself known to his enemies since leaving Kirtland, and said, "I am the man." The sheriff then gave them instructions concerning the manners, customs, and disposition of the people, and what course they ought to pursue to secure their favor and protection.

The attitude of Governor Dunklin of Missouri was revealed in a letter to Colonel J. Thornton, City of Jefferson, dated June 6, 1834. He said he had refrained from entering the trouble to help compromise the issues because he felt that his intervention would do no good. He recognized the right of free citizens to own property and to arm themselves to defend it, but said: "I am fully persuaded that the eccentricity of the religious opinions and practices of the Mormons is at the bottom of the outrage committed against them."

The Governor counseled a course to avoid trouble by having the Mormons sell their property and leave or set aside a certain section and live within those bounds. He gave the law concerning other counties marching troops to the aid of Jackson County to drive the Mormons out, saying that the citizens of the county might organize and arm themselves for mutual protection.

In closing he said: "The character of the state has been injured in consequence of this unfortunate affair and I sincerely hope it may not be disgraced by it in the end." [^5]

The march of Zion's Camp to Missouri aroused both excitement and comment. On June 7, 1834, the Niles Register contained the following: "It is said that these poor fanatics, the Mormonites, have armed themselves to conquer their 'Holy Land,' in Missouri. They count 500 men and seem mad enough 'for the trial of battle.' " [^6] The Fayette Monitor wrote under title of "Mormons in Missouri" that "the people may look for the worst." The Missouri Inquirer, printed at Liberty, Missouri, June 18, 1834, said: "No compromise, the affair to involve the whole upper country in civil war and bloodshed. The citizens of Jackson County it appears, though inferior in number to the Mormons, are resolved to dispute every inch of ground, burn every blade of grass, and suffer their bones to bleach on their hills rather than let the Mormons return to Jackson County."

False rumors were circulated. On July 26, the Niles Register declared:

The report of battle with the "Mormons," in Jackson County, Missouri, was not true, but these people to the number of 800 to 1000 well-armed advanced, assured by their Prophet Smith that he would raise all that would be killed in fighting the battles of the Lord! The people of Jackson County had also armed themselves and a bloody fight must have ensued, had the parties come into contact. But they had not at the latest advices and a hope is expressed that some negotiations may be entered into to quiet the controversy. [^7]

The people of Jackson County were informed through the press under date of July 12, 1834, about the situation of the Mormons and about apprehension of war breaking out between the Mormons and citizens of Jackson County:

It appears that war is inevitable. Even though the Mormons have greater numbers than the people of Jackson County. . . [^8]

The frenzy of excitement among the people gave rise to blaming the Mormons for every crime. At this time a report was circulated blaming the Mormons for the sinking of a ferryboat at Everett's Ferry following a committee meeting. Eight members of the Missouri Committee were on board. It sank from being flooded from the bottom. Five men were lost. [^9]

* * *

The journey of Zion's Camp continued toward Liberty, Clay County. When they were within five or six miles of Liberty they were met by General Atchison and other gentlemen who warned them not to go to Liberty because of the intense hostility and hatred of the people against them. Taking this advice, the camp wheeled to the left, crossing the prairie and woodland, came to Brother Algernon Sidney Gilbert's residence and camped on the bank of Rush Creek.

The citizens of Clay County were assured by a statement signed by the Prophet and others that the purpose of Zion's Camp was to come to the aid of their brethren and was of a peaceful nature. [^10] The warning given the camp that sickness would break out if certain ones did not humble themselves and repent of their evil ways was not heeded. This warning was recalled when cholera struck and several of the brethren were overcome. Thomas Hayes was the first to die, June 21, 1834.

On the night of June 24, the air was rent with cries, moanings, and lamentations which attested to the sudden attack of the disease. Some fell to the ground when they were on guard. Joseph and Hyrum attempted to administer to the sick and rebuke the disease, but they were also seized with cramps. To use Hyrum's description, "It seized us like the talons of a hawk. [^11] Joseph said, "If my work is done, you would have to put me in the ground without a coffin."

After the epidemic passed, fourteen had died. Hyrum Smith escaped death and thus was permitted to administer to the sick and lay away the bodies. Great love was shown for one another, and many tears were shed. Later, at Lyman Wight's near Liberty, the Prophet told the brethren that if they humbled themselves before the Lord and covenanted to keep his commandments and obey his counsel, the plague would be stayed from that hour and there should not be another case of cholera among them. This they agreed to do with uplifted hands, and the plague was stayed.

The last week in June witnessed the demobilization of Zion's Camp amid scenes of sickness and distress. The object of the expedition was not achieved. The Lord, in a revelation to the Prophet at Fishing River on June 22, said in part: "Verily I say unto you who have assembled yourselves together that you may learn my will concerning the redemption of mine afflicted people . . . were it not for the transgressions of my people, speaking concerning the church and not individually, they might have been redeemed even now. . . they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I require at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil and do not impart of their substance as becometh Saints, to the poor and afflicted among them." [^12]

After organizing the stake and high council, the Prophet instructed Lyman Wight to discharge every man of the camp who had proved himself faithful.

Incidents relative to Zion's Camp were told by many of the brethren. Joseph Holbrook wrote that they all walked carrying their muskets and knapsacks with only the sick and crippled riding the heavily loaded baggage wagons. They had to help lift the wagons out of the swamp lands of Ohio. It took them forty-seven days to reach Clay County, Missouri, with thirty-seven traveling days. Because of the unfamiliar terrain the distance was increased by a circuitous route. [^13]

George A. Smith, in describing the hardship of the Camp said: "Joseph walked most of the time, never complaining of sore toes, scanty provisions, poor bread, bad corn dodger, 'frousy' butter, strong honey, maggoty bacon and cheese. When the dog would bark they would complain to Joseph. If they camped with bad water it would cause a rebellion, yet we were the Camp of Zion. Many of us were careless, heedless, foolish or devilish, yet we did not know it. Joseph had to bear with us like children. There were many, however, in the camp who never murmured and who were always willing and ready to do the will of our leaders."

The contribution of Hyrum Smith for the partial success of Zion's Camp was considerable. He supported his brother, Joseph, by sound counsel and advice, and by acting as his personal bodyguard, and companion. And, as before on similar occasions, the mutual sharing of sorrow incident to the cholera scourge and the refusal of Missouri's governor to come to their aid pointed up the importance of Hyrum in the life of Joseph the Prophet.

Diary of Hyrum Smith, and his watch shattered by a musket ball when he was killed by a mob in Carthage, Illinois. (Courtesy of Ralph Smith.)

Hyrum Smith's home at Nauvoo, Illinois. (Courtesy of Church Historian's office.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lyman E. Johnson 7. Wm. E. M'Lellin Joseph Smith, History of the Church, vol. II, p. 161.
[^2] Brigham Young 8. John F. Boynton Ibid., pp. 297-298.
[^3] Heber C. Kimball 9. Orson Pratt Ibid., p. 388.
[^4] Orson Hyde 10. William Smith Ibid., pp. 341-343.
[^5] David W. Patten 11. Thomas B. Marsh Ibid., p. 324.
[^6] Luke S.Johnson 12. Parley P.Pratt The term "ordain" here is misused. "Set apart" is more appropriate considering the office.
[^7] Ibid.,pp. 180-200.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 201-204.
[^9] The revelations were sections 107,108,109, 110, and 111.
[^10] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 118-120.
[^11] Idem.
[^12] Ibid., vol. II, p. 108.
[^13] Joseph Holbrook, The Life of (Diary) Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
