Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XIV

Hyrum The Peacemaker

Hyrum Smith took affectionate leave of his brethren at their camp just outside Liberty, Missouri. He felt that the trials along the way, the suffering, the sickness and the many casualties from cholera had strengthened their love and affection for each other. He shed a few tears that Monday morning, July 9, 1834, as he watched General Lyman Wight muster out the remaining militiamen of the original two hundred five men. He knew that a few of these men, with no families to return to, would remain in Missouri to make their homes. The others in small groups would travel in leisurely fashion to their families in Ohio.

As they loaded Hyrum's personal effects into one of the two-horse wagons, he felt that the mission was complete. There was satisfaction in having been obedient to the call to assist the unfortunate brethren. Thus thoughtfully, he turned and climbed to the buggy seat with his brother Joseph. Brothers Frederick G. Williams and Sidney Rigdon were riding in one of the baggage wagons, on which they were to take turns.

As they rode out, Hyrum thought of the new stake that had been organized in Missouri, with David Whitmer as president, W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer as counselors. This new ecclesiastical organization assisted by twelve high councilmen would conduct both spiritual and temporal affairs of the Church in northern Missouri and also act as a negotiating agency for a peaceful settlement of the Jackson County affair.

When they parted from their friends, Joseph gave George A. Smith expense money with which to get home, the unused part of which was returned when the boy arrived in Kirtland.

Three months had passed since Hyrum had left Kirtland and there was general rejoicing on his return. Hyrum inquired about the work on the temple, how the crops were doing, and inquired about the names of the several families of newcomers. There was much work to be done, and his family needed attention-a replenishment of food and clothing was necessary.

No sooner had he settled into the routine of home life and church responsibilities than he was called to attend several meetings with the high council. Sylvester Smith had made some grave charges against the Prophet Joseph Smith while on their recent trip to Missouri. After several meetings, Sylvester Smith recanted his charges and repented of his evil complaints.

As a member of the building committee of the temple, Hyrum was gratified to have the fine co-operation of the brethren, even Joseph worked with his hands. Speaking of this he wrote: "September 1, 1834, I continued to preside over the Church and in forwarding the building of the house of the Lord in Kirtland. I acted as foreman in the Temple stone quarry, and when other duties would permit, labored with my own hands." [^1] The Prophet called a meeting in Kirtland and bestowed blessings upon those who had been working on the temple.

In September, Jared Carter, a member of the building committee who had erred in criticizing certain of the brethren, was brought before the high council. During the trial, Hyrum arose and expressed himself as to how Brother Carter had sinned. He pointed out how pride had engendered in Elder Carter's heart a desire to excel, and the spirit of meekness was withdrawn, and he was left to err. . . because he was not yet perfect. But he erred in understanding, and his words were wrong; yet the spirit of his heart. . .might be good in the main.

At this time at Kirtland much time was taken up with problems arising among members who transgressed and needed trial and correction before the high council. William Smith, brother to the Prophet, brought a charge against a Brother Elliot for whipping his fifteen-year-old daughter. The usual procedure of a trial before the church court was resorted to. When Mother Smith, a witness, arose to testify, Joseph cautioned her about irrelevant information being unnecessary. William objected to Joseph's interference, and a bitter quarrel ensued. Father Smith realized that tension was developing and counseled Joseph not to leave the meeting. The trial was brought to order, and the defendant confessed his error.

The next day, William wrote the Prophet justifying his actions, whereupon, Joseph wrote a reply requesting William to come to his office. On Saturday, October 31, William came to see the Prophet. Hyrum happened to be present, having come he said, ". . .Because he had been troubled all night and had not slept any. . . ." Hyrum excused himself, saying he had to go to the store but would return. William wanted to proceed at once to discuss their trouble, but Joseph asked him to wait until Hyrum returned. Soon Hyrum returned and the subject of their difficulties was taken up. Joseph proposed that Hyrum and Brother Parrish decide the matter. William continued to justify himself but finally agreed to have Hyrum and Brother Parrish be the adjudicators. Joseph confessed that he was willing to make amends for any wrong he might have been guilty of.

After he [William] got through, Joseph later wrote, "Brother Hymn began to make some remarks in the spirit of meekness. He (William) became enraged. I joined Brother Hyrum in trying to calm his stormy feelings, but to no purpose, he insisted that we intended to add abuse to injury, his passion increased, he arose abruptly, declared he wanted no more to do with us. He rushed out at the door. We tried to prevail on him to stop, but all to no purpose. . . . He went home and spread the leaven of iniquity among my brothers, and especially prejudiced the mind of Brother Samuel." Later the Prophet wrote of William, . . ."I obtained a testimony that my brother William would return to the Church, and repair the wrong he had done. [^2]

On Wednesday, December 16, a debate was held at William Smith's home between Joseph, William, and others on the subject of revelation being necessary for one's happiness. The Prophet, taking the affirmative, provoked the antagonism of William to the extent that violence was the result of the debate.

The Saturday following, Hyrum received a letter from William asking forgiveness for the abuse he had given Joseph. Hyrum, again acting as a peacemaker, called on Joseph bringing the letter, and spent most of the forenoon discussing the difficulty between Joseph and William. Referring to this occasion Joseph wrote:

He, [Hyrum] said that he was perfectly satisfied with the course I had taken in rebuking William in his wickedness, but he is wounded to the very soul, because of the conduct of William; and although he experienced the tender feelings of a brother toward him, yet he can but look upon his conduct as an abomination in the sight of God. And I pray in my heart that all my brethren were like unto my beloved brother Hyrum, who possesses the mildness of a lamb, and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ; and I love him with that love that is stronger than death, for I never had occasion to rebuke him nor he me, which he declared when he left me today. [^3]

The Prophet Joseph had also received a repentant letter from William. He confessed his sins and asked his brother to consider his withdrawal from the Quorum of the Twelve, because his iniquity would undermine the effectiveness of the quorum. He complained of ill health and felt that someone else could take his place to better uphold the office. He also expressed a desire to remain a member in order to enjoy the fruits of the gospel. He said he had been called by his quorum to answer for his misconduct.

Joseph after reading the letter wrote a reply. He reminded William that he had helped build the house in which he was then living, had given him flour and supplies, and that as brothers they should have natural affection for each other. He said that even though their parents were living with them and shared the ownership of the house, in due time he (William) would own it. There should be due respect for their parents because as children they had been raised from the cradle through periods of sickness and poverty. Therefore, the children should not bring the parents' gray hairs down with sorrow to the grave. Joseph reminded him that "After the school closed, Brother Hyrum requested the privilege of speaking; you objected; however, you said if he would not abuse the school he might speak, and that you would not allow any man to abuse the school in your house. Now, you had no reason to suspect that Hyrum would abuse the school; therefore my feelings were mortified at these unnecessary observations. . . .

. . .I desire brother William for you to humble yourself. I freely forgive you. . .you know the doctrine I teach is true, you know that God has blessed me. I brought salvation to my father's house, as an instrument in the hands of God when they were in a miserable situation. . . .

And now may God have mercy upon my father's house; may God take away enmity from between me and thee, and may all blessings be restored and the past forgotten forever. May humble repentance bring us both to Thee, O God, and to Thy power and protection, and a crown, to enjoy the society of father, mother, Alvin, Hyrum, Sophronia, Samuel, Catherine, Carlos, Lucy, the Saints, and all the sanctified in peace, forever, is the prayer of your brother, Joseph Smith Junior. [^4]

During the late fall and winter months of 1834, there was sufficient lull in hostilities toward the Mormons to permit them to push the construction of the temple.

The economic conditions of the frontier were such that a system of barter made the distribution of goods possible. Farm produce was exchanged for books, clothing, furniture. Each trade transaction, however, was appraised in terms of dollars and cents. About a year before this, the Prophet owed his brother Hyrum $203.00 for certain items he had purchased. Perhaps that was one reason why Joseph, on December 4, 1834, in company with Vincent Knight and Hyrum, went to Painesville and drew $350 from the Painesville Bank on three months credit. Co-signers were F. G. Williams and Colonel N. K. Whitney, John Johnson, and Vincent Knight. With this money, he later wrote: "settled with Brother Hyrum and paid V. Knight $250." [^5]

The long winter evenings of 1834 were spent by Hyrum and the brethren in the pursuit of knowledge. The "School of the Elders," later the "School of the Prophets," was well attended. In his record Joseph wrote: "December 8, at home. Read Hebrew in company with Dr. Williams, President Cowdery, Brother Hyrum and Orson Pratt." Oliver Cowdery was, on December 5, 1834 ordained [^6] an assistant-President to Joseph Smith; but because of long periods spent in Missouri, Oliver, Second Elder in the Church, was unable to act in his important office.

There were three items uppermost in the minds of Hyrum Smith and the brethren at the close of 1834. First, the trouble in Missouri had not been settled. Governor Dunklin had presented their case to the state legislature, but no action had been taken upon it. Second, there was the urgency of moving ahead on the temple construction, which involved labor, money, and planning. Third, was the School of the Prophets by which the leaders desired to raise the literacy of the missionaries and members of the priesthood in order that they might be more effective in their various callings.

It was Saturday, February 14, 1835, that Hyrum Smith attended a special meeting, at which all who had gone up to Zion to assist in its redemption the previous season were present. Since June, 1829, it had been known that there soon would be called twelve special witnesses of the name and mission of the Lord Jesus Christ-a body of twelve apostles. (See D&C 18:37.)

This occasion was another important scene in the dramatic development of the Church. The field was ripe, ready to harvest, and laborers were sorely needed. On Sunday, February 8, the Prophet called Joseph Young and his brother Brigham to his home where he related a vision to them, telling them that he saw the organization of the Church, Brother Brigham chosen as one of the witnesses. He told him to notify all the brethren in the immediate branches to be present on February 14. He appointed Joseph Young to be the President of the Seventies. This office was new to this generation but Moses had chosen Seventy Elders of Israel, and Jesus chose seventies to help in the ministry during the Meridian of Time.

When the time came to open the meeting, Hyrum Smith, seated on the stand, noticed that the assembly room (located in the new school building under the printing office) was filled. After the opening exercises, the Prophet Joseph spoke, acknowledging the blessings of the Lord. He then told of the journey to Zion by members of the camp and promised a crown of glory for those of the brethren who had died with the cholera. He then read to the congregation the fifteenth chapter of John after which he asked that all members of Zion's Camp arise. (They were by pre-arrangement, seated together.) He said that from these would be chosen the Twelve Special Witnesses because they had already proved their faith by their willingness to die for the Church, and had made as great a sacrifice as Abraham. He asked the congregation to raise their right hands if they agreed to this proposal. The vote was unanimous. He made it clear that the Lord had commanded him to hold this meeting and proceeded to organize the Quorum of the Twelve and also the Seventies.

Complaints were made by some because they had not been able to fight on their arrival in Missouri. Joseph explained that it was not the purpose of the Lord to have them fight.

President Hyrum Smith prayed, after which they sang the hymn entitled "Hark, Listen to the Trumpeters." At the close of the hymn the meeting was adjourned for one hour.

The first item of business after reassembling and an opening prayer was the choosing of twelve men. The three witnesses, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, united in prayer and then were blessed for this occasion by the laying on of hands by the First Presidency. Then these three according to previous commandment, proceeded to choose twelve men as follows:

The twelve were later listed in order of their age which revised the above list. [^7]

Two weeks later, on February 28, 1835, the seven presidents of the seventy were chosen. These seven were to work under direction of the twelve and to serve primarily as missionaries in all the world. Seven presidents would later be called to preside over quorums as they were organized among the stakes. Seventy men were then called and ordained by the First Presidency as the First Quorum of Seventy. These too were selected from members of Zion's Camp in accordance with a revelation. [^8]

During the following months several great revelations were given, the most important perhaps being those on the priesthood. [^9] The leaders made no effort to organize or establish rules and laws without first being given specific instructions from God in revelations in the most minute detail. The revelations were carefully recorded and copies of them made for the use of missionaries until a collection could be compiled and published.

Hyrum Smith felt a great upsurge of enthusiasm for missionary work as he listened to President Oliver Cowdery charge the missionaries with the great obligations of their office and calling. Among other things, they were to be fearless like the apostles of old, a traveling high council to preach among the gentiles until he (God) called them to go to the Jews. Joseph followed by saying that they (the missionaries) were to hold the keys of this ministry, to unlock the door of the kingdom of heaven unto all nations and preach the gospel to every creature. This was the power, authority, and virtue of their apostleship.

The good office of Hyrum during periods of crisis was frequently sought. His summation at the trial of Jared Carter revealed the depth of his wisdom and understanding—part of which was: ". . . he was left to err because he was not yet perfect. But he erred in understanding, and his words were wrong; yet the spirit of his heart . . . might be good in the main."

His name was beginning to appear in the records as one having addressed the departing missionaries. He was aware of the importance of the new quorums and the added power and prestige they would give to the Church. His greatest desire was to keep close to all activity so that he could lend his guiding influence and offer his advice when it was needed. It was becoming more apparent as the church organization grew and inexperienced men, having no precedent to follow, would be more apt to exhibit weaknesses of judgment and personality. A little authority may prompt many to exercise unjust dominion over others. Therefore, until a sense of protocol could be established, there was evidence of bickerings, complaints, envy, and jealousy among the brethren. Fortunately there were those individuals mature enough to prevent such men from destroying the Church. Recent events in Kirtland reveal the emerging influence of Hyrum Smith as an arbitrator, counselor, and a peacemaker—a role he was destined to assume frequently during times of trouble and crisis.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hyrum's Day Book, size 3" x 4Â¼", well preserved paper cover, writing in ink. Entries dated Feb. 24, 1835, Aug. 5, 1835, and Oct. 30, 1837.
[^2] George A. Smith, Memoirs.
[^3] Susa Young Gates, Lydia Knight's History, Juvenile Instructor Office, Salt Lake City, Utah. (1883), p. 35. Note—Lydia Goldwaithe had married Calvin Baily at 16 and had had a daughter. After 3Â½ years he deserted her, and she married Brother Knight at 23.
[^4] Idem.,
[^5] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. II, p. 351.
[^6] Luke S.Johnson 12. Parley P.Pratt The term "ordain" here is misused. "Set apart" is more appropriate considering the office.
[^7] Ibid.,pp. 180-200.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 201-204.
[^9] The revelations were sections 107,108,109, 110, and 111.
