Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XV

Hyrum at Home

January and February of 1835 was a period of taking stock for Hyrum and his family. The cold weather brought the family inside their comfortable home where they loved to be together. Here Hyrum counted his many blessings, grateful that there was little sickness and an abundance of love and affection in his home. Material needs were adequately provided, and this gave a feeling of security. Outside his home the walls of the temple were rising to the square. Materials and many willing hands had seemed to multiply, literally speeding the temple toward completion. The temporary lull in its construction would end when the warmer weather of March and April arrived. Meanwhile, seldom a day passed without Hyrum's making a careful inspection of the work. Stone and lumber were in good supply. The co-ordination of the workmen on the various projects was inspiring to see and a constant source of joy to the zealous chairman of the building committee. Even work on the temple was not allowed to impede missionary activity, and Hyrum was still a missionary, subject to active duty at any time; however, he was now more a temple builder than a missionary.

On February 14, 1835, the twelve were called to go to mission fields. At that time, Hyrum was assured that those working on the temple were to remain on the job until the project was completed for theirs was also a mission. Like those leaving to go abroad, the builders had a similar zeal for doing the work of the Lord. About a week after the twelve were called as missionaries, Hyrum recorded in his diary the following:

"February 21, 1835, a meeting was called to (thank the Lord) for the blessings that (have come) to Zion (and those who) were driven (from their) homes." Three days later, in his Day Book, [^1] he recorded incomplete entries of baptisms, subscriptions received on the temple and labor performed.

Before the winter was over the newly selected traveling high council were on their way to the mission field in the Eastern States. It was necessary for the Church to help the needy missionaries with clothes and money. George A. Smith, a member of the first quorum of seventies, describing his call to preach the gospel in the East, wrote: "Joseph and Hyrum gave me some gray cloth to make me a coat and a (snuff-tobacco-colored) vest and pantaloons. Brother Charles Thompson cut them out and Sister Eliza Brown made them up for me." [^2]

There was little time for Hyrum Smith to spend with his family: Lovina, John, and Hyrum, Jr. The death of his second child, Mary, on May 29, 1832, had been a sore trial for Hyrum and Jerusha, but two more daughters were yet to bless their union: Jerusha and Sarah. Hyrum's was an affectionate and happy home where culture and refinement were characteristic qualities which emanated from this family circle to bless the Saints.

In the fall of 1835, Hyrum and Jerusha invited Lydia Goldthwait to their place to help Jerusha with her work during the remainder of her pregnancy. While there, Lydia met Newel Knight, an old friend of the Smiths, and a romance developed.

It was the advice of both Hyrum and Jerusha that the marriage take place at once, and when Lydia's objections were overruled, preparations were made immediately. A wedding supper was included in the plans and on the afternoon of November 22, Hyrum set out to invite the friends of the family. Going to Father Smith's he asked them all to be present. Hastening on to Joseph's house, he acquainted him with what was to take place the following day, and then asked Joseph to be present. As Hyrum was hurrying away, Joseph called out: "Stop, Brother Hyrum, don't be in such a hurry, where are you going now?"

"Oh, I can't say, I must make haste, as I have to go down and ask Seymour Brunson to perform the ceremony."

"It won't be necessary, Hyrum," replied Joseph, "for I intend to marry the couple myself." Hyrum looked at his brother with astonishment at this announcement. . . .

"Very well," replied Hyrum, "you know best. We will be very glad to have you do so." [^3]

The next evening (November 23), about a dozen intimate friends of the family gathered in Hyrum's parlor. The young couple stood up and the Prophet arose and commenced the ceremony, at the close of which he pronounced them husband and wife by the authority of the priesthood he held. This was the first marriage ceremony performed by the Prophet Joseph.

The Smiths gave Brother and Sister Knight a hearty invitation to remain with them during the winter and advised them not to set up housekeeping until they removed to their Western home. The Knights gladly accepted the offer and spent several happy months in this pleasant home.

In the spring Hyrum Smith provided the newlyweds with a team and driver to take them to the Ohio River, where they embarked by steamer for their home in Clay County, Missouri. The Knights never forgot Hyrum's acts of hospitality. From them later came a description of and a tribute to Hyrum Smith expressed in the words of their biographer as follows:

When Lydia went to his home he (Hyrum) was between thirty-five and forty years of age, tall, well-framed, with a fine, handsome countenance, and blue eyes and his face was full of intelligence and spirit. His manner was dignified; but, he was amiable, and vivacious, withal exceedingly courteous and fascinating to all with whom he ever had intercourse. He was really a worthy brother of the Prophet, and together they were a worthy pair. [^4]

As the temple neared completion, the temple committee (with Hyrum as its chairman) was gratified with the rapid progress made in building this house of the Lord. They felt that it was appropriate to publish a long list of donors. Soon the upper rooms would be ready for the School of the Prophets. The "fame" of this holy edifice was spreading far and wide, and a public journal made it a subject for comment. From M. M. Noah of the New York Evening Star came the following:

"Heathen Temple in Lake Erie—That boldfaced impostor, Jo Smith, of God Bible and Mormon memory, has caused his poor fanatic followers to erect on the shores of Lake Erie, near Painesville, Ohio, a stone building, 58 by 78 feet, with dormer windows, denominating the same 'The Temple of the Lord.' We should think this work of iniquity extorted out of the pockets of his dupes, as it reflects its shadows over the blue Lake, would make the waters crimson with shame at the prostitution of its beautiful banks to such an unhallowed purpose." [^5]

Hyrum could only pity such lack of understanding. Actually the Kirtland Temple was tangible evidence of the Saint's loyalty to their faith in Hyrum and Joseph Smith. It symbolized the Lord's work and helped to authenticate the fact that there was revelation in modern times. Such a concept was new, and it clashed with the catechisms of the various sects which stated that visions and revelations had been done away with, that the Bible was the complete word of God, and that the gifts of the Holy Spirit ceased with the holy apostles. Would not this disturbing person, Joseph Smith and his Church go the way of other fanatics and, like a tornado, blow themselves out? The Christian societies waited for the Church, to them a fraudulent institution, to fail and vanish away. Such failure would reveal to the world the true nature of the organization. But instead of failing it seemed to flourish. News filtered through from Ohio and Missouri that Mormonism was persisting. Every report of the church's activity was a disappointment to its detractors because the so-called fraud was succeeding. People were believing and joining; missionaries, ever increasing in numbers, were going abroad. Still, enemies of the Church felt that it could not last because it was contrary to the logic of God and the Bible. It was, therefore, they reasoned, a man's duty to expose it and label it for what it really was.

During the latter part of 1835, the growth of the organization and its doctrine experienced an upsurge. Hyrum Smith was an apt student of the scriptures and the new revelations. He had studied Joseph's revision of the Bible and was now looking forward to the time when he could study the writings of Abraham. This recent addition to the scriptures had been the result of one Michael Chandler's bringing several Egyptian mummies to Kirtland for the purpose of getting Joseph, the Mormon Prophet and Seer, to decipher some ancient writing on papyrus rolls which had been found with one of the mummies.

Hyrum and the family, with some friends, made arrangements to purchase several of the embalmed bodies in order to obtain the ancient scrolls. After Joseph had successfully translated some of the inscriptions, Mr. Chandler was willing to part with the specimens. The Smith family and the Saints were proud to know that soon the book of Abraham would be added to the developing body of scripture. The work of the ancient Patriarch Abraham proved to be a message of great importance coming out of the remote past.

This important discovery was termed, by Joseph, to be a result of divine favor. This new revelation would, in time, be put with the scriptures of the visions of Moses, and the record of Joseph Smith's first vision and calling, to make up a volume of scripture known as the Pearl of Great Price.

The Lord had fortified the infant Church by bestowing upon its members such gifts of the Spirit as revelation, visions, inspiration, discernment of spirits, testimony, and faith. He had also given them new scriptures and the Holy Priesthood, and had authorized the building of a temple. Thus, as the year 1835 came to an end, there was much for Hyrum and his family to be thankful for. The temple, soon to be occupied, was a monument to Hyrum's faith and devotion. His spirit of encouragement and determination had inspired many to greater effort.

Hyrum spent Christmas and New Year's Day with his family. Then on Sunday, December 27, he met with the Saints in worship at the schoolhouse, which was their usual meeting place at that time. In this meeting Hyrum shared the time at the pulpit with President Cowdery and Bishop Partridge. Joseph, who was present, wrote of this occasion: "Each [gave] a short and interesting lecture."

Hyrum and Jerusha celebrated the arrival of the new year (1836) with the family, in a gathering at Joseph's place. Several members and friends, including Uncle John Smith and Martin Harris were in attendance. A part of the festivities was to make some resolutions. Those present covenanted with each other: "In the sight of God, and the Holy Angels, and the brethren to strive hence-forward to build each other up in righteousness in all things; and not to listen to evil reports concerning each other, with our grievances, in the spirit of meekness, and be reconciled, and thereby promote our happiness, and the happiness of the family; and, in short, the happiness and well-being of all."

Hyrum had shared Joseph's anxiety over the trouble which had developed in the family, for both sensed an evil influence seeking to weaken and undermine the Church from within. Prayers and supplication had been regularly addressed to God that he would bless the family and the Church with the spirit of love and unity. And William's return to the family fold and to activity in the Church was the source of great rejoicing.

The history of this period reveals the tremendous responsibility of Joseph and Hyrum. So many people brought their problems and quarrels before the high council that dealing with such problems became routine. There were constant reports of the teaching of false doctrine. These could not be ignored, and so the offenders were called in and set straight. Even so, in view of the heterogeneous background and diversified philosophies of the converts, it was amazing how unified the infant church had become in so short a time.

Hyrum and the Prophet were like two skilled craftsmen, welding on an anvil, the divergent human elements into one unified whole. They realized the importance of withstanding the fierce disintegrating forces which were threatening the destruction of all they stood for, and they found that their most powerful weapons against the forces of evil were the missionaries of the Church and the temple being gradually completed there in Kirtland.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hyrum Smith, op. cit.
[^2] From an old diary, author unknown, pp. 38-39. B.Y.U., Provo, Utah.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith, pp. 431-433.
[^4] Ibid.,, pp. 442-443.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 463-464.
