Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XVI

Hyrum The Temple Builder

The beautiful new temple with its spire facing east was the first tangible representation of the Church, architecturally. The brethren often admired and commented about its New England design, its beauty and symmetry. The thick gray limestone walls were being plastered over and the woodwork of the windows, eaves, and doors painted.

The congenial spirit of Hyrum typified the harmony among the people as 1836 was ushered in. The work of building the temple had promoted a spirit of brotherhood and well-being, and such a structure gave the Church added prestige, as did the newly organized Quorums of Apostles and Seventies who were fulfilling in every way the charges placed upon them as prophets, seers, and revelators.

At the conference in Kirtland, January 13, 1836, Hyrum Smith was ordained to the Presidency of the high council, and several vacancies were then filled by ordination under the hands of Joseph, Hyrum, and Sidney Rigdon. During the closing period of the conference, Brother Rigdon became ill, and requested that Hyrum Smith and David Whitmer lay their hands on him and rebuke the disease. This they did, and he recovered.

Even before the temple was completed, various meetings of the Saints were held in the finished rooms. Hyrum, on his visits to the temple, noticed children and a few adults conducting themselves in a manner unbecoming to Saints in the house of the Lord, and he urged that a committee be appointed to draw up some rules of conduct. Therefore a committee met in the council room in the printing office to complete a set of rules.

The schools known as of the elders and the prophets moved into the upper rooms of the temple. There Hyrum witnessed many marvelous spiritual manifestations and participated as blessings were pronounced on the heads of many of the presiding brethren. He, himself, anointed and set apart Don Carlos Smith as president of the high priests and then watched as Don Carlos in turn anointed the quorum.

The close-knit Smith family met together Friday afternoon, January 29, 1836, for a feast, and to strengthen the bonds of fellowship. The oldest son, Hyrum, sensed the need for these periodic get-togethers. Among this family there was a deep concern over each others welfare, as was evidenced when Hyrum, while cutting wood, during early February, fell on his ax and cut a deep gash in his left arm. Dr. Frederick G. Williams sewed up the wound (about four to five inches in length), and when Joseph heard of the misfortune he rushed to Hyrum's side. Writing of this incident later Joseph declared, "And I feel to thank God that it is no worse, and I ask my Heavenly Father in the name of Jesus Christ to heal my brother, Hyrum, and bless my father's family, one and all with peace and plenty and eternal life."

Hyrum later mentioned in his journal a similar accident: "George Grant left October 30, 1837, for a little trip out to Antewarp. Visited Aunt Fannie. Stayed at Fannie's, fell on my arm, deep wound." [^1]

This mention of a visit to "Aunt Fannie" reveals another side of Hyrum's character. He was tireless in his efforts to convert his kinsmen and have them identified with the Church. He visited his Uncle Silas, in obedience to a revelation, and said, "Uncle Silas, I have come, the Lord has sent me to baptize you for the Lord has seen the integrity of your heart, but knows your fears in regard to your family." Silas was baptized. [^2]

Toward the end of March, the temple received its final inspection and was pronounced sound and well-built. No doubt the building committee exhibited great pride and satisfaction at the conclusion of such a formidable undertaking. The structure stood out in bold relief against a background of budding trees and flowering shrubs. The approaching day of dedication would be very significant because the edifice would be the first to receive such distinction since the dedication of the ancient temple of Solomon in Palestine. It was a time of triumph, marking another step in the establishment of the restored Church. The building itself was evidence that the revelation of God's will had been put into action.

The day set for the dedicatory rites was Sunday, March 27, 1836, and it dawned with clear skies and bright sunshine which seemed an omen of the great blessings yet to come. When the appointed hour arrived, the temple was crowded to capacity, with the priesthood seated in their proper places. It was indeed, a solemn occasion.

As Hyrum sat with the First Presidency he felt caught-up in a spirit of exaltation and ecstasy as he reflected on the toil and sacrifice which had made this day possible.

This momentous occasion marked the beginning of the administration of holy ordinances necessary for the salvation of mankind. The Presidency of heaven and the hosts abiding with them were evidently pleased and gave evidence by way of many spiritual manifestations which were witnessed by those present.

The following Tuesday at 11:00 a.m., Hyrum Smith attended a meeting in the temple with the First Presidency and Oliver Cowdery to deliberate on certain problems. At that meeting a revelation was given concerning the dedicatory exercises-two more meetings were to be held in order that all who desired might attend. The Tuesday meeting continued through the day and the following night, and on Wednesday, the priesthood quorums assembled for the rites of the washing of feet. It was a time of great spiritual manifestation; a day of pentecost, of great rejoicing, for important blessings were poured out upon the members of the Church. [^3]

In accordance with the revelation, a second dedicatory exercise was held Thursday, March 31, and a third on Sunday, April 3, 1836. There was no variation in the procedure except for certain important spiritual manifestations. It was during this final session that the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery were visited by the Lord, who accepted the house (temple), and by Moses, Elias, and Elijah, who delivered to them important keys of the priesthood.

The temple represented a mighty work initiated by the Heavenly Father in a new dispensation of time. The primary objectives for its construction had now been realized. The keys of the priesthood were now restored.

* * *

The few months following the dedication of the temple was a period of peace and felicity for Hyrum and his family. Their faith and prayers were answered by the coming of Father Smith's relatives to Kirtland. The first to arrive in May 1836, was cousin Elias Smith from St. Lawrence County, New York. Elias said that his father (Asael Smith) and family, and his Uncle Silas Smith and family were also coming to Kirtland, and that their grandmother Mary Duty Smith (wife of the first Asael Smith), was at Fairport on Lake Erie. Hyrum immediately made ready the family carriage to bring Grandma Smith to live with them. She was ninety-three, and had not been baptized mainly because of the attitude of her eldest son Jesse, who had always been an enemy to the work. The family rejoiced at her arrival. She had come five hundred miles to see her children and recognized all whom she had previously met. Upon being introduced to her great-grandchildren, she expressed pleasure and gratification to see them.

Grandfather Asael Smith had died October 31, 1830, but had predicted long before that there would arise a prophet in his family, and Grandmother Smith was fully satisfied that the prediction had been fulfilled in the Prophet Joseph.

Silas Smith and his family arrived from the East on May 18, and then there was a joyful family gathering with Father Smith and three of his brothers in attendance, the first such gathering for many years. Joseph later wrote: ". . . It was a happy day for me, for we had long prayed to see our grandmother and uncles in the church." [^4]

About sunset on May 27, 1836, within a few days after visiting with her children, Grandmother Smith died quietly, without sickness, pain, or regret. Sidney Rigdon preached a brief funeral sermon, and she was buried in the little cemetery near the temple. She had buried one daughter, Sarah; two sons, Stephen and Samuel; and her husband, and was survived by five sons—Silas, Jesse, John, Joseph, and Asael—and three daughters—Jessie, Priscilla, and Susanna.

The passing of Mary Duty Smith brought to an end a short period of happy association, for she had been an inspiration to her posterity. Her children had bestowed their most kind and tender affection upon her, and when she breathed her last it was a time for reminiscing. She had lived to see her illustrious grandchildren, and to partake of the blessings of the gospel. Hyrum was grateful to her for the heritage she had bequeathed them; his faith removed the sting of losing her so soon, for it assured him that he would see and be with her again.

Shortly after the death of Mary Duty Smith dark clouds began accumulating over Kirtland. At the moment they were only dark specks on the horizon. The work of Hyrum had settled into a comfortable routine of activity. With the final completion of the temple and the end of his chairmanship on the temple committee, came new opportunities for church service.

While petitions were being exchanged between the local citizens and the Mormons of Clay County, Missouri, for and against the Mormons' removal to other locations, the leaders of Kirtland were busy arranging missionary excursions into the Eastern States.

On Monday afternoon, July 25, 1836, Hyrum left his family to accompany the Prophet Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and Oliver Cowdery on a mission to Massachusetts. The first part of their journey was by boat via Buffalo to New York. After meeting Elders Orson Hyde and Moses C. Nickerson, at the Farmer's Hotel, they proceeded by boat to Utica. From Utica they took the train making eighty miles in six hours. The following day the party took a steamer the Erie to New York. Another steamer, the Rochester, going to the same direction signalled a race. The Rochester won by a few minutes. Joseph described the final outcome in these words: "By such undue pressure of steam lives of thousands may have been sacrificed, and I thank God that myself and friends were safely landed." [^5]

This mission was like a vacation for Hyrum, because in contrast to that of the western frontier, he was enjoying the culture and conveniences of large cities and the companionship of Joseph and the leading brethren. The trip to New York was exciting. While in this city they went sightseeing. They visited a district where six months before a fire destroyed seventeen million dollars worth of property. From New York they went by steamer to Providence and then boarded a steam train to Boston, thence to Salem where they arrived early in August. Here they rented a house and did missionary work from house to house, preaching publically whenever the opportunity presented itself.

While in Salem, where they remained for over a month, they visited places of historical importance, those rich in the memory of Pilgrim Fathers. They recalled how the settlers, having fled from the old country to avoid persecution and death, had themselves become persecutors by denying religious liberty to the Baptists and Quakers, who like themselves, had fled from tyranny to a land of freedom. The town fathers of Salem from 1692 to 1693 had whipped, imprisoned, tortured, and burned to the stake, and hung many of their citizens for supposed witchcraft.

While at Salem, this group received a visit from Brothers Brigham Young and Lyman E. Johnson. Brother Young with his brother, Joseph, had been through New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, doing missionary work and had baptized many into the Church.

The apparent tendency of the missionaries to combine business with pleasure brought a censure from the Lord, for while at Salem, on August 6, Joseph received a revelation in which the Lord said he was not displeased with Joseph's journey to this place notwithstanding his follies, and gave general counsel about the missionary work.

The records are silent about the success of this mission and the details of their return trip to Kirtland. It is supposed they returned home sometime in September. It is quite probable that the missionaries took note of the social and economic conditions along the eastern seaboard, and also, made an appraisal of the religious temper of the people. This knowledge would help facilitate missionary activity.

When Hyrum Smith and the brethren arrived home there were three problems needing their attention: First was the settling of the Missouri Saints on new territory in order to relieve the citizens of Clay County; second, the task of settling the new converts converging on Kirtland; and third, the establishment of a banking system to help facilitate the financial security of the Church. The country was experiencing a period of inflation and land speculation.

Before the end of 1836, the Shoal Creek territory attached to Ray County was taken up in Northwest Missouri which was subsequently to be divided into several counties. Caldwell County was designated early in December.

At this time the attention of the country was focused on the west with its opportunities for land and new business. This attraction, coupled with the gospel message helped to fire the imagination of new members to move west, many before they were adequately prepared. To meet this situation the brethren instructed the missionaries in the field to have the families moving to Kirtland to first send someone in advance to secure a place for them to live. All indications pointed to an economic boom in real estate values in this prosperous agricultural area.

By January 1, 1837, all preliminary arrangements had been made to establish the Kirtland Safety Society. Unable to secure a charter of incorporation, they decided to operate the banking institute on an independent basis. The Prophet called on all who could to support the institution and thus help to build and further the great work of the Lord.

What the brethren hoped would be a benefit to the new Church later proved to be a source of great trouble, for a spirit of speculation developed among some of the brethren who hoped for quick wealth. Notes and currency were over-issued against the total amount of legal specie on reserve. Then, during the early part of 1837, the nation's economy began to collapse, and a money panic swept the country causing the failure of many banks.

In Kirtland, the trend toward uncontrolled inflation and booming investments alarmed Joseph, but his warning went unheeded by most of the stockholders. Unable to stem the tide and sensing imminent failure, Joseph and Hyrum withdrew from the banking firm, but their withdrawal failed to prevent the losers from incriminating them as contributors to the ensuing catastrophe.

A series of events coming in rapid succession during the year 1836-1837 kept Hyrum Smith active in his role of shepherd of the flock in Kirtland, Ohio. The seeds of disaffection and apostasy were creeping in among the Council of Twelve.

With the Kirtland era reaching its climax, Hyrum's voice was frequently heard among the priesthood quorums, which met in the temple. On April 6, 1837, Hyrum addressed the assembly on the temporal affairs of the Church. He censured those who, without authority to do so, encouraged converts to move to Kirtland. He also alluded, in terms of disapprobation, to the practice of some individuals, of getting money from the brethren that came in, when such money should have been used to discharge heavy debts that were then hanging over the heads of the Church, or for the benefit of the Saints in that place. [^6]

The illiteracy in the Church won Hyrum's hearty approval of the temple's being used as a school. Already over 140 had been enrolled at one time, divided into three departments: the Classics, where the languages only were taught; the English Department, where mathematics, common arithmetic, geography, English grammar, writing, and reading were taught; and third, the Juvenile Department. [^7]

The gospel must be preached by missionaries with training in the liberal arts as well as in the scriptures and principles of the gospel. The loss caused by pruning the dead wood (apostates) from the Lord's vineyard must be compensated by grafting new branches. To meet this contingency a policy of missionary expansion was agreed upon, and inspiration came to open a mission in the British Isles.

The call of Heber C. Kimball met with sneers and opposition from apostates who formerly were members of the Quorum of Twelve. To the faithful Saints the call was divinely inspired. Speaking of this occasion, Elder Kimball wrote: "Hyrum, seeing the condition of the Church, when he talked about my mission, wept like a little child; he was continually blessing and encouraging me, and pouring out his soul in prophecies upon my head, he said: 'Go and you shall prosper as not many has prospered.'" [^8]

In Kirtland that summer of 1837, Hyrum became increasingly alarmed over rumors that Joseph Smith was a fallen prophet. The "Kirtland Safety Society" was failing and Joseph had been stricken with ill health at the time the missionaries were leaving for England. His illness, the people reasoned, was a curse of God placed on him for his transgressions.

The reports coming from Missouri demanded attention. All was not well among the presiding brethren there, and the condition required the immediate attention of the First Presidency. Hyrum realized that he must make preparations to accompany Joseph, which meant that he must leave his family for a trip that would require two to three months. He worried about Jerusha who was expecting their sixth child. Lovina, now ten years old, helped to lift the load of household chores. John was almost five; Hyrum, Jr., was three; and little Jerusha was about twenty months old. Hyrum's departure although necessary was most difficult for him. A spirit of foreboding depressed him, and it was with tears of affection that he assured his family he would return at the earliest possible moment. He was unaware that he was never again to see his beloved wife in mortality.

Not many days after his departure, while he was still following the now familiar route through rough and primitive country to Northern Missouri, his wife died, October 13, 1837, eleven days after the birth of a baby girl whom they named Sarah. Jerusha had stood by her husband through many dark periods of poverty and persecution. Her faith and devotion to Hyrum and the Church was without malice or complaint. She supported, complemented her husband, and strengthened his hand during every crucial period of the Church. Her death was a shock to the family and to the Church; and to Hyrum her loss was a staggering blow.

Of her death, Joseph the Prophet wrote: "My brother Hyrum's wife, Jerusha Barden Smith, died on the 13th of October while I was at Terre Haute, and her husband at Far West. She left five small children and numerous relatives to mourn her loss; her demise was severely felt by all. She said to one of her tender offspring when on her dying bed, 'Tell your father when he comes that the Lord has taken your mother home and left you for him to take care of.' She died in full assurance of a part in the first resurrection." [^9]

There seemed to be no limit to the severity of the trials Hyrum was called upon to endure. Always a devoted husband and father, he was over a thousand miles away helping to put the Church in order when his bereaved and lonely family were laying away their mother. In Missouri, Hyrum was patient with his brethren. They had accepted the suggestions of kind friends in Clay County, Missouri, to move into new territory in the region of Shoal Creek. Hyrum met with Joseph (who had arrived a few days before) and a group of leading elders at the townsite to be known as Far West, later to become the county seat of Caldwell County. Here a conference was called for November 6, 1837. Hyrum noted at this meeting were present four of the Twelve: Lyman E. Johnson, Thomas B. Marsh, William E. McLellin, and William Smith; also the high council. Among the problems discussed by these brethren was the laying out of the city of Far West and the size of the city blocks, which should be four acres. The building of the Lord's house (temple) would be postponed until the Lord should reveal it to be his will to have it commenced.

Another session of the conference was held the next day, at which time Hyrum was set apart as second counselor to his brother the Prophet in place of Frederick G. Williams, who was released because of insubordination. Certain brethren voted against him. Sidney Rigdon's nomination of Hyrum to fill this vacancy thus caused was unanimously accepted by the vote of those present. This new appointment removed Hyrum from the position he had held since September 3, 1837 as assistant counselor to Joseph Smith, jointly with Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, Sr., and John Smith.

The crucial conference was concluded when Hyrum assisted in the ordination of Isaac Morley to the office of Patriarch. [^10]

Hyrum, with his brother Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and others, returned to Kirtland after an absence of about two months. It was a difficult homecoming. He was grief-stricken at the news of Jerusha's passing. It is quite likely that Annie Grinolds, a charity member of his household came to live with the family at this time and remained as a domestic for many years. The Smith families had co-operated and been most kind in giving needed aid and comfort to the bereaved family.

Many tasks awaited Hyrum's attention after his long absence, and the press of many responsibilities, such as providing for the needs of a large family, and trying to solve problems in the Church was a heavy load indeed. His wife who had been a pillar of strength had been snatched from him. His burdens seemed insurmountable, and he sought out Joseph for advice. Part of the solution to his troubles would be to find a helpmate, some eligible young woman for a wife.

A series of events coming in rapid succession during the year 1836-1837 kept Hyrum Smith active in his role of shepherd of the flock in Kirtland, Ohio. The seeds of disaffection and apostasy were creeping in among the Council of Twelve.

At this time there were living in Kirtland, Mary Fielding and her sister Mercy Rachel Fielding. The sisters from Toronto, Canada, were converts of Elder Parley P. Pratt. Their brother, Joseph Fielding, was then on a mission to England. [^11] They had themselves emigrated from England to Toronto.

Hyrum had known them for sometime. They were both pretty, personable with light brown hair and of medium stature. Mary, who had taught school in Kirtland during February, 1837, was Hyrum's choice. He spent little time on courtship, and his early proposal was made on the basis of expediency. As Hyrum later remarked: "It was not because I had less love or regard for Jerusha, that I married so soon, but it was for the sake of my children." Then, too, his brother Joseph had advised such a course for the sake of his children, and he felt that it was the will of the Lord. [^12]

Mary Fielding [^13] did not hesitate to accept the proposal of so handsome and prominent a man. He was nearly thirty-eight and she thirty-six. The marriage was solemnized December 24, 1837, at Kirtland, Ohio. Mary was surely the most significant Christmas gift to bless that household! She was loved and respected by the Smith family, and her devotion to Hyrum's children rivaled that of their own mother, Jerusha.

The optimism and good feeling among the Saints at the beginning of 1837 was shattered as the year came to a close. To Hyrum, the man second only to Joseph in the hearts of the people, the year had been a period of great worry and strain. The loss of his wife who had been a companion and sweetheart, leaving him with five young children to care for increased his burden. No doubt his sense of mission and his devotion to a great cause sustained him during the family crisis. He had known death before. There had been the loss of Alvin, his older brother, and his own little daughter, Mary. These had helped to condition him but could not soften the blow of Jerusha's death.

His long trip to the Eastern States and the journey to Missouri had been made at the request of the Prophet Joseph. He had been asked to give aid and counsel when others in high places were faltering. He mourned over the loss of good men who had been led astray and over the mounting enmity and cruelty heaped upon his revered brother, Joseph, by traitors in the Church. However, he would not look back and be discouraged; the drama of the great revelation was unfolding and trials of greater magnitude were yet in store. With the completion of the temple and the restoration of important keys of the priesthood, came also greater faith and devotion from the membership. The brief period of school pointed toward the importance of education and an enlightened priesthood. The enthusiasm of Hyrum for education was expressed in his letter to cousin Silas when he wrote that after four weeks study of Hebrew he was able to translate the Hebrew Bible fluently.

Notes

Earlier, John Fielding had married Sarah Kitson. To this union were born seven children, five of whom died soon after birth. A daughter, Sarah, who never married died in her forty-sixth year. She belonged to the Saint Neots Circuits of the Methodist Church, of which she was a consistent and steady member. A young brother, Marmaduke Fielding, died at the age of eleven. After the death of the first wife, John Fielding married Rachel Ibbotson in 1790, when she was twenty-three years old.

Mary Fielding emigrated to Canada in 1834, where she joined her sister, Mercy Rachel, who proceeded her to Canada. (Courtesy of Marion Fluckigar.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 247-248.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. III, p. 2.
[^3] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 248-249.
[^4] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. III, p. 87-8.
[^5] Ibid., p. 90.
[^6] Ibid., p. 90.
[^7] Interview, Thomas Gale, resident of Kirtland, Ohio. (1954)
[^8] The ten were: Hyrum's wife (Mary Fielding Smith), Lovina, Hyrum, John, Jerusha, Sarah (children), Grandma Grenolds, George Mills, and Robert Thompson and wife, Mercy Fielding thompson.
[^9] Journal History, Historian's Office, Salt Lake, Utah.
[^10] George A. Smith, Church Historian, History of Mo., "American Commonwealths" p. 181. From History of the Church, vol. III, p. XLIII.
[^11] History of Caldwell County, (National Historical Company, 1886) Ref. Hist. of the Church, vol. 3, p. XLIII.
[^12] The Church has been called: "The Church of Christ," "The Church of Jesus Christ," and "The Church of God." History of the Church vol. III, p. 24.
[^13] D&C sec. 65.
