Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XVII

A New Home

At the beginning of 1838, the conditions at Kirtland, Ohio, were coming to a climactic close for Hyrum Smith. Conditions beyond his control were forcing him to anticipate drastic action if necessary. There was very little he could do to prevent the hostility against the Church. Apostasy within the higher echelon of the Church was spreading at an alarming rate. The enemy, also, sensing the trouble among the church leaders, began to take action, but prosperity and the unity of the membership kept hostilities from flaming into open conflict.

A similar situation to that at the close of the New York period was now developing for the Smiths. The pattern of attack by the enemy was painfully familiar. The events prior to Hyrum's departure for the West had a significant bearing on the welfare of him and his family.

The favorite method of their persecutors was to bring civil suit for debt against members of the Smith family, then if the defendants were unable to pay, either their property was seized or they were sent off to prison. For a debt of fifty dollars against the Prophet Joseph, the mob threatened to take the Egyptian mummies, but the strategy of the family kept them from being harmed or destroyed.

In view of the critical situation, Hyrum met with others at his father's home on the night of January 12. Here they were somewhat reassured to hear Joseph say: ". . . But one thing, Brethren, is certain, I shall see you again, let what will happen, for I have a promise of life five years, and they cannot kill me until that time has expired." [^1]

This pronouncement did not lessen the efforts to guard against grave dangers to members of the family. The following day word was received by Hyrum that his brother, Joseph, had left town during the night. He had been warned by the Holy Spirit to arise from his bed and leave. He arose immediately and waked Sidney Rigdon, and within moments the two had left their families and were headed toward Missouri on horseback. It was later learned that they rode sixty miles to Norton Township, Medina County, Ohio, where they stayed among brethren for the three days which elapsed before the arrival of their families. Several of the mob then followed them for many days. Brigham Young and his family joined them, and the three families traveled by covered wagon, in extremely cold weather, to Far West, Missouri. [^2]

The day following Joseph's departure from Kirtland, Luke Johnson an apostate constable, served a summons on Hyrum's father for marrying a couple without a proper license. Ignoring the pleas of Mother Lucy Smith, the constable took Father Smith to have him released on bonds. At that time, Hyrum was summoned by Mr. Johnson, and a plan was devised for Brother Smith's escape. With the help of John Boynton, Hyrum made good the liberation of his father. In a few days word was brought to Mother Lucy of the whereabouts of her husband, and she sent Don Carlos to him with money and clothes. Returning from the errand to his father, Don Carlos was discovered by the mob which unsuccessfully attempted to arrest him on the same charges as those made against his father. Soon after this incident Don Carlos moved his family to New Portage, and later joined the family of his father in moving to Missouri. [^3]

Hyrum too began to make preparations to leave Kirtland for Missouri. After the winter frost was out of the ground and the snow melted away, the Saints would all be able to leave. There had been a council meeting to arrange for the removal of church records and other valuable items to Missouri. Hyrum fortunately did not become the object of enemy action and was free to give direction to an orderly movement westward.

On March 6, 1838, the seventies met in the temple to make plans to go in a body to Zion. Hyrum felt that moving the Saints from Kirtland to the land of Missouri was in accordance with the commandments and revelations of God, and it seemed practical for a quorum of seventies to locate in as compact a body as possible in a spot where they could receive counsel from the twelve and the First Presidency in matters pertaining to their mission.

The morning session of their meeting was held under the supervision of President Hyrum Smith. They asked him to open with prayer and proceeded to formulate what they called the "Constitution for the Organization and Government of the Camp."

Another meeting for further planning was held March 17, just prior to the departure of Hyrum and his family. At this gathering Hyrum counseled them about their movement to Zion. The commandment had been given for "the honest in heart to rise up and go up into that land." He stated that what he had said and done about chartering a steamboat was for the purpose of moving the Church as a body. He told them, however, that this he had done according to his own judgment, without reference to the testimony of the Spirit of God. He said also that he had recommended the plan and advised the high council and high priests to adopt it, acting solely upon his own wisdom. It had seemed to him that the whole body of the Church in Kirtland could be removed with less expense in the way he had proposed. He said further that the Saints often act in relation to temporal affairs, upon their own responsibility, without any reference to the testimony of the Spirit of God. [^4]

Hyrum declared that he knew by the Spirit of God that the plans made by the seventies for their removal and journey were according to the will of the Lord. He advised all others who were planning to go up to Zion, whose circumstances would permit, to join the seventies and go with them. If he were so situated he said, he would join the camp and go with them and comply strictly with the rules adopted for the regulation of the camp on the journey. It would be to his delight as an individual, he said, to go without having any concern whatever in the management of affairs, either directly or indirectly, during the journey.

In answer to an inquiry concerning the difficulties that might attend the movements of so large a body, Hyrum observed that no fears need be entertained by any on that score, for, said he, "There would be no difficulty attend the camp if there should be 5,000 persons in it. The more the better; and the advantages of their going all together would be greater than they could possibly be if they should go in smaller companies. Food, clothing, and other provisions could be purchased much cheaper in large quantities." [^5]

In closing, President Hyrum Smith advised the camp not to discriminate against those not living the word of wisdom, and to secure the assistance and advice of the high council in carrying out their plans for the move and organizing the camp. [^6]

It was a miserable March day when Hyrum and his family bade farewell to Kirtland. They were leaving a comfortable and commodious home to face the cold of spring rains and an implacable enemy. It took great faith and courage to leave a well-regulated routine of good living and face the hazards of establishing a home in a primitive land.

Hyrum was endowed with a keen sense of loyalty and obligation, and had already shown marked ability as a leader. With this move to Missouri he was unconsciously playing his part in the rapid unfolding of God's plan for the Church. But it cost him heavily.

Just thinking of the Kirtland Temple brought a flood of memories of the toil and worry, and the spiritual blessings resulting from its erection. As his little caravan started westward Hyrum swept a last long look over the familiar surroundings of this village nestled among rolling, verdant Ohio hills. This place had been their home for seven years, and leaving it excited mingled emotions.

Across the street from the temple stood Sidney Rigdon's now vacant home. A little farther on, the well-traveled road descended a gradual slope to the north, past the frame home of his parents; to the right, across the way, was the tavern-inn where the Prophet Joseph's son Joseph III had been born. [^7] Nearby was the store of Gilbert and Whitney, now managed by its new owners. The bridge running in a westerly direction over the creek through well-cultivated patches of land, reminded Hyrum of the many times he had gone this way with loads of grist, flour and lumber to and from the mills erected along the water course.

Hyrum Smith realized now that Kirtland had never been meant to remain the headquarters of the Church. The infant Church was not a year old when Hyrum and Joseph had been commanded by a revelation to leave the state of New York and go to Ohio. During the first year in Ohio, Parley P. Pratt had returned from his mission to the western borders of Missouri and had described to Hyrum and the Prophet Joseph the fertile region lying westward. Upon Joseph's inquiry the Lord had revealed to him the significance of this new area, which was geographically located near the center of the North American continent. Here would be located, eventually, the city of Zion, or the New Jerusalem, and the headquarters of the Church.

However, Kirtland was first to be built up. The Lord, in a revelation had said: ". . . I, the Lord, will retain a strong hold in the land of Kirtland . . . in the which I will not overthrow the wicked, that thereby I may save some. . . . After that day, I, the Lord, will not hold any guilty that shall go with an open heart up to the land of Zion." (D&C 64:21-22.)

This revelation gave sanction for the Saints to emigrate to Missouri. The Colesville Branch had gone on to get settled, and the law of consecration had been established among them.

Hyrum reflected on the progress made during the few short years at Kirtland and his status in contrast with that of seven years before. His success could be judged by the progress of the Church. The Church had grown rapidly. A President and two counselors had been set apart to be known as "The First Presidency"; a Quorum of Twelve Apostles and a Council of Seventies had been added. A local organization had been effected, this to be called a stake, a term taken from Isaiah, and meaning "support the church like a great tent." This organization also had a president, and counselors, a high council, bishops, high priests, seventies, and elders. There had been revealed a comprehensive organization of the priesthood, both Melchizedek and Aaronic—the latter to have quorums of priests, teachers, and deacons.

During the period at Kirtland, about sixty-two revelations had been given and recorded, the Bible had been revised and the book of Abraham had been translated. From this new scripture emerged new principles and doctrines of the gospel.

Surely, no other period had been so fruitful of growth and development of polity (form of government) in the Church. Hyrum had been a part of it all. But now he resolutely turned his face from the past to the new life beyond the western horizon. There could be no turning back.

The journey to Far West, Missouri, was a two months' trek, a distance of over a thousand miles. Later, when speaking of this journey, Hyrum said, "I left Kirtland in the spring of 1838, having the charge of ten individuals, [^8] weather very unfavorable, roads poor which increased expenses and caused delays. After much suffering and privation we arrived safely in Missouri. I sent all household furniture and some implements via water, amounting to several hundred dollars, having made purchase of several hundred acres of land to settle on. Took a house in Far West. Heard rumors of mob action but couldn't believe because we had broken no law." [^9]

Hyrum's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, described their journey as one of hardship. They camped out in tents, in driving storms, traveled on foot through marshes and quagmires, and were soaked many times with rain. Being without any change of clothing or warm bedding, they suffered greatly when colds and sickness resulted.

When Hyrum and his family arrived at Far West they were amazed to see a fast-growing community. The Saints had moored north from Clay County, Missouri, in 1836, after the local citizens had met and passed a resolution urging them to move. They had selected this town site in Caldwell County.

By the autumn of 1838, the exiles had established two thousand farms and paid the government $318,000 for land, which at the minimum price for government land would give them over 250,000 acres. [^10] There were 150 houses, constructed from native lumber, 4 dry-goods stores, 3 family groceries, 6 blacksmith shops, and 2 hotels. The excavation for the temple had been made, and by the fall of 1836 a commodious schoolhouse had been erected on the public square. This structure was also used as a town hall and courthouse, as well as a schoolhouse. It first stood in the southwest quarter of the town, but upon the establishment of the county seat, it was removed to the center of the square. [^11]

Far West was situated on a rolling plain covered by a stand of prairie grass cut by intermittent water courses which were lined with native shrubs and timber. Wild game, such as deer, turkey, and prairie hens was abundant. The land was good, just waiting to be tilled before it could yield its strength to feed the multitudes that would soon begin to gather there from all corner of the globe.

There was much to be done at Far West: The Church had to be strengthened; the civil government had to be established (the Federal Government would provide sufficient land for settlement on a large scale); and a house needed to be erected unto the Lord. A revelation mentioning Hyrum's name had been received by the Prophet Joseph the latter part of April. This revelation read in part:

. . . my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., and also my servant Sidney Rigdon, and also my servant Hyrum Smith, and your counselors who are and shall be appointed hereafter; . . . and unto all the . . . Saints scattered abroad into all the world; my church shall be called in the last days . . . "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^12] Verily, I say unto you all, arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations. . . . Let the city Far West, be a holy and consecrated land unto me, and it shall be called most holy; Therefore I command you to build an house unto me, for the gathering together of my Saints, that they may worship me. [^13]

This announcement no doubt pleased Hyrum and the brethren, for now a permanent home for the Church could be established. But before Missouri could become a "most holy" land, the Church must be put in order. The disaffection and apostasy at Kirtland had spread like an epidemic to Far West. Before Hyrum had arrived at Far West, trouble had arisen among the church leaders there. David Whitmer, the stake president at Far West, and his two counselors had been tried for mishandling church funds; and Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten had been named to head the Church until Joseph should arrive.

Soon afterward David Whitmer was excommunicated from the Church, and then Oliver Cowdery was cited before the high council on nine separate counts, three of which were later withdrawn; but the remaining six he answered only partially. He defended himself for the sale of his land in Jackson County, Missouri, on the ground that it was his personal right under the Constitution. Of his complicity with the apostates in Kirtland or his charges against the Prophet, he said nothing. William E. McLellin was brought before the council for apostasy. He said he had lost confidence in the head of the Church and had stopped praying and keeping the commandments of the Lord. He also was excommunicated from the Church at Far West. [^14]

Among the first things Hyrum did, after locating his family, was to go north about fifteen or twenty miles with Joseph and a company of the brethren to seek a location for another city. On their way they met Sidney Rigdon and company, who were returning to Far West from a similar scouting trip. [^15] The town of Far West was fast becoming the hub for several settlements, such as Adam-ondi-Ahman, Hawn's Mill, Millport, DeWitt, Wight's Ferry, and Gallatin.

On this trip north on Monday, May 28, Joseph and Hyrum and company visited Adam-ondi-Ahman. On Wednesday, May 30, Hyrum returned home, and on Friday the Prophet also returned to Far West. On June 2, Hyrum and family were happy to hear that Joseph's household had been blessed with another member—born that day—whom they had named Alexander Hale Smith.

The following Monday, June 4, Hyrum with Joseph and others returned to Adam-ondi-Ahman and stayed with Brother Moses Dailey overnight and the following day went in the rain to Colonel Lyman Wight's home. For several days they continued surveying and locating plots for houses, working until their task was completed.

The immediate problem was to obtain homes for newcomers by locating sites for towns where they could build more housing; and a defense against mounting mob action must be organized. John Smith and six families were soon to arrive and would settle at Adam-ondi-Ahman. A Canadian company and the Kirtland Camp, expected sometime in July, would also be directed to this new town site north of Far West.

* * *

Adam-ondi-Ahman was located to the north of Grand River, in Daviess County, Missouri, about twenty-five miles north of Far West. It was situated on an elevated spot of ground overlooking the river, which rendered the place as healthful and beautiful as any other in the United States. The following is a description of the altar site written by one Chapman Duncan:

I think the next day (after arriving the night before) he (Joseph) said to those present, Hyrum Smith, Bishop Vincent Knight, myself and two or three others, "get me a spade and I will show you the altar that Adam offered sacrifice on." . . .We went forty rods north of my house. He placed the spade with care, placed his foot on it. When he took out the shovel full of dirt, it bared the stone. The dirt was two inches deep on the stone I reckon. About four feet or more was disclosed. He did not dig to the bottom of the three layers of good masonry well put wall. The stone looked more like dressed stone, nice joints, ten inches thick, eighteen inches long or more. We came back down the slope, perhaps fifteen rods on the level. The Prophet stopped and remarked that this place where we stood was the place where Adam gathered his posterity and blessed them, and predicted what should come to pass to later generations. The next day he returned to Far West.

Independence day, July 4, 1838, was celebrated at Far West in appropriate style. This day had special significance for a people who had been subjected to persecution by mobs who had driven them from their homes, destroyed their property, and threatened their lives.

An excavation on a suitable location was ready at this time for the laying of the cornerstone of a new temple. It was a little over two months (April 26, 1838) since they had been commanded by revelation to build a house unto the Lord; the Saints had organized a committee and laid plans to build a temple, which was to be 110 feet long and 80 feet wide.

The day, which dawned fair, had as its first event a colorful parade at 10:00 a.m. The parade was led by the military unit, which was followed by the leaders of the Church. These leaders included the brethren who were in charge of the day's celebration: Joseph Smith; Hyrum Smith; Sidney Rigdon, orator of the day; and Reynolds Cahoon, Chief Marshal; also the Twelve Apostles, presidents of stakes, High Council, Bishop and Counselors, Architects, and assorted ladies and gentlemen. The cavalry brought up the rear of the large procession, which marched to music and formed a circle, with ladies in front, around the temple excavation.

The southeast cornerstone of the Lord's house was then laid by the presidents of stakes assisted by twelve men; and the southwest stone was laid by the presidents of elders' quorums, assisted by twelve men. After the oration by Sidney Rigdon there was a shout of "Hosanna," and a song composed for the occasion by Levi W. Hancock was sung by Solomon Hancock. The most perfect order prevailed throughout the day.

Word from William Smith was received by Hyrum and Joseph on July 6, stating that William, Don Carlos, Joseph Smith, Sr., and three other families were having considerable trouble on their journey to Far West. Their horses were sick and lame, and their money had run out. They had failed to acquire sufficient cash before leaving Kirtland, because it was not available, and they had only $25.00 among them on which to make the remaining journey of 500 miles. "But," wrote Don Carlos, "our courage is good, and I think we shall be brought through. I leave it with you (Joseph) and Hyrum to devise some way to assist us to some more expense money. . . . Poverty is a heavy load, but we are all obliged to welter under it. . . ." [^16]

The shifting and moving of the Saints made the economic phase of their existence very difficult. There seemed never to be enough money. On July 8, 1838, the Prophet approached the Lord in prayer with these words, "O Lord, show unto thy servant how much thou requirest of the properties of thy people for a tithing."

In reply the Lord said in part:

Verily thus saith the Lord, I require all their surplus property to be put into the hands of the bishop of my church of Zion. For the building of mine house and for the priesthood, and for the debts of the Presidency of my church; And this shall become the beginning of the tithing of my people; And after that those who have thus been tithed, shall pay one-tenth of all their interest annually, and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood, said the Lord. [^17]

Shortly after this time, a meeting was held and resolutions were passed to meet the financial needs of the presiding brethren. Hyrum, Joseph, and Sidney Rigdon were kept busy directing the arriving Saints to the various settlements and in the council meetings that were necessary to conduct the affairs of the people.

Increased activity of the Saints aroused mob action against them. While the business of organizing an orderly government went on, the mob element was busy inciting the old settlers against the Mormons. Already plans were laid to prevent the Saints from voting at the polls at Gallatin, Daviess County, Missouri. On the day the voting took place a skirmish occurred with the Mormons obtaining the upper hand. The Missourians feared the loss of their suffrage.

The following day rumors spread that several casualties among the brethren had occurred and that Missourians had been prevented from voting, and that the majority of the citizens of Daviess County were determined to drive the Saints from the county. Immediately, Hyrum left for the West with the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon for Gallatin to investigate affairs. They were soon joined by fifteen or twenty men armed for their own protection, and further along the way to Gallatin they were joined by others. That night, they arrived at Colonel Wight's place. To their great relief and joy they learned that none of the brethren had been killed, although several had been severely wounded.

The next day Hyrum and Joseph, with the posse, called on Adam Black, justice of the peace-elect for Daviess County, who had joined the mob forces to prevent the Saints from settling in the county. When they asked him outright whether he was for or against the Mormons, and whether he would administer justice; they politely requested that he sign an agreement to uphold the law. He refused to sign the document but agreed to write one himself to their satisfaction and sign it. He agreed to follow a neutral course avoiding taking sides.

The above incidents gave the enemy a chance to misrepresent conditions, by lying and deceit, to arouse the citizenry of Missouri against the Saints.

On Thursday, August 9, Joseph, Hyrum, and Sidney Rigdon met at noon at Adam-ondi-Ahman with certain representative citizens for the purpose of drawing up a covenant of peace in order to preserve one another's rights and to deliver offenders to be dealt with according to law and justice; after this meeting hoping that things would be worked out satisfactorily. For safety, families at Gallatin were moved to Diahman and Far West. On Monday, August 13, some of the brethren on their way from the forks at Grand River, were chased by evil men for ten or twelve miles. After successfully eluding them, the brethren were met eight miles from Far West by some other brethren who informed them that Judge King had issued a writ for the arrest of the Prophet Joseph and Lyman Wight on trumped up charges growing out of their visit to Adam Black on the night of August 8 to obtain his signed agreement to uphold the law and help bring peace. [^18]

Soon afterwards the sheriff of Daviess County came to Far West to serve the writ, but after an interview with the Prophet, he demurred on the grounds of seeking more evidence, and the writ was never served.

By the last of August, Governor Lilburn W. Boggs of Missouri, as commander-in-chief of the state militia, made a proclamation to General David R. Atchison which read: "Ready four hundred mounted men. . . and form into companies according to law. Indications of Indian disturbances on the immediate frontier and the recent civil disturbances in the counties of Caldwell, Daviess, and Carol, render it necessary as a precautionary measure." A similar letter was addressed to Major Generals John B. Clark, Samuel D. Ducas, David Willock, Lewis Bolton, Henry W. Crowther, and Thomas D. Grand. [^19]

The Prophet Joseph and Lyman Wight were brought to court and bound over on a $500 bond on the basis of many false accusations, not because they were guilty, but to satisfy the mob. Every precaution was made to avoid any undue provocation.

On Saturday, September 8, word was received that Adam-ondi-Ahman had been attacked. [^20] The following day a company of mounted men were sent from Far West to its defense. When it was learned that a wagon load of arms had been sent to the Daviess County mob, Captain William Allred, with ten mounted men, was sent to intercept it. Two men were arrested and, with their guns, taken to Far West for trial. Captain Allred acted under the civil officers of Caldwell County. The next day, the prisoners were ordered by Judge Black to be liberated. Nevertheless, a trial was held the following Wednesday which proved that the arms were being taken to the mob.

Reports continued to come in that Mormons captured by the mob were being tortured to death in the most cruel manner. These reports were circulated to bait the Mormons into making reprisals, and thus give the enemy justification to accuse them of acts of violence.

A letter was sent from Daviess County to Governor Boggs containing all the falsehoods and lies that the mob could devise against the Mormons. Also, orders were sent that General Atchison, by the solicitation of the citizens and the advice of the judge of the circuit court, was to order out four companies of fifty men each from Clay County, and a like number from Ray County, to proceed immediately to the scene of excitement and insurrection.

When an investigation was made of the trouble, a report was sent by General Atchison and General Alexander Doniphan to the governor that the reports already made to him were invalid and false; that the Mormons who lived on the east of Grand River should return to their homes and the militia be disbanded. [^21]

After the disbanding of the militia in Daviess County, the discharged soldiers gathered at DeWitt, Carol County-located fifty miles southeast of Far West near the junction of the Grand and Missouri rivers-and threatened vengeance against all Saints without regard for age, sex, or condition. On Tuesday, October 2, 1838, they opened fire on the Saints.

In the meantime at Far West, Hyrum, with the leading brethren, traveled several miles out to extend a welcome to the Kirtland Company and escort them into the city. The company had traveled eleven miles that last day, having come 860 miles from Kirtland. Many were hungry, for food had been at a minimum for several days. Sidney Rigdon furnished beef for the camp and took care of the sick ones. They camped on the public square at Far West directly south of and close to the excavation for the Lord's house. It was a scene of greeting old friends and praising the Lord for their safe arrival. Concerning the arrival of the Kirtland camp Joseph wrote:

The camp continued their journey to Ambrosial Creek, where they pitched their tents. I went with them a mile or two, to a beautiful spring on the prairie accompanied by Elder Rigdon, brother Hyrum and Brigham Young, with whom I returned to the city.

The next day was a day to be remembered by that part of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, called The Camp, or Kirtland Camp, No. 1, for as they arrived at their final destination and began to pitch their tents about sunset, one of the brethren living in the place proclaimed with a loud voice:

Brethren, your long and tedious journey is now ended; you are now on the public square of Adam-ondi-Ahman. This is the place where Adam blessed his posterity, when they rose up and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel, and he being full of the Holy Ghost predicted what should befall his posterity to the latest generations.

Over five hundred Saints had journeyed from Kirtland to Zion enduring many hardships during the three months' trek; insufficient food for themselves and feed for their animals, sickness and the spirit of rebellion in some, adverse weather and poor wagons, which had often to be repaired all made it a period of extreme hardship. Their faith in the gospel had been tried to the breaking point, and during the last several weeks of the journey, many withdrew to remain by the wayside.

The mounting force of evil like a tidal wave was about to sweep over them. In Hyrum's family, now located in a comfortable house at Far West there was a feeling of tension and uneasiness. Conditions were not favorable. Mary Fielding Smith, Hyrum's wife, was soon to become a mother, and the worry and concern endured by Hyrum for his wife and family was almost overwhelming. What was in store for him and his loved ones? The next few months would tell.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapman Duncan, a member of the Mormon Militia, described what happened; "The bugle sounded, and by the time I was ready there were three-hundred men mounted early to start. We arrived in Adam-ondi-Ahman after sun rise the next morning. The Mormons went down to Millport through the mob. Three-hundred men buried their cannon and left. They started after burying their cannon in the road and got corn and scattered over it. An old sow in rooting after the corn bared the end of the cannon. So the brethren, as they called it, raised the dead. We placed the cannon on an high elevation as was and went to firing it. By this time Joseph the Prophet had come out. After the shooting he made a very mild speech." Biography of Chapman Duncan, BYU, Provo, Utah.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. III, pp. 417-418.
[^3] Ibid, pp. 207-208.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 419-428.
[^5] Ibid., p. 90.
[^6] Ibid., p. 90.
[^7] Interview, Thomas Gale, resident of Kirtland, Ohio. (1954)
[^8] The ten were: Hyrum's wife (Mary Fielding Smith), Lovina, Hyrum, John, Jerusha, Sarah (children), Grandma Grenolds, George Mills, and Robert Thompson and wife, Mercy Fielding thompson.
[^9] Journal History, Historian's Office, Salt Lake, Utah.
[^10] George A. Smith, Church Historian, History of Mo., "American Commonwealths" p. 181. From History of the Church, vol. III, p. XLIII.
[^11] History of Caldwell County, (National Historical Company, 1886) Ref. Hist. of the Church, vol. 3, p. XLIII.
[^12] The Church has been called: "The Church of Christ," "The Church of Jesus Christ," and "The Church of God." History of the Church vol. III, p. 24.
[^13] D&C sec. 65.
[^14] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. III, pp. 30-31.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 37-38.
[^16] Ibid., pp. 41-44.
[^17] D&C sec. 119.
[^18] Joseph Smith, op. cit. vol. III, pp. 55 60-63.
[^19] Ibid., pp. 64-65.
[^20] Adam-ondi-Ahman had 500 inhabitants. Journal History, vol. XII, p. 199.
[^21] Joseph Smith, op. cit., pp. 82-85.
