Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XVIII

Driven from Far West

When Hyrum Smith first arrived in Far West, the threats he heard made by the enemy to drive the Mormons out of Northern Missouri puzzled him. He was disturbed because the Saints were citizens of the United States and had done nothing to warrant such threats and treatment. They had acquired virgin territory by legal means and had spent considerable money for improvements.

Since Hyrum's arrival the threats of molestation had become a reality. It had been necessary for him to visit the outlying settlements and spend much time attending council meetings trying to solve the difficulties. Then came the alarming reports of an attack on the Saints in Carroll County.

The governor of Missouri had turned a deaf ear to their entreaties for help. Dr. Austin and Captain Bogart, a Methodist minister, one of the worst of the mobocrats, distinguished themselves as leaders of the mob militia which had been laying sedge to the settlement of DeWitt for several days. They guarded the roads, intermittently firing guns and a cannon into the village. General Clark of the state troops had written to General Atchison that the Saints were on the defensive and that unless he could get reinforcement to control the mob, the Mormons would be forced to flee the country. Reinforcements did not come, and on Thursday, October 12, 1838, the mob drove the Saints of DeWitt, Carroll County (about seventy wagons of them), from their homes and out of town.

An agreement to reimburse the Mormons for their losses was never honored. Cattle were slaughtered and used by the mob; houses were burned and goods destroyed. The sick and the weak died and were buried by the wayside without coffins or funeral services. The caravan made about twelve miles that first day, a pitiful and stricken company journeying to Far West.

The victorious mob of Carroll County then made plans to move their forces to Daviess County to dispossess the Mormons there of their property and repossess the land that had been purchased and improved to make farms. About eight hundred mobbers from different sections converged on Adam-ondi-Ahman. Some deliberately fired their own homes to make it appear that the Mormons had done it-an old trick successfully used five years before in Jackson County. The leaders of the mob also wrote to the governor, blaming the Mormons for the blackest of deeds.

For self-protection, the Saints called for volunteers to join the Caldwell militia. On Monday, October 15, one hundred men volunteered under the leadership of a Mormon officer, Lieutenant-Colonel George M. Hinkle (an arrangement agreed to by General Doniphan), and marched to the defense of Adam-ondi-Ahman. [^1] They found conditions of suffering, fear, and evil similar to those at De Witt. Isolated houses were burning; cattle, hogs, and horses were being driven off; and people were fleeing into the town for safety, destitute of clothes, fearing for their very lives. A snowstorm on October 18 and 19 added to the suffering.

The mob showed no mercy. Women and children, ordered out of their comfortable homes, were forced to stand and watch their homes burn to the ground. The experience of Agnes M. Smith, wife of Don Carlos Smith, was typical. Don Carlos was at that time serving as a missionary for the Church. His wife and two small children fled from their burning home toward the settlement. Sister Smith carried her little ones across Grand River, wading in water up to her waist. In all she walked more than three miles over ground covered with snow.

When word of these acts was received at Far West, the first judge of the county, Elias Higbee, ordered Lieutenant Colonel Hinkle to send a company to disperse the mob. About midnight, seventy-five volunteers under Captain David W. Patten met on horseback at the town square to commence their march.

After traveling for several hours they approached the Crooked River Ford, in the vicinity of the enemy. Drawing near, the volunteer company dismounted, leaving several of their number behind to look after the horses while the others proceeded on foot. As they ascended a rise near the river bank, their figures were silhouetted against the eastern sky in the early dawn; Bogart's men fired upon them. Of the several who were felled by the burst of fire, Brother Patrick O'Bannion was killed.

Captain Patten then ordered a charge and the volley roared as he shouted the watchword, "God and Liberty." The enemy returned the fire and retreated; and as the volunteers pursued them, a mobber stepped out from behind a tree, wheeled, and shot, mortally wounding Captain Patten. After the battle the volunteers counted 11 casualties: 3 dead and 8 wounded. Bogart reported one killed.

The wounded were taken in wagons to Far West, and the men who had been taken prisoners by the enemy were released. The Prophet, Hyrum, and Lyman Wight met the returning company near Log Creek. The sight of the dead and wounded made them sick at heart. The stricken Captain Patten was being carried in a litter to Brother Winchester's place, three miles from Far West. As they moved along the road with him, his suffering was so intense that he pleaded with his bearers to leave him by the side of the road. But his faith was undaunted, and his last words to his wife were, "Whatever you do else, oh! do not deny the faith."

Captain Patten, then President of the Quorum of Twelve, died as he had lived, a man of God and strong in the faith. And, as Joseph the Prophet later wrote: "How different his fate to that of the apostate, Thomas B. Marsh. . . ."

The battle of Crooked River climaxed the crisis between Mormons and Missourians. Captain Bogart falsely reported that ten of his comrades had been killed, many wounded, and the rest taken prisoner; that the Mormons were preparing to plunder, sack, and burn Richmond; and that in anticipation of such an attack from the Mormons, men, women, and children had began fleeing in all directions, many going to nearby Lexington. He said too that at that moment one hundred armed Mormon militia men were converging on Richmond. These and other false charges were repeated the next day.

The second day after the battle of Crooked River, after receipt of a lying report to Governor Boggs at Jefferson City, Missouri, the governor dispatched an order to General John B. Clark, telling him to mobilize the state militia for immediate action against the Mormons. The communique contained further misinformation: "The Mormons have burned and pillaged many homes, driven off stock, and are destroying the crops. The towns of Gallatin and Millport are in ashes." The message was concluded with instructions that the General go well-equipped with sufficient supplies and wagons.

On Saturday, October 27, 1838, Governor Boggs, without first making an investigation into the reports, issued at Jefferson City what has appropriately been called "The Exterminating Order." This order sent to General Clark was to drive the Mormons from the state and was the signal for widespread depredations.

That dreadful order from Governor Boggs became the signal for an unrestrained attack on the Mormons. It had been issued at the precise moment when the enemy of the Saints was in its ugliest mood, and thus it was that the little hamlet of Haun's Mill on Shoal Creek became the site of a premeditated attack.

The persecutions had only one ray of light and of relief in an otherwise bleak persistence-the courage of General Doniphan who stalwartly refused to follow orders to shoot the Mormon leaders.

Following the massacre, the enemy detachment (a part of the main army under the supervision of Colonel Ashby but under the immediate command of Captain Nehemiah Comstock) rejoined the main body of the army camped outside Far West.

To Hyrum Smith, the atmosphere supercharged against the Church was nothing short of astounding. He returned with Joseph to Far West after witnessing the distressing situation at Diahmon and dispatched some documents by messenger to General Atchison, stating the facts as they did exist and praying for assistance. A petition was sent to the governor setting forth the alarming situation. In the meantime the presiding judge of the county court, acting upon affidavits made to him by the citizens, issued orders to the sheriff of the county to order out the militia of the county to stand in constant readiness night and day to prevent the citizens from being massacred.

The perfidy on Colonel Hinkle's part to deliver up the Mormon leaders to General Lucas as prisoners is well known. It was a temporary triumph for Lucas and the mob militia. The temper of the military toward the prisoners is revealed by what followed.

It was learned later that General Clark had written General Lucas to have the "royal prisoners" sent to him at Richmond for execution. But Lucas, ignoring the order, made haste to show off his prisoners to the people of Jackson County. On this journey, the Prophet Joseph received assurance by revelation that not one of them would perish but would live to join again with the Saints.

The caravan arrived at Independence a little past noon, in the midst of a great rainstorm, which failed however to keep people from lining the streets to witness their arrival and to hear the bugle blast of triumphant joy. Hyrum describing this event, later wrote:

After our arrival at Independence, we were driven all through the town for inspection, and then the following day we were all permitted to go to the tavern to eat and to sleep, but afterwards they made us pay our own expenses for board, lodging, and attendance . . . for which they made a most exorbitant charge.

We remained in the tavern about two days and two nights, when an officer arrived with authority from General Clark to take us back to Richmond, Ray County, where the General had arrived with his army to await our arrival there; but on the morning of our start for Richmond, we were informed by General Wilson that it was expected by the soldiers that we would be hung up by our necks on the road while on the march to that place and that it was prevented by a demand made for us by General Clark, who had the command in consequence of seniority, and that it was his prerogative to execute us himself, and he should give us up into the hands of the officer, who would take us to General Clark, and he might do with us as he pleased.

During our stay at Independence, the officers informed us that there were eight or ten horses in the place belonging to the Mormon people, which had been stolen by the soldiers, and that we might have two of them to ride if we would cause them to be sent back to the owners after our arrival at Richmond. We accepted of them, and they were ridden to Richmond, and the owners came there and got them.

We started in the morning under our new officer, Colonel Price of Keytsville, Chariton County, Mo., with several other men to guard over us. We arrived there on Friday evening, the ninth day of November, and were thrust into an old log house, with a strong guard placed over us. After we had been there for the space of half an hour, there came in a man who was said to have some notoriety in the penitentiary, bringing in his hands a quantity of chains and padlocks. He said he was commanded by General Clark to put us in chains. Immediately the soldiers rose up and pointing their guns at us, placed their thumb on the cock and their finger on the trigger and the state's prison keeper went to work putting chains around the leg of each man, and fastening it on with a padlock, until we were all chained together, seven of us.

In a few moments came in General Clark. We requested to know of him what was the cause of all this harsh and cruel treatment. He refused to give us any information at that time, but said he would in a few days, so we were compelled to continue in that situation-camping on the floor, all chained together, without any chance or means to be made comfortable, having to eat our victuals as they were served to us, using our fingers and teeth instead of knives and forks.

While we were in this situation, a young man of the name of Grant, brother-in-law to my brother William Smith, same to see us and put up at the tavern where General Clark made his quarters. He happened to come in time to see General Clark make choice of his men to shoot us on Monday morning, the twelfth day of November; he saw them choose their rifles, and load them with two balls in each; and after they had prepared their guns, General Clark saluted them by saying, "Gentlemen, you shall have the honor of shooting the Mormon leaders on Monday morning at eight o'clock!" But in consequence of the influence of our friends, the heathen General was intimidated so that he durst not carry his murderous design into execution; and sent a messenger immediately to Fort Leavenworth to obtain the military code of laws. After the messenger returned, the General was employed nearly a whole week examining the laws, so Monday passed away without our being shot. However, it seemed like foolishness to me that so great a man as General Clark pretended to be, should have to search the military law to find out whether preachers of the gospel, who never did military duty, could be subjected to courtmartial.

However, the General seemed to learn the fact after searching the military code, and came into the old log cabin, where we were under guard and in chains, and told us he had concluded to hand us over to the civil authorities, as persons guilty of treason, murder, arson, larceny, theft, and stealing. The poor deluded General did not know the difference between theft, larceny, and stealing.

Accordingly, we were handed over to the pretended civil authorities, and the next morning our chains were taken off, and we were guarded to the courthouse, where there was a pretended court in session; Austin A. King being the judge and Mr. Birch the district attorney, the two extremely and very honorable gentlemen, who sat on the court martial when we were sentenced to be shot.

Witnesses were called up and sworn, at the point of the bayonet, and if they would not swear the things they were told to do so, they were threatened with instant death; and I do know, positively, that the evidence given in by those men, whilst under duress, was fake. This state of things was continued twelve or fourteen days, and after that we were ordered by the judge to introduce some rebutting evidence, saying if we did not do it, we would be thrust into prison. I could hardly understand what the judge meant, for I considered we were in prison already, and could not think of anything but the persecutions of the days of Nero, knowing that it was a religious persecution, and the court an inquisition. [^2]

While the Mormon leaders were enduring a mock trial at Richmond, Brigadier-General Robert Wilson marched on Adam-ondi-Ahman with his troops and arrested all the men and put them under guard, at the same time patrolling all roads to prevent any person passing in or out without his consent. A court of inquiry was set up having as its judge Adam Black, an attorney belonging to General Clark's army, who was also a leader of the mob in Daviess County.

After three days' investigation every man was honorably acquitted. Thereupon General Wilson ordered every family to be out of Diahman in ten days and granted permission for them to go to Caldwell County (Far West) and remain there until spring, when they must leave the state under pain of extermination.

In obeying the order of General Wilson, the Saints had to leave their crops and houses, and to live in tents and wagons, even though the weather was bitterly cold. As for their flocks and herds, the mob had already stolen them—thereby relieving the Saints of the trouble of taking care of them, or from the pain of seeing them starve to death. The casualties from mobbing included about thirty dead, many wounded, about a hundred missing. and sixty awaiting trial—for what they knew not. [^3]

The court proceedings at Richmond, Missouri, were a travesty of justice, a rank violation of the spirit of free America. The words of Hyrum Smith paint a picture of "Make-believe justice":

. . . We gave him (Judge King) the names of forty persons, who were acquainted with all the persecutions and sufferings of the people. They made out a subpoena, and inserted the names of those men, and caused it to be placed in the hands of Bogart, the notorious Methodist minister, and he took fifty armed soldiers and started for Far West. I saw the subpoena given to him and his company when they started.

In the course of a few days, they returned with most of all those forty men, whose names were inserted in the subpoena and thrust them into jail, and we were not to bring one of them before the court; but the judge turned upon us, with an air of indignation and said, "Gentlemen, you must get your witnesses or you shall be committed to jail immediately, for we are not going to hold the court open on expense much longer for you, anyhow."

We felt very much distressed and oppressed at that time. Colonel Wight said, "What shall we do? Our witnesses are all thrust into prison or probably will be, and we have no power to do anything; of course we must submit to this tyranny and oppression; we cannot help ourselves." Several others made similar expressions, in the agony of their souls, but my brother Joseph did not say anything, he being sick at the time with a toothache, and ague in his face, in consequence of a cold brought on by being exposed to the severity of the weather.

However, it was considered best by General Doniphan and Lawyer Reese that we should try to get some witnesses before the pretended court. Accordingly, I, myself gave the names of about twenty other persons; the judge inserted them in a subpoena and caused it to be placed in the hands of Bogart, the Methodist priest, and he again started off with fifty soldiers to take those men prisoners as he had done to the forty others. The judge sat and laughed at the good opportunity of getting their names, that they might the more easily capture them and so bring them down to be thrust into prison in order to prevent us from getting the truth before the pretended court of which himself was the chief inquisitor or conspirator. Bogart returned from his second expedition with one prisoner only whom he thrust also into prison.

The people at Far West had learned the intrigue and left the state, having been made acquainted with the treatment of the former witnesses. But we, on learning that we could not obtain witnesses whilst privately consulting with each other what we should do, discovered Mr. Allen, standing by the window on the outside of the house; we beckoned to him as though we would have him come in. He immediately came in. At that time Judge King retorted upon us again, saying, "Gentlemen, are you not going to introduce some witnesses?"; also saying it was the last day he should hold the testimony open for us, and if we did not rebut the testimony that had been given against us, he should have to commit us to jail.

I had then got Mr. Allen into the house, and before the court, so called. I told the judge we had one witness, if he would be so good as to put him under oath; he seemed unwilling to do so, but after a few moments consultation the state's attorney arose and said, he should object to that witness giving in his evidence and being sworn in, stating that this was not a court to try the case, but only a court of investigation on the part of the state Upon this, General Doniphan arose, and said he would be d----d, if the witness should not be sworn; and that it was d----d shame, that their defendants should be treated in this manner; that they could not be permitted to get one witness before the court, whilst all their witnesses, even forty at a time, have been taken by force of arms and thrust into the "bull pen" in order to prevent them from giving their testimony.

After Doniphan sat down, the judge permitted the witness to be sworn, and enter upon his testimony. But as soon as he began to speak, a man by the name of Cook, who was a brother-in-law to priest Bogart, the Methodist, and who was Lieutenant and whose place at that time was to superintend the guard, stepped in before the pretended court and took him by the nape of his neck and jammed his head down under the pole or log of wood that was placed up around the place where the inquisition was sitting to keep the by-standers from intruding upon the majesty of the inquisitors, and jammed him along to the door and kicked him out of doors. He instantly turned to some soldiers who were standing by him and said to them, "Go and shoot him, shoot him."

The soldiers ran after the man to shoot him-he fled for his life, and with great difficulty made his escape. The pretended court immediately arose and we were ordered to be carried to Liberty, Clay County and there to be thrust into jail. We endeavored to find out for what cause, but, all that we could learn was, because we were "Mormons."

The next morning a large wagon drove up to the door and a blacksmith came into the house with some chains and handcuffs. He said his order from the judge was to handcuff us and chain us together. He informed us that the judge had made out a mittimus and sentenced us to jail for treason; he also said the judge had done this that we might not get bail; he also said the judge stated his intention to keep us in jail until all the "Mormons" were driven out of the state; he also said that the judge had further stated that if he let us out before the "Mormons" had left the state, that we would not let them leave, and here would be another d__d fuss kicked up. I also heard the judge say myself, whilst he was sitting in his pretended court, that there was no law for us, nor the "Mormons" in the state of Missouri; that he had sworn to see them exterminated, and to see the governor's order executed to the very letter, and he would do so; however, the blacksmith proceeded and put the irons upon us, and we were ordered into the wagon, and were driven off for Clay County, and as we journeyed along the road, we were exhibited to the inhabitants. And this course was adopted all the way, thus making a public exhibition of us, until we arrived at Liberty, Clay County.

There we were thrust into prison again, and locked up and were held there in close confinement for the space of six months, and our place of lodging (log building) was the square side of a hewed white oak log, and our food was anything but good and decent. Poison was administered to us three or four times. The effect it had upon our system was that it vomited us almost to death, and then we would lie some two or three days in a torpid, stupid state, not even caring or wishing for life. The poison being administered in too large doses, or it would inevitably have proved fatal, had not the power of Jehovah interposed on our behalf to save us from their wicked purpose. . . . [^4]

It was ironic in a town named Liberty to behold the laws of justice flouted and mobocracy hold sway. But there was no hesitancy on Hyrum's part to uphold principles and demand the rights of his people. To compromise in the least degree with the enemy would result in eventual apostasy. If he had ever interpreted the suffering and sorrow of the Saints as evidence of God's ill-will toward them, he might have deserted the cause. But he was not one to yield to expediency. If he had yielded to the side which seemed to hold the upper hand at the moment, his life's story might well have been similar to that of Thomas B. Marsh, W.W. Phelps, John F. Boynton or David Whitmer.

However, the primary motive for Hyrum Smith's migration to Missouri was not economic advantage but rather to assist God in establishing the church.

But the constant worry and the strain on Hyrum since his arrival at Far West about six months before had affected his health. The soldiers had callously and rudely torn him from his family and had placed him face to face with death. His concern over Mary Fielding Smith who was then expecting their first child, his realization of the dependency of his and Jerusha's four small children upon him, his knowledge that his home needed work done on it to make it comfortable, his grief over the plight of the Saints, and his own imminent peril, were almost overwhelming. But throughout his ordeal Hyrum exhibited a faith which the enemy could not destroy, a faith which reconciled him to his fate. To him, God was still in control and would overrule all things for the Saints' best good.

When the prison doors of Liberty Jail closed upon the prisoners there came to a close one of the most intensely stirring scenes in the life of Hyrum Smith. The events in northern Missouri had ended any hope for him to remain in Far West. And, had it been possible for him to blot from his memory the horrors of the past few weeks, he would, no doubt, have done so.

But Hyrum could not forget. He remembered the details of the pretended court proceedings under Judge King. He had had to be spokesman for the group when Joseph was ill. He had been the object of curious people who gazed at him as if he were some queer and unfamiliar creature. He recalled the clanking of the leg chains and the foul language of the guards, and the grief of leaving his family at the mercy of the mob. He relived the anguish of seeing his brother, Joseph, march off and become enveloped in a sea of howling demons and then be ignominiously and disrespectfully treated, being forced to lie on the ground all night like an animal without a covering to shield him from the rain and cold.

These and many other inhuman acts could never be erased from his mind. And here in Liberty Jail, Hyrum pondered how it would be possible for the Lord to build his Church under such conditions.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Quincy Whig, Quincy, III, Nov. 17, 1838. By Bartlett and Sullivan.
[^2] Sangamo Journal, Springfield, Illinois, Oct. 13, 1838.
[^3] Ibid., January 17, 1839.
[^4] Idem.
