Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XIX

A Prisoner

Was the fate of Hyrum Smith sealed when the door closed and the key turned with an echoing thud in Liberty Jail? No doubt the mob militia of Missouri thought so, because their objective in driving out the Mormons had been achieved. Because of the nerve-shattering experience of becoming a prisoner and enduring the indignities of being arrested and threatened with death, Hyrum would never again be quite the same. He had been a missionary and a leader at Kirtland, but now was a felon before the law, not because he had broken the law, but, like Paul of old, for the sake of Christ. And, like the ancient prophets had stoically accepted his lot, and with a resigned spirit shifted the responsibility for his plight to the benevolence of God.

The forced exhibition of being paraded like animals along the route to Liberty Jail did not disturb him as much as did the welfare of his family at Far West. Could Hyrum have callously ignored his family by taking an indifferent resigned-to-his-fate attitude? No, not likely, because there were others outside the prison walls such as Brigham Young, John Taylor and Heber C. Kimball to aid the exiles in establishing a new home beyond the reach of the enemy. His hope of deliverance was not based on blind faith, nor did his calm demeanor reveal his intention of planning an escape. If he were to be an instrument in the hands of God to help build the kingdom, how was he to begin under such adverse circumstances? The way was hedged for the time being to establish the Church in Missouri or to help the membership of the Church to find a place of refuge from the enemy. Evil forces had triumphed, their objective had been achieved and the satanical forces like a hurricane had blown themselves out. The excitement simmered down to an attitude of wait-and-see.

How was this crisis going to affect the life and temperament of Hyrum Smith? Many of the faithful were made stronger; some became bitter and left the Church; others became disillusioned and returned to their native land. There was very little for the prisoners in Liberty Jail to rejoice about. The fast moving events of the past several months was a period of great trial and emotional upset in the lives of the Smiths. When the municipal court, later in Nauvoo, convened to put the record straight before the Saints and citizens of Illinois, Hyrum testified to what took place and expressed his feelings concerning the whole affair.

Like an attorney for the plaintiff, Hyrum was well versed in all of the details leading to the present impasse. He enumerated the events connected with the Gallatin affair and the perfidy of Judges Black and King. He described the atrocities at Millport and the part played by generals Clark, Atchison, and Lucas of the Missouri militia and how they yielded to the popular cry to drive the Mormons out. There was also General Doniphan, a man of courage who showed understanding and sympathy for the Mormons. His sympathy for Colonel Hinkle and Neil Gillium was non-existent, for these men were considered traitors to the people and to God. Other prominent citizens such as one Bogart and Sashiel Woods, Methodist and Presbyterian ministers respectively, he charged with robbery, driving off cattle, carrying off men, women, and children and threatening their lives; and subjecting them to all manner of abuse. He recounted the suffering of his brother's (Don Carlos) wife who was driven from her home and who escaped with her two children across Grand River to the home of Col. Wight; also how Col. Wight, the Mormon officer, put a stop to the mob's efforts to set fire to the houses of the Mormons.

In support of his brother Joseph, Hyrum said.

"I have been acquainted with him ever since he was born, which was thirty-seven years in December last; and I have not been absent from him at any one time not even for the space of six months, since his birth, to my recollection." Hyrum defended his brother against charges of treason or the violation of any other law in any state of the union; was never subject to military duty in any state, he being exempt because of the amputation and extraction of a bone from his leg; he was rather a minister of the gospel. Hyrum ended his testimony in these words: "But I do know that whilst he was in the state of Missouri, the people commonly called 'Mormons' were threatened with violence and extermination."

Hyrum was in a favorable position to plead Joseph's cause, knowing his brother so intimately since his (Joseph's) birth and having shared the searing heat of mobocracy and malignancy of the enemy from within and from without. In Hyrum's mind there was no justification for the enemies' untoward action against his people. According to the law, both civil and moral, the Missourians were the offenders and should therefore be held accountable before the nation and the world. What he didn't realize was the nature of human psychology pertaining to the craving of self-preservation and economic and social security by the enemy. By fair or foul means the old settlers had expressed a desire to eliminate an imaginary threat to their security, this they could not achieve except by violence and war upon the Saints.

It is quite understandable for the leaders of the Church to condemn their enemies. The local and state newspapers and periodicals expressed a more objective viewpoint of the situation and on occasion asserted the side of the defendant. The Quincy Whig announced the end of the Mormon War and expressed a great concern for the 5000 exiles thrust on the charities of Illinois, Iowa, and Wisconsin. Hope was expressed for an impartial trial so that Missouri could maintain its dignity before its sister states and fellow citizens of the Union. [^1]

From the Sangamo Journal of Springfield, Illinois, came an expression of sympathy and a suspect of sin somewhere between the Missourians and this misguided sect; it was difficult to fix the responsibility. [^2] The St. Louis Gazette sympathized with the Missourians and spoke of the Mormons' taking things in their own hands, quoting a report from Judge King at Richmond. The newspaper at Liberty, The Far West, reported the order of General Lucas to have Joe and Hyrum Smith returned to Richmond for trial—and General Lucas' high regard for the correct conduct of his troops; also the stipulation under which the Mormons were to be removed from the state.

While the newspapers were taking sides, the legislature was passing resolutions. On January 3, 1839, three were passed: first investigate the cause of the disturbance and have the military stop them; second, have none of the documents published without the consent of the legislature; third, have a committee of both branches investigate and report to the governor. Testimony by the Mormons was lacking because most of them had left for Ohio and Michigan. And what would the world say if a committee read the testimony while the defendants were in chains, according to a Mr. McDaniels? A Mr. Ashley defended the citizens in the disturbed counties. He said the tears shed were crocodile tears and desired the documents of Judge King's court to be published. A Mr. Scott said that Judge King was the most unfit man for this purpose and wished that the legislature would remove King from office. He was against having a few individuals cooped up in jail.

Continuing, Mr. Scott said:

The gentlemen said that "crocodile tears" have been shed over these poor Mormons. Sir, I would to God there were no occasion for shedding tears in these transactions; but sir, when we see the women, and the widows and orphans shedding tears over the mangled bodies of their dead husbands and fathers, there is occasion for tears, and they are not crocodile tears.

The senate, after much debate, adopted the first resolution by a vote of 27 to 3 and the second without opposition; the third was voted upon by a committee, which was negative, and the senate adjourned. [^3] An effort was being made by representatives to see conditions in their true light. There exuded from the legislative halls an anxiety to maintain the dignity and self-respect of Missouri. At the moment the voices for an objective appraisal of the situation were in the minority. The two thousand dollars appropriated by the state to alleviate the distress of the Mormons was a gesture of good will. However, it was later charged that the money benefited the Missourians more than the Mormons or the money found its way into the hands of the Missourians because the Mormons were forced to buy food including meat stolen from them by their enemies.

From the Missouri Republican at Jefferson City came an article stating that the perpetrators of the war on the Mormons were inspired by selfish motives. It read in part:

We have many reports herein, relating to the conduct of some of the citizens of Daviess and other counties, at the present land sale at Lexington: It is reported. . .that on a recent land sale, the lands of Caldwell and Daviess were brought into the market, and that some of the citizens who have been the most active in the excitement against the Mormons purchased a number of Mormon tracts of land. Where the Mormons had made settlements and improvements, the said citizens have purchased them for speculation. It is said that the town of "Adamon Diamond," [sic] a Mormon town in Daviess, in which there is several houses—a very valuable site for a town—was purchased at this sale for a dollar and a quarter an acre. It is further said that there is a company formed, embracing a number of persons, for the purpose of speculating in the lands of these people.

It can hardly be expected that an editor in Missouri will come out fully and give the whole story of this base affair. Enough, however, is disclosed to cover that part of the state with lasting disgrace. Can men, women and children be driven from their homes to "hide the peltings of pitiless storm" of winter, many of them shot like wild beasts, for the purpose of obtaining their lands, without incurring public indignation? [^4]

Public indignation over the plight of the hapless Mormons was not of sufficient force to tip the scales of justice in their behalf. The result of the legislature's inquiry was anticipated. A serious difficulty confronted the state in the trial of Hyrum Smith and his brethren. It was almost impossible to find an unbiased jury in the counties where the disturbances had taken place.

According to the editors of the Sangamo Journal in Springfield, Illinois, there was not a man to be found in the counties who had not formed an opinion of the case: "If the prisoners do not change the venue, the state cannot change it and I am well assured that such has been the excitement that no man in the counties of Ray, Carroll, Caldwell, and Daviess will be in a position to serve as a juror. What will be the result of these persecutions, I am at a loss to say. This much is certain, the detention of those 36 prisoners under guard have to be fed and protected during the winter season which the state will feel before it's done. It cannot fail to be a very expensive affair for the state. The pay of the militia called out, the expense of helping such a number of prisoners, the cost of attending their trial, . . . etc., must amount to a large sum." [^5]

It is evident from the foregoing newspaper accounts that there was much confusion and lack of information as to the true condition of the Mormons. Few among the news writers were able to discern the injustices heaped upon the exiles, and their voices calling for justice were feeble and faint amid the general hysteria of an inflamed and excited populace in northern Missouri.

The Sangamo Journal of Springfield, Illinois, viewed the trouble somewhat realistically. The editor forthrightly expressed his opinion regarding the state of Missouri in disgrace; the driving of defenseless people from their homes into the bitter storms of winter, many being shot like wild beasts for the purpose of seizing their lands without arousing public indignation; also, the failure of the courts to obtain an unprejudiced jury, and the Missouri editors for not telling the whole truth of the Mormon War.

Never before had Hyrum been in jail. The court and the officers of the state militia had not exhausted their list of Mormon leaders whom they hoped to arrest. No doubt the conversation of the prisoners included the hope that Brigham Young, John Taylor, Heber C. Kimball, Charles C. Rich, and Erastus Snow would not be captured and made prisoners. Perhaps conditions could be a lot worse. The frustration of men caught in a labyrinth of confusion made mostly by new and strange conditions beyond their control was very real. They must have time to take stock of themselves and view the shifting conditions of the times. The environmental conditions of the frontier were not conducive to rationality and sound logic. The law of the jungle, might-makes-right and inhumanity-to-man, was firmly entrenched in the traditions of the people on the frontier of America. How long would conditions exist containing the ingredients of primitiveness? No one knew, perhaps as long as ignorance, jealousy, suspicion of men's motives, and intolerance existed. If Hyrum Smith had any ideas of solving the dilemma, he never recorded it. The details of events leading to his imprisonment were clear in his mind but how he was to escape was greatly obscured.

Perhaps at this point it would be well to relate the details preceding and during the imprisonment.

At Richmond, Missouri, late in 1838, the trial of Joseph and Hyrum Smith and the other brethren (Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, Caleb Baldwin, and Sidney Rigdon) lasted sixteen days, before Judge Austin A. King. An ignorant man who knew no law, he finally stated the charges against them: "treason, murder, burglary, arson, robbery, and larceny." Not a single witness was allowed to testify in their behalf. On November 29, 1838, Judge King closed the trial and committed the prisoners to jail on the following mittimus:

State of Missouri

Ray County

To the keeper of the Jail of Clay County

Greetings: Whereas, Joseph Smith, Jr., Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin, as also Sidney Rigdon,-are committed into your custody in the jail of said County of Clay, there to remain until they be delivered there from by due course of law. Given under my hand and seal the 29th day of November. 1838.

/s/ Austin A. King

State of Missouri, Clay County

I, Samuel Hadley, sheriff of Clay County, do hereby certify that the above is a true copy of the mittimus to me, directed in the case therein named.

/s/ Samuel Hadley, Jailer

Clay County, Missouri. By Samuel Tillery, Deputy Jailer. [^6]

The prisoners, in chains, were thrust into the primitive basement of a two-story structure, into a room whose dimension was about fourteen and a half feet square, with a ceiling about six and a half feet high and walls about four feet thick. [^7]

At every opening and closing, the heavy wooden door, with its crude lock device and heavy iron hinges, emitted a nerve-shattering, soul-chilling screech which mocked their dignity and self-respect. The high, iron-barred windows were little more than peepholes through which sunshine and very little fresh air could enter.

This dungeon with its smoke-smudged walls and ceiling and its burnt-oil-wick and stale-sweat odor became the scene of a living nightmare for the Lord's anointed. They would transform this profane place into a hallowed spot, but for them the part it played in their education was to acquaint hearts and spirits with life in its most trying and degraded state.

The time in jail was tolerable only because of frequent visits from members of their families, friends and the mail service. At intervals the jailer would Joseph for a turn about town. [^8]

On January 16, 1839, Joseph wrote a letter to the apostles addressed to Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young. The letter began, "Salutations: Joseph Smith Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, prisoners for Jesus' sake; send greetings":

The message was one of hope and courage. The twelve were to manage the affairs of the Church until the crisis was over. The blessing of the Lord were invoked upon them. [^9]

In the meantime the homes of Hyrum, Joseph, and others at Far West had been looted by roving bands of mobbers. Hyrum was tortured by the news that his home had been pillaged by a mob led by Bogart, the infamous Methodist preacher who had been the cause of so much trouble to the Saints.

The mob had forced their way in amid the protests and cries of the family and had broken open Hyrum's trunk and carried away papers and other valuables. Joseph F. Smith, at that time Hyrum's youngest child, later wrote of the incident.

. . . I being an infant lying on the bed, another bed being on the floor, was entirely overlooked by the family, my mother being very sick. The care of me devolved upon my Aunt Mercy and others of the family, during the fright and excitement. So when the mob entered the room where I was, the bed on the floor was thrown onto the other completely smothering me up; and here I was permitted to remain until after the excitement subsided. When thought of and discovered, my existence was supposed to have come to an end . . . their suppositions were erroneous, however well-founded. . . . [^10]

Mary Fielding Smith, after the birth of her first child (which occurred November 13, 1838) caught a severe cold and for four months was too ill to do any work. Her large family had to depend on her sister Mercy who was a great comfort to all of them.

Describing this melancholy scene Mercy later wrote:

. . . At times I feared to lay my baby down (Mary Jane, born June 14, 1838) lest they (the mob) slay her." (Her husband, Robert B. Thompson, had fled ahead of the mob and was not heard of for three months.) "About the first of February 1839, by the request of her husband, my sister (Mary) was placed on a bed in a wagon and taken on a journey of about 40 miles to visit him [Hyrum] in prison, her infant son Joseph F. then being about eleven weeks old. I had to accompany her taking my own babe along, then near eight months old. The weather being extremely cold we suffered much on the journey.

We arrived at the prison in the evening. We were admitted and the doors closed upon us, a night never to be forgotten. A sleepless night. I nursed the darling babes and in the morning prepared to start for home with my afflicted sister, and as long as memory lasts will remain in my recollection the squeaking hinges of that door which closed upon the noblest men on earth. Who can imagine our feelings as we traveled homeward, but would I sell that honor bestowed upon me of being locked up in jail with such characters for good? No! No!

The visit of Mary Fielding Smith to see her beloved husband was a momentous occasion. The pitiful sight of his sick wife and his tiny son, whom he had never seen before, melted Hyrum's heart. The spare bedding and the food delicacies brought by the welcome visitors bespoke their loving devotion. The bleak winter weather of February and the threats of hostility plunged their hopes into an abyss of dark despair. Many tears were shed as the atrocious acts of the mobs were delineated. Never would Mary and Mercy Rachel forget the prayers uttered by Hyrum that night for the Lord to shed his power of mercy and protection in behalf of his loved ones. Surely words cannot describe their anguish when came the hour for the women to leave. The clumsy covered wagon lumbering into the distance, with Mercy and perhaps son John at the reins and Mary lying ill inside—was a scene Hyrum would never forget.

About February 7, soon after the visit of Mary and Mercy, food was brought to the prisoners by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Porter Rockwell, Don Carlos Smith, and George A. Smith. William Covey also visited them and brought each of the prisoners a new pair of boots. James Bleaven and daughters brought cakes, pies, etc., and handed them through the window. This food was most gratefully received for what they usually had was coarse and filthy. [^11]

The experiences of Hyrum and the prisoners while incarcerated first at Richmond and then at Liberty may never be adequately told. There were times when conditions deteriorated to the point where the human spirit must assert itself or yield to utter debasement. While still in Richmond, prior to the Liberty experience, the Prophet Joseph had occasion to rebuke the guard. Parley P. Pratt, who was lying chained on the prison floor with the Prophet and the other prisoners described what happened:

It was one of those nights . . . we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained while we listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths . . . and filthy language of the guards . . as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., while at Far West and vicinity . . . I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards . . . On a sudden, Joseph arose to his feet and spoke in a voice of thunder. . . . "Silence, ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ, I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant."

Brother Pratt said he had seen majesty and dignity but once, and that was when it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village in Missouri. [^12]

There seemed to be no good reason for Hyrum and Joseph to have hope for survival. No friends were allowed to champion their cause. If the state or the nation had sympathy for them no one knew it. The enemy had succeeded in sealing off every avenue of escape and had not overlooked any means of embarrassing and humiliating the prisoners.

Plans were even laid to kill the prisoners by serving them spoiled and poisoned food. The crowded, stinking cell—cold and unsanitary as it was and supplied with inadequate bedding—added to their misery. The coming trial with the "court" being what it was held little hope for acquittal on legal grounds. Reports reaching them of the scattered and poverty-ridden Saints being driven by a ruthless mob, together with their anxiety over the safety and welfare of their families, were almost more than they could endure.

What was the purpose of this ordeal? Was it necessary for the Lord to exact such an extreme test of their faith? Joseph went to the Lord with this pathetic plea, March 20, 1839.

O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens, the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them?

The Lord answered:

My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment;

And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes.

Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands.

Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job. . . .

The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee;

While the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand.

And thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors. [^13]

The eyes of God were upon his servants, and this crucial period, with all its hardships, had a definite purpose. The blessed coming of the great revelation, the establishment of the Church and kingdom of God, required all that they had endured. Joseph and Hyrum had been ruthlessly torn from their wives, children, mother, father, and friends, but the experience was not in vain. Their hearts were comforted with the Lord's words:

If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from the bosom of thy wife, and of thine offspring; and thine elder son, although but six years of age, shall cling to thy garments, and shall say, My father, my father, why can't you stay with us? O, my father, what are the men going to do with you? and if then he shall be thrust from thee by the sword, and thou be dragged to prison, and thine enemies prowl around like wolves for the blood of the lamb;

And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? [^14]

Needless to say, Joseph and Hyrum took great comfort in this personal and sacred counsel.

But still the indolence of the civil authorities in taking action to clear up the present impasse was most disheartening to the prisoners. Escape seemed the only solution to an intolerable situation and an escape attempt was made early in February. Of this attempt Alexander McRae, one of their fellow prisoners, recorded the following:

After we had been there sometime, and tried every means we could to obtain our liberty by the law, without effect (except Sidney Rigdon was bailed out), and also having heard, from a reliable source, . . . by the most influential men, that "the Mormon prisoners would have to be condemned or the character of the state would go down," we came to the conclusion that we would try other means to effect it.

Accordingly on the 7th day of February, 1839, after counseling together on the subject, we concluded to try to go that evening when the jailer came with our supper; but brother Hyrum, before deciding fully, and to make it more sure, asked Brother Joseph to inquire of the Lord as to the propriety of the move. He did so, and receiving answer to this effect-that if we were all agreed, we would go clear that evening; and if we would ask, we should have a testimony for ourselves. I immediately asked, and had not more than asked, until I received as clear a testimony as ever I did of anything in my life, that it was true. Brother Hyrum Smith and Caleb Baldwin bore testimony of the same: but Lyman Wight said we might go if we chose, but he would not. After talking with him for some time, he said, "if we will wait until tomorrow I will go with you." Without thinking we had no promise of success on any other day than the one above stated, we agreed to wait.

When night came, the jailer came alone with our supper, threw the door wide open, put our supper on the table, and went to the back part of the room, where a pile of books lay, took up a book, and went to reading leaving us between him and the door, thereby giving us every chance to go if we had been ready. As the next day was agreed upon, we made no attempt to go that evening.

When the next evening came, the case was very different; the jailer brought a double guard with him, and with them six of our brethren to visit. Erastus Snow, William D. Huntington, Cyrus Daniels, David Holeman, Alanson Ripley and Watson Barlow. . . . The jailer seemed to be badly scared; he had the door locked and everything made secure. It looked like a bad chance to get away, but we were determined to try it; so when the jailer started out, we started too. Brother Hyrum took hold of the door, and the rest followed; but before we were able to render him the assistance he needed, the jailer and the guard succeeded in closing the door, shutting the brethren in with us, except Cyrus Daniels, who was on the outside.

As soon as the attempt was made inside, he, Daniels, took two of the guards, one under each arm, and ran down the stairs that led to the door, (the entrance to the jail was a door on the floor above, via the jailer's office), it being in the second story. When he reached the ground they got away from him; and seeing we had failed to get out, he started to run, but put his foot in a hole and fell, a bullet from one of the guards passed very close to his head, and he thinks the fall saved his life.

The scene that followed this defied description. I should judge from the number, that all the town and many from the country, gathered around the jail, and every mode of torture and death that their imagination could fancy, was proposed for us, burning us to death, tearing us to pieces with horses, etc. But they were so divided among themselves that they could not carry out any of their plans, and we escaped unhurt.

During this time, some of the brethren spoke of our being in great danger; and I confess I felt we were. But Brother Joseph told them not to fear, that not a hair of their heads should be hurt, and that they should not lose any of their things, even to a bridle, saddle, or blanket; but that everything should be restored to them; they had offered their lives for us and the gospel; that it was necessary the church should offer a sacrifice, and the Lord accepted the offering. [^15]

The trouble ended when several of the brethren employed lawyers and a hearing. Erastus Snow pleaded his own case and was acquitted. Having no knowledge of law, his plea nevertheless won the admiration of the court.

With the passing days, the snow melted outside, and the warm spring breezes changed the landscape to green; but the prisoners grew gaunt, pale, and hollow-eyed. Still they hoped for something to happen soon to make their escape possible. Their crowded cell had become headquarters for the harassed Church. There had been much coming and going of friends and relatives; messages had been sent and received. And although the tide of evil and hatred threatened to engulf them, God was yet with them. He comforted them and gave them revelations, and their spirits remained unbroken. The heavens had not been closed; no man's puny arm could interfere with God's great purposes. The scene of their ordeal was drawing to a close, and Joseph and Hyrum, the main actors, were soon to be on their way to assume their roles in another episode even more climatic and providential than this had been.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. III, p. 321. Taken from History of Daviess County, Pub. Birdsall and Deon, 1882.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 320-324.
[^3] Jeffersonian Republic, Jefferson, Mo., Saturday, Feb. 2, 1839.
[^4] The ten in Hyrum's family were Mary, his wife; baby Joseph Fielding, Lovina, John, little Jerusha, Sarah, Hyrum Jr. The three others Hyrum had taken in out of charity; these were Hannah Grinnels (Grinolds) an elderly woman; Jane Wilson, a younger woman afflicted with nervous spells (fits), very dependent, and George Mills, a British army veteran who joined the family in 1835. Mercy R. Thompson, Letter to Posterity.
[^5] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. III, p. 272.
[^6] Idem.
[^7] Ibid., p. 256.
[^8] Ibid., p. 272.
[^9] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 301-302. Hyrum and Joseph reached Quincy, Illinois, April 23, 1839, according to Susa Young Gates. The Relief Society Magazine, vol. III, No. 3.
[^10] John Smith, Document 7 Â½ x 11 Â½ inches-written longhand-black ink-dated February 9, 1909, Salt Lake City, Utah. A brief history of his life during Missouri and Illinois period. In possession of descendants.
[^11] D&C 63:29.
[^12] Ibid., 68:29-34.
[^13] Joseph Smith, op. cit., pp. 102-110.
[^14] D&C 121:1-3, 7-10; 122:1-3.
[^15] Ibid., 122:6-8. (Italics author's.)
