Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XX

The Escape

The days in jail were endless to Hyrum. He compared his present misery with the days at Kirtland, thinking of their comfortable home and the relative tolerance of the enemy. Yet the present distressing situation had not resulted from any thoughtless decision to leave Ohio. They had moved to Missouri at the command of the Lord. Hyrum and his wife didn't question the wisdom of coming with the Saints to this frontier region, there to face a populace governed by a suspicion and hate unsurpassed in the history of America. There were times now, however, when Hyrum wondered why the Lord had called them thither and why he was so slow to extend his hand in their behalf.

Toward spring in 1839, Hyrum sensed from the word that filtered into their jail cell that the hateful passion of the mob element was beginning to subside a little, to blow itself out. This calm came, however, only after the enemy was satiated with murder, rapine, pillage, and theft. The deeds of the mob were recounted over and over by the jail guards, who in a spirit of jesting and mockery deliberately intended to wound the sensitivities of their listeners.

But ultimately the mob reached an impasse. Their prisoners could not be tried and acquitted; therefore, the case could not be brought to an "honorable" conclusion. The state of Missouri could not justify its actions before the court of public opinion or among her sister states of the union. The Mormon trouble hung like a dark cloud over Missouri. Perhaps the best solution would be to allow the prisoners in Liberty Jail to escape, ultimately.

When the ice began to break up on the streams and rivers, the attention directed toward the Mormons shifted from Missouri to Illinois, and like the coming of spring, new hope came to the exiles. The Missouri episode was drawing to a close, for by spring the Prophet and Hyrum, with the brethren in Liberty Jail, and another group in jail at Richmond, Missouri, were the only Mormons remaining in Missouri. The others, approximately fifteen thousand who remained loyal to their faith, had fled to Illinois. Many had renounced their faith and returned to former homes.

The prisoners justified their escape from prison because the machinery of justice had broken down. The judicial authorities were intimidated and threatened if they moved for an acquittal. The prisoners petitioned the Missouri supreme court for a writ of habeas corpus twice but were refused both times by Judge Reynolds, who later became governor of the state. They also petitioned the county judges for a writ of habeas corpus, which was granted three weeks afterwards, but they were not permitted to have any trial. The prisoners were only taken out of jail and kept out for a few hours and then remanded again.

After three or four days, Judge Turnham came into the jail in the evening, and said he had permitted Mr. Rigdon to get bail. He said Rigdon had to do it in the night, unknown to any of the citizens or they would kill him, for they had sworn to kill him if they could find him. As for the rest of them he dared not let them go for fear of his own life as well as of the prisoners' lives. He said it was hard to be confined under such circumstances, for he knew they were innocent men! And he said that the people also knew it.

Judge Turnham said the plan to hold the prisoners was concocted from the Governor down to the lowest judge, and that the Baptist priest, Riley, was riding down into town every day to watch the people, stirring up the minds of the people against the Mormons all he could, exciting them and stirring up their religious prejudices, for fear we would let them go. Mr. Rigdon, did however, get bail, and made his escape to Illinois.

The jailer, Samuel Tillery, Esq., told the prisoners that several of the Generals of the Missouri militia had met with the governor of Jefferson City in September to make plans to arrest the Mormon leaders, but now the governor was ashamed of the whole transaction and would be glad to set the prisoners free.

Some time in April a farcical court was held for the prisoners in Daviess County. Esquire Birch, the man who was one of the jury who sentenced the prisoners to death, was now the circuit judge. The grand jury that was impanelled were all at the massacre at Haun's Mill. They excused themselves for the barbaric act because the governor had ordered them to do it. The same men who sat as the jury in the daytime were placed as guards over them at night. Judge Birch made no effort to stem the abuse of the prisoners, and he said on one occasion within the hearing of the prisoners, that there was no law for the Mormons in the State of Missouri. After ten days of pseudo-court proceedings, the prisoners were informed that they were indicted for "treason, murder, arson, larceny, theft, and stealing."

At this point the prisoners asked for a change of venue from Daviess County to Marion County but were refused. However, the court, for some unknown reason, allowed them to change to Boone County. Therefore a mittimus was made out by Judge Birch, without date, name, or place. They fitted them out with a two-horse wagon and horses and four men, besides the sheriff, to act as guard.

In the words of Hyrum, the details of their escape are as follows:

We started for Gallatin, the sun about two hours high, a.m. and went as far as Diahman that evening, and stayed until morning. There we bought two horses of the guard and paid for one of them in our clothing which we had with us, and for the other we gave our note. We went down that day as far as Judge Morins, a distance of some four or five miles. There we stayed until the morning, when we started on our journey to Boone County, and traveled on the road about twenty miles distance. There we bought a jug of whiskey, with which we treated the company and while there the sheriff showed us the mittimus before referred to without date of signature, and said that Judge Birch told him never to carry us to Boone County, and never to show the mittimus, "And," said he, "I shall take a good drink of grog, and go to bed, you may do as you have a mind to."

The constituted judicial authorities of Northern Missouri were forced by public opinion to hold a make-believe court, knowing the prisoners were innocent but defied the citizens in allowing them to escape. The mob's objective of expulsion of the Mormons was complete, and the thirst for blood and craving for exultation over their sense of power to degrade and humiliate the Mormons. The persecuted and frightened Saints were being conditioned to seek a more effective way for self-preservation if a similar situation again should rise. Hyrum Smith became more wary of the designs of men and had a lesson in the depravity of mankind. Surely, he thought, how important was the message of the gospel in a world where only the law of the jungle prevailed.

When William Morgan, sheriff in charge of the prisoners, and ex-sheriff William Bowman returned to Gallatin and reported the escape of their prisoners, the people became very angry. The citizens of Gallatin abruptly rode the sheriff out of town on a rail, and Bowman was dragged over the town square by the hair of his head. They accused these men of complicity in the escape of the Mormon leaders and said that both had been well paid for their treachery. [^1]

The escape of Hyrum Smith, his brother, and the others ended the crisis of imprisonment from November 1, 1838, to April 15, 1839 five months and a half—the prisoners had endured hardship, privation, and insult. The enemy seemed not to have overlooked any device to realize their evil aims. A mock court, treachery, false testimony, threats, abuse, indignities, attempted murder were all used to undermine, discredit, and if possible destroy, the Lord's anointed.

Later, the Prophet Joseph wrote of the reasons for their escape:

. . . Knowing that the only object of our enemies was our destruction, and likewise knowing that a number of our brethren had been massacred by them on Shoal Creek. . .and they sought every opportunity to abuse others who were left in that state, and that they were never brought to an account for their barbarous proceedings, which were winked at and encouraged by those in authority, we thought that it was necessary for us, inasmuch as we loved our lives, and did not wish to die at the hands of murderers and assassins, and inasmuch as we loved our families and friends, to deliver ourselves from our enemies, and from that land of tyranny and oppression, and again take our stand among a people in whose bosoms dwell those feelings of republicanism and liberty which gave rise to our nation. [^2]

The reaction of the Missouri press concerning the Mormon trouble from January to May, 1838, varied from being favorable to bad. At Jefferson City, February 2, a newspaper excused the Governor for issuing the Extermination Order on the ground that there was a general uprising among the people. A Mr. Corrill sent a memorial to the General Assembly asking them to rescind the "Exterminating Order." A Mr. Arthur of Clay County wrote a defense of the Mormons to the Legislature, saying "The citizens of Clay County were robbing the poor Mormons." He called the citizens "devils in human shape." [^3] From St. Louis came an article from the Missouri Argus May 6, 1839, "Joe Smith, Golden Bible—migrating to the land of promise wicked and sinful enough to prevent the fulfillment of his prophecy." And from the St. Louis Missouri Republican, January 8, 1839, " . . . confident the trial before Judge King, of the Mormons would be a fair one." Dissatisfaction was expressed concerning the manner by which the money appropriated for the Mormons was being handled. Thus the Mormon trouble in Missouri came to an end with public opinion in a state of deadlock, a few "for" but most against.

While the trial of Hyrum Smith and his brethren was being enacted, his family had not been spared of mob action. The inclement weather during the exodus from Missouri made their suffering more acute. Had they been allowed to leave at their own discretion much suffering could have been avoided. The three previous moves had been made under much different circumstances, pleasurable in the main, but now the bleakness of their humble home and the vacant houses of Far West echoed a sorrowful and depressed spirit of Hyrum's household as the journey commenced toward a new home in Illinois.

The exact date of the Smiths leaving is not known. However, it was only a few days after Mary Fielding Smith returned from seeing her husband in Liberty Jail. Quite likely the schedule and details of the departure for Illinois had been advised and planned by Hyrum. No doubt it was a strenuous undertaking and required the help of everyone. Mercy Fielding Thompson accompanied her sister, Mary, and the children, and other members of Hyrum's family on their long and hazardous journey. Years later, Mercy wrote her version of the move in these words:

Shortly after our return (from Liberty Jail) to Far West we had to leave our cold unfurnished house and start in lumber wagons for Illinois, my sister (Mary) again being placed on a bed in an afflicted state. This was about the middle of February, the weather extremely cold. I had still the care of both babies (Joseph and Mary Jane). We arrived at Quincy about the end of the month. My husband (Robert Thompson) had engaged a room for our accommodation but my sister was obligated to be with me on account of the baby.

The whole of Brother Hyrum's family of ten [^4] remained with us until April when Brother Hyrum arrived in Quincy, Illinois. He soon made arrangements to move his family. I went along to Commerce, leaving my husband in Quincy, who followed in a few weeks and was employed by Joseph Smith as a private secretary, which office he held until his death which took place August 27, 1841. . . [^5]

The kindness and love of Mercy for her sister, Mary, illustrates the close bond of family ties and unity so characteristic of Hyrum's family. Within a few days after their arrival at Quincy, Illinois, William Smith wrote to Hyrum. A letter dated March 6, 1839, stated that Emma and children (Joseph's family) were living three miles from her (Quincy) and were in a tolerable good place. Also, that Hyrum's children and Mother Grinolds are living at present with father Joseph Smith, Sr. and were all well. [^6]

Perhaps Joseph Smith, Sr., had moved in with Hyrum's family and the Thompsons. Joseph's family left Far West, February 6-7, 1839, with Jonathan Holmes and wife, under the care of Stephen Markham. [^7]

It is supposed that the house obtained by Robert Thompson for Hyrum's family was located near that of Judge Cleveland, outside Quincy about seven miles. Edward Partridge had seen Mary Fielding Smith before Hyrum arrived and had reported to Hyrum that her health was very poor when she arrived at Quincy, but that she was improving. [^8]

* * *

Hyrum and Joseph, free men once more, kept to the by-ways in order to avoid the Missouri officers. Several weeks before, Sidney Rigdon had arrived safely in Illinois. The other prisoners, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin had each taken his separate way in order to avoid capture; but all traveled toward the new gathering place of the Saints.

The families of Hyrum and Joseph were anxiously waiting at Quincy, Illinois, for their return. Some of the brethren had given up hope of ever seeing their leaders again, but not their families, nor their mother. It was Mother Smith who told Brothers Partridge and Morley, who were themselves doubtful of ever seeing Joseph and Hyrum again, that she would see them before the following night. The Spirit had whispered to Mother Smith and given her this assurance. She asked the brethren to stay in town in order to witness the truth of her statement.

That night Lucy Smith had a more vivid manifestation, which she later described in these words:

After falling asleep that night I saw my sons in vision. They were on the prairie traveling and seemed very tired and hungry. They had but one horse. I saw them stop and tie him to a stump of a burnt sapling, then lie down on the ground to rest themselves, and they looked so pale and faint that it distressed me. I sprang up and said to my husband, "Oh, Mr. Smith, I can see Joseph and Hyrum and they are so weak they can hardly stand. Now they are lying on the cold ground asleep! Oh, how I wish that I could give them something to eat!"

Mr. Smith begged me to be quiet, saying that I was nervous; but it was impossible for me to rest—they were still before my eyes—I saw them lie there full two hours, then one of them went away to get something to eat, but not succeeding, they traveled on. This time Hyrum rode and Joseph walked by his side, holding himself up by the stirrup leather. I saw him reel with weakness, but could render him no assistance. My soul was grieved; I rose from my bed and spent the remainder of the night in walking the floor.

Continuing, Mother Smith relates the fulfillment of her prophecy:

The next day I made preparations to receive my sons, confident that the poor, afflicted wanderers would arrive at home before sunset. Sometime in the afternoon, Lucy, (the youngest Smith daughter) and I went down stairs—she was before me. When she came to the bottom steps she sprang forward and exclaimed, "There is Brother Baldwin. My brothers—where are they?" This was Caleb Baldwin, who had been imprisoned with them. He told us that Joseph and Hyrum were then crossing the river and would soon be in Quincy. Lucy, hearing this, ran to carry the tidings to Hyrum's family, but the excitement was not sufficient to keep up her strength. When she reached the door she feel prostrate, but after recovering a little, she communicated the welcome news. [^9]

Hyrum's seven-year-old John, later describing the Missouri scene said:

I left Ohio in the spring of 1838, and remembered much of the travel on the journey to Far West—remember that the Liberty Pole was struck by lightning on the 4th of July. I remember some of the suffering on our way to Quincy, Illinois; remember seeing my father (Hyrum Smith) when he came home from Liberty Jail. He had a full beard, his hair was long, and he was riding a small bay horse. [^10]

The arrival of Hyrum and Joseph at Quincy was a signal for family rejoicing. When Hyrum clasped his wife in his arms and in turn his children, new strength flowed into his tired and emaciated body. There was for him no purpose in prolonged grief over the sight of their poverty and starvation. There must be no giving way to self-pity. All that mattered at the moment was that they as a family were again united. Their lives had been spared by the kind hand of divine Providence, and their health was sufficient for them to make plans and begin work to establish a new home. These plans began to take form on April 23, 1839, the day Hyrum arrived. The warm spring breezes changed the landscape from a winter vista to a season when mother earth puts on her new garb of green. Nature seemed to aid in bringing an upsurge of new hope to the Smith family.

The vast new region with its water courses, timbered swales and hillsides, and wild game, brought new hope and courage to the penniless exiles. Here, perhaps, another beginning could be made.

The momentum of conversions to the new society had lessened somewhat during the past year, and the bitter, sustained persecutions had thinned the ranks of the Church. Many problems awaiting the leadership must be attacked, studied, and eventually solved.

The Missouri period had been an intense, excruciating, and paradoxical period in the history of the American citizens known as the "Mormons." No such incident, involving thousands as it did, can be regarded as trivial. No doubt, this displacement of whole communities by forceful means, in a land dedicated to freedom of religion, is without a parallel in the history of man.

Hyrum and other truth-seeking and thoughtful individuals would have done well to analyze objectively the whole picture of the sad days of the 1830's. In so doing they might have erased from their memories much of the rancor and hate they experienced, and the outcome may have been less tragic. As some have expressed it, the degenerate element formed on the frontier of that period cannot be wholly blamed for what happened. It is true that many a criminal or man of notorious character sought protection from the law in the seclusion and relative safety of the frontier. But it is also true that some of the lawless element consisted of county and district judges, physicians, army captains, majors and generals, and many other high officials of the state, including the governor and lieutenant governor.

The state of Missouri was guilty of no greater crime when it persecuted the Latter-day Saints than were the countries which persecuted Saints during the barbarous Dark Ages of European history. When estimated in net results there may have been more murders and robberies, greater destruction of property, and more widespread suffering in those times than in Missouri.

When the New England Mormons and the old settlers of the Southern States met in Missouri, a clash of cultures resulted in a conflagration that could not be smothered. The hard-working northerners were looked down upon by southern gentlemen as people akin to the slave owning class. Many high positions among civil, professional, and military personnel were sought by unworthy gentlemen of the south. The Mormons had a strong puritanical background of religion, morality, and industry. Their ideas were in direct contrast to the established order of the easygoing, haughty spirit of southern hospitality.

And the Missourians were super-sensitive about the slave question. Missouri had been admitted to the union, 1818-1819, on a compromise which stated "That while Missouri. . .permitted slavery, it also prohibited free people of color from immigrating into the state." Therefore, in July 1833, when the Mormon paper, Evening and Morning Star, appeared, containing an article inviting free Negroes and mulattoes from other states to become Mormons, the old settlers wrote back in retaliation what was called "The Secret Constitution." Among other things it said: "In a late number of the Star, . . . there is an article inviting free negroes and mulattoes from other states to become Mormons, and settle among us." The Missouri Constitution permitted the entry of free men of color only if they possessed a certificate clearly indicating their status that had been issued by a court of record. Otherwise they were expelled from the state. Hence the Missourians' condemnation of the Mormons on this account was without foundation. In a special issue of the Star on July 16, 1833, the Saints declared their intention not only to stop free Negroes from coming into Missouri, but also to prevent their becoming members of the church.

Another point of difference was political. The Mormon concept of government was world-wide, not local. Zion embraced the whole world. The old settlers envisioned the Mormons eventually occupying the seats of government, and great fear came upon them. This fear bore fruit in their refusal to permit Mormons to vote at the polls in Gallatin, Daviess County, August 1838.

The Prophet Joseph Smith had said that the Constitution of the United States was written to establish good order in society, love of God, and good will to man. The standard of democracy was to be exalted and priestcraft put down.

Another charge leveled at the Mormons was that they had encouraged the Indians on the frontier to become Mormons, stating that the Indians were part of God's chosen people. The flyleaf of the Book of Mormon conveys the idea that the Lamanites (Indians) were to be favored.

Then, too, many of the Saints were tactless in openly declaring that Western Missouri was the land of Zion and that the Lord would eventually favor his people by having them own the whole of it; it was to become the Mormons' land of inheritance. Missourians were unaware that the Lord had said: "The land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase. . . . " [^11]

It is quite evident that the newly converted Saints were not ready to establish Zion. Full sainthood had not been achieved, for there were certain iniquities among them. The Lord had pointed out that they were to observe the Sabbath day that there was too much idleness among them, and that they failed to teach their children correct principles. There were also jealousies and bickerings. Hyrum Smith and Orson Hyde had sent the Saints a letter from Kirtland, which read in part: "We feel more like weeping over Zion than in rejoicing over her, for we know the judgment of God hangs over her. . . ." [^12]

The importance of the establishment of the new church was not fully understood by many of the converts. Their previous religious concepts and ideologies were deeply imbedded; hence they had great difficulty in conforming to Mormonism.

The above reasons for the antagonism of the Missourians toward the Mormons were symptomatic of a deeper fear, a fear inspired by the very nature of this new religion. The Mormons were called fanatics or knaves who communicated with God. The citizens felt that nothing could dissuade the newcomers from their "pretensions." This same fear prompted General John B. Clark to say on the public square in Far West:

I am sorry, gentlemen, to see so great a number of apparently intelligent men found in the situation you are. . . .I would advise you to scatter abroad, and never organize yourselves with Bishops, Presidents, etc. lest you excite the jealousies of the people, and subject yourselves to the same calamities that have now come upon you.

In the minds of Hyrum and Joseph was the memory of what Moroni had said years before, that the adversary was present in the world, and that his objective was to overthrow the Lord's work. Satan with his followers had been cast out of heaven to reside upon the earth, [^13] and there had never been a truce established between the opposing forces of good and evil. The war between the Saints and the Missourians was never settled, and peace was never established.

Even when the Smiths moved to a new location, the peace they had so long desired was only temporary. The escape from jail of Hyrum and Joseph was providential; their time to die had not yet arrived. Mary Fielding Smith had recovered her health, and her baby was doing well. Because many friendly hands gave them assistance, they had successfully escaped the threats of the enemy; and it was good to be once more near a friendly community. Surely the scars of conflict would fade in time. At any rate, there was no time for tears and bitterness.

Before Hyrum and his brethren lay a greater challenge; there was a home to build, and a church, and a city.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, vol. II, p. 251-254.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 265-271.
[^3] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 302.
[^4] Journal History, Vol. 13, No. 13, p. 383.
[^5] Lucy Smith, op. cit., pp. 303-305.
[^6] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, p. 7.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 23-23.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 41-42.
[^9] Ibid. p. 46. Times and Seasons, vol. I, pp. 20-23
[^10] Ibid., pp. 51-52.
[^11] Ibid., p. 121.
[^12] Thomas B. Marsh was excommunicated, March 17, 1839, which made Brigham Young President of the Twelve.
[^13] Joseph Smith, op. cit., pp. 102-110.
