Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXI

A New Home in Nauvoo

The gently rolling plains of western Illinois looked good to the Smiths as they made their way to the new Zion. This area, with its sparsely settled communities, was about two hundred miles southeast of Northern Missouri. Its people had been apprised of the conditions of the Saints by newspapers and by rumors, and the reports reaching them from Quincy, Illinois, and St. Louis, Missouri, had been favorable to the Mormons and critical of Missouri. Therefore, these people reacted sympathetically toward the Saints in somewhat the same way as they would have sympathized with homeless animals.

During the first few months of 1839, the refugees had made their way to Illinois, traveling in small companies and groups with many sick, maimed, cold, and hungry among them. Fortunately, their capable leaders organized the trek and helped to provide food, clothing, and transportation. A committee had been organized by Brigham Young, John Taylor, and others to put the more able among the Saints under covenant to help the less fortunate. On January 30, 1839, Brigham Young had obtained 380 signers of this covenant. [^1]

In February, 1839, a meeting was called by William Marks and John P. Green at Quincy, Illinois to decide on a suitable place for a permanent settlement. Among the locations considered, and the most favored, was a section lying between the Mississippi and Des Moines Rivers, which was favorable for two dollars an acre. This section of land was situated about twenty-five miles north of Quincy, their temporary headquarters, and was owned by Dr. Isaac C. Galland who resided on the land at a frontier trading post called "Commerce."

Dr. Galland had heard from Elder Israel Barlow about the Mormon trouble in Missouri the fall before, when Elder Barlow had fled from Missouri and settled above the mouth of the Des Moines River. Being in sympathy with the Mormons, Dr. Galland wrote to Governor Lucas of Iowa Territory and obtained his support for the Saints to occupy the section known as the "Half Breed Lands," across the Mississippi River to the west. Letters were then written to Elder Barlow and others to obtain a response to the idea of having the Mormons settle in Illinois. Sidney Rigdon, after leaving the prison in Missouri, made an investigation, and through his correspondence with the brethren in jail at Liberty, the proposal of Dr. Galland was accepted. [^2]

It was gratifying to Joseph and Hyrum Smith to learn that on March I7 Brigham Young had called a meeting at Quincy to consider whether the Saints should scatter or settle in a body. Brother Young and others well remembered the plea made in Far West by General Clark when he urged them to cease organizing stakes, with presidents, bishops, etc., and to scatter out in order to avoid the wrath of the citizens. However, the Saints, in a community, had social contacts for mutual benefit and enjoyment and also provided a common defense against enemy pressure. Thus, the Lord's work could best be served by a civic institution whose members were in close proximity to each other. That way the evil forces could not succeed in dividing, then conquering. It was the duty of these Saints to build Zion, and they must maintain a united front.

The joy of Hyrum's reunion with his family after six months of enforced separation was ample proof to him that God had heard and answered the many fervent prayers addressed to him. The clouds of despair had parted, and once more the bright sunlight of hope shone through. Looking back, Hyrum felt that every mile lying between Illinois and their former home in Missouri meant greater security from the enemy. He saw in the kind acts of new friends and neighbors the hand of the Lord and became convinced that man cannot live alone. To be at the mercy of others and to receive aid in time of great distress was for him a humbling experience which, in turn, developed in him a deeper love and understanding of his fellow men.

In the days following the arrival of Hyrum and Joseph (about April 23, 1839), the Smith families again enjoyed a close fellowship. The harrowing experiences of Missouri were often spoken of but always with the hope in mind that a secure future would dim the horrors of the past. This new country and its people seemed most hospitable.

Hyrum was astonished to have a company of Quincy Grays (militia) come to the house and salute the liberated prisoners in a most polite manner. It heartened him to observe that there was yet a spirit of human kindness and moral integrity among men, and this kindly and respectful act was to him an omen of future peace and good will.

The decisions of the brethren regarding a possible location for settlement north of Quincy was very satisfactory to Hyrum. Within a few days of their arrival he, with Joseph and several of the brethren, was on his way to view a possible location for the settlement recommended by Bishop George Miller. The virgin territory held a strange fascination for them, seeming to beckon them onward as they rode over one high knoll after another. Then, as the mounted party topped a promontory, they beheld a landscape falling away to the west in a gradual slope; and Hyrum's feeling was the same as that of the others: this site was a unanimous choice. It seemed to them that nature had put on her loveliest dress in order to impress her visitors. Their return trip to Quincy was a joyous one for the prospect of a new homesite, for the penniless refugees had now become a reality.

They spent very little time preparing to move to the new location, other than long enough to make an agreement to purchase one farm containing 135 acres from Hugh White at Commerce for $5,000, and to buy the western tract owned by Dr. Isaac Galland for $9,000. The acreage extending to the east would provide space for an expanding metropolis.

Before Hyrum and others could move their families, however, a number of church matters had to be settled. A conference convened (May 6) to decide how best to help the arriving Saints get located. Missionaries had to be called for foreign missions, a petition must be dispatched to the federal government for redress of losses suffered in Missouri, and a presiding elder should be sent to New York to encourage the scattered Saints there.

Within a week after this conference Hyrum's family was happy to be on their way to a new home, with their scanty belongings stacked high on lumber wagons. The presence of Joseph and Hyrum as free men among them comforted the Saints. Their voices, offering counsel and encouragement, strengthened the morale of the entire group. Troubles seemed suddenly to have vanished; all seemed right again. The Church had not been destroyed but was growing stronger with every passing day. Once more the Saints began to feel secure.

Both Hyrum and Joseph were able to locate their families in abandoned log houses in Commerce. [^3] During the days that followed, the voice of the ax, the hammer, and the saw was constantly heard; the river wharf received a constant stream of building supplies and emigrants; the whole place was swarming with busy, happy people, and Joseph and Hyrum were familiar figures moving about them. The brothers frequently met in counsel with the brethren in a log cabin which had become the temporary headquarters of the Church. Quincy became a supply base for the building of Nauvoo as well as for the establishment of the Church. Frequent business trips to and from Quincy by the brethren accelerated the work of building a new city. The scanty capital available among the Saints for the purchase of land and building material was supplemented by the issuing of promissory notes. The losses suffered by the Saints in Missouri in terms of money alone, can never be known, and it was money needed desperately now in order to re-establish themselves.

Reconstruction plans were formulated in the humble log cabins occupied by Joseph, Hyrum, and Sidney Rigdon; and the task of welding and rebuilding the Mormon society went steadily forward. Meetings were held; the gospel was preached; and new sites were selected where cities and towns would be organized to take care of the influx of Saints and converts. On Tuesday, July 2, 1839, Hyrum Smith accompanied Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, Bishops Whitney, Knight, and others across the river to the Iowa side to inspect a purchase lately made by Bishop Knight as one of these townsites. The site was selected and the name designated as "Zarahemla."

During the afternoon of July 2, Hyrum, busy with his work as a leader, addressed members of the twelve and seventies who had been called on missions. Directing his remarks to the twelve he said:

Remember the nature of your mission, be prudent and humble and use care in the selection of subjects for preaching. Never trifle and take lightly your office and calling and hold strictly to the importance of your mission. At all times remember your position before the Lord and hold in high esteem and respect the priesthood you bear. [^4]

At the conclusion of much instruction and advice, Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, having been ordained apostles to fill vacancies in the twelve, were set apart for their respective missions. The immediate needs of a people in dire distress did not becloud the vision of the leaders in Zion. They saw the constant need of missionaries. They realized that the Great Designer had brought his Church out of the furnace of persecution and that powerful blows must be made while the iron of the Spirit was hot.

The health of Hyrum, Joseph, and the brethren was also poor. Many members of the flock were often bedridden. The heat of July brought swarms of mosquitoes and other insects from the marshes along the river, and the hapless refugees, with resistance lowered by malnutrition and poor housing fell easy prey to the dreaded malarial fever. The homes of Hyrum and Joseph and other leaders became homes of refuge to many of the most critical cases.

Hyrum's youngest sister, Lucy, and his eldest daughter, Lovina, contracted the disease. William Smith, Hyrum's brother, came on a visit and offered to take Lovina back to his home at Plymouth, Illinois, hoping that the ride would benefit her, but she continued to decline; and fearing she would die, William sent for her father. When the messenger arrived, Hyrum was so ill that he was unable even to sit up, and Mother Smith decided to take Lucy and go to Lovina's bedside. Much to their relief, they found Lovina greatly improved, and in a short time she regained her health. [^5]

By the latter part of July, during a rainy season, the number of sick had increased to include members of the twelve and other leading brethren. On Monday and Tuesday, July 22 and 23, the sick were administered to with great success. The Prophet Joseph arose from his own bed, made his way to other sick people lying in their tents, dugouts, and shanties, and administered to them in the name of the Lord, healing them in a miraculous way.

Following this miraculous time of healing, the number of sick decreased.

On Sunday, July 28 Hyrum Smith and his family sat in Sacrament meeting and listened to the Prophet Joseph admonish the members of the church to set their houses in order, and to meet on the next Sabbath to partake of the Sacrament, ". . . that we might be enabled to prevail with God against the destroyer and that the sick might recover." By the eighteenth of August, the Prophet wrote: "This week I spent chiefly visiting the sick, sickness much decreased." [^6]

At the semiannual conference held at Commerce on October 6, 7, and 8, a proposal was made to organize a stake of Zion for a gathering place at Nauvoo. William Marks was made president and three wards were organized with respective bishops. It was also decided that a news sheet was to be published, to be known as the Times and Seasons; Emma Smith was called to select hymns appropriate for publication for the use of the Church; and plans were laid to construct an office for President Joseph Smith, a schoolhouse, and a boarding house. Again their lack of funds hampered them. They thought bitterly of the wrongs perpetrated against them in Missouri.

Throughout the Missouri persecutions, and since their coming to Illinois, Hyrum and Joseph had made plans to appeal the Mormon case to the federal government in Washington, D. C. Surely, they reasoned, the parent government, if fully informed, would take action to have the state of Missouri reimburse the stricken Saints for their losses. There should be no time lost in making this appeal, now that a new place had been found for the gathering of the refugees. They needed their lost funds to expedite the building of a new community.

Accordingly, on October 28, Hyrum voted with others to send Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Elias Higbee as delegates to Washington, D. C., to importune the President and Congress for redress.

Prior to their leaving for Washington, D. C., the Prophet gave Hyrum advice and instruction on matters of the Church, and on October 29, with Porter Rockwell driving their two-horse carriage the trio left for the nation's capital. Elder Rigdon was ill at the time and grew no better, so that the following Friday, traveling toward Springfield, Illinois, they obtained medical aid from Doctor Robert D. Foster, a member of the Church, who kindly consented to accompany the group in order to aid Brother Rigdon. The journey of about 800 miles was fraught with considerable difficulty. While going through the hill country toward Washington, the coach team ran away and the Prophet Joseph displayed the courage of a hero, risking his life to save its passengers. The occupants of the coach had nothing but praise for his actions and wanted to reward him for valor, until they learned of his identity. [^7]

In Nauvoo during this time, the high council had met at the home of Oliver Granger and voted that Hyrum Smith, George W. Harris, and Oliver Granger act as a committee to send a petition to the state legislature to define the new boundary lines of the city of Nauvoo, and of Commerce. Hyrum Smith was to furnish the maps and plates for the alteration, and Seymour Brunson was to circulate the petition for signatures.

On the day of their arrival in Washington the Prophet and Brother Higbee after much looking, finally secured a place to stay in the capital city, which then had a population of about 50,000, and on Friday of the next week, the Prophet mailed the following letter to Hyrum:

Washington City, Corner Missouri and 3rd St's., December 5, 1839. Dear Brother Hyrum, President, and to the Honorable High Council of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to whom be fellowship, love, and the peace of almighty God extended, and the prayer of faith forever and ever. Amen. Your fellow laborers, Joseph Smith, Jr., Elias Higbee, and agents as well as the servants that are sent by you to perform one of the most arduous and responsible duties . . . we arrived in this city on the morning of the 28th of November, and spent the most of that day looking up a boarding house . . . we found as cheap boarding house as can be had in this city.

On Friday morning, 29th, we proceeded to the house of the President. We found a very large and splendid palace. . . . We went to the door and requested to see the President [Martin Van Buren], when we were immediately introduced into his parlor, where we presented him with our letters of introduction. As soon as he read one of them, he looked upon us with a kind of half frown and said, "What can I do? I can do nothing for you! If I do anything, I shall come in contact with the whole state of Missouri."

But we were not intimidated, and demanded a hearing, and constitutional rights. Before we left him, he promised to consider what we had said, and observed that he felt to sympathize with us on account of our suffering.

The Prophet, continuing, told about hunting up the representatives in order to put the case before them, and how the gentlemen from Illinois had cordially treated them; but he added: "Yet there is prejudice, superstition, and bigotry of an ignorant generation to contend with. There is but little solidity and honorable deportment among those sent to Washington to represent the people; but a great deal of pomposity and show."

The Prophet had received a letter from Sidney Rigdon, who because of illness had been left along the way. His health was improving, and he was soon to arrive in Washington. They could draw on him to publish their book (hymnbook), and there should be some money deposited at the Branch Bank in Quincy and the receipt forwarded to them. Money from the sale of books would help. Their anxiety about money was expressed as follows:

We cannot accomplish the things for which we were sent without some funds. You very well know, brethren, we were contented to start, trusting in God, with little or nothing.

In closing he wrote:

For God's sake, be wide awake and arm us with all the power possible, for now is the time or never. We want you to get all the influential men you can of that section of the country, of Iowa, and of every other quarter to write letters to members of Congress, using their influence in our behalf, and to keep their minds constantly upon the subject.

Please forward this to our wives. Yours in the bonds of the everlasting covenant, signed, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Elias Higbee.

In the postscript, the Prophet wrote about Congress and some seats being contested in the New Jersey delegation. He mentioned the disposition of some members of Congress to show off their oratory on the most trivial occasions, and to insist on so much etiquette, bowing and scraping, twisting and turning to make a display of folly and show, more than of substance and gravity, such as becomes a great nation like ours. ("However," he said, "There are some exceptions.")

Mention was made of Joseph's stopping the runaway team driven by a drunken Missourian, and how Elias Higbee jumped out of the stage before the team stopped to assist them in stopping and hurt himself. He told of their interview with the President and of his questions as to how they differed from other religions; and how he answered the questions, telling the President of the mode of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by laying on of hands, all other considerations being contained in the gift of the Holy Ghost. He deemed it unnecessary to preach the gospel to the President, although he gave him his testimony. [^8]

* * *

In Nauvoo, Hyrum Smith was conducting the affairs of the Church-meeting regularly with the high council and advising on various problems brought before the Church. The high council of Nauvoo voted that Bishop Knight provide for the families of Joseph Smith, Jr., Sidney Rigdon, and Orrin Porter Rockwell during their absence in Washington.

About the middle of December, Hyrum Smith wrote a long epistle entitled "To the Saints scattered abroad," giving an account of his suffering in Missouri. Much of the content was the same as had already been published in the Times and Seasons, with the exception of his testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and of his being one of the eight witnesses of the Nephite plates from which the record was translated.

Hyrum's feelings toward the Book of Mormon and toward his recent suffering are expressed in the following:

Having given my testimony to the world of the truth of the Book of Mormon, the renewal of the everlasting covenant, and the establishment of the kingdom of heaven in these last days, and having been brought into great affliction and distresses for the same, I thought that it may be strengthening to my beloved brethren to give them a short account of my sufferings, for the truth's sake, and the state of my mind and feelings, while under the circumstances of the most trying and afflicting nature. * * * I had been abused and thrust into a dungeon and confined for months on account of my faith, and the testimony of Jesus Christ. However, I thank God that I felt a determination to die, rather than deny the things which my eyes had seen, which my hands had handled, and which I had borne testimony to, . . . wherever my lot had been cast, and I can assure my beloved brethren that I was enabled to bear as strong a testimony when nothing but death presented itself, as ever I did in my life. My confidence in God was likewise unshaken. I knew that He who suffered me, along with my brethren, to be thus tried, that He could and that He would deliver us out of the hands of our enemies, and in His own due time He did so, for which I desire to bless and praise His holy name. [^9]

On December 22, Hyrum sent a letter to Parley P. Pratt at New York in answer to Brother Pratt's inquiry about printing an edition of the Book of Mormon in New York. Hyrum advised him that such an important decision must await the consideration of Joseph and others, that he, Hyrum must acquiesce to the idea of publishing the Book of Mormon also in Europe. This observation would also apply to the publication of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, hymnbook, etc. He wrote that the families of the twelve were generally well but not altogether comfortable.

After receiving word from Joseph about the necessity for raising funds, Hyrum succeeded in depositing three hundred dollars with Messrs. Holmes and Co., merchants of Quincy, subject to the order of Judge Young to be applied to the Prophet's account.

In his letter to the Prophet January 3, 1840, he said, referring to raising money on the sale of city lots: "In consequence of my health, which has been poor and the coldness of the weather, I have not been able to attend to it myself." Hyrum mentioned the printing of the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants and Parley P. Pratt's offer to have the printing done in New York. Near the close of the letter Hyrum wrote:

I want a letter from you, brother Joseph, as soon as possible, giving me all the instructions you think necessary. I feel the burden in your absence is great. . . . The Mississippi is frozen up. The weather is very cold, and a great quantity of snow is on the ground and has been for some time. Your family is in tolerable good health, excepting one or two having the chills occasionally. . . . You may expect to hear from me again. I sent you a copy of the deposit I made in Holmes and Co., which I hope you will receive safe. I am very affectionately, signed Hyrum Smith. [^10]

Judge Elias Higbee remained in Washington, D. C., to meet with congressional committees in order to bring before the highest legislative body the grievances of the Saints against the state of Missouri. The Prophet Joseph Smith, after visiting several branches of the Church, preached and counseled the various brethren who where on their way to their appointed fields of labor as missionaries and returned to Nauvoo, March 4, 1840, after a very difficult trip.

There remained much to be done to build up this wilderness country, where the Saints could consolidate their position. The postoffice at Commerce had its name changed to that of Nauvoo, taken from a Hebrew term signifying a beautiful place. [^11]

During the month of March much correspondence was received from Judge Higbee on developments in Washington. Prejudice and misunderstanding among the nation's lawmakers made it impossible to obtain satisfactory results. Sidney Rigdon was still under a physician's care in New Jersey and seemed unable to assist Brother Higbee. His able help at home was greatly missed by Hyrum and Joseph.

At the general conference at Nauvoo, April 6, 7, 8, the results of the mission to Washington were related by the Prophet Joseph. It was a time of taking stock, making decisions, and giving counsel. Reports from the British Mission were very favorable. Brigham Young who was in England, became President of the Quorum of Twelve. [^12] Willard Richards was ordained an apostle to fill the vacancy made by the advancement of President Young. Orson Hyde and John E. Page were assigned to go to Palestine to dedicate that land for the return of the Jews. A number of grievances among the Saints were taken care of. The case of Frederick G. Williams was presented by Hyrum Smith, and it was recommended that he be forgiven for his misconduct in Missouri. His re-instatement was unanimously approved. Seventy-five persons had been baptized during the conference and fifty ordained into the seventies quorum. [^13]

Again, slowly but surely, the star of hope was rising for the outcast Saints. They were gathering to a new state. The original settlers were friendly. The state of Illinois was anxious for new settlers who were thrifty and who could be relied upon to help liquidate the state's bonded indebtedness. Hancock County in western Illinois could boast of a new city named Nauvoo. The year 1840 would prove to be the beginning of a new era, a period of consolidation and growth.

During the early months of 1840, Hyrum spent many hours in thoughtful consideration of what was best to do for the welfare of the people. He had made a selection of a plot of ground for a home of his own in Nauvoo, and the cold weather pointed up the need for improved housing facilities for his family. But his personal needs were never permitted to make demands upon the time and energy required for the fulfilment of his duty to the Church.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, p. 112.
[^2] Sangamo Journal, Springfield, Ill., Dec. 8, 1839, vol. 8, No. 7, Whole No. 371, p. 2.
[^3] Quincy Whig, Quincy, Ill., vol. 3, No. 29, p. 1.
[^4] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, pp. 162-163.
[^5] Ibid., p. 168.
[^6] Ibid., 182.
[^7] Joel Johnson Diary, 1802-1883.
[^8] Journal History, op. cit.
[^9] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, p. 186.
[^10] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 306-314.
[^11] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, pp. 198-199.
[^12] Idem.
[^13] Joseph Smith, op. cit., pp. 102-110.
