Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXII

Hyrum's Administration

Three days of April conference at Nauvoo cleared the atmosphere of many vexatious problems. Hyrum Smith had endorsed the plan of acquiring land on the Iowa side of the river for a place of gathering for the Saints and had also supported the advice of the Prophet to the brethren to pay off the debt on the town plots for an inheritance to the poor. He heard again a report of the proceedings at Washington, D. C., and of the action of the Senate on the memorial which was presented to them. Elders leaving for the mission field were advised to see that their respective families were provided for, and to teach the "Gathering of Israel" as set forth in the Holy Scriptures.

During the week following the conference the brethren were concerned with getting the missionaries ready to depart for their field of labor. The call of Orson Hyde and John E. Page to Palestine marked the commencement of the Lord's work of gathering the remnants of the House of Israel. Joseph Smith had said: "The Jewish nations have been scattered among the Gentiles for a long period of time, and in our estimation, the time of the commencement of their return to the Holy Land has already arrived." [^1]

It was believed by the brethren and others that the gathering of the Jews to their homeland and of the converted Saints to Illinois was a fulfilment of prophecy prerequisite to the second coming of the Messiah, and by April 15, the Palestinean missionaries were on their way. Being without funds they worked their way from city to city. It was heartening to the leaders to witness the faith and devotion of the elders of the Church, and to hear that Elders Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor and others had established several branches of the Church in England. The success of the English mission was partly due to the conversion of a group of Anglican dissenters, called the "United Brethren," including their ministers. This event did not escape the notice of the London newspapers nor of the American press: One article entitled "Mormonism" in the Philadelphia Gazette, read: "We perceive by the London papers . . . Missionaries in England preaching with considerable success." [^2]

The reality of the gathering of Israel was evidenced to the brethren when they read the following press release on November 14, 1840: "Announcement—49 cabin and 200 steerage passengers belonging to a sect called Latter-day Saints, bound for Quincy. . . . 2000 next spring will embark for that place." [^3] These and similar reports were forerunners of more to follow. The field was ripe and ready to harvest and there was but a need now for more missionaries to thrust in their sickle with all their might.

The successful establishment of Nauvoo within so short a time was sensational. The vigorous growth of this frontier town had a sobering effect on certain dissenters and curious onlookers. During July, 1840, a letter was received from William W. Phelps, an apostate who had been a stalwart during the Ohio and Missouri period, begging forgiveness and a restoration of his membership.

Phelps had turned traitor to Joseph, Hyrum and the brethren during the crisis at Far West. But in the face of his repentance, their hearts retained no rancor. Their feelings on the matter are reflected in a reply to his letter dated July 22, 1840: "You may in some measure realize what my feelings, as well as Elder Rigdon's and Brother Hyrum's were when we read your letter." The Prophet manifested a forgiving spirit in these closing lines: "Believing your confession to be real and your repentance genuine, I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of fellowship." [^4]

A few days later came a letter from one John C. Bennett who had achieved some degree of importance as a physician and a professor and was then a military man, a brigadier-general who had been appointed quarter-master general of the state of Illinois in 1840. He professed a desire to be identified with the Saints and live in Nauvoo. He said in part: ". . . I shall likewise expect to practice my profession, but at the same time, your people shall have all the benefits of my speaking powers and my untiring energies in behalf of the good and holy faith. . ." [^5] Several letters were exchanged prior to Bennett's coming to Nauvoo; but the innate weakness of his character and his evil motives were not detected because of his seeming sincerity. Not until later was his treachery exposed, to the great sorrow and suffering of the people.

Nauvoo was like a magnet which drew Mormons and non-Mormons alike. Saints and sinners, rich and poor gravitated to this boom town. Hyrum realized the need of locating new townsites near Nauvoo in order that the virgin territory could be cultivated and made to sustain an expanding economy. Eventually villages, towns, and cities would fan out from Nauvoo like the spokes of a huge wheel. Already several communities had been established across the river west in the territory of Iowa, and Joseph and Hyrum decided to spend several days among the Iowa Saints.

On Sunday, August 16, Hyrum addressed the congregation in Lee County, Iowa, on "The Eternal Judgment." The following Sunday he visited Nashville, three miles southeast of Montrose, and while there voted with the people to build a city near Nashville. [^6] The Church had purchased 20,000 acres for this purpose. A stake had been organized at Ramus, and Hyrum ordained Joel Hills Johnson its stake president. [^7] Later (October 23), another stake was organized at Lima, Adams County, Illinois. Here Hyrum ordained Gardiner Snow a bishop. [^8]

Each time Hyrum returned with his companions to Nauvoo from across the river they expressed joy at the growth of the city. The terrain, enclosed at the river's edge, extended about six miles up to a central prominence, with wide streets running at right angles. Many new homes were in the process of construction, and the whole scene elicited a feeling of peace and satisfaction. To them, no other city was quite so picturesque or so strikingly beautiful. Near the end of August, the population had grown to about three thousand. And people continued to pour in, some to make their homes and others as tourists. Hyrum, as one of the founders of this commonwealth, was intrigued by the visits of many unique personalities and was interested in their comments.

To the Saints it was important news when something favorable was published about Nauvoo. Such a column appeared October 17, 1840. The article, "A Glance at the Mormons," written by a correspondent about a year after he had visited the Mormon settlement, reflected the gentile view. It appeared in the Alexandria Gazette and read in part:

Since the Mormons were expelled from the state of Missouri, they have purchased the town of Commerce, a situation of surpassing beauty at the head of the lower rapid on the Illinois shore of the upper Mississippi River. The name of the place they recently changed to Nauvoo, the Hebrew term for fair or beautiful. Around this place, as their center, they are daily gathering from almost every quarter, and several hundred new houses erected in the past few months attest to the passing traveller the energy, industry, and self-denial with which the community is imbued. They have also obtained possession of extensive lands on the opposite side of the river, in that charming portion of Iowa Territory, known as the "Half Breed Reservation" and there on the rolling and fertile prairies, they are rapidly selecting their homes and opening their farms. As the traveller now passes through those natural parks and fields of flowers which the hand of the creator seems to have originally planned there for the inspection of his own eye, he beholds the cabins dotted down in the most enchanting perspective either on the border of the timber or beside the springs and streams of living water, which are interspersed on every hand.

Nor are they unmindful of their interests abroad while they are accomplishing so much at home. No sect with equal means has probably ever suffered and achieved more in so short a time. Their elders have not only been commissioned and sent forth to every part of our country, but they have left their families and friends behind them and gone to Europe and even to the Holy Land to reveal the wonders of the "New and Everlasting Covenant" to preach the dispensation of the fullness of time.

They do not doubt but that they shall be endued when necessary, with power from on high to proclaim to all the nations of the earth in their own tongues, the wonderful works of God.

The signal success which everywhere attends their exertion, proves how well their religious system is adapted to give expression to the various forms of enthusiasm that pervade the religious sentiment of the day. Retaining many truths which are held in common by different denominations of Christians and covering their own absurdities with imposing forms and lofty pretensions, their system opens a winning asylum for all the disaffected or dissatisfied or other persuasions, and much that is congenial to almost every shade of erratic or radical religious character. As an illustration, it is stated, in the last number of their Times and Seasons, that, on a single occasion in England, one of their Elders lately baptized, among others, no less than thirteen preachers of one denomination of Christians.

There had been some talk among the brethren of a temple at Nauvoo. To Hyrum Smith such talk brought memories of his experience at Kirtland, and he felt impelled to make mention of it several times to Joseph, for he sensed a personal involvement in the planning of such a building. In a message from the First Presidency, August 31, 1840, to the scattered Saints, a statement was made, among others, about the erection of a divine edifice in order that the Saints might secure the blessings of heaven. . . . "The time has now come to erect a house of prayer, a house of order, a house of worship to our God, where the ordinances can be attended to agreeably to His divine will in this region of the country." [^9]

Hyrum's interest and his feeling were reflected in the general epistle. The Saints were urged to put forth their strength for the upbuilding of Zion, and to arm themselves with courage. They were urged to feel an individual responsibility and to show as much interest as though the whole labor depended on themselves alone.

Those who could assist in this project were urged to come to Nauvoo. The printing and circulation of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, a hymnbook and other new scriptures would help not only to sweep away the cobwebs of the superstition and error but also to finance the building of God's house. But a temple was only one among the many buildings needed in Nauvoo.

The leaders of the Church did not minimize the importance of full co-operation of its members in a gigantic building program. They had visions of future needs and an expanding membership. Amid other plans for buildings, Hyrum also made plans for a new home to be constructed on his acre not far from Joseph's house. He had been deeply concerned about his parent's comfort, too, and was happy for the new house Joseph had built them. Hyrum supported the construction of a city hotel to accommodate visitors who were coming more frequently. As Nauvoo grew, the demand for housing and for public buildings would naturally increase.

During the hot busy days of summer, Hyrum found time for frequent visits to his aging parents. His father was very feeble, having failed steadily for some time; and the stifling heat of early September 1840, was taking a terrible toll of his strength. Even the many prayers for the aging patriarch, and the medical aid and loving care of his family failed to relieve him except temporarily.

Mother Smith wrote of her husband's illness, telling how Joseph, after his return from Washington, D. C., had administered to him and brought about a temporary recovery.

Father Smith's condition worsened steadily and Mother Lucy sent for Hyrum and Joseph. They arrived on a Saturday night and gave their father something which alleviated his distress. The next day Joseph came and assured his father that he (Joseph) would not for the time being be troubled by the Missourians who had begun an attempt to rearrest Joseph as an escaped prisoner. Joseph then explained to his father the principle of work for the dead. This information was comforting to the weakened patriarch, and he requested Joseph to be baptized immediately for his brother Alvin.

As it became evident that their father was dying, the children all gathered to receive a father's blessing. He first gave his wife, Lucy, a blessing and then, beginning with Hyrum, gave a blessing to each in his turn, down to the youngest.

Before receiving his blessing, Hyrum bent over his father and said: "Father, if you are taken away, will you not intercede for us at the throne of grace, that our enemies will not have so much power over us?" The father then laid his hands upon Hyrum's head and said:

My son, Hyrum, I seal upon your head your patriarchal blessing, which I placed upon your head before, for that shall be verified. In addition to this, I now give you my dying blessing. You shall have a season of peace, so that you shall have sufficient rest to accomplish the work which God has given you to do. You shall be as firm as the pillars of heaven unto the end of your days. I now seal upon your head the patriarchal power, and you shall bless the people. This is my dying blessing upon your head in the name of Jesus. Amen.

To Joseph he said:

Joseph, my son, you are called to a high and holy calling. You are even called to do the work of the Lord. Hold out faithful and you shall be blest and your children after you. You shall even live to finish your work; at this Joseph cried out, weeping, "Oh! my father, shall I?" "Yes," said his father, "you shall live to lay out the plan for all the work which God has given you to do. This is my dying blessing upon your head in the name of Jesus. I also confirm your former blessings upon your head, for it shall be fulfilled. Even so, Amen."

When he had blessed Lucy, the youngest, he spoke to his wife, praising her for her steadfastness in rearing their children, saying that she should not mourn but live to be a comfort to the children and that her last days would be her best days.

He then paused for some time, being exhausted. After which he said in a tone of surprise, "I can see and hear as well as ever I could." Pausing again; "I can see Alvin"; another pause and "I shall live seven or eight minutes." Then, straightening himself, he laid his hands together; after which his breathing shortened and in about eight minutes stopped altogether without any sign of struggle or even a sigh. [^10] Joseph Smith, Sr., was buried in Nauvoo, in a plot whose exact location is unknown. At his death his oldest living son, Hyrum Smith, was made presiding Patriarch to the Church. The young Church provided a successor by following the patriarchal order of father to son, thereby setting a precedent to be followed in perpetuating this office.

Joseph Smith, Sr., had been an old man at sixty-nine. He had endured the hardships of pioneering and bitter persecutions. But his faith had remained undaunted during adversity. He had ridden out the storm and lived to see his people gain a state of comparative security and well-being.

After the funeral, Hyrum and Joseph were forced to maintain a constant vigilance against the threats of arrest and imprisonment made by some Missouri officers who were seeking to take the escaped leaders back to their home state. The Times and Seasons under date of Tuesday, September 15, announced that the governor of Missouri, after a silence of two years, had at last made a demand on Governor Carlin of Illinois for Joseph Smith, Jr., Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt, Caleb Baldwin, and Alanson Brown as fugitives from justice.

The article stated that the sheriff visited Nauvoo to arrest these men, but due to the tender mercies of a kind Providence, they were not found. The governor of Missouri had at one time permitted the mob militia to drag the prisoners from everything dear and sacred to them; and he had countenanced their being tried by a court-martial which condemned them to be shot. In part, the Times and Seasons article read:

What a beautiful picture Governor Boggs has presented to the world, after driving twelve to fifteen thousand from their homes and murdering innocent men, women and children; then, because a few made their escape from his murdering hand and have found protection in a land of equal rights so that his plans and designs have all been unfruitful to the extent that he has caused "Mormonism" to spread with double vigor, he now has the presumption to demand them back, in order that his thirst for innocent blood may yet be satisfied. [^11]

Hyrum's name was not listed as one of the fugitives from justice. Perhaps the Missouri court felt that Hyrum was not a key figure. This fact was important to the Saints as future events will show. Hyrum would be needed to keep a firm hand on affairs while his brother Joseph maneuvered to avoid capture by a relentless foe. The action of Missouri against the Mormon leaders, coming so soon, was a complete surprise to Hyrum and Joseph. The warrant for the arrest of Joseph and the others shocked and angered the Saints, and they resolved to thwart the enemy with every available means.

It is quite logical to suppose that a state in the position like that in which Missouri found herself, smarting under a cloud of infamy, and desiring to vindicate her cause and clear her name, would strive to destroy the Mormon movement. Only in this way could she regain her respectability among her sister states. Thus it was that when reports reached Missouri telling of the success of the people whom they had banished beyond their borders, fear and evil forebodings aroused its citizens to take action.

While the enemy was plotting and scheming to wreck the Church, Hyrum and others sat in general conference during October 3, 4, and 5, 1840, at Nauvoo. These meetings gave them new hope and revived their faith. Since the previous conference in April, noticeable progress had been made in missionary work. Hyrum was chosen as one of a committee of three to organize stakes between Nauvoo and Kirtland wherever the church membership justified it. He gave some general instructions and spoke on a problem he had observed for some time. He said that there were several individuals who, in moving to Nauvoo had not settled with their creditors and had no recommend from the branches of the Church where they had resided. On motion, it was resolved that "The persons moving to this place, who do not bring a recommend, be disfellowshipped." Hyrum was also appointed on a committee to liquidate the debts on the city plot. [^12]

As had been previously stated, the death of his father brought to Hyrum the office of presiding Patriarch, because he was the oldest living son of his father's family. This additional responsibility he assumed in a quiet and modest manner; and his appointment met with the immediate favor of the Saints, for he was much beloved of all who had come under his benign and understanding personality.

As the year 1840 drew to a close, Hyrum and his family were happy to acknowledge their blessings. As a father, Hyrum found joy and satisfaction in his family. They were devoted and co-operative, and he was glad to see their material needs well supplied. As a leader of his people he marveled at the faith and devotion of the church membership. He felt a powerful strength of faith among his immediate associates and many who had been called to go abroad as missionaries. He had never been more sure that the cause he had espoused was of divine origin and that he was blessed by a kind and benevolent Heavenly Father, and he resolved anew to carry out every command and duty pertaining to his holy office in the restored Church of God.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, pp. 268-273.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, pp. 294-295.
[^3] Quincy Whig, vol. III, no. 52, quoted from Warsaw World, April 7, 1841.
[^4] Hawkeye and Iowa Patriot, vol. 2, n. 46, p. 2, April 15, 1841, Burlington, Iowa, I. T.
[^5] Joseph Smith, vol. IV, op. cit., pp. 326-331.
[^6] Journal History, op. cit.,
[^7] Ibid.,February 15, 1841.
[^8] The Sangamo Journal, vol. 9, no. 361, Friday, September 5, 1840.
[^9] Hawkeye and Iowa Patriot, vol. II no. 17, p. 2, October, 1840.
[^10] Joseph Smith, vol. IV, op. cit., pp. 364, 360, 369, 370-371.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 393-394. Press notice: "Don Carlos Smith's death notice"—"One of the publishers of the Times and Seasons died 7th of August at 26. He was universally respected. Younger brother of the Prophet." Quincy Whig, vol. 4, no. 19, p. 2.
[^12] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, p. 411.
