Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXIII

A Year of Decision

Early in January, 1841, Hyrum sat with the First Presidency at Nauvoo, Illinois, to write a proclamation to the Saints in all the world. From time to time it was deemed necessary to make a statement about existing circumstances and prospects of the Church, and also to give such instructions as might be necessary for the well being of the Saints.

In this message the leaders congratulated the membership of the Church on the progress of the great work. Encouraging reports had continued to come in from abroad concerning missionary work and the establishment of branches and stakes, and in glowing terms the brethren wrote:

. . . For not only has it spread through the length and breadth of this vast continent, but on the continent of Europe, and on the Islands of the sea, it is spreading in a manner entirely unprecedented in the annals of time.

All this had happened in the short time since the Mormons had been driven unmercifully from Missouri. Many citizens of the country had been led to rejoice because of the seeming triumph of the enemy over the Mormons. The Saints acknowledged that the Lord of Hosts was with them and had delivered them from the hands of bloody and deceitful men. The state of Illinois had welcomed them, and here they found an asylum among people worthy of the character of free men. The citizens of Quincy, like the good Samaritan, poured oil into their wounds, and contributed liberally for their necessities. Those most responsible were mentioned by name. The legislature without respect to parties, freely, openly, boldly, and nobly came to their assistance and owned them as citizens and friends, took them by the hand and extended blessings of civil, political, and religious liberty. Under date of December 16, 1840, one of the most liberal charters, with the most plenary powers ever conferred by a legislative assembly on free citizens, was granted for "The City of Nauvoo," the "Nauvoo Legion" and the "University of the City of Nauvoo."

The meaning and origin of the name "Nauvoo" was explained; the site of the city described as having the Mississippi River bounding it on the north, west, and south, with a vast prairie to the east. The place had been made healthy by drainage of the swamp area. The population numbered in excess of 3000, and the opportunities for agriculture and manufacturing were most favorable. All Saints who had been blessed of heaven with the possession of this world's goods were advised to dispose of them as fast as circumstances would possibly permit, without making too great a sacrifice, and remove to their city and county, to establish and build up manufacturing in the city, or purchase and cultivate farms in the county. Those with riches were urged to come-help should be given to the poor. The elders were to instruct the Saints to come without delay, and these instructions were from the Lord.

Soon to be constructed was a temple of the Lord, where the Saints would be able to worship the God of their fathers according to the order of his house and the powers of the Holy Priesthood. The Nauvoo Legion would enable them to perform their military duty by themselves, and thus afford them the power and privilege of avoiding one of the most fruitful sources of strife—oppression from the world. It would enable them to show their attachment to the state and nation. And as a people, whenever the public service required their aid, thus proving whenever the public service required their aid they could prove themselves obedient to the paramount laws of the land and, be ready at all times to sustain and execute them.

The "University of the City of Nauvoo" would enable the Saints to instruct their children in all knowledge and learning, in the arts, sciences, and learned professions. The future importance of this institution was expressed in these words:

We hope to make this institution one of the great lights of the world, and by and through it to diffuse that kind of knowledge which will be of practicable utility, and for the public good, and also for private and individual happiness. . . . This corporation contains all the powers and prerogatives of any other college or university in this state.

The membership was urged to more united action, in these words:

By a concentration of action and a unity of effort, we can only accomplish the great work of the last days which we could not do in a . . . scattered condition, while our interests, both temporal and spiritual, will be greatly enhanced, and the blessings of heaven must flow unto us in an uninterrupted stream; of this, we think there can be no question.

It was to be understood that the Saints, when they came to Nauvoo, should not expect perfection, or that conditions would be only harmonious, peaceful, and lovely. If they did they would undoubtedly be deceived, for there were, in Nauvoo, too, people from different states and countries who retained their prejudices. There were also those who crept in, unawares, to sow discord, strife, and animosity, and by so doing, brought evil upon the Saints. There should be a determination among those who came to keep the commandments of God and not be discouraged by the things enumerated. Great exertion must be made to erect the temple of the Lord in order that he might accept it. In it his power and glory would be manifest.

The proclamation closed in a democratic spirit, declaring that the writers claimed no privileges that they could not share with their fellow citizens of every denomination. All were invited to come and settle among them, for they would be treated as citizens and friends. The Saints would consider it not only a duty but a privilege to reciprocate the kindness they had received from the benevolent and kind-hearted citizens of the state of Illinois. The Proclamation was signed Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith—Presidents of the Church, Nauvoo, January 15, 1841. [^1]

Thus the infant movement known as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints gathered momentum. The stage was set to establish the kingdom of God firmly upon the earth. The blessings of heaven were poured out upon a much injured and maligned people. A proclamation of the gospel was to be made to all the kings of the world as well as to all the governors of the nation and to all the nations of the earth. The proclamation was to be written by Robert E. Thompson, clerk to the Prophet Joseph, in a spirit of meekness and by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Out of the budding and flowering of the restored gospel gradually evolved a new approach toward religion. Hyrum Smith became an apt student of the fundamental gospel principles as they were revealed and expanded. Upon his sturdy shoulders had been placed the responsibility for helping to shape the course of this new society. Hyrum always felt a need to have the membership of the Church manifest a spirit of dignity and a sense of mission. This sense of mission was doubly necessary at this time because before them lay a most formidable task: the work of building the "Nauvoo House" and a temple.

The position of Hyrum Smith in the supreme councils of the Church had not been defined since the death of his father. No new revelation had been given to the Church since the imprisonment of its leaders in Liberty Jail, almost twenty-one months before. Thus, it was not surprising that the beginning of 1841, the Lord gave some important instructions, which included a declaration of his esteem for Hyrum and also defined his authority and duties. (D&C 124.) The revelation, in part, says:

And again, verily I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith; for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord. (verse 15.)

Continuing, the Lord spoke of the building of the temple in order that baptisms for the dead might be performed; also regarding the erection of a house for the weary traveler to be known as the "Nauvoo House." The revelation continued:

. . . Let my servant Hyrum Smith put stock into that house as seemeth him good, for himself and his generation after him, from generation to generation.

It had been about two years and nine months since Hyrum Smith had been referred to in a revelation as a counselor in the First Presidency. He had nobly filled the vacancy made by the withdrawal of apostate Frederick G. Williams.

As associate President with his Prophet brother, he had fully shared the privations and sufferings of his brother and had been a pillar of strength in the council during the most trying period of the church. But now his new appointment was defined in the revelation as follows:

And again, verily, I say unto you, let my servant William (Law) be appointed, ordained, and anointed, as counselor unto my servant Joseph, in the room of my servant Hyrum, that my servant Hyrum may take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right.

That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings upon the heads of all my people.

That whosoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whosoever he curses shall be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph;

That he may act in concert with my servant Joseph; and that he shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with the same blessing, and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood that once were upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery;

That my servant Hyrum may bear record of the things which I shall show unto him, that his name may be in honorable remembrance from generation to generation forever and ever. (verses 91-96.)

The revelation further stated that the Prophet Joseph must be given greater assistance:

Behold, I say unto you, I have a mission in store for my servant William, and my servant Hyrum, and for them alone; and let my servant Joseph tarry at home, for he is needed. The remainder I will show unto you hereafter. Even so. Amen. (verse 102.)

In the revelation too was advice to Counselor Sidney Rigdon that he was to humble himself and remain in Nauvoo and not think of moving to the eastern lands.

And then the Lord speaking to the Saints at large, said:

And hearken unto the counsel of my servants Joseph, and Hyrum, and William Law, and unto the authorities which I have called to lay the foundation of Zion, and it shall be well with him for ever and ever. Even so. Amen. (verse 118.)

* * *

A few days later on Sunday, January 24, 1841, Hyrum Smith was sustained as Patriarch to the Church, and William Law as a Counselor.

The patriarchal office required Hyrum to give individual blessings to the members of the Church, blessings which were carefully recorded by a scribe and given to the recipient. A special office for this work was to be constructed near Hyrum's home. However, his new duties did not remove him from the council of the First Presidency, for the Lord had designated him, as well as Joseph, "prophet, seer and revelator." He was to work in concert with Joseph and have all the blessings, glory, and honor, priesthood and gifts of the priesthood that were once conferred on Oliver Cowdery. Hyrum was to fulfill the role next to Joseph, as an associate President of the Church.

The following day, Monday, February 1, 1841, Hyrum was elected to the City Council of Nauvoo. Two days later he heard John C. Bennett, Mayor-elect, deliver his inaugural address, and he approved Bennett's eloquent and scholarly address. Bennett's concluding remarks emphasized a determination to execute all state laws and city ordinances to the very letter, even should it require the strong arm of military power to enable him to do so. As a public official he would be partial to no man; the peaceful, unoffending citizen was to be protected in the full exercise of all his civil, political, and religious rights, and the guilty violator of the law was to be punished, without respect to persons.

On Thursday, the following day, Hyrum signed his name with that of Joseph, Don Carlos Smith, and Charles C. Rich as members of the city council. They solemnly swore in the presence of Almighty God that they would support the Constitution of the United States and that of the state of Illinois, and would truly perform the duties of Councillors of the city of Nauvoo, according to the law and to the best of their ability. [^2]

This was the beginning of Hyrum's experience in civil affairs, and he championed the several developments needed to make Nauvoo a first rate municipality. Before the month of February was gone, a corporation, with Hyrum as a member, was formed to promote agriculture and manufacturing in Hancock County. On Monday, March 1, the city council divided the city into four wards designating the blocks and boundary lines. The wards were to be known as First, Second, Third, and Fourth. Ordinances were passed upon by the City Council pertaining to the "Nauvoo Legion," "Religious Liberty in Nauvoo," "Ordinances to choose additional city officers," etc. Military commission was given to the offices of the Nauvoo Legion by Governor Thomas Carlin of Illinois.

Following the work of organizing Nauvoo, preparations were made to lay the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple on April 6, 1841. A central location above the city to the east, about a mile from the Mississippi River, had been chosen. Many visitors were present to witness the ceremony. The Quincy newspaper, a week later, reported that there were present between seven and eight thousand; and some said 12,000. Also present was the Nauvoo Legion of 650 men. Sidney Rigdon spoke energetically for an hour; there was good order, no accidents; General Bennett commanded the Legion under Joseph Smith. [^3]

Another newspaper stated: "The Mormons had a great military display last week at Nauvoo. The cornerstone of the temple was laid, with great military pomp and array by the Nauvoo Legion. . . . One or two of the Fort Madison visitors came nigh being put under guard during the ceremonies." [^4]

Hyrum was not present on this significant occasion. While the Prophet Joseph and others were laying the southeast cornerstone and listening to Sidney Rigdon's address, Hyrum was presiding over a conference in Philadelphia, where a branch was organized with a president and two counselors. Many branches were represented at this gathering. [^5]

No mention is made of Hyrum's return to Nauvoo from Philadelphia. It is assumed that he returned around May 1, 1841, for he made a report (May 4, 1841) of his journey and proceeding in the East which had been pleasing and satisfactorily. [^6]

No sooner had Hyrum returned to Nauvoo than another trip East was proposed for important business reasons. This time he must be careful of his health, for the recent trip had been a grueling one, and the trip the year before with Oliver Granger and the one more recently with Dr. Isaac C. Galland had been arduous and fatiguing. On this journey he and William Law were to sell stock in the Nauvoo House, and collect donations for the building of the temple. Their written authorization said in part: "They are vested with full authority pertaining to their business transactions." Joseph commented further that "the Saints should place confidence in them. Hyrum has long been known for his virtue, patience, and every principle that can adorn a Christian character." [^7]

Prior to Hyrum's departure for the East he warned Joseph of the dangers of being taken by Missouri officers for a trial based on charges of being a fugitive from justice. The following events and news items reveal the intensity of feeling among the enemy against Joseph and the Saints and also reveal the tactics they employed to get the Prophet involved again in endless lawsuits.

Shortly, Missouri Governor Boggs demanded of Governor Carlin of Illinois that he deliver the head of the Mormon Church for trial. Agitation for the arrest of Joseph was made soon after his escape from Missouri and persisted. The fall before, the press at Springfield, Illinois, had said: "Governor Carlin issued a process for the arrest of Joe Smith and Sidney Rigdon, and their delivery to the Missouri officers." [^8] About the same time the newspaper at Burlington, Iowa, quoted an article from the Quincy Whig, concerning the suggested giving up of Smith and Rigdon to Missouri. It was an affair between Carlin and Boggs. [^9] The editors were opposed to another trial in Missouri, and also to plotting to maneuver Joseph Smith to justify taking him to Missouri.

Perhaps Hyrum Smith should have delayed his eastern assignment in order to aid Joseph in thwarting the enemy. The following episode reveals the shallow soil supporting the opposers of Mormonism, the methods used by evil forces in fighting the growth of the new church, and the sinister forces arrayed against this new society which in time would challenge the Brethren's utmost ingenuity for self-protection.

On Tuesday, June 1, Joseph accompanied Hyrum Smith and William Law as far as Quincy, Illinois, on their way east. Before returning to Nauvoo, Joseph made a courtesy call on Governor Carlin who treated him with the greatest kindness and respect. Shortly after leaving the governor's residence, however, he was arrested at Heberlin's Hotel, Bear Creek, about twenty-eight miles south of Nauvoo by a posse of officers headed by Sheriff Thomas King of Adams County, Illinois, and an officer from Missouri, sent by Governor Carlin for the purpose of delivering the Prophet to the Missouri authorities. Joseph returned to Quincy to obtain a writ of habeas corpus from Charles A. Warren, Esq., Master in Chancery. Judge Stephen A. Douglas happened to come to Quincy that evening and granted a request for a hearing on the Tuesday following at Monmouth, Warren County, where the court would then give a regular term.

The trial at Monmouth lasted for over a week amid great excitement. Judge Douglas acquitted the Prophet after a stirring defense by attorney O. H. Browning who described in eloquent words the suffering of the Mormons when they were driven from Missouri. His speech, one of the most eloquent ever made in defense of Joseph Smith, caused the spectators to weep, even the honorable judge himself, and most of the officers shed tears. The co-editor of the Times and Seasons wrote:

. . . we have listened to one of the most eloquent speeches ever uttered by mortal man in favor of justice and liberty by O. H. Browning, Esq., who has done himself immortal honor in the sight of all patriotic citizens who listened to the same.

This crisis in the absence of Hyrum brought to a satisfactory conclusion was a great relief to the Saints. The feelings of the Prophet were expressed in these words:

This decision was received with satisfaction to myself and the brethren. . . . It is now decided that before another writ can be issued, a new demand must be made by the Governor of Missouri. Thus have I once more been delivered from the fangs of my cruel persecutors for which I thank God, my Heavenly Father. [^10]

Hyrum Smith and William Law had met Elder George A. Smith while they were visiting the Saints in Chester County, Pennsylvania. Elders Young, Kimball, and Taylor arrived at Nauvoo, July 1, amid a large gathering of friends and received the hand of fellowship and the commendation of the Prophet for a mission that was highly satisfactory.

And from Elder Orson Hyde came word of his eventful journey to Palestine to dedicate that land for the return of the Jews. Hyrum Page had deserted him at New York.

On Saturday, August 7, 1841, Hyrum and Joseph again suffered a heavy loss when their beloved brother Don Carlos died at his home in Nauvoo. Don Carlos' life had been closely knit with that of his brothers. He had performed valiant missionary service for the Church; had been associated with the Elders Journal in Kirtland and had later assisted with the publication of the Times and Sessions at Nauvoo. At nineteen he had married Agnes Coolbirth and had subsequently become the father of three daughters. And now at twenty-six he was dead, a victim, it was thought, of the dampness in the basement where he worked on the newspaper. [^11]

The spectre of death haunted the Smiths that August of 1841. Don Carlos' death on August 7 was followed a week later by the death on August 14 of Joseph's infant son, Don Carlos (fourteen months old), and two weeks later by the death on August 27 of Robert Blaskel Thompson, Hyrum's brother-in-law, then thirty years of age. But the climax of sorrows for Hyrum came on September 25 with the loss of his own next oldest son, Hyrum, who was then just over seven years of age. [^12] Neither the circumstances nor the causes of these deaths are known. [^13]

To Hyrum it seemed that he lived constantly on the edge of disaster; each day or week brought its joy or sorrow. On the more hopeful side of life's ledger was the return of the apostles from England. The presence of such stalwarts as Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Wilford Woodruff lightened the heavy load borne by the Prophet and Hyrum. Meetings were called and certain authority delegated to the Quorum of the Twelve. The Prophet wrote:

. . . I also requested the Twelve to take the burden of business of the church in Nauvoo, and especially as pertaining to the selling of church lands.

In order to relieve his brother Joseph of as much responsibility as possible, Hyrum made it a point to be part of welcoming committees whenever a demand for one arose. At this time word had been received at Nauvoo that a large number of Sac and Fox Indians were encamped at Montrose, Iowa. On Thursday, August 13, a ferryman brought a number of them to visit the Prophet. A squad of the Nauvoo Legion and the military band were on hand to escort them to the grove, and Hyrum went to welcome them. But they refused to come ashore until Joseph came down. At the landing, Hyrum introduced the Prophet to Keokuk, Kis-ku-kosh, Appenoose, and about one hundred other chiefs and braves of the above-mentioned tribes, with their families.

After conducting them to the meeting grounds in the grove, Joseph instructed them in many things which the Lord had revealed to him concerning their fathers and told them of the promises that were made concerning them in the Book of Mormon. He advised them, through an interpreter, to cease killing each other and warring with other tribes, also to keep peace with the whites.

Keokuk replied that at his wigwam he had a Book of Mormon which Joseph had given him some years before. Speaking to the Prophet, he said: "I believe you are a great and good man; I look rough, but I am a son of the Great Spirit. I have heard your advice-we intend to quit fighting and follow the good talk you have given us."

After the conversation they feasted on the green with good food, dainties, and melons grown by the brethren, and they entertained the spectators with a specimen of their dancing. [^14]

Hyrum had assumed many duties of a routine nature hoping to relieve his younger brother for more important work.

And, too, there was always the possibility that Joseph would be forced into absenting himself from Nauvoo to defend himself from the enemy. If such a situation should suddenly arise who would take his place? This problem had been much in the minds of Hyrum and Joseph since their coming to Nauvoo. And so at one of the meetings held at this time, the Prophet spoke on the seniority of authority among the First Presidency and the twelve. He said that "the time had come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency. They should attend to the settling of the emigrants and the business of the church in the Stakes. The Twelve," he said, "should have an opportunity of providing for themselves and families and at the same time relieve him so that he might attend to the business of translating" (the papyrus which had come with the Egyptian mummies).

During the semiannual conference in October, 1841, Patriarch Hyrum Smith occupied the stand in the bowery atop the hill in front of the temple whose walls were slowly rising. The morning session had been presided over by President Brigham Young while members of the First Presidency were laying the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House. Saturday, October 2, 1841, was a chilly fall day; but all seats were taken, and many were standing. Many nonmembers had also gathered and were scattered among the members to witness the proceedings. With the several quorums seated in their order, the gathering was an impressive affair, and a spirit of friendliness and well-being filled the air. The brethren on the stand manifest a cordiality and love which created just the right atmosphere for a successful conference.

A letter from Elder Orson Hyde on the success of his mission was read and various vacancies in church offices were filled. Then some general advice was given by the several speakers. Patriarch Hyrum Smith made plain his disapproval of the course of some elders in attempting to discourage immigrants from coming to Nauvoo and enticing them to settle at places not approved for gathering.

During the later sessions of this conference the importance of baptism for the dead was stressed at length by the Prophet, and he explained the role of angels, ministering spirits, translated bodies, etc. Hyrum was called upon to offer the benediction at two sessions of the conference. At the conclusion of the conference the Prophet wrote:

Although the conference commenced under discouraging circumstances owing to the inclemency of the weather, yet a vast number of the brethren and visitors from abroad were present, and on Saturday and Sunday, the weather having become favorable, the congregation was immense. [^15] The greatest unanimity prevailed; business was conducted with the most perfect harmony and good feelings, and the assembly dispersed with new confidence in the great work of the last days. [^16]

The good feeling prevailing among the Saints at the conference persisted afterward. There had been a frank appraisal of general conditions in the Church. Their economic situation had been evaluated, and solutions to problems proposed. And their zeal for missionary work remained unabated. The Quorum of Twelve met to make missionary assignments to various centers of population in the Middle West and East.

It was agreed among the brethren that the Church would negotiate all land sales to the emigrants to prevent speculators from profiteering and to provide the needed source of revenue for the Church. This policy would not only be carried out at Nauvoo but also at Zarahemla, Warren, Nashville, and Ramas.

Land located north of Nauvoo along the River had been purchased from Horace R. Hotchkiss of New Haven, Connecticut, and some also to the south, which included the best steamboat landings, but it was very unhealthy. Mr. Hotchkiss who had received no interest on the agreed terms of the land sale wrote to Joseph Smith, explaining that he had failed to contact Hyrum Smith and Dr. Galland when they were in the East. A verbal agreement with Mr. Hotchkiss allowed to the Saints five years grace should conditions be unfavorable and prevent their paying for the land.

The situation at Nauvoo concerning the Hotchkiss land trouble was described by the Prophet in a letter to Smith Tuttle, Esq.

. . . Cold weather is now rolling in upon us. I have been confined here this season by sickness and various other things which are beyond my control.

. . . Having been demanded by the Governor of Missouri, of the Governor of this state, and he did not have moral courage enough to resist the demand . . . I accordingly was taken prisoner and they put me to some ten or eleven hundred dollars' expense and trouble such as lawyer's fees, witnesses, etc. etc., before I could be redeemed from under the difficulty. But I am now clear of them once more.

From what followed in this communique it appeared that Dr. Galland had not yet reported to Nauvoo the details of his mission east to take care of the Hotchkiss real estate transaction. He had been instructed either to trade some church property located in the East or to obtain money in some other way to pay Mr. Hotchkiss. Hyrum Smith, who had accompanied Dr. Galland, had become ill and been forced to return home. It had been his hope to pay off both the Hotchkiss principal and the interest, even though it was not due until some time later. Toward the end of the message Joseph said:

As to the growth of our place, it is very rapid, and it would be more so were it not for sickness and death. There have been many deaths which leaves a melancholy reflection, but we cannot help it. When God speaks from the heavens to call us hence, we must submit to his mandates. [^17]

No doubt, the coming of cold weather and the winter soon to descend upon them brought memories of persecution, suffering, and want. The year 1841 had been a trying one for Hyrum Smith. At forty-one years of age he was beginning to realize the limitations of his physical capacities. Exposure to the inclement weather and long months of imprisonment with foul food, besides the constant pressure of enemy threats of violence and death, took their toll. He had to guard his health. Hyrum had worked long hours away from home a good part of the time Joseph was absent in Washington. He had gone to Quincy, Illinois, to arrange for money to help carry the Saint's appeal to the Federal Government for redress for their losses in Missouri.

The death of his beloved father had been a great trial, as had that of his brother Don Carlos, whom he had dearly loved. The grim reaper had spared neither Joseph's nor his own immediate family; both had been bowed by grief over the loss of their little ones. He had himself spent anxious days and nights standing vigil over the sickbeds of his loved ones, and had also offered prayers of supplication to the throne of grace for his sick friends. The many calls of his benevolent faith and prayers had not gone unheeded.

But in the midst of this travail he had been greatly blessed. The Lord had called him to be Presiding Patriarch, giving him great power. He had been designated as a prophet, seer, and revelator and had been called to hold the position next to the Prophet that was formerly held by Oliver Cowdery, that of assistant to the President. He was more nearly equal to Joseph in authority than any other man. He enjoyed the complete confidence of the First Presidency. He had made two long tedious trips East on important church business. Only the failure of his health had prevented him from successfully completing the second venture.

His voice had been heard in important councils establishing the city government of Nauvoo, the Nauvoo Legion, and city ordinances. He had had a voice in the erection of the Nauvoo House and the temple, and a part in the organization of new stakes, wards, and towns. He had given patriarchal blessings, extended advice to missionaries abroad and offered a solution to many vexing problems arising in the establishment of a civic and religious organization.

After the grief of losing his little son had somewhat subsided, Hyrum resumed his work with a more mature zeal and with complete self dedication. He was fully aware that in the months ahead there lay more problems to be solved and more work to be accomplished.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Journal History, op. cit., October 18, 1841.
[^2] In Doctrine and Covenants, 124:83, the Lord warned William Law not to return to Kirtland for he had a scourge prepared for the inhabitants thereof.
[^3] Sangamo Journal, vol. 10, no. 13, whole no. 533-p. 2, Springfield; S. Francis, (Ill. Nov. 19, 1841). Also Church History, vol. IV, pp. 443-444.
[^4] See Artel Ricks "Hyrum's Prophecy," The Improvement Era, vol. 59 (May, 1956), p. 305.
[^5] The above meeting was held in Hyrum Smith's new office. The Times and Seasons—in an October, 1841, issue quoted by the Sangamo Journal of Springfield, Illinois—said: ''The brethren are here notified that our well beloved brother Hyrum Smith, Patriarch of the whole church, has erected a comfortable office, opposite his dwelling house, where himself together with his scribe and recorder (James Sloan) will attend regularly every Monday, Wednesday and Friday during the entire day, or, upon any other day if urgent circumstances require it, to perform the duties of his high and holy calling. "A copy of the blessing can be received immediately after being pronounced so thee the brethren who live at a distance can have it to take with them." Sangamo Journal, op. cit., also Times and Seasons, Nauvoo, Ill., October number, 1841.
[^6] The Prophet's new home "The Mansion House" located across the street was then under construction. John William Smith's father worked on it in July, 1841, and lived in an old blacksmith shop. Biography of John Wm. Smith, 1826-1905.
[^7] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, pp. 460-461.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 565, 566.
[^9] Hyrum Smith received his first three degrees of Masonry in Ontario County, N. Y. Joseph and Hyrum were Master Masons. Taken from Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, (Salt Lake City, 1888), p. 11.
[^10] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. IV, p. 567.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 393-394. Press notice: "Don Carlos Smith's death notice"—"One of the publishers of the Times and Seasons died 7th of August at 26. He was universally respected. Younger brother of the Prophet." Quincy Whig, vol. 4, no. 19, p. 2.
[^12] Idem.
[^13] Idem.
[^14] Ibid, pp. 594-600.
[^15] Quincy Whig, vol. IV, no. 39, p. 2, Jan. 22, 1842.
[^16] Joseph Smith, op. cit, vol. IV, p. 429.
[^17] Ibid., p. 432.
