Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXIV

A Prophecy

On October 31, 1841, the Sunday after conference Hyrum Smith unlocked his new office for a meeting which was to transact important business. Soon, others arrived including Brother Joseph and members of the Quorum of Twelve. At this meeting the Prophet instructed those present on many principles of the gathering of the nations and the fate of the wicked and downtrodden of this generation.

Hyrum mentioned that he had written a letter to the Saints still in Kirtland, Ohio, concerning the building up of that place. The minutes of a conference held in Kirtland, Ohio, October 2, 1841, were then read. They included a proposal to have Saints living in that vicinity contribute to the establishment of a religious paper, entitled The Olive Leaf.

There had been much concern among the brethren over the affairs at Kirtland, Ohio. The Kirtland Stake President, Almon W. Babbitt, had taken a mistaken attitude about the leaders returning to Kirtland. In a letter to Nauvoo he referred to his impression that he was to prepare the way for men of greater counsel and wisdom. He had understood that Brother Hyrum Smith, with his family, was to have returned to Kirtland by the spring of 1841, although Hyrum had made arrangements with Brother Babbitt to exchange a piece of land in Clayton for the Carter house and had made many other arrangements of like nature. [^1] Apparently Brother Babbit had a misconception of Hyrum's intentions.

Kirtland, Ohio, would never again become the headquarters of the whole Church. The sacred temple had been defiled and the spirit of evil was there. The Saints of Kirtland had not even expressed their sympathy or regrets to Hyrum and Joseph while they were prisoners in Missouri. The Lord had completed his designs in Kirtland during that period of five years when the Prophet had made his headquarters there, and he now had other plans for that city. [^2]

During that October 31 meeting, Hyrum Smith read for the brethren's approval a letter he had prepared for Kirtland. This letter contained Hyrum Smith's prophecy concerning Kirtland, which is not contained in the Doctrine and Covenants.

All the Saints that dwell in that land are commanded to come away, for this is "Thus saith the Lord"; therefore pay out no moneys nor properties for houses nor lands in that country, for if you do you will lose them, for the time shall come that you shall not possess them in peace, but shall be scourged with a sore scourge; yet your children may possess them, but not until many years shall pass away; and as to the organization of that branch of the church, it is not according to the Spirit and will of God; and as to the designs of leading members of that branch relative to the printing press and the ordaining of Elders, and sending out Elders to beg for the poor, are not according to the will of God, and in these things they shall not prosper, for they have neglected the House of the Lord, the baptismal font, in this place in Nauvoo wherein their dead may be redeemed and the key of knowledge that unfolds the dispensation of the fullness of times may be turned and the mysteries of God be unfolded upon their salvation and the salvation of the world and the redemption of their dead depends, for thus saith the Lord, there shall not be a general assembly for a general conference assembled together until the House of the Lord and the baptismal font shall be finished, and if we are not diligent the church shall be rejected, and their dead also, saith the Lord.

Therefore, dear Brethren, any proceedings of the Saints otherwise than to put forth their hands with their might to do this work, is not according to the will of God, and shall not prosper; therefore, tarry not in any place whatever, but come forth unto this place from all the world until it is filled up, and polished, and sanctified according to my word, saith the Lord. Come ye forth from the ends of the earth that I may hide you from mine indignation that shall scourge the wicked, and then I will send forth and build up Kirtland, and it shall be polished and refined according to my word: therefore, your doings and organizations and designs in printing, or any of your councils are not of me, saith the Lord, even so, Amen. Signed Hyrum Smith, Patriarch for the whole church. [^3]

The Lord made it plain that a scourge was to fall upon Kirtland and its inhabitants but said also that after many years should pass away, their children would possess the blessings promised. Today, the latter part of this prophecy is beginning to be fulfilled, for the membership of the church is increasing in the vicinity of Kirtland and Northern Ohio. [^4]

The above revelation also expressed the feeling of urgency to complete the Nauvoo Temple. There was no room left for doubt in the minds of the Saints regarding the importance of this temple project. [^5]

November 1841 was cold, but Hyrum Smith's family was comfortably housed not far from the main street of Nauvoo and only a short distance from the Prophet's home, which was later to be referred to as the "Homestead." [^6] As winter approached that year Hyrum found that giving patriarchal blessings and attending council meetings were only part of his duties. As a city councilman he was aware of the undesirable element being swept into Nauvoo by the rising tide of immigrants and that the atmosphere of the city was charged with the spirit of speculation, heightened expectancy, and novelty that accompanies the growth of any boom town.

The thoroughfares of the bustling frontier city were crowded with strangers, notable because of their wearing apparel, their language, and their manners. And it was only natural that among these strangers should be some of unscrupulous character. Many of these were speculators from St. Louis, New Orleans, and other points east and south, brought in either by vessels plying the Mississippi River or the overland routes. Some of these undesirables had gained negative impressions about the Mormons from false reports. Others felt that quick wealth could be had by outwitting a people who were simple, naive, and trusting. One of their methods was to blame the Saints for crimes committed and circulate rumors that their leaders endorsed their dishonesty.

To counteract these rumors Hyrum, with the consent of Joseph and the brethren, issued the following statement to the public condemning the idea that the brethren sanctioned crime:

Whereas it has been intimated to me by persons of credibility that there are persons in the surrounding country who profess to be members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who have been using their influence and endeavors to instill into the minds of good and worthy citizens in the State of Illinois and the adjoining states that the First Presidency and others in authority and high standing in said church, do sanction and approbate the members of said church, in stealing property from those persons who do not belong to said church, and thereby to induce persons to aid and abet them in the act of stealing and other evil practices; I therefore, hereby disavow any sanction or approbation by me, of the crime of theft, or any other evil practice in any person or persons whatever, whereby either the lives or property of our fellow men may be unlawfully taken or molested; neither are such things sanctioned or approbated by the First Presidency or any other person in authority or good standing in said church, but such acts are altogether in violation to the rules, order, and regulations of the church, contrary to the teachings given in said church and the laws of both man and God. I caution the unwary who belong to the aforesaid church, and all other persons against being duped or led into any act or scheme which may endanger their character, lives, or property, or bring reproach upon the church, and I certify that I hold my person and property ready to support the laws of the land in the detection of any person or persons who may commit any breach of the same. To which I subscribe my name and testify this 26th day of November, 1841.

Signed

Hyrum Smith

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 26th day of November, 1841, Ebenezer Robinson, J. P." [^7]

Mary Fielding Smith, wife of Hyrum Smith

Patriarch John Smith, Son of Hyrum Barden Smith. (Courtesy of Ralph Smith.)

As the Christmas season neared, the Saints enjoyed the preparations for the usual festivities. The families of Hyrum and Joseph were closely knit. Much visiting and exchanging of gifts among them promoted love and good will. On Sunday evening, the day after Christmas, Hyrum attended a public meeting at Joseph's home, at which he, President Young, and the Prophet were the speakers. The congregation was very attentive to the subject of Faith and Spiritual Gifts as explained from 1 Corinthians 13, 14. The Prophet said that the gift of tongues was necessary in the Church . . . to enable servants of God to preach to unbelievers. He said that when devout men from every nation should assemble to hear the things of God, the elders were to preach to them in their own mother tongue, whether it was in German, French, Spanish, or Irish, or any other, and those who understood the language spoken in their own tongue were to interpret. This would be done by the gift of tongues.

Hyrum's family was happy to see Joseph's new store building across the street, a half block east from their place. Christmas had come and gone with some regrets over not having sufficient supplies for the celebration. But now, the wagons were arriving loaded with merchandise, and the citizenry would be able to obtain a belated supply. On Saturday (New Year's day), Hyrum's children saw their Uncle Joseph, with several others, go into the store to unpack the boxes of groceries and dry goods and arrange them on the newly built shelves.

It seemed to Hyrum that this was an opportunity for Joseph to strengthen his economic position by establishing a mercantile business. Why should Joseph not take advantage of the times for such a venture rather than have the outside speculators enrich themselves at the expense of the Saints? Hyrum himself was too involved in other affairs and lacked the necessary capital for such a venture. The store building had been in the course for construction for several months. Its red-brick walls had been extended vertically, high enough for a second story where Hyrum and Joseph had planned sufficient space for a council room and an office for Joseph, and perhaps a larger room for school classes and for storage purposes.

The wisdom of such planning was later proved, for in the upper rooms of the storehouse many important events transpired. Hyrum spent many hours in Joseph's second story office, where a place for the Egyptian mummies had been provided and the work of translating the Book of Abraham from the papyrus went forward. Here, too, the proofs of the new book of modern scripture were checked prior to publication in the Times and Seasons. School was held for a time in these rooms, and sacred temple ordinances were revealed and performed.

The ground floor of the building served as the store, but only for a limited time because Joseph was no merchant. Such a mundane occupation was beyond the province of his calling. His kindhearted liberality disqualified him as an astute businessman.

Nevertheless, despite evil rumors and mutterings drifting in from Missouri, the Smith families at the beginning of 1842, were enjoying a period of comparative peace and prosperity. There was no room for pessimism, thought Hyrum, when there were so many things on the credit side of the ledger which were favorable to the Saints. One of the most favorable aspects was the progress made on the temple and on the Nauvoo House: large cargoes of lumber had been brought on barges from the mills in Wisconsin; on February 1, two large stones for doorsills for the Nauvoo House were landed; and the font in the temple was sufficiently complete to be used for baptisms.

Then too, when tithing days were designated at regular intervals, the Saints responded in a gratifying manner. Thus, the debts of the Church were being met, thereby relieving the tension of threatened lawsuits; and the success of the missionaries abroad was phenomenal. Church immigrants pouring into Nauvoo were of the sturdy middle class—thrifty, hardworking, skilled in the crafts and building trades. It seemed to Hyrum that conditions were ripe for success in the building of Zion.

The ideal place, the time, the natural resources, and the skilled manpower necessary to complete the task were all available.

These and other blessings gave Hyrum and his brethren cause for true rejoicing. The disappearing snow and melting of the ice on the river during March and April of 1842 signalled an increase of activity. Hyrum's large home was noted for its warmth and hospitality. The hitching posts in front, almost always in use, were an indication of the traffic that came to his door. Horses and carriages were there every day and often late into the evening. Newly arrived immigrants stared curiously and were duly impressed with the importance of the place. Serious-faced officials, farmers, workmen, families came and went.

And the sudden growth of Nauvoo did not go unnoticed. The spiraling population caused by immigration, principally from England, brought the Mormons more and more into the spotlight; and Hyrum found himself becoming an object of curiosity. As a leader of the people he was forced to share the limelight with his brother Joseph the Prophet.

Toward the end of March, Masonic Grandmaster Jonas visited Nauvoo; and, like the other prominent personages, who came out of curiosity to get a first hand glimpse of the Mormons, their leaders, and their city, he was entertained by the Prophet Joseph. After a visit of several days, this Masonic official returned to his home at Columbus, Adams County, Illinois, and reviewed his experiences in an article appearing in the Advocate, addressed to the Editor of the newspaper:

Mr. Editor—Having recently had occasion to visit the city of Nauvoo, I cannot permit the opportunity to pass without expressing the agreeable disappointment that awaited me there. I had supposed, from what I had previously heard, that I should witness an impoverished, ignorant, and bigotted population, completely priest-ridden and tyrannized over by Joseph Smith, the great Prophet of these people.

On the contrary to my surprise, I saw a people apparently happy, prosperous and intelligent. Every man appeared to be employed in some business or occupation. I saw no idleness, no intemperance, no noise, no riot—all appearing to be contented with no desire to trouble themselves with anything except their own affairs. With the religion of these people I have nothing to do; if they can be satisfied with the doctrines of their new revelation, they have the right to be so. The constitution of the country guarantees to them the right of worshipping God according to the dictates of their own conscience, and if that can be so easily satisfied, why should we who differ from them complain?

But I protest against the slanders and persecutions that are continually heaped upon these people. I could see no disposition on their part to be otherwise than a peaceable and law-abiding people, and all they ask of the country is to permit them to live under the protection of the laws, and to be made amenable for their violations. They may have among them bad and desperate characters, and what community has not? But I am satisfied the Mormon people, as a body, will never be the aggressors or violators of the law.

While at Nauvoo I had a fine opportunity of seeing the people in a body. There was a Masonic celebration and the Grand Master of the state was present for the purpose of installing the officers of the new lodge. An immense number of persons assembled on the occasion variously estimated from five to ten thousand persons, and never in my life did I witness a better dressed or a more orderly and well behaved assemblage. Not a drunken or disorderly person to be seen and the display of taste and beauty among the females could not well be surpassed anywhere.

During my stay for three days, I became well acquainted with their principal men, and more particularly with their Prophet, the celebrated "Old Joe Smith." I found them hospitable, polite, well informed, and liberal. With Joseph Smith, the hospitality of whose house I kindly received, I was well pleased; of course, on the subject of religion we widely differed, but he appeared to be quite as willing to permit me to enjoy my right of opinion as I think we all ought to be to let the Mormons enjoy theirs, but instead of the ignorant and tyrannical upstart, judge my surprise at finding him a sensible, intelligent, companionable, and gentlemanly man. He appears to be much respected by all the people about him, and has their entire confidence. He is a fine looking man about thirty-six years of age, and had an interesting family.

The incorporated limits of Nauvoo contains, it is said, about seven thousand persons; the buildings are generally small and much scattered. The temple and Nauvoo House now building, will probably, in beauty and design, extent and durability, excel any public building in the state and will both be enclosed before winter.

From all I saw and heard, I am led to believe that before many years the city of Nauvoo will be the largest and most beautiful city of the west provided the Mormons are unmolested in the peaceable enjoyment of their rights and privileges and why they should be troubled while acting as good citizens, I cannot imagine, and I hope and trust that the people of Illinois have no disposition to disturb unoffending people who have no disposition but to live peaceably under the laws of the country and to worship God under their own vine and fig tree. [^8]

The above provides a partial appraisal of the Mormon community, but even in its favorable remarks it is apparent that the negative criticism of this people was wide spread. Even this author was surprised and "agreeably disappointed" to find many complimentary and praiseworthy qualities among them. The Masonic official looked on them with benign favor, having an understanding spirit which helped him to observe conditions in a true light. Jonas' interest in the church leaders is understandable because Joseph and Hyrum had a few weeks before becoming members of the Masonic fraternity, [^9] for reasons not fully determined or understood.

During the two weeks prior to the general conference which was to convene Wednesday, April 6, 1842, Patriarch Hyrum Smith was unusually busy. A number of problems were developing which needed immediate attention. Hyrum had been aware of severe poverty among some of the Saints and the inclement weather during the winter had emphasized a need for action. To help alleviate the suffering of the people, the "Female Relief Society" was organized March 24, 1842, with Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, as President, assisted by two counselors. The purpose of this society was to relieve the poor, the destitute, the widow, and the orphan, and to serve all benevolent purposes. [^10] The first auxiliary organization of the Church was organized to meet a specific need among the Saints and was destined to prove its worth for generations yet unborn.

There was also another situation developing which disturbed Hyrum. Rumors of immorality among the leaders of the Church, especially Joseph Smith, were being circulated, When the day arrived for the conference, Hyrum, with others, was summoned to the home of Joseph Smith to receive instructions concerning current problems and the conference. The Prophet was ill and unable to attend. And here, before leaving Joseph's home for the conference, Hyrum and the others—Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards—testified that they had never heard Joseph Smith teach any principle but those of the strictest virtue, either in public or in private. [^11]

When the conference convened, Hyrum was on the rostrum prepared to present to the Saints the thoughts uppermost in his mind. The topics discussed by the speakers at this conference reflected the conditions of the time. When Hyrum spoke, he gave expression to that which was closest to his heart—the blessings of the temple, and the value of obtaining the blessings of the endowment when the temple should be completed. He reminded the Saints that the missionaries who went from Kirtland, were called in at the dedication of that temple to receive their washings and anointings and that with the completion of the Nauvoo Temple, the missionaries could again receive their endowments and go forth into the world clothed with mighty power. He continued his sermon by refuting slanderous rumors about himself and the Prophet, Brigham Young, Willard Richards, and others of the twelve. [^12]

The conference made Hyrum aware that dissatisfaction was creeping in among the leading brethren. The names of Sidney Rigdon and William Law were conspicuously deleted from the record of those called to take part in the conference. At the final meeting on Sunday, April 10, Joseph was present and preached: "Notwithstanding, this congregation profess to be Saints, yet I stand in the midst of all (kinds of) characters and classes of men." [^13] The meaning of this observation was not at that time clearly understood; only time would make it clear. But temporarily at least the conference sessions seemed to clear the air, bringing problems into the open where they could be dealt with.

Then, close on the heels of the conference came another vital issue pressing for attention. The brethren had worried much regarding old claims against themselves and the Church; but now claimants were clamoring for immediate payment, many without valid claims at all, and, as usual, the attacks were upon Joseph.

The Saints from Missouri had endured hardship and the loss of property. But they had already held a meeting and agreed to forgive each other their debts and to pay what they could for the erection of the temple. And so at this time Hyrum and the others endorsed the use of the bankruptcy law recently enacted by the Congress of the United States. The Prophet, like Hyrum, had been robbed of property time after time in various places; and they were unable, because of the bankruptcy law, to collect from those who owed them; so there remained no alternative for them but to use the law to extricate themselves.

On Monday, April 18, 1842, Joseph, Hyrum, and Samuel Smith went to Carthage, Illinois, where they declared their insolvency before the clerk of the county commissioner's court. Dr. Willard Richards went along as the Prophet's clerk. [^14]

In due time both Hyrum and Joseph were granted legal release from the encumbrance of debt both to themselves and to the Church. But this move was pounced upon by their enemies as an act of dishonesty, and they were accused of using the law as a means to enrich themselves at the expense of their creditors. It must be made plain that in taking this course neither Hyrum nor Joseph repudiated their legitimate debts to those in Nauvoo and neighboring counties.

During the long spring and summer evenings, Hyrum and Joseph would often visit the temple site together. Contemplating its erection and purpose gave them an upsurge of faith and hope. The clouds of calumny and distrust were dispelled as they gazed on its walls slowly rising. The baptismal font in the basement was now completed and in use.

The temple scene held for Hyrum and Joseph a special significance, for here had developed new religious doctrine, a doctrine which gave all mankind an opportunity to obtain eternal salvation.

The font made possible baptismal work for the dead, an ordinance which had only recently been explained in sermons and writings. The temple represented the work of the priesthood, the keys of the work having been given by the hand of Elijah the prophet, turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, and of the children to the fathers. (Malachi 4:5-6.) The basis for this unique doctrine was that the new church was the sole custodian of the priesthood which held the sealing power to preside in behalf of the dead as well as for the living. Therefore, the living descendants of those who had died before the restoration of the gospel could now be baptized (by proxy) for their dead. This was the same ordinance, now restored, which was spoken of by Apostle Paul when he said: "Else what shall they do, they that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all. . . ." (I Corinthians 15:29.) Following his crucifixion Christ preached to the spirits in prison (I Peter 3:18-19), for he had said to the thief on the cross: "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise." Thus during the time between death and resurrection the spirits of men were to have a chance to hear the gospel. The same principles which saved the living could also save the dead.

When the realization of this glorious principle burst upon the Saints, there was renewed vigor to complete the building of the Lord's house. With such a principle the great family of the Father could be linked together. The past could be joined to the present and the present to the future, for all generations to come. This principle revealed God the Father as a loving Father, the same yesterday, today, and forever.

Every man-hour of work on the temple, every stone, every piece of timber, and every nail used in its construction added to the permanency and strength of the young Church which was surely the kingdom of God on the earth.

Hyrum felt that the work of building the temple was a race against the enemy. Would the Saints win? Perhaps, by a very close margin. The Patriarch kept careful watch. He was well aware of the cynicism in the Lee County Democrat from Fort Madison, which said: "The population of Nauvoo has increased to 8000; walls of the temple going up-many wealthy neophytes are coming into the church . . . doubtless making it a 'profitable business."' [^15] The increasing population of Nauvoo and the steady progress of the temple incited the jealousy of the apostates and many of the gentiles. To the Saints it was evidence of God's work in their behalf.

There was no mistaking the fact that evil forces were using every device to impede the work of the Church and eventually overthrow it. Hyrum realized this and was not surprised to hear increasing rumors of immorality among the leaders of the Church.

The ancient order of patriarchal marriage had been revealed and a command given from the Most High to practice it; but how was the commandment to be obeyed when the cultural background of the people and their established mores made them antagonistic toward it. To obey the commandment provided a choice opportunity for disgruntled members and the enemies of the Church to consider the holy principle a product of Satan, and the leaders of the Church Satan's tools. But at that time this lack of understanding among a few members could not be cleared up openly, even though Joseph and Hyrum and a few others understood the new principle and its implications. There was no immorality and no sensual living. There was nothing in the principle contrary to the ancient law of chastity. Joseph and Hyrum set their wills like flint to counteract the evil rumors.

Notes

11.Ibid., pp. 582-583.

---
Notas:
[^1] The endowment pertains to man's journey from his premortal state of existence through mortality, and into eternity. Certain covenants, tokens, and signs are made known by which he may, when the time comes, pass by the angel to his place in the celestial kingdom.
[^2] Among the visitors were Governor Thomas Carlin and the editorial staff of the Sangamo Journal of St. Louis, Missouri, who were invited to attend by the Nauvoo Legion. A description appearing in the Lee County Democrat, Vol. 1 No. 43, p. 2, follows: "Nauvoo Legion parade in Nauvoo, about 1500 troops-3000 ladies and gentlemen from surrounding country attended. In afternoon a sham battle ensued . . . in which a dreadful slaughter would have ensued if the cowardly legs of the infantry had not carried their valiant bodies with great celerity out of the contest. Altogether it was a rare scene of the young and aspirant after military glory. . . .
[^3] Quincy Herald, op. cit., vol. 1, no. 49, August 25, 1842.
[^4] Alton Telegraph, July 30, 1842.
[^5] Quincy Whig, August 20, 1842.
[^6] Quincy Herald, August 25, 1842.
[^7] Lee County Democrat, September 24, 1842.
[^8] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. V, pp. 77-81.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 84-85.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 86.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 87-88.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 107-108.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 138-139.
[^14] Ibid., p. 200.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 200-204.
