Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXV

The Enemy from Within

With the beginning of May, 1842, certain events began to unfold which revealed plottings from within against the Prophet Joseph's life.

On Wednesday, May 4, Hyrum went to the Prophet's general business office in the upper part of the store. This private office was where the sacred writings were kept, translations made, and revelations received. Soon after he arrived, General James Adams from Springfield, Bishop Newel K. Whitney, George Miller, President Brigham Young, Elders Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards also arrived; and during the several hours that followed, the group listened to the Prophet explain and instruct them in the intricacies of the Holy Endowment, [^1] including its sacred ritual. Joseph's words concerning this occasion are descriptive: "In this council was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days."

At the end of that day Joseph and Hyrum administered the endowment and communicated the keys from those pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood up to the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

The following day the same council, with the exception of General Adams, met in a continuation of the previous meeting. Here again was re-enacted, in behalf of Joseph and Hyrum, the same rites that they had communicated to the council the day before. Hyrum Smith acted jointly with the Prophet, having the necessary keys to effect the ancient rites for and in behalf of the council present. These ceremonies were an integral part of the great "restoration of all things" in this last dispensation, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, and were to become the foundation of the sacred ritual of the temples.

With this new doctrine came added responsibilities for the leaders. The Saints, facing the challenge of the new doctrine, had to be oriented by the brethren, who had first to study and comprehend the full meaning and application of many newly revealed principles before they could teach them to the Saints.

To Hyrum it had been evident for some time that many of the Saints were ignoring the word of wisdom (Doctrine and Covenants 89), the health code given under inspiration in 1833. This principle had proved to be a test of faith to the new members. English converts were prone to have their tea; the southerners, their liquor; the New Englanders their tobacco; and some were reluctant to abstain from any of the forbidden stimulants. Sufficient time had to be allowed for recent members to understand the evil effects of age-old habit, and thus it had been necessary from time to time, for the leaders to define this new way of life.

Now, however, the growing disregard of this fundamental principle moved Hyrum Smith, on Sunday, May 1842, to discourse on the subject. In his characteristic way, speaking under the inspiration of the Lord, he explained what the Lord meant by "hot drinks" stating specifically that these included coffee and tea. These things, he stated firmly, were forbidden by the Lord. Hyrum's interpretation of that day was subsequently adopted by the Church and has been adhered to ever since.

About two weeks later the mayor of Nauvoo, John C. Bennett, resigned his position. He had been charged with other apostates with plotting against the Prophet and resigned in order to defend himself before the city council, which had summoned him and Hiram Kimball, Robert D. Foster and Chauncey Higbee. The ex-mayor declared before the council that he had nothing against Joseph Smith and that in time he hoped to be restored to full fellowship in the church. The conduct of various civic leaders had worried Hyrum for some time, and finally culminated in charges being brought against them after the Nauvoo Legion under the command of John C. Bennett staged a sham battle [^2] following a parade of about two thousand of the Legionnaires on May 7.

Hyrum, who was ever on guard lest some danger threaten Joseph, became alarmed as he saw the Prophet, without a bodyguard, stationed at a point of vantage to witness the army maneuvers. The incident passed, however, as Joseph's bodyguard under Captain A. P. Rockwood countermanded the order of Mayor Bennett and took up a position close by the Prophet. Could this have been a plot to assassinate the Prophet? Joseph's feelings about this occasion made him suspicious of the true motives of John C. Bennett and led to the Mayor's resignation to face charges brought against him. The Prophet himself succeeded Bennett as mayor and Hyrum became vice-mayor.

During the weeks that followed the sham battle, a series of events revealed the perfidy of this former officer of the quartermaster corps of Illinois. Hyrum's testimony at Bennett's trial before the judicial body of the Church led to Bennett's excommunication from the Church. Bennett's persistence in immoral practices forced him to leave Nauvoo under pressure of public censure; whereupon he joined the enemies of the Saints to seek vengeance. Afterward, rumors were circulated that he would lead an uprising from Galena, Illinois, to come against Nauvoo. Bennett's final blow against the Church, however, was his book, The History of the Latter-day Saints, in which he chronicled all his grievances. His feelings were summed up in the statement:

My reason for joining the church was to effect the salvation of my country. . . . I learned that the Mormons intended to revolutionize and involve in a Civil war, the whole of the western country, and to prevent such a catastrophe, I joined them and became acquainted with their secrets for the sake of exposing them. [^3]

The Bennett incident gave rise to calumny and hate against the Mormons. The various media of communication took up the chant of annihilation for the followers of Hyrum and Joseph Smith. Journals and newspapers of the region were sensitive to the evil reverberations coming out of Nauvoo. from June until December of 1842, the presses seem to work overtime perverting the truth. Articles such as the following did not go unnoticed by Hyrum Smith.

General John C. Bennett is on his way to Missouri to expose Joseph Smith. [^4] Rumor-Joe Smith had a revelation that he would be bodily absent from Nauvoo for 10 years. [^5] A battle between Mormon and non-Mormon Anti-Mormons driven back-can do nothing against 900 well armed soldiers-20-30 killed, many wounded- Governor with 300 left for Warsaw. Nothing but the destruction of Nauvoo will restore peace to this part of the state. Mormons leaving for Europe in crowds--looking for suspension of hostilities in Nauvoo. [^6] It is supposed that Joseph Smith has gone to Olny, LaHarpe, Hancock Co., gives reasons why he is withdrawing from the Church. . . . They cannot stay the tide which is setting against the Mormon imposture. Public opinion has decreed its own downfall. [^7]

However, the press hysteria against the Church was not accepted at face value by all citizens, partially because of the apparent lack of unity among the editors of the various publications. But during July, Hyrum himself became greatly upset over a news item pressing for the indictment of Joseph, accusing him of being implicated in the assassination of ex-governor Boggs of Missouri. Hyrum urged Joseph to take measures to avoid possible arrest by police officers from either Illinois or Missouri.

The danger was very great because Governor Carlin of Illinois had made threatening remarks against the Prophet. Orrin Porter Rockwell was cited by the paper as the actual assassin, being Joseph's henchman who had committed the deed. He was warned to avoid arrest but later fell into the hands of Missouri officers. After his release from prison he made his way to Nauvoo, where his account of the suffering and abuse he had suffered at the hands of his Missouri captors brought Joseph to the point of tears.

At this time, with the Bennett episode over and Porter Rockwell released from prison, the turmoil subsided somewhat. Nauvoo was in the capable hands of Joseph and Hyrum. The brethren all felt that John C. Bennett had been sincere at first but that later, because of his immorality, had lost his faith. His so-called "Expose of Mormonism" in his book was certainly insincere. [^8]

The foul charges made by Bennett against the church leaders should not detract from the importance of the commandment of the Lord concerning the law of plural marriage. (Doctrine and Covenants 132). Documentary evidence confirms the reality of the above revelation being given as early as 1831. The very nature of the commandment made it necessary that the Prophet Joseph communicate its contents only to certain people under certain conditions. Perhaps the very secrecy surrounding the revelation on plural marriage lent credence to the charges of immorality.

On Friday, August 5, Hyrum, with the Prophet and others, crossed the river to Montrose to witness the installation of the officers of the Rising Sun Lodge (a unit of Ancient York Masons) in a meeting conducted by General James Adams, Deputy Grand Master of Illinois. To the brothers the future looked especially gloomy because of the ever-rising tide of slander, threats, and infidelity. Hyrum and the others, while waiting for the installation services to begin, listened to Joseph and conversed about the persecutions in Missouri and the constant annoyances which had followed them to Illinois.

To their astonishment they heard the Prophet prophesy that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains where many would apostatize, be put to death, or lose their lives as a result of exposure and disease. He also said that some would assist in making settlements and building cities and some would see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. [^9] Anson Call standing nearby watched the Prophet take a drink from a barrel of ice water sitting in the shade of a block house. After the Prophet drank the water he stood holding the tumbler in his hand and said: "I prophesy that the Saints will go to the Rocky Mountains, and this water tastes much like that of the crystal streams that are running from the snowcapped mountains."

Later, Brother Call, describing this scene wrote: "I had before seen him in vision, and now saw while he was talking, his countenance changed to white, not the deadly white of a bloodless face, but a living brilliant white. He seemed absorbed in gazing at something at a great distance, and said: 'I am gazing upon the valleys of the mountains."' Then he turned to Anson Call, promising him that he would live to go west to help build cities from one end of the country to the other. [^10]

* * *

On the afternoon of Monday, May 8th, Hyrum Smith, as vice-mayor and president pro-tempore of the Nauvoo City Council, met with the council and passed an ordinance stating the mode of procedure in ease of habeas corpus demanding that they appear before the municipal court. The ordinance stated that if such a writ, after an examination into its origin, were found to be illegal or was issued through private pique or with malicious intent it should be quashed and considered of no force or effect, and the prisoner, or prisoners, should be released. This ordinance was signed by Hyrum Smith. [^11]

This action resulted directly from the arrest that morning of the Prophet and Porter Rockwell by the Sheriff of Adams County, on a warrant issued by Governor Carlin. The warrant was founded on a requisition from Governor Reynolds of Missouri, the charge being that they had been accessories to the shooting of ex-governor Boggs of Missouri. When a writ of habeas corpus was issued for a trial before the municipal court, the officers could not concur until they had consulted with Governor Carlin. The Prophet and Rockwell left with the local marshal, pending further action.

Again it was necessary for the Mayor of Nauvoo to go underground, leaving Hyrum to fill the office and discharge its duties. By the end of the week, Hyrum, Joseph's wife, William Law, Newel K. Whitney, and others met the Prophet after dark in a skiff on the river to hold a council meeting. Joseph had gone to Zarahemla to visit with Uncle John Smith and had asked them to meet him so that they could determine what to do about the illegal warrants that had been issued for his arrest.

To avoid arrest the Prophet had to move from one secluded place to another, and the loyal brethren decoyed the sheriff away from his hiding places. On Saturday, May 13, Hyrum received a letter from Elder Hollister at Quincy, stating that Governor Carlin had admitted that his proceedings were illegal and that he would not pursue the matter any further. Reports came from over the river that several companies of men were searching for the Prophet at Montrose and Nashville in Keokuk County. His horse had been seen going down the river the day before. A reward of thirteen hundred dollars which had been offered for him and Rockwell had increased the determination to find them. Threats were even circulated by the sheriff that unless the Prophet could be found Nauvoo would be burned to ashes.

Under such circumstances it was extremely difficult for the church leaders to maintain the necessary daily contact with the Prophet. On the fifteenth, at nine o'clock, Hyrum Smith, and others of the brethren, walking in different directions to elude the vigilant officers, arrived at Joseph's hiding place to make a report of conditions and to receive advice and instruction. A variety of subjects were discussed. They were cautioned about being overly wrought-up over the plotting of the enemy. All of them felt encouraged after the meeting, for there was present a spirit of love and unity.

The council broke up at 2:00 a.m. and its members returned home. Hyrum had received special instructions to be carried out in the event that a militia came to search for Joseph.

The dark period of isolation from the familiar scenes of home and family brought periods of great depression and melancholy to the Prophet. But he received consolation and hope from loyal and righteous brethren. Erastus H. Derby offered Joseph the kindest of hospitality. Then there was Emma, whom Joseph never ceased to praise for her unwavering devotion and deep concern. And of Hyrum Joseph wrote:

There was Brother Hyrum who next took me by the hand—a natural brother. Thought I to myself, Brother Hyrum, what a faithful heart you have got! Oh may the Eternal Jehovah crown eternal blessings upon your head as a reward for the care you have had for my soul!

Oh, how many are the sorrows we have shared together, and again we find ourselves shackled with the unrelenting hand of oppression. Hyrum, thy name shall be written in the book of the law of the Lord, for these who come after thee to look upon that they may pattern after thy works. [^12]

The designs of the enemy at this time were frustrated, and the tension eased. Within a few weeks the Prophet appeared again among the Saints at Nauvoo. Hyrum Smith called a special conference to be held in the grove near the temple on Monday, May 29, 1842, the purpose of which was to counteract the malicious charges made against the Saints by John C. Bennett. More missionaries were asked for as well as vigor in the construction of the temple and the Nauvoo House. Toward the close of Hyrum's address, the congregation was electrified by the sudden appearance of the Prophet on the stand. President Hyrum Smith was visibly moved by the Saints' show of affection and love for their beloved leader, and his powerful testimony set the scene for Joseph's speech. When Hyrum had closed his remarks, the Prophet arose with all eyes upon him and ears strained to receive a renewed assurance that all was well. He addressed the Saints in his familiar way and congratulated them on his victory over the Missourians. He promised that if they followed his counsel there would be no lives lost.

Joseph promised to fight with the broad sword of the spirit, and to send Hyrum to call conferences everywhere throughout the states to show the world the corrupt and oppressive conduct of Boggs, Carlin, and others, so that the public might have the truth laid before them. He was sending the twelve abroad to support the Prophet, the Lord's anointed, and if they upheld his character, they would prosper. He concluded by saying that he had the best of feelings toward his brethren, but to the apostates and enemies he would give a lashing and a curse. [^13]

On this high note, the conference closed. Approximately 380 elders volunteered to go immediately on the proposed mission. Preparations were begun to send Hyrum Smith and William Law to the eastern states on church business. Many meetings were held and arrangements made so that the Prophet could go into hiding should the enemy again appear with illegal warrants of arrest.

The weeks that followed found Hyrum Smith and Wilson Law visiting among the branches of the eastern states, attempting to determine the evil effects of John C. Bennett upon the progress of the Church in that region. In Nauvoo, a careful watch was maintained to preserve the Prophet from capture by his enemies.

When Hyrum returned from the East, he was happy to see the interior of the temple gradually rising above the foundation. The workmen were laying a temporary floor and installing benches within the enclosure of the massive stone walls. Extensive work on the temple had momentarily come to a halt because of a charge of unequal distribution of iron and steel tools and lumber. It was time, too, to award the contract to the lowest bidder for construction of the first course of stone around the temple. Hyrum Smith was asked to represent the defendants in the case involving the workmen on the temple. Both sides were given a hearing and after several hours the trouble was settled. Hyrum advised those aggrieved to realize the difficulties involved and to show a spirit of understanding and charity. The Prophet gave the final verdict that the temple committee remain as it had been before.

Another problem needing attention at this time was the postal service at Nauvoo, which was so poor that the Prophet, as mayor, requested the resignation of the postmaster, Sidney Rigdon. Letters had not been delivered and important mail had been pilfered, and the Prophet accused the postmaster and his confederates of unlawful practices. The service improved after the appointment of a new postmaster.

Pressure of the enemy from Missouri against the Prophet during the fall and winter of 1842 kept Hyrum constantly on the alert. He took every precaution to prevent his brother Joseph from being taken to Missouri. Only the fact that Joseph and Porter Rockwell were granted by the Nauvoo municipal court a writ of habeas corpus, saved them from trial in Missouri.

This action by the municipal court of Nauvoo and other special privileges granted under the Nauvoo Charter prompted Governor Thomas Ford of Illinois in his inaugural address Thursday, December 8, 1842, to say among other things: "The municipal charter of Nauvoo is too liberal and should be modified so that the inhabitants of Nauvoo should have no greater privileges than others." [^14] To have the charter of Nauvoo changed would lead to its abolishment by the state lawmakers. Such a move would weaken the Mormon's bulwark against the enemy and their chances for self-preservation.

The news of the governor's speech alarmed Hyrum and his brethren. And since some other business also demanded attention, Hyrum decided that they should leave immediately for the state capital. Therefore, the day after the Governor's speech they left Nauvoo for Springfield, Illinois.

The journey was slow and laborious, the weather being very cold, and after thirty-four miles of travel, they stopped in Plymouth with Samuel Smith who kept a public house. The next day they continued their journey to Springfield. Having arrived at the capital, Hyrum presented his and Joseph's petition of bankruptcy and evidence to prove that Joseph was in Illinois when the attack was made on ex-governor Boggs of Missouri. [^15]

Hyrum and his party remained in Springfield to hear the proceedings of the House of Representatives on the Nauvoo charter issue. A resolution had been introduced which urged the repeal of the charter. It had been urged that the state arms consisting of three six-pound cannon, a few score of muskets, swords, and pistols be taken from the Nauvoo Legion.

As a representative from Hancock County Hyrum's brother William assured the legislative group that they were laboring under undue apprehension about the Nauvoo Charter. He made it clear that the Charter of Nauvoo contained no special privileges not found in other charters in cities such as Quincy and Springfield.

The delegation waited upon the new governor to obtain an annulment of the writ issued by ex-governor Carlin. Upon receiving the request of the governor of Missouri for the Prophet's arrest on the charge of shooting Boggs, Governor Ford asked the state Supreme Court to make a decision. He felt that he should not change the verdict of his predecessor.

Hyrum Smith received his discharge in the case of bankruptcy on Thursday, December 16. The Prophet's case was continued with a plea that he must write to the office at Washington. [^16] Hyrum was easier now, for he felt freed of the illegal and fraudulent debt claims of his enemies.

With a change in the office of chief executive of the state, some hope was expressed that the Prophet might secure a release from the illegal charges that had been brought against him. When Hyrum and the others returned to Nauvoo, they brought letters from Governor Ford, Justin Butterfield, James Adams, advising Joseph to go to Springfield at his earliest convenience to have a hearing before the state court. He was assured of protection against mob violence.

As he told Joseph about the details of the trip, Hyrum noted a spirit of optimism rise in the Prophet at the prospect of again being a free man. Plans were made for him to make an immediate trip to the state capital, accompanied by Hyrum and others of the brethren; and within a few days they commenced another long tedious journey to Springfield, Joseph having submitted to arrest in order to clear his name. The weather continued cold. The party stopped again in Plymouth at Samuel Smith's the first night and then continued on, arriving four days later at their destination. It was Friday, December 30, at two-thirty o'clock when they arrived at Judge Adams. [^17] Joseph and Hyrum Smith were the center of attention. They had been measured for height by the brethren at Rushville, the second night after leaving Nauvoo. They were of equal stature—six feet—and were handsome, dignified, and inseparable.

The Nauvoo party, on arriving at Springfield, caught the gaze of the local inhabitants. Hyrum alighted from his mount to follow the Prophet up the front steps of Judge Adams' home, and was followed by Wilson Law, who had custody of the Prophet. Others followed—serious-faced, intelligent, able, men of vigor—including Dr. Willard Richards, John Taylor, William Marks, Levi Moffit, Peter Haws, Lorin Walker, and Orson Hyde. In a few minutes others stopped and went in. These included William Clayton, Henry C. Sherwood, Edward Hunter, Theodore Turley, Dr. Tate, and Shadrach Roundy.

Hyrum Smith listened to Justin Butterfield, Esquire, United States District Attorney, tell the Prophet that Judge Pope had continued the court two days because of this case and would close it tomorrow. He assured the Prophet that his case would be tried on its merits and not on any technicality. It was agreed that Joseph be arrested on the original writ which had previously been demanded by King and Pitman, the officers of Adams County. The Missouri persecutions were rehearsed by the Prophet. Later, the court interviewed William Smith, who was a member of the legislature. The evening was spent at Judge Adams', and all were made comfortable for the night in his large home.

The following day, Saturday, December 31, 1842, set the scene for civil action to release the Prophet from the cloud of suspicion which had blighted his life for months past. But good friends and a strong spirit of justice and humanity were needed.

At nine o'clock, Attorney General Butterfield called to inform Joseph that Sheriff King had the original writ. However, rather than have Joseph arrested on this original writ, the Attorney General agreed that a new petition be signed by Joseph for Governor Ford to issue a new writ on which Joseph should be tried. The writ was granted, and at eleven o'clock Joseph was arrested by Mr. Maxey in the presence of Mr. Butterfield, his attorney, who immediately wrote a petition to Judge Pope for a writ of habeas corpus which Joseph signed. At half-past eleven he stood before Judge Pope.

Mr. Butterfield read the petition and stated that the writ and warrant were different from the requisition of the governor of Missouri. He then read Governor Ford's warrant, Watson's affidavit, Governor Reynolds' requisition on the governor of Illinois, and the proclamation of Governor Carlin, showing that Governor Reynolds had made false statement, since nothing appeared in the affidavit to show that the Prophet was in Missouri. He also stated that all the authority of transportation of persons from one state to another rests on the Constitution and the law of Congress. He asked for habeas corpus because the papers were false, and because they could prove that Joseph Smith was in Illinois at the time of the crime, not in Missouri.

The writ was granted, returned, and served in one minute. The habeas corpus was read, and the court granted a move to allow Joseph bail until a hearing could be held. Generals James Adams and Wilson Law each put up bail of $2,000 for the Prophet, and the Monday following was set for the trial.

The news of the trial had spread and the courtroom was crowded. The spirit of mobocracy was manifest when Joseph, Hyrum, and the others left the courtroom preceded by William Law. As Law came to the head of the stairs, a man in the crowd below remarked, "There goes Smith the Prophet, and a good looking man he is."

"And," said another, "as damned a rascal as ever lived."

Hyrum, overhearing the remarks, replied, "And a good many ditto."

"Yes," said the man, "ditto, ditto, G—D— you, and every one that takes his part is as damned a rascal as he is."

Then at the foot of the stairs, General Law said, "I am the man, and I'll take his part."

Whereupon, the man answered, "You are a damned rascal, too."

"You are a lying scoundrel," replied Law; and the man, cursing and swearing began to strip off his clothes and ran out into the street. Mr. Prentice, the marshal, interfered and with great exertions quelled the mob. [^18] Following the trial, Joseph and Attorney Butterfield called on Governor Ford who was ill. They learned that the governor had received a requisition from the Governor of Missouri to continue the persecution, but Governor Ford seemed to realize that the old charges were dead.

During the afternoon, while the legislature was in session, a team ran away and went past the state house. A cry was raised, "Joe Smith is running away," which produced great excitement and a sudden adjournment of the House of Representatives.

The following day, Sunday, January 1, 1843, the speaker of the House of Representatives offered the hall for preaching services. At 11:30 A.M., a respectable congregation assembled. Elders John Taylor and Orson Hyde delivered the sermons. Most of the members of the legislature and the various departments of state were in attendance. The congregation listened with good attention notwithstanding the great anxiety to "see the Prophet."

On Monday, court convened at 9:30 a.m., at which time it was decided to continue the Prophet's case until the following Wednesday. From the remarks of several individuals it was felt that a more favorable spirit toward Joseph Smith was manifest. Out of curiosity, several women acquaintances of Judge Pope accompanied him on the bench, which was the first time during his term.

The decision of the court on the following Wednesday was to dismiss the case on the ground that no state upon the requisition of its governor can call upon the governor of another state to deliver up a criminal if it cannot be proved that the so-called criminal is a fugitive from justice. In this case the Prophet had supporting evidence, through affidavits and testimony that on the day of the shooting of Boggs, May 7, 1842, he was reviewing the Nauvoo Legion in the presence of thousands of people.

The tension relaxed when the decision of the court became known and there was great rejoicing among Joseph's party. Both Hyrum and Joseph were overjoyed. In the late afternoon the Prophet, accompanied by General Law and Elder Orson Hyde, went to the home of Mr. Prentice where they had been invited for dinner. Others present were Judge Douglas; Esquires Butterfield, Lamborn, and Edwards; Judge Pope's son, and many others. It was like a feast of triumph for the Saints. A feeling of good will, the sparkling wit, and several anecdotes made the dinner a pleasurable occasion. [^19]

Friday, January 6, with the affairs of the trial ended, the Prophet was released. Many gathered around him in the courtroom, conversing and asking questions on religion and a variety of other subjects. Mr. Butterfield, on handing Joseph his discharge papers, said, "You must deposit these in the archives of the temple when it is complete." Joseph received many invitations to visit distinguished gentlemen in Springfield and a ticket from the theatre manager to attend the theatre.

The return trip to Nauvoo commenced Saturday morning, January 7. On the way the horses on the large carriage became unmanageable and slipped off the icy road, over a six-to-eight-foot embankment cracking the fore axletree and top of the carriage. Luckily, Lorin Walker and Dr. Richards escaped injury. They repaired the axletree with wood from a small tree—joking meanwhile that Lilburn W. Boggs ought to have to pay the damages.

The return of Joseph and Hyrum was a signal for general rejoicing in Nauvoo. And where Joseph was, there also was Hyrum—at the trials, hiding to elude officers, initiating new rites and ceremonies, rejoicing over dangers past, planning to meet new dangers whatever joy or sorrow life brought to one was shared by the other as they strove valiantly to fulfil their divine callings.

Notes

"To hero bounce for battle strife

Or hard of martial Ley

'Twere worth ten years of peaceful life

One glance at their array!"

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith—History of the Church, vol. V, p. 409.
[^2] Orson F. Whitney, op. cit. p. 422.
[^3] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. V; pp. 438-439.
[^4] Alton Telegraph, July 30, 1842.
[^5] Quincy Whig, August 20, 1842.
[^6] Quincy Herald, August 25, 1842.
[^7] Lee County Democrat, September 24, 1842.
[^8] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. V, pp. 77-81.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 84-85.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 86.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 87-88.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 107-108.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 138-139.
[^14] Ibid., p. 200.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 200-204.
[^16] Ibid., pp.202-205.
[^17] Ibid., p. 211.
[^18] Ibid., pp. 210-213.
[^19] Ibid., pp.221-223.
