Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXVI

The Family

Faithful Hyrum, whose home was located a short distance from Joseph's homestead and the store, continued to act as the Associate President of the Church. Mary Fielding Smith was a dutiful wife and mother to their six children. Martha Ann, the baby, born May 14, 1841, was a constant source of joy, and her health was carefully guarded. Joseph Fielding had been born in Far West, Missouri, during the height of persecution and mob action. Of Hyrum and Jerusha's children Lovina—now sixteen and budding into womanhood—was a reliable and dutiful daughter; John, just past ten, was a growing boy much like his father; Jerusha, six, was active and helpful, reminding Hyrum often of her dear dead mother; and Sarah, four and a half, was a little mother to the younger children.

The spring months of 1843, were happy with father at home. Their Uncle Joseph, going about his business without fear of arrest, came often to visit them. He bounced Martha, the baby, on his knees and exclaimed over her dimpled cheeks and plump little arms and legs. He drew young Joseph to him remarking what a fine lad he was and spoke to the others endearingly.

The children were known among the Saints of Nauvoo as they went about their errands—walked to church—or visited their friends. Everyone seemed gracious, often remarking what a fine family they were. The neighbors manifested their interest and affection which reflected their love for the Patriarch. Therefore, the older children soon realized the responsibility of belonging to an important household. This was borne in upon them when they witnessed the constant stream of visitors to their father's office, when they saw him in full officer's uniform before the Nauvoo Legion, and when he occupied the stand at church gatherings. They noticed the likeness between their father and their Uncle Joseph, and noted also that Hyrum's profile was somewhat thinner and sharper and that his full head of brown hair was somewhat darker than the Prophet's. Hyrum's gray eyes were kind, and his firm voice had a pleasing pitch that was warm and friendly.

Hyrum and the Prophet were natural leaders. At conferences Hyrum often presided or conducted and always occupied the pulpit to discourse on the gospel, or to give general counsel on current problems confronting the church. To avoid offense he was deliberate and careful in his remarks. If some of the brethren happened to make tactless remarks, he called them to one side, and, in a kindly tone, cautioned them.

The history of Hyrum Smith continued to be intertwined with that of the Prophet. When the Prophet occupied the center of the stage, Hyrum was usually in the background like a guardian fortress. There was a spirit of harmony between them, a meeting of minds. This inseparable bond gave both of them strength when it was greatly needed, so that the enemy sought in vain to undermine their morale and faith. Their united strength was felt like a sturdy pillar throughout the membership of the Church, lending support to the apostles, the priesthood, and to the membership in general.

The rapid growth of Nauvoo and the spread of Mormonism became an increasing source of alarm to the gentiles. If this vigorous new Church should continue to grow, the enemy reasoned, what would become of the country? On the surface all seemed calm, but underneath there were sinister rumblings which bode ill for the Church and its leaders. Evil forces, fearing righteousness and morality and blinded by hate were ready to strike.

The carefully documented history written by the Prophet provides the best source of information about the fast-moving events of the months that followed. And it provides a faithful glimpse into the life of Hyrum by reviewing some of the more important problems, movements, and decisions of the time, all of which he was concerned with.

At 5:00 p.m. on Friday, May 26, Hyrum Smith, with the Prophet, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Judge James Adams, Bishop Newel K. Whitney and William Law met in the upper room above Joseph's store. The Prophet gave them their endowments, and some instructions in the priesthood, and on the new and everlasting covenant. [^1]

The thirteenth year of the young Church witnessed the last of the major doctrinal concepts to be revealed. There was an urgency to place responsibility and keys of authority on the potential leaders of the future. The sacred rites, when once established, would lend the spiritual strength necessary to weather the storm of a new crisis during the years ahead. And when the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood were housed within the walls of the gray limestone structure on the brow of the hill, the combination would be a symbol of the Church's foundation. It would become like the rock upon which the Savior told Peter he would found his Church and against which the gates of hell should not prevail.

Hyrum and Joseph continued to weld into definite form a mighty Church, whose author was God. However, the winds of adversity were still strong against it. Weak members had to be made strong. Those who erred were counseled to improve their ways. If a member proved to be rebellious, unfaithful, and unrepentant, he must be severed from the society in order to protect it. Therefore, from time to time a pruning had to take place.

When it was necessary to hold a church court to try an erring member, Hyrum Smith was usually one of the judges and sometimes a member of the jury that was called upon to decide on the more important cases. Then as now much care had to be taken in resolving problems of apostasy, especially among the ranks of leaders. Each had his following who would be sympathetic, and because of personal devotion, would be influenced negatively against the church. Hyrum Smith sensed more keenly the gravity of the situation, therefore advocated mercy and would be on the side of the offender allowing him the benefit of the doubt until his guilt was fully determined.

* * *

Early in the evening of Sunday, June 18, a message arrived at Nauvoo for Hyrum Smith, the contents of which aroused Hyrum to action. The Governor of Missouri (Reynolds) had been urged by the grand jury of Daviess County, Missouri, to serve a warrant for Joseph's arrest on the old Missouri charges. One Samuel C. Owens had written to Governor Ford about a week before concerning this warrant and his (Owen's) correspondence with John C. Bennett. He claimed that Bennett had made arrangements with Harmon T. Wilson of Carthage, Illinois, to obtain a writ from the Governor (Ford) in order for Wilson to serve it and bring this man, Joseph Smith, to that justice which "the magnitude of his crime merits." [^2]

The previous Tuesday, June 13, Joseph, with Emma and the children, had left Nauvoo to visit Emma's sister, Mrs. Wasson, who lived near Dixon, Lee County, Illinois, some 210 miles distant. Fearing that the Prophet was in danger of being arrested and taken to Missouri, Hyrum immediately contacted William Clayton and Stephen Markham, urging them to leave at once to inform Joseph of his danger. They left Nauvoo at about half-past twelve at night and by continuous travel, except for brief pauses to rest and feed their mounts, met the Prophet between Wasson's and Dixon after 4:00 p.m. Wednesday, having ridden 212 miles in 66 hours. The Prophet told them not to be alarmed, saying, "I have no fear, I shall not leave here; I shall find friends, the Missourians cannot hurt me, I tell you in the name of Israel's God." [^3]

A plot had been carefully laid by his enemies to arrest him and take him to Missouri. Fortunately the plans were frustrated by the quick action of Hyrum Smith and others who made a dramatic rescue from the custody of two sheriffs. Apparently the enemy failed to realize the loyalty of Joseph's friends and the efficiency of members of the Nauvoo Legion in guarding all roads and waterways to prevent his abduction. Several points of law were violated by the sheriffs in their anxiety to accomplish their purpose: Personal damage, bruising Joseph's side by the muzzles of their pistols and attempting to deny the prisoner legal counsel, and by refusing to allow a writ of habeas corpus to try the prisoner in a local court. The sheriffs were arrested by the sheriff of Lee County, Mr. Campbell, and were taken to Nauvoo for trial.

The events leading to Joseph's liberation began at Nauvoo a week after the first alert of danger. Hyrum Smith who was administering the affairs of the Church and the community of Nauvoo was not aware of the extreme danger of his brother. As an official of the ancient accepted York Masons as Worshipped Master, laid the cornerstone of the new Masonic Temple located on Main Street. He had been advanced to its leadership and took a prominent part in its establishment in Nauvoo. There had been much work in planning for a fit celebration, which was held on Saturday, June 24, 1843. Hyrum was pleased with the procession as it marched in true Masonic order from the lodge room to the new site. Following the ceremony, two Masonic hymns were sung, after which they proceeded to the grove near the temple where an oration was delivered by Brother John Taylor. From thence they went to Mr. Warner's where about two hundred sat down to an excellent dinner. The company broke up early in the afternoon, highly delighted with the day's proceedings.

The following day, Sunday afternoon, June 25, while meeting was being held at the temple, Hyrum went to the stand while Elder Maginn was preaching and asked to make an announcement. He requested the brethren present to meet him at the Masonic Hall in thirty minutes. The lodge room could only accommodate about a fourth of the number who came, whereupon they assembled to an adjoining green and formed a hollow square where Hyrum told them of the circumstances of Joseph's arrest. Elder William Clayton had arrived about two o'clock with the message. He asked that a company go to Joseph's assistance, to see that he had his rights. The desired number were chosen from three hundred volunteers.

Hyrum remained in Nauvoo to see that everything was done to guarantee Joseph's safety. The dramatic rescue of the Prophet from his enemies was as follows:

On Thursday, June 29, General Wilson Law and William Law and about sixty men came up in several little squads. The meeting was described by Joseph in these words: "I walked out several rods to meet the company. William and Wilson Law jumped from their horses and unitedly hugged and kissed me, when many tears of joy were shed."

It was decided to by-pass Quincy and to go directly to Nauvoo. The lawyers told him that Nauvoo was the nearest place to obtain a writ of habeas corpus. A messenger was sent ahead to tell the citizens of Nauvoo of the approaching company. That evening they camped on Honey Creek at Mr. Michael Crane's where a feast of turkey and chicken was prepared for over a hundred men. The company feasted, sang, and had a happy time that night.

Early the next morning was the beginning of a day of triumph for Joseph, Hyrum, and the Saints. On this memorable day Joseph wrote the following:

Friday, 30. A messenger started from my company in the night, and arrived in Nauvoo early in the morning, saying that I and the company would be in the city about noon. Dr. Willard Richards and Wilford Woodruff arranged the seats in the court-room, preparatory to my arrival.

At half-past ten o'clock, the Nauvoo Brass Band and Martial Band started with Emma and my brother Hyrum to meet me; also a train of carriages, containing a number of the principal inhabitants. . . .

When the company from the city came up, I said I thought I would ride a little easier; got out of the buggy, and, after embracing Emma and my brother Hyrum, who wept tears of joy at my return, as did most of the great company who surrounded us, (it was a solemn, silent meeting) I mounted my favorite horse, "Old Charley," when the band struck up "Hail Columbia," and proceeded to march slowly towards the city, Emma riding by my side into town.

At Nauvoo, a petition of the municipal court was issued in lieu of Joseph H. Reynold's refusal to submit to a writ of habeas corpus. The Nauvoo Charter granted the right to act on the writ of habeas corpus, thus placing Joseph under the jurisdiction of the local court for trial. With this action he asked to be excused in order to address the Saints. Permission was granted; the court was adjourned until eight o'clock the next morning.

Hyrum's heart was full as he sat with a large gathering to hear the Prophet speak. He acquiesced to all the Prophet had to say about what had happened the past several days. And surely Joseph was right when he said forbearance ceases to be a virtue when tyranny exists and that the Saints were justified in taking up the sword to defend their rights, and that he would be willing to spill his blood rather than to yield to mob rule. The Saints, Joseph continued, must not, however, be the aggressors. He spoke of the Nauvoo Charter, its strength, and its legality. To go against the charter was to oppose the Constitution of the United States, for Illinois had obtained its charter from the parent government at Washington, D. C.

The threat against Joseph's life was also a threat against Hyrum and the brethren. The crisis had passed successfully but not without its implication of that which was to follow. Hyrum remained alert and ready for any emergency.

Martha Ann Smith Harris daughter of Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith. Taken on her 60th birthday. (Courtesy of Richard Harris.)

Joseph F. Smith Son of Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith and the sixth president of the Church.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, vol. V., pp. 533-535.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 479-480, taken from Wilford Woodruff's Journal.
[^3] Journal History, March 17, 1843.
