Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXVII

Hyrum The Prophet

It had been but a few months since Hyrum and Joseph had returned from Springfield, Illinois, with an acquittal of all the Missouri charges. Now if their enemies continued to secure new warrants on the old charges what might eventually be the outcome? Were law and justice to be ignored? Was anarchy to triumph?

Sheriff Joseph H. Reynolds of Missouri and Harmon T. Wilson of Carthage were enraged over the final acquittal of the Prophet by the Municipal Court of Nauvoo. They immediately proceeded to Carthage and laid the plans to petition Governor Thomas Ford of Illinois to raise a military force and move upon Nauvoo and take Joseph Smith into custody. To counteract this move, 900 citizens of Nauvoo signed a petition to be forwarded to the governor to abide by the court's decision. A copy of the proceedings of the local court were made and sent to Springfield in order for the governor to be apprised of the testimony and details of the trial.

When the case was reviewed by Governor Ford, he decided to abide by the court's decision. Later, Governor Ford, when asked by Sheriff Reynolds of Missouri to use a military force to capture Joseph Smith, replied:

. . . Now, sir, I might safely rest my refusal to order a detachment of militia to assist in retaking Smith upon the grounds that the laws of this state have been fully exercised in the matter. . . . The governor has no other authority in calling out the militia than which is contained in this section; by which it appears that there must be . . . an actual or threatened invasion or some extreme emergency to warrant the governor in exercising his power. No one of these contingencies has arisen. [^1]

Sunday evening, July 2, 1843, at 6 o'clock, Hyrum was seated in Joseph's office above the store when he glanced out the window and noticed a large gathering in the street. He answered a knock on the door and ushered in several brethren who announced their return on the Maid of Iowa. They had been on a scouting trip up the river to safeguard the Prophet from his enemies. The remainder of the group formed a hollow square in the street below, and Joseph called out the window for them not to break ranks until he came down and spoke to them. Of this occasion he wrote, "My brother Hyrum and I went into the hollow square and directed them not to allow their ranks to be broken. I then shook hands with each man, blessing them and welcoming them home."

Joseph enumerated the experiences which had restored his freedom; and while he was speaking, a stranger, heavily cloaked, broke through the south line of the ranks. Immediately the orderly sergeant took the stranger by the nape of the neck and thrust him outside the ranks, telling him not to come in again. No stranger must be permitted to get close to the Prophet.

About dusk, Joseph dismissed the company, blessing them in the name of the Lord; and before they departed, Hyrum also bestowed his blessings on them commending them for their diligence and their attention to the instructions he had given them before their departure.

It had been a busy Sabbath. Hyrum told Joseph about welcoming several Pottawattamie Indian chiefs in the basement of the Nauvoo House. They had refused to talk to Hyrum or communicate their feelings until they could see the great Prophet. They had waited to deliver their message. The meeting was held in the courtroom with about thirty of the brethren present. During the interview, the Indian spokesman arose and said among other things:

We have talked with the Great Spirit and the Great Spirit has talked with us. We have asked the Great Spirit to save us and let us live, and the Great Spirit has told us that he had raised up a great Prophet chief and friend who would do us great good and tell us what to do, and the Great Spirit has told us that you are the man (pointing to the Prophet Joseph).

The Spirit of God rested upon the Lamanites, especially the orator. Joseph was much affected and shed tears. He arose and said unto them:

I have heard your words. They are true. The Great Spirit has told you the truth. I am your friend and brother, and I wish to do you good. Your fathers were once a great people. They worshipped the Great Spirit. The Great Spirit did them good. He was their friend, but they left the Great Spirit and would not hear his words or keep them. The Great Spirit left them and they began to kill one another and they have been poor and afflicted until now. [^2]

The Prophet told the chiefs to cease their warfare and killing and to live in peace. The Indians seemed well satisfied and returned to their homes after receiving a gift of beef and several horses.

The most pressing problem at the moment was the need to present to the public the truth concerning the Prophet's recent arrest. On Monday, July 3rd, a meeting was called at the Grove, where it was decided to send elders throughout the various counties of Illinois. Over a hundred special missionaries were called and dispatched. In the afternoon, the relief expedition of Charles C. Rich sent out by Hyrum before Joseph's return, came home, and met the Prophet, as had the others. After singing a song and shaking the Prophet's hand they received his blessing for a task well done.

The history of the Missouri persecutions from the testimony by Hyrum, previously given, was reviewed. An affidavit by the Prophet briefly recounted the events of his time spent in Missouri, showing that he had neither been a soldier nor borne arms in any military action which would make it possible for him to be guilty of treason against the state of Missouri.

No action must be left undone that would help to counteract the evil reports about the Prophet and his people abroad.

The press reports kept the citizens of Illinois informed on developments at Nauvoo. From January to August 1843, notices concerning such things as the Prophet's arrest in the Boggs case, the legal counsel of Mr. Lamborn for the state and of Mr. Butterfield for Joseph Smith, the requisition by the Governor of Illinois, and the acquittal by Judge Pope were printed. The Gazette and Advertizers of Burlington, Iowa, noted the arrival of 1252 English and German immigrants at St. Louis, all of them bound for Nauvoo. From Springfield, a press notice condemned the verdict of acquittal of Joseph Smith and described the ladies who sat on the judge's bench of the trial as having come to see a licentious prophet.

A notice in the Lee County Democrat said "Emigrants arriving. Steamer Dension—large number of Mormons—English—Nauvoo bids fair to become a large city."

Reports were made on the election of Joseph Smith to the mayorship of Nauvoo with Hyrum Smith as one of his counselors, and also, that the Prophet had heard that there was an indictment out for him and Hyrum on old Missouri charges. [^3]

At the general conference at Nauvoo, the first of April, 1843, Hyrum Smith was sustained as Presiding Patriarch over the whole church. In this office, whose duty was to bless the membership of the Church, he succeeded his father, Joseph Smith, Sen., as his eldest son would in turn succeed him upon his death. The Lord, through a revelation, had named the office of Patriarch as that of "Evangelist." [^4]

Among the many who came for their patriarchal blessings was Elias Harmer. In his office across the street from his home, and with James Sloan, the scribe, copying in legible handwriting, Hyrum blessed Brother Harmer telling him that he was of the lineage of Naphtali. [^5]

The ice in the Mississippi River was breaking up, the weather chilly and windy when the general conference convened on Thursday, April 6, 1843, to continue—two sessions a day—until Sunday, April 9.

Hyrum Smith occupied the stand throughout the conference and listened to the Prophet speak regarding the building of the Nauvoo House. Interest in working for its completion was greatly lagging, the emphasis being placed on the temple. Money donated by members of the Church to the traveling elders had not been accounted for, and it was therefore decided to discontinue this manner of obtaining money. From then on only the apostles were authorized to accept monetary offerings.

There were charges made by the enemy that the Church allowed its members to steal from gentiles. These were vehemently denied. Charges made against members of the temple committee revealed that some of the committee members either spent the funds unwisely or were guilty of poor bookkeeping.

When the conference convened at three o'clock, April 6, Patriarch Hyrum Smith spoke about thieves saying that he had some communication to make to the conference on stealing.

I have had an interview with a man who formerly belonged to the church. He revealed to me that there is a band of men and some who pretend to be strong in the faith of the doctrine of the Latter-day Saints, but they are hypocrites and some who do not belong to the church who are bound together by secret oaths, obligations, and penalties to keep the secret, and they hold that it is right to steal from any one who does not belong to the church, provided they consecrate one-third of it to the building of the temple. They are also making bogus money.

This man says he has become convinced of the error of his ways and has come away from them to escape their fury. I wish to warn you all not to be duped by such men, for they are Gadiantons of the last days. . . .

I will mention two names—David Holman and James Dunn. They were living in my house. [^6] I went to them and asked them if they were stealing for a livelihood. Holman confessed that he had stolen from the world, not from the brethren. I told them to get out of my house. David asked me to forgive him, and he lifted his hands towards heaven and swore, if I would forgive him, he would never do so again. Soon after he went to Montrose where he was found stealing salt. He then stole a skiff and came across the river, stole a barrel of flour that had just been landed from a steamer, rowed down the river to Keokuk and sold the flour for $2.00, saying he had picked it up in the river, and it was likely to be a little damaged, got his pay, and went his way. Dunn would not promise to quit stealing but said he would go to St. Louis. I tell you today, the men that steal shall not long after be brought to the penitentiary. They will soon be brought to condign punishment. I demand in the presence of God, that you will exert your wit and your power to bring such characters to justice. If you do not, the curse of God will rest upon you. Such things would ruin any people. Should I catch a Latter-day Saint, he is the last man to whom I would show mercy.

With the growing boldness of the unscrupulous in Nauvoo, the troubles of the Saints increased. There were also complaints about the temple committee because of the lack of materials such as nails, glass, etc., and money to buy the necessary furnishings. When the temple committee met on Saturday for a hearing, Patriarch Hyrum Smith said:

I feel it my duty to defend the committee as far as I can, for I would as soon go to hell as be a committee-man. I will make a comparison for the temple committee. A little boy once told his father he had seen an elephant on a tree; the people did not believe it, but ran out to see what it was; they looked and it was only an owl.

On July 4, 1843, the patriotic Saints noted the anniversary of the founding of the United States with all due respect. However, the day dawned upon Nauvoo that year at a time when the very principles which established the country whose birth they celebrated were being grossly violated by the enemies of the Church. As the sun rose on this picturesque city of ten to fifteen thousand inhabitants, tension was present beneath the calm exterior. Its people did not know what move their enemies were to make next. At one o'clock that morning Messrs. Walker, Patrick, Southwick—lawyers of the Prophet—together with Stephen Markham and Lucien Woodworth, had left Nauvoo for Springfield, Illinois, with affidavits, a petition, and a record of the proceedings of the Nauvoo Municipal Court which had freed Joseph.

The day was well planned. Following the advice of Hyrum Smith, the committee of the day had selected Orson Hyde to address the morning gathering. Elder Hyde had been called to go to Russia on a mission. At 2:00 p.m. Elder Parley P. Pratt delivered a masterly discourse to the nearly 15,000 who had assembled. The Saints needed the reassurance of their rights as citizens which such an occasion provided. Just prior to the afternoon meeting a volley of artillery was heard coming up from the river. It came from a large group of visitors (800 to 1,000), in a holiday mood, who had just landed at the Nauvoo River wharf. Three steamers, one each from St. Louis, Quincy, and Burlington, had landed. Two companies of the Nauvoo Legion were escorting them. The Prophet met them and invited them to listen to an oration.

The impression of the Saints obtained by these visitors at the celebration was summed up by a Quincy citizen in these words:

The large concourse of people assembled to celebrate the day which gave birth to American independence convinced me that the Mormons have been grossly slandered, and that they respect, cherish and love the free institutions of our country and appreciate the sacrifice and bloodshed of those patriots who established them. I never saw a more orderly, gentlemanly and hospitable people than the Mormons, nor a more interesting population as the stirring appearance of their city indicates. Nauvoo is destined to be, under the influential enterprise of such citizens as it now contains and her natural advantages, a populous, wealthy, and manufacturing city.

The services of the day were opened by a chaste and appropriate prayer by an Elder whose name I do not know, which was followed by rich strains of vocal and instrumental music. Then followed the oration which was an elegant, eloquent, and pathetic one, as much so as I ever heard on a similar occasion.

We started home about six o'clock, all evidently much pleased with Nauvoo and gratified by the kind reception of her citizens.

Signed,

A citizen of Quincy. [^7]

In the early journals of the Saints is recorded an account of the institution of plural marriage. Joshua R. Clark recorded the following:

. . . When the Prophet received the revelation on plural marriage it was first read in father's home by Hyrum Smith to a few close friends back of closed doors. Father's younger brother, Samuel, was very sick upstairs but his spirit stood behind Hyrum and read the revelation over Hyrum's shoulder. My sister, Rachel, crept downstairs and sat on the steps and heard it read. [^8]

Certain periodicals of the Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois period of the Church, alluded to the advocacy of plural marriage. The Warsaw Signal, April 5, 1844, wrote: "Spiritual wife doctrine taught in 1836, Kirtland, Ohio." This article was used against the Prophet in his campaign for President of the United States.

During the storm which followed the revelation on plural marriage, Hyrum was a bulwark of strength to the Prophet. He was invited to Joseph's office, rode with him through the city, and walked with him at night along the river bank, giving always of his understanding strength and supplying what advice he could. Both brothers knew that the cunning of Satan motivated those who could not or would not understand the full significance of the doctrine of celestial marriage. Pressures both from without and within the church were increasing.

The following Sabbath (July 16, 1843) Hyrum sat on the stand in the Grove and listened to Joseph preach concerning a man's foes being those of his own household; and about the everlasting covenant of marriage:

Joseph said in part:

The same spirit that crucified Jesus is in the breast of some who profess to be Saints in Nauvoo. I have secret enemies in the city intermingling with the Saints, etc., saying that I should not prophesy anymore, and proposing Hyrum to hold the office of Prophet to the Church as it was his birthright.

I am going to have a reformation and the Saints must regard Hyrum, for he has the authority that I might be a Priest of the Most High God; and slightly touched upon the subject of the everlasting covenant, showing that a man and his wife must enter into that covenant in the world, or he will have no claim on her in the next world. But on account of the unbelief of the people, I cannot reveal the fullness of these things at present. [^9]

During the following week, repercussions of Joseph's speech were heard. Did Joseph resign from being Prophet? The following Sunday, July 23rd, he again addressed the Saints. He spoke on love and friendship; and about the great burden he was called upon to carry and the call made upon him by his Heavenly Father to lay the foundation of this great work and kingdom in this dispensation. He was subject he said, to the same passions as other men, like the prophets of olden time. He said:

Last Monday morning certain brethren came to me and said they could hardly consent to receive Hyrum as a prophet, and for me to resign. But I told them, "I only said it to try your faith, and it is strange, brethren, that you have been in the church so long and not yet understand the Melchizedek Priesthood." [^10]

Between the conference meetings, Hyrum, William Law, and Willard Richards were called to come to Joseph's home and administer to him. The Prophet had become ill from too much outdoor speaking at the grove, but soon recovered.

The building of the temple had been progressing satisfactorily. Each day Hyrum took careful notes of its progress. He felt an almost inexplicable urgency to get the new structure fully completed. Somehow it symbolized a bulwark against the enemies of the Church, and he directed his energies toward the positive side of building the kingdom. He reflected on the gains made in Nauvoo since its founding, and noted the success of the missionaries in Philadelphia. The Sabbath meeting following conference gave Hyrum a chance to address the Saints and retaining his optimistic mood, he spoke words of encouragement.

The Saints, including their Prophet had a high regard for Hyrum's integrity, as was evident on Sunday, August 6, 1843, when Joseph said: "Brother Hyrum tells me this morning that he has had a testimony to the effect it would be better for the people to vote for Hodge, and I never knew Hyrum to say he ever had a revelation and it failed." Following Joseph's discourse, Hyrum spoke at some length on the coming election.

Meanwhile the enemies of the Church continued with their work of trying to destroy the Church.

On Saturday, August 19, 1843, an anti-Mormon meeting of the citizens of Hancock County convened at the courthouse in Carthage. A committee was chosen and a date set (September 6, 1843 at 1:00 p.m.) for the next meeting. However, the late August showers that fell on Nauvoo seemed not only to revive the vegetation but also to soothe the tension. Elder Jonathan Dunham returned from an exploration trip to the West and reported to the brethren. [^11] The Prophet learned of Sidney Rigdon's conspiracy to deliver him into the hands of his enemies, the Missourians, and had him publically disfellowshiped. In the evenings Hyrum, with others, met at Joseph's for prayer meeting.

Hyrum Smith would never replace his brother the Prophet as head of the Church even though their enemies were circulating the erroneous report of Joseph's fall from the grace of God. The Saints were assured, by the presence of their leaders in their midst and by their testimony of the divinity of the work, that all was well. At a meeting in the Grove, Sunday, July 9, Joseph had remarked that all was well between him and the heavens; that he had no enmity against anyone. [^12]

However, if Joseph were to die, Hyrum, by virtue of his position would take his place. The remark that Joseph had made about Hyrum becoming the Prophet was the object of comment. Willard Richards happened to meet Hyrum on the street one day and remarked: "I am writing to the brethren; has our new Prophet anything to say to them?" and Hyrum answered, "Give them my respects." [^13]

The seership of Joseph the Prophet made it possible for him to sense the activity of evil forces closing in upon him and the Saints. He knew that the political climate was not right. Earlier, the people of western Illinois had welcomed the Mormons because they needed more people to develop their natural resources and strengthen their economy. [^14] And too, with the natural sympathy of most people for an outcast, they had extended a helping hand to the Mormon exiles. But as time elapsed and the newcomers gained the balance of power politically, each of the major powers courted the majority potential to assure their election. The party that was defeated cursed the Mormons and vowed reprisal. The party that won the election was on the spot to support the Saints. When public sentiment began to turn against Nauvoo and the Mormons because of the failure to arrest the Prophet and of the way the municipal court of Nauvoo had exercised its powers in acquitting the Prophet, the incumbent party weakened in their loyalty to the Mormon cause.

Hyrum and Joseph, in counsel with the brethren, had to act to forestall a crisis from this direction. The state's lawmakers were agitating for a repeal of the Nauvoo Charter. The politicians had assured the Saints every legal protection and advantage through the charter, but now when adverse winds were blowing, the true status of the Saints under the charter became evident. Of what value would the Nauvoo Legion be if, by order of the chief executive, they were ordered to disarm or if the courts and law enforcement agency were nullified.

In addition to the political aspect there were other causes of strife-social and economic-and false brethren within. The next few months would bring to the surface the evil forces which had worked so long for the overthrow of the whole Mormon movement. Hyrum's cherished dreams of completing the temple and achieving peace for himself and his people would not see fulfilment in his day.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op.cit., vol. VI, p. 35.
[^2] Ibid., p. 39
[^3] Ibid., p.41.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 42-43.
[^5] Ibid., p. 46.
[^6] Ibid., pp. 39-49, Journal History, October 23, 1843.
[^7] Idem.
[^8] Ibid., p. 53.
[^9] William Clayton's Journal, quoted from Journal History.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 143, 298-299.
[^11] Idem.
[^12] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 32-33.
[^13] Lee County Democrat, vol. 3, no. 7. Whole no. 111, Fort Madison, I. T. R. Wilson and Albright-Editors, July 29, 1843.
[^14] Ibid., vol. 3, no. 2. Whole no. 106, p. 2.
