Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXVIII

Hyrum and the Temple Committee

On September 20, 1843, [^1] when Hyrum Smith with his brother Joseph visited the former's farm, located a mile east of the city, Hyrum was pleased to see his crops looking better. A heavy rain the week before, the first since June 1, had somewhat revived the scrubby vegetables, corn, and other crops, but the early potatoes were scarcely worth digging. The storm had broken the summer heat as well as the drought and given notice that fuel must be secured for the coming winter.

Thinking of wood for winter comfort reminded Hyrum of the crackling of the wood fire in Joseph's private office above the store the week before. He had been summoned by Joseph to meet with several brethren to discuss some urgent matters of business. With most of the Quorum of Twelve away on missions, a special council had to be organized.

The uncertainty of the times and the many pressing problems required a council of men with sound, mature judgment, and Hyrum approved a list including himself and Uncle John Smith, Newel K. Whitney, George Miller, Willard Richards, John Taylor, Amasa Lyman, John M. Bernhisel and William Marks. Thursday, September 28, this council met in the room over Joseph's store at Nauvoo and chose the Prophet president; whereupon Joseph led them in prayer, asking that he might be prolonged until his mission on the earth was accomplished, that all their households might be blessed, and also the Church and the world, and that he might have dominion over his enemies. [^2]

Such a council, thought Hyrum, was especially needed at this time, to lend strength to the leadership of the church. The spirit of dissension and criticism was gaining headway among some of the most trusted of the brethren. Former Counselors Sidney Rigdon and William Law were conspicuously absent from the newly formed council, and their names had been deleted on official letters from the office of the President. This change in the membership of the First Presidency of the Church was evident on October 3, 1843, when only the names of Joseph and Hyrum under "Presidents of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" appeared on the letter appointing George J. Adams to fill a mission to Russia. [^3]

But the good fellowship of Hyrum and Joseph's friends was expressed when their special council meetings and parties were held. There was much to be thankful for. In their awareness of enemy threats and imminent danger ahead, they found it good to meet together often in the autumn months of 1843.

When Hyrum received an invitation for him and his wife to attend a party at the Mansion House on October 3, they made plans to attend. Hyrum realized the need for such social gatherings, and his family had on several occasions been the recipients of Joseph and Emma's graciousness and warm hospitality. When they arrived at the appointed hour, they were surprised to see over a hundred couples already crowded into the spacious parlor and living room of the first lady and gentleman of the city of Nauvoo and of the Church. Even with this extra large crowd, however, there was a warm outpouring of friendship and sociability. As usual, the evening began with a multiple-course dinner served personally by Joseph and Emma as host and hostess. Following the dinner the guests appointed a committee to draft some resolutions, which included a manifestation of thanks to Joseph and Emma for such a festive occasion.

The following resolutions drafted at that time reveal the loyalty and kindly spirit of Hyrum and the brethren toward the Prophet:

Resolved, General Joseph Smith, whether we view him as a Prophet at the head of the church, a General at the head of the Legion, a Mayor at the head of the city council, or as a landlord at the head of his table, if he has equals, he has no superiors.

Resolved, Nauvoo, the great emporium of the West, the center of all centers, a city of three years' growth, a population of 15,000 souls congregated from the four quarters of the globe, embracing the intelligence of all nations, with industry, frugality, economy, virtue, and brotherly love, unsurpassed by any age in the world, a suitable home for the Saints.

Resolved, Nauvoo Legion, a well disciplined and faithful band of invincibles, ready at all times to defend their country with this motto, Vive la Republique.

Resolved, Nauvoo Charter, like the laws of the Medes and Persians, an unalterable decree by a patriotic band of wise legislators for the protection of the innocent.

Resolved, Thomas Ford, Governor of Illinois, fearless and faithful in the discharge of all duties, long may he live and blessing attend his administration. [^4]

This party proved to be a most enjoyable occasion, for it lifted the morale of both Hyrum and Joseph and assured them of the love and high esteem in which the Prophet was held by his friends. Hyrum himself, as Patriarch to the Church and Associate President, continued to hold a significant position in the councils of the Church. And he and his wife were especially favored at a prayer meeting at Joseph's home on Sunday evening, October 8, 1843. Of this occasion the Prophet wrote: "My brother Hyrum and his wife were blessed, ordained and anointed." [^5]

The special conference of the Church which had been set for October 6, 7, and 8 was interrupted by stormy weather, and had to be postponed until Monday, October 9, at 10:00 a.m. Monday dawned fair, and the outdoor facilities in the Grove were filled to capacity by the faithful saints. The Prophet and Hyrum occupied most of the time. Among several problems taken up was that of Sidney Rigdon and his collusion with the Missourians at the time of Joseph's arrest at Dixon. Elder Almon W. Babbitt and President William Law made remarks in defense of Sidney Rigdon. On motion of William Marks, seconded by Patriarch Hyrum Smith, the conference voted that Elder Sidney Rigdon be permitted to retain his station as Counselor in the First Presidency. Whereupon, Joseph Smith arose and said: "I have thrown him off my shoulders, and you have again put him on me. You may carry him, but I will not." [^6]

Hyrum arose and in his kindly characteristic way spoke on the attributes of the mercy of God, who influences, controls, and conquers, and the propriety and importance of the Saints exercising the same attributes toward their fellows, especially toward the aged and fellow servants in the cause of truth and righteousness. [^7] No one, said Hyrum, should be unjustly accused of wrongdoing. And if someone were suspected of any offense there should be ample time allowed to establish fully his innocence or guilt. A person was innocent until proved guilty.

After conference, Hyrum inspected the partially built temple. He felt responsible to do all he could to complete this building, for there was a great need for the Saints to obtain their endowments and other important blessings, which could only be received in a house of the Lord. There was at the moment a lag in the construction of the edifice. The great concern of Hyrum for its completion was reminiscent of his experience years before at Kirtland. As he pondered on the problem he little realized that he was to receive an appointment to help speed its construction.

The appointment of Hyrum to the temple committee came unexpectedly, when Judge Elias Higbee, a member of the committee passed away, and Hyrum was selected to fill the vacancy. Of this occasion the Prophet wrote: "My brother Hyrum was appointed by the voice of the Spirit, one of the Temple Committee in place of Judge Elias Higbee, deceased." [^8] Hyrum was also appointed Trustee in Trust of the building committee. The news of Hyrum's appointment met with many favorable comments. And when he went on the job October 23, as chairman of the committee, he got a great hand from the workers. A universal feeling of good will resulted from his appointment. [^9]

The supply of available materials and skilled labor increased, and the unity of the Saints became increasingly evident. The blessings of heaven seemed to be with them in a greater degree than ever before. Large cargoes of lumber from the pinery in Wisconsin began to arrive regularly at the wharf at Nauvoo. The Prophet noted the volume in terms of thousands of feet and the number of shingles on each barge which arrived. [^10]

During the weeks that followed, Hyrum kept close to the project, encouraging the workmen. At the suggestion of Mercy Rachel Thompson, the penny-fund was instituted by the Women's Relief Society to buy glass and nails for the temple. Hyrum had approved this project and had encouraged the sisters both at home and in the foreign missions to contribute. [^11]

While reports of enemy mass meetings against Nauvoo and rumors of the enemy's action against the Church continued to come in, Hyrum Smith was quick to note any news of a favorable nature about his people. Thus it was that his attention was called to an article appearing in The Nauvoo Neighbor, entitled "Nauvoo and Joseph Smith," and taken from the New Haven (Connecticut) Herald. The article said that a man from New Haven had recently visited Nauvoo, and that he spoke of the industrious, moral, and well-ordered town, where there was freedom of religion, a diversity of society, and two-thirds of the population were Mormon. He considered that Joseph Smith was an agreeable man in conversation and more sinned against than sinning. In Nauvoo, said the visitor, education was by no means neglected; proper schools and teachers were provided and temperance reigned throughout. At Nauvoo, a city of 15,000 to 18,000 inhabitants, four or five steamboats stopped each day. The man wished that he could speak so well of his native town as he could of Nauvoo. [^12]

And there were other events which Hyrum found favorable to the Church. Among the more important of these were the release of Orrin Porter Rockwell from prison in Missouri and the safe arrival in England of Elder Reuben Hedlock, who was to take charge of the British mission. The success of the brethren on missions in the Eastern States and of the recent conference at Boston, and the general response of the Saints in that area was also most encouraging. There were missionaries being sent to Russia, to the Islands of the Pacific, to Canada, and into the local and neighboring states.

But all was not brightness. There were also problems for Hyrum to solve at this time. The lowering temperatures were a warning of approaching winter, and there were always those who would need fuel, clothing, bedding, and adequate housing to see them comfortably through the cold. The Relief Society was functioning and could be relied upon to help meet this need. But another problem was the constant stream of emigrants. The city was literally bursting at the seams; new subdivisions had to be plotted and lots made available for new homes. Also, jobs had to be found to utilize new skills, talents, and muscles. Many of the newcomers would need temporary relief to get started in this new land.

The influence of Nauvoo was being felt throughout the frontier region of Illinois, Missouri, and Iowa. Economically, socially, and politically this "City Beautiful" was stealing the spotlight from other centers of population. It was becoming the hub of a great wheel where all roads converged, and such a center of business and culture brought hordes of inquisitive people, many of them questionable in character, fugitives from justice, horsethieves, counterfeiters, swindlers, gamblers, and ruffians who preyed upon the people. To safeguard the populace, Hyrum had voted, as a member of the city council, to pass a law making it legal to question any vagrant or stranger concerning his business and place of residence, and anyone caught on the streets after a certain hour at night was under suspicion.

Always present were the newsmen from the daily press of eastern cities, there to confirm or disprove the rumors concerning the Mormons and Nauvoo. Representatives of the leading churches and sects of the day came to satisfy their curiosity concerning the Prophet and stayed at his home, now transformed into a hotel with a dining hall and a lobby. Mayors, governors, army officers, writers, industrialists, and just plain people trekked to the city to look the situation over; and many were disappointed to see only industry, sobriety, intelligence, friendliness, brotherhood, and a prophet without affectation. Their preconception hadn't prepared them for this youngish man of thirty-eight and his brother Hyrum, forty-three. They were not tyrannical in appearance, with an austere swagger in their walk and actions. They hadn't any long gray beards and black broadcloth costumes to set them apart. The visitors scrutinized closely their deportment, manners, and speech, in an effort to discover the course of their influence, but the power was hidden; they couldn't discover it. Some left with fear of what the outcome would be if this people were left unmolested; others marveled and wrote about their wonderment; and some swore vengeance against an imaginary evil they expected to come upon the country.

Many were guests of Hyrum and Joseph on occasions when the Nauvoo Legion maneuvered and paraded to martial music. They saw the well-drilled squads of infantry and cavalry, with their new equipment—cannons, rifles, sabers, uniforms—and a serious glint in their eyes. The soldiers were young, intelligent, healthy—full of esprit de corps. The officers rode in full uniform upon fine-looking mounts saddled with the latest and best, with Lieutenant General Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum at their head. Commissioned army officers with every military rank in their order, moved down the main thoroughfare of Nauvoo in a never-to-be-forgotten sight. Nauvoo was like a sovereign state within a state, having unusual powers of rank and authority.

But what was the real purpose of all this display and authority? To the Saints it meant security; to the non-Mormon it spelled danger. The Missourians were frankly alarmed. What would happen to them if this threat of power from Hancock County, Illinois, should gain momentum? And their alarm spread like a cloud to Illinois where the people began to ask themselves if the sovereign state of Illinois had granted the Mormons too much power. If so, something must be done. There were those who began to murmur that welcoming the Mormons to Illinois had been a mistake. The Mormons, they concluded, had become potential liabilities to the state.

How could Carthage, Quincy, Warsaw, Burlington, and even St. Louis grow when land values remained dormant, business was hindered, and financial capital flowed to this new metropolis? Having a thriving new city mushroom from a swamp in 1839 to a city over 15,000 population in four short years (and still increasing rapidly) was just too much to contemplate. Like a too sudden change in customs, styles, inventions, discoveries, the shock jolted the inert non-Mormon element, arousing its resentment.

The history of the months following this time reveal the forces of evil becoming increasingly ferocious. Every means was used by the enemy to stem the growth of this thriving Mormon metropolis and of the Church itself. Hyrum Smith was sensitive to the tension mounting against Nauvoo and understood its underlying causes. He felt it his duty to keep abreast of the times so that he would be ready to act should the need arise.

On Saturday, September 2, 1843, a notice appeared in the Lee County Democrat at Fort Madison, which was typical of the temper of some:

Notice of Expulsion. A meeting was held in Hancock County in which they [the citizens] declared the Mormons shall either peaceably leave the state or they will forcibly be driven away. It is said that the notices to that affect have been posted in public places in the county. [^13]

Prior to this time the same paper referred in part to Hyrum Smith, brother of the Prophet, mentioned the arrest of Joseph Smith by Illinois authorities and his release by writ of habeas corpus before the municipal court of Nauvoo, as being well-known and said:

We do not presume to pass upon the merits of the issue of this case, nor to judge of the more ancient rupture between the Missourians and the Mormons. Perhaps both parties will find it difficult to clear their skirts of all blame, but which will in the end be able to say, "I can wash my hands of the blood—guiltless, we will not venture a judgment."

Jo Smith, the Mormon Prophet, is doubtless one of the most remarkable men of the present, or in fact, of any other age. He is now, as we are advised, but thirty-seven years old, and if our memory serves us well, it is not yet fifteen years since he first gave motion to the doctrine of Mormonism. He was uneducated, of an obscure parentage, poor and the very last man in the world who would have been called out to lead and direct one of the most anomalous revolutions in religion the world has ever experienced. He has now upward of two hundred thousand followers in this country and his missionaries in Europe seem to meet with success there, only paralleled in times when Luther and Melancthon stormed the "papalsee," and Protestantism, struggling against the clouds "of the dark ages," burst the darkling gloom of idolatrous popery and espoused of the affairs of human events.

Our astonishment, however, at events so strikingly strange, so apparently anomalous in the provinces of the great disposer of all events has been lessened by the reflection, that He (Christ) appeared at an age when darkness, idolatry and superstition cast upon the world the shadows of mental stupor and moral death. How different stands the case of Jo Smith, the Prophet, and apostle of Mormon. He appears in the middle of the eighteenth century. The full glory of brightness and revelation is in the very zenith of the Christian firmament, and in a country, too, most distinguished for enlightenment, and the least prejudiced of bigotry and fanaticism, ancient manners, and inherited forms of religion. Still his success is no less remarkable, although in an age so much less susceptible to the wicked designs of Priesthood and the designing schemes of ambitious men.

We make these remarks entertaining neither jot nor tittle of belief in Mormonism, or in our friend Joseph the Prophet, as a divine teacher. Nevertheless, we shall be disposed to show to the public a fair expose of the matters of controversy between our Mormon neighbors and their inveterate enemies across the Mississippi, the Missourians. [^14]

The above reflects the thoughts of men striving to be fair and measuring Joseph Smith and his work in an objective manner. A comparison of the Mormon movement was made with the reformers of medieval times and a contrast of this enlightened age with the corrupt and evil conditions of the sixteenth century. Perhaps some progress had been made since those earlier times, but the will to malign, persecute, and kill was the same; only the methods were more modern. Due recognition was awarded the Prophet for his rise from a lowly station in life to that of leader of hundreds of thousands.

Press releases during September spoke of a pleasure trip to Nauvoo on board a new steam ferryboat:

. . . At about ten o'clock in the morning she left our wharf crowded with men, women, and children, in all between two and three hundred, and after passing our town (Fort Madison) in a beautiful style, proceeded on her way downward to the city of "Latter-day Saints. . . . "

After the landing of the boat at the wharf, many of the ladies and gentlemen paid a visit to the temple, while others paid a visit to the circus, others partook of the good things which are at all times found in the city of Nauvoo. . . . [^15]

From the same publication there appeared the following:

Tempest in a Teapot. Announcement of an anti-Mormon meeting in Carthage. A committee to warn the Mormons to move—two to three thousand qualified voters—rather a great number to be much alarmed by their Carthagenian brethren. Wouldn't it be amusing if the county seat should be removed from Carthage to Nauvoo? This we predict will be the result of this anti-Latter-day Saint movement. [^16]

Continuing three weeks later:

The leaders of the anti-Mormon movement make fools of themselves.

Those who are believers in the Mormon faith have little to fear from the lions like these. We understand that the Prophet is ready for any attack that may be made upon him or his people. Let them beware.

An ordinance in Nauvoo Neighbor that marriages can be performed by any minister of the Gospel, mayor, alderman, justice or judge, without a license which is required by the state. Under age must get consent of guardian.

Those of our young people who are unable to procure a license had best to go to the city of the Latter-day Saints to have those solemn rites performed. [^17]

On October 21, 1843, there appeared the following: "Another anti-Mormon meeting at Warsaw, a resolution was passed to ask the governor to withdraw the state arms from the hands of the Mormons and the citizens be allowed to form themselves into independent companies in case of emergency." [^18]

The editor of the Burlington Hawkeye, wrote:

The Mormons: The prairie between Fort Madison, Warsaw, and Carthage has changed from dreary prairie to one studded with houses and good farms. Seven years ago along the old Rock Island Trace, a dreary waste, were fields, good sod fences, six miles long. As long as the Mormons are harmless they should be treated well. We shall never convince them that they are a deluded people, in as far as their religion is concerned in any other way. [^19]

The expressions from the newspapers indicated an admiration for the Mormons, and also a great alarm because people thought these frugal, industrious people were deluded, and that all their religious principles were based on fraudulent concepts. They supposed it impossible that good could come out of such a corrupt source. They forgot to judge the tree by its fruits.

The Savior said,

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

Even so, every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. . . .

Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. [^20]

If there were evils in the Church, then a pruning would be in order. The new Church, like a vigorous, healthy growing tree was not becoming corrupt. Hyrum and Joseph watched for blight, and infected branches, and cut out the objectionable parts in order to build the Church strong and true.

And the pruning process was very difficult for Hyrum because his kindly nature shrank from taking action against suspects, whether Saint or gentile. But he knew that Nauvoo could not present a united front against an enemy from without if the home front was weak and its position undermined by traitors from within.

As the year 1843 drew to a close, only the blessings of heaven made it possible for Hyrum to bear the tremendous burden which was his as combined Associate President of the Church, Presiding Patriarch to the Church and chairman of the Nauvoo Temple building committee. His responsibilities were great, but he carried them humbly and without shirking.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Journal History, op. cit., October 31, 1843.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, p. 65.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 83-88
[^4] These appeals were the memorial to Congress, the appeal to the Green Mountain Boys, and P. P. Pratt's appeal to the state of New York.
[^5] The Illinois Statesman, Jacksonville, Illinois, vol. 1, no. 35, p. 2. Mormon kidnapped—great excitement. Governor of Missouri called on to make arrest.
[^6] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 113-115.
[^7] Ibid., p. 134
[^8] Preston Nibley, Joseph Smith the Prophet, (Salt Lake City, 1944), pp. 488-489.
[^9] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 135-142.
[^10] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 320-321.
[^11] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 152-165.
[^12] Ibid., p. 143. Mercy Fielding Thompson initiated the suggestion of the penny fund.
[^13] Lee County Democrat, op. cit., vol. 3, no. 26. Whole no. 133, p. 2. Joseph Smith rented the Mansion House to Ebenezer Robinson, formerly editor of The Times and Seasons.
[^14] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, p. 168.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 169-170.
[^16] Ibid., p. 188.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 197-209.
[^18] Idem.
[^19] Burlington Hawkeye, vol. 5, no. 11, p. 2, Burlington, Iowa, October 19, 1843.
[^20] Matthew 7:16, 7, 20.
