Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXIX

A New Political Party

The latter part of October 1843 brought the first evidence of winter. Two-thirds of an inch of ice froze on small bodies of water. When Hyrum rode out to the prairie with Joseph and returned at 3:00 p.m., snow was on the ground. There was a cold east wind, and the storm continued all day. [^1] On Sunday, two weeks before, the Apostles—Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith—who had been laboring in the East, returned home. Hyrum and Joseph Smith were pleased with their report of increased activities among the Saints and of the spirit of gathering manifest by them. Collections of tithing and donations to the temple and the Nauvoo House fund were sufficient to permit their ordering from St. Louis the groceries and various other items necessary for the temple and its workmen.

At 10:00 a.m. Thursday, November 2, the council sat with Hyrum and Joseph to consider current business matters. Joseph L. Heywood had sent a letter concerning a Colonel Frierson who desired to help the Mormons by petitioning Congress in their behalf. Brother Heywood stated in the letter that he knew of some honorable men in Missouri who desired to wipe out the stain that rested upon Missouri by making a just reparation. He stated also that he, with others of the Saints, preferred John C. Calhoun as a candidate for President of the United States rather than Martin Van Buren. He hoped that Colonel Frierson could obtain the endorsement of the Mormons to memorialize Congress in their behalf. If the leaders approved, he (Brother Heywood) would come to Nauvoo to assist in writing the memorial.

The council decided to write a letter to each of the five candidates who were then campaigning for the Presidency of the United States to inquire what his feelings were toward the Saints as a people and what his course of action would be, should he be elected, regarding the cruelty and oppression that the Saints had suffered in the state of Missouri.

To the letter sent to Martin Van Buren, a postscript was added asking whether his views had changed since the subject matter of the present communication was presented to him in his then official capacity at Washington in the year 1841, a subject treated by Van Buren with coldness, indifference, and neglect bordering on contempt. [^2]

Letters were mailed to Lewis Cass, Richard M. Johnson, Henry Clay, as well as Calhoun and Van Buren. During the months ahead the Saints would have to make a choice of a candidate on either the Democratic or Whig ticket. Perhaps it would be necessary to withdraw, to avoid taking sides, and create a party of their own.

By the end of November, Colonel Frierson had arrived at Nauvoo and had met with Hyrum, Joseph, and the twelve. The Prophet had seen that a careful history of the Church was kept even though death and apostasy had claimed several of his scribes, and precious records had been stolen. Frierson studied the history of the Missouri troubles and the leaders read to him the affidavits concerning the expulsion of the Saints from Missouri, made by Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, and others at the time of their testimony before the municipal court at Nauvoo.

Colonel Frierson wrote a memorial to Congress, setting forth a review of the trouble of the Saints in Missouri. In it he called upon Congress to take into consideration the wrongs perpetrated against this greatly maligned people and to grant them such relief as, by the Constitution and laws, they have power to grant.

The colonel took a copy of the memorial with him to Quincy to obtain signatures and endorsements, and a committee was appointed to obtain signatures from citizens residing in Nauvoo. [^3]

The leaders of the Church had come to feel that the Mormons were being maneuvered into a position where justice could never be obtained. President Van Buren had said, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you," and Governor Ford of Illinois, being a politician was inclined to favor only those forces which would support his position. Memorializing Congress for help seemed futile, but they were willing to try anything. Perhaps an appeal for help to Hyrum and Joseph's native state would help to solve the problem.

They therefore drew up an appeal to the "Green Mountain Boys of Vermont," a lengthy treatise imploring the liberty-loving sons of Vermont to come to the aid of their fellow citizens. Examples from the Bible were cited: Abraham had rescued Lot in the days of Sodom and Gomorrah. And France and Holland had come to the aid of the thirteen American Colonies during the revolution. Copies of this appeal were made, and Parley P. Pratt was granted the right to distribute them in all the towns of Vermont.

Elder Parley P. Pratt addressed an appeal for aid against the enemy to his native State of New York. At a public meeting in the hall above the store the appeals [^4] were read, and the Prophet addressed those present for two and a half hours, reviewing circumstances in Missouri. Already he had thirty-eight law suits and had paid Missouri $150,000 for land. The Prophet made a motion that every man at the meeting should write his native country, and the motion carried.

It was also determined that the Nauvoo Legion was to enforce justice. However, the state auditor would not honor the warrants on the state treasury to pay the legion. Under the charter the legion was to be part of the state militia and were liable to call, yet attorney-general Josiah Lambourn disallowed any money for the legion. The only consideration would be to furnish them state arms. The state auditor, J. N. McDougall ruled that the Nauvoo Legion was an independent military establishment designed to sustain the municipal authorities of Nauvoo. The Prophet realized that prejudice against the Saints because of their religion was the main cause for the withholding of their portion by the state.

The seriousness of the situation was not minimized by Hyrum, for very soon something of a drastic nature would have to be resorted to to help stem the tide of opposition. Hyrum accompanied the Prophet on trips to the prairie and met with him often to plan strategy to cope with the enemy. Reports were beginning to come to their attention concerning the increased boldness of certain men harassing the Saints in Nauvoo. A report came from David Avery and his son Philander that they had been kidnapped by the Missourians and were being held in jail. [^5] This act indicated a plot by the enemy to get more of the Saints into their hands. General Wilson Law received orders to have a part of the Nauvoo Legion on hand for immediate service in case of an emergency. Also a force of from forty to fifty men were made policemen to protect Nauvoo against the subversive element which might slip into the city for evil purposes. A petition to Congress was prepared asking the government to recognize the Nauvoo Legion as part of the United States militia.

By December 14, Philander Avery, (son of Daniel Avery) arrived in Nauvoo, having escaped from his kidnapers in Missouri. Also a letter had been received from Governor Ford informing President Smith that it was not lawful to call out a part of the legion to re-inforce the police in guarding against an invasion from Missouri or against any group from that quarter who attempted to take Joseph Smith into custody. The governor advised the citizens of Nauvoo to be peaceful towards the people of Missouri. He stated further that the many affidavits he had received concerning the trouble had not been read, and perhaps would not be read unless he felt the necessity to do so, that is unless new demands from Missouri were made for the arrest of the Prophet.

This communique from the chief magistrate once again revealed an utter lack of sympathy and sense of justice toward the Saints. The feelings of Joseph were expressed in these words:

. . . Oh reason, where art thou fled! O humanity, where has thou hidden thyself? Patriots of '76 has your blood been spilt in vain, that in 1843 the executive of a great republican state can coolly say, "I have not yet read them (affidavits) and probably never will." Is liberty only a name? Is protection of person and property fled from free America? Let those answer who can. [^6]

Constable King Follet arrested John Elliott, a schoolmaster for kidnapping Avery and brought his prisoner to Nauvoo for trial. At his trial the Prophet gave him a lecturing to and dismissed him. A warrant was issued at this time for the arrest of Colonel Levi Williams on the charge of kidnapping Daniel Avery. General Wilson Law was asked by Lieutenant General Joseph Smith to detach one hundred men from the Nauvoo Legion to help carry out the writ. A report was received that over one hundred men had assembled at the home of Colonel Williams at Warsaw to prevent any disorder. The report said that Colonel Williams had ordered the lower part of the county to mobilize a force, send runners to Missouri to excite the Missourians, and have them join the forces at Warsaw for the purpose of making an attack on Nauvoo. It was deemed advisable not to try to arrest Colonel Williams at this time, but to have General Law place the legion in readiness to repel any such invasion.

Affidavits concerning this warlike preparation of the mob, were duly sworn to and forwarded to the governor; even though he might never read them, he would be left without an excuse.

The city of Nauvoo drew up a lengthy memorial to Congress to which Hyrum Smith signed his name along with that of the Prophet Joseph, the counselors, the aldermen, the recorder, and the marshal. Reports of robbery and of Saints' homes being burned indicated to the brethren the increasing boldness of the mob element.

* * *

In Hyrum's household, preparations were completed for the Christmas holidays. Saturday and Sunday, December 23 and 24, were days for the family to be at home.

Early Christmas morning (Monday), Hyrum and his household were awakened by serenaders singing Christmas carols. He arose from his bed and went out to shake hands with the group consisting of a blind English widow, Lettie Rushton, who had lost her sight ten years previously, three of her sons with their wives, her two daughters with their husbands, and several of her neighbors. Hyrum blessed each one of them in the name of the Lord and said that he had thought at first that a cohort of angels had come to visit them; it was heavenly music to him. The Prophet said of the song, "Mortals, Awake! with Angels Join," which awakened him at 1:00 a.m. "It caused a thrill of pleasure to run through my soul. All of my family and boarders arose to hear the serenade, and I felt to thank my Heavenly Father for their visit and blessed them in the name of the Lord." [^7]

The Christmas festivities centered at the Mansion House. The spirit of love and kindness was, as always, a part of the Prophet's household; but somehow this holiday time had about it a special significance. Joseph's thirty-eighth birthday had been duly observed on Saturday, two days before. Perhaps for Joseph Christmas day was a continuation of his own birthday observance and enhanced by the Savior's birthday. The Prophet at 2:00 p.m. seated fifty couples at dinner. Later in the evening a large party again seated themselves for supper, which was followed by music and dancing.

Hyrum and Mary were present. They had brought their five-year-old son, Joseph Fielding, and seated him on the orchestra platform during the party. [^8] This lad, who later became the President of the Church remembered the occasion. He remembered that a man with long hair falling over his shoulders and apparently drunk came in and acted like a Missourian. Joseph, describing the affair later, wrote:

I requested the captain of the police to put him out of doors. A scuffle ensued and I had a chance to look him full in the face, when to my surprise and joy, untold, I discovered that it was my long-tried, warm, but cruelly persecuted friend, Orrin Porter Rockwell, just arrived from nearly a year's imprisonment without conviction in Missouri. [^9]

Orrin Porter Rockwell, a lifelong friend of the Prophet enumerated the events of his arrest and imprisonment in Missouri, and the story was a revelation of man's inhumanity to man. He had been shackled with irons, thrust into a filthy prison without benefit of bedding or heat during the winter months. His life had been threatened. He had refused a bribe to decoy the Prophet into the hands of the Missouri officers. When he had heard the plot to arrest the Prophet at Dixon, his dread and fear of what might happen had made the flesh on his bones twitch until a dove flew several times into the grating of his cell and cooed, and he knew that it was an omen to him Joseph would be safe, and he himself would be liberated. His liberation came soon, when his mother brought $100.00 to pay for the service of attorney Doniphan. The court was unable to find sufficient grounds for a conviction and decided to acquit him of complicity in the shooting of ex-Governor Boggs. His return to Nauvoo was a source of great satisfaction to the brethren.

It was also learned on this day that Daniel Avery had been released from imprisonment in Missouri. The Prophet felt that his (Avery's) release had been due to their vigilance in communicating with the Governor and continually making public the conduct of Missouri. Whatever the cause, they rejoiced in the freedom of these two good brethren.

At this time, sixteen-year-old Lovina, Hyrum's oldest daughter was growing into womanhood and had become the object for several suitors. Joseph Jackson, a newcomer to Nauvoo was one who attempted to court Lovina. He asked Hyrum for permission to become his son-in-law and was refused. Thereupon he asked the Prophet to use his influence in his favor; and failing in this request, too, he applied to William Law, who became a secret enemy of the Smith family to help Jackson steal Lovina from her father. The attempt failed, and Jackson then tried to persuade a number of the enemy to join him in a conspiracy to murder the whole Smith family. Later, a Mr. Eaton exposed Jackson's evil schemes along with the names of others who became open enemies to the Prophet and Hyrum. [^10]

Soon after the Christmas festivities, the Prophet appointed forty men to act as police officers. There was an uneasy feeling among the brethren that all was not well among some of the top leaders. Rumors were about concerning the infidelity of William Law, counselor to the Prophet, and William Marks, president of the stake.

On January 3, at a meeting of the special city council, the case of William Law was taken up. William Law had told Hyrum Smith that the police had been secretly instructed by the Prophet to put Law out of the way. This accusation was denied by the Prophet. Councilor Hyrum Smith said that William Law had told him that the police had sworn him (Law) to keep the secret, which was that he was to be put out of the way in three months. On cross examination, William Law named the man who had told him of the intention of the police. The man in question was brought in and the cross-examination continued. All this had grown out of an erroneous interpretation of the Prophet's remarks about a Judas in General Smith's cabinet, who stood next to him and must be taken care of.

Hyrum considered the matter very alarming. Recalling Dr. Sampson Avard and John Carl's treachery and false-swearing in Missouri, he rehearsed what had been said by the mayor to the police in the former council. The council lasted all day. William Law cross-examined all the police but discovered nothing but imaginings which had grown out of a surmise by one Daniel Carn. William Law was mollified and shook hands with Joseph, declaring he did not believe a word of the story, and would stand by the Prophet to the death. He then called upon the whole council and the police to witness his declaration. [^11]

Such a declaration temporarily restored William Law into the full confidence of Hyrum and Joseph. However, during the weeks ahead, a number of situations helped to reveal the true character of Joseph's counselor.

With Nauvoo under heavy police protection, the work on the temple continued at a steady rate. Hyrum Smith endorsed the penny fund donation, made to the temple by the sisters of England. An article in the Millennial Star complimented the English sisters, and Mary Fielding Smith, Hyrum's wife, with her sister Mercy Thompson, wrote to the women in England, informing them of the allotment of the fund in Nauvoo. A weekly amount of one penny and a half-penny had been subscribed to by over a thousand, and more were expected to join. On the bottom of the letter was written the following: "Nauvoo, Dec. 25, 1843. The ladies' subscription to the temple, of one cent a week, is fully sanctioned by the First Presidency. Signed, Hyrum Smith." [^12]

The weather was cold with intermittent snowstorms. But the city of Nauvoo even under the tension of expected persecution was the scene of many socials, house parties, and sleighing. Hyrum and his family were welcome guests with many others at the Mansion House. [^13] Among the Saints was a spirit of peace and confidence that everything would be all right, even though evil rumors were about. There had been so much trouble because of persecutions and threats that the conditions now did not seem to warrant any alarm. All went about their daily work, proud of Nauvoo. The presence of the temple under construction, the colorful Nauvoo Legion, and the constant arrival of immigrants from abroad were all a source of pride which gave a feeling of security and well-being. The leaders, Hyrum and Joseph, had been preserved in health; they had succeeded in being liberated from the enemies. Nothing, the Saints felt, could change this situation.

Hyrum and Joseph were happy to note the confidence and the peaceful, happy feeling among the Saints. However, like a ship's officers on their vessel at sea, they could read the barometer and sense the direction and strength of the wind. For them the lowering clouds in the distance bode little good. The age-old conflict of tyranny versus justice was to reach new heights during the new year (1844) which had just dawned.

On Friday, January 5, 1844, a special session of the city council met at 11:00 a.m. again to allay the fears of William Law and Marks. There had been many rumors circulated concerning the fate of these men. Again witnesses were called in and it was finally decided that the reports were false. During the investigation of the rumors against Brothers Law and Marks, it was revealed that a Brother Sobey had testified on a basis of mere rumor to the effect that Joseph Smith was going to get revenge against Brothers Law and Marks. The stir among the brethren at such charges was illustrated by Hyrum Smith who remarked:

. . . Sobey makes me think of an old Dutchman that had an ox—the first animal he ever owned in his life, and he broke him to ride; then he filled a sack with rocks and laid it on the ox's back, got on himself, and told his son to hide by the roadside and when he came along to jump out and yell boo, as he wanted to know how well his ox was broke. The son did accordingly. The ox was frightened and threw the old man off . "Father," said the son, "I did as you told me." "Yes," said the old man, "but you made too big a boo." [^14]

At the end of the meeting which adjourned because of a lack of candles, Joseph had been again assured by a person of questionable loyalty, this time, General Wilson Law, who said: "I am Joseph's friend; he has no better friend in the world. I am ready to lay down my life for him." Upon this the mayor and General Law shook hands. [^15]

The winter of 1843-44 wore on, extremely cold. The council chamber over the store was often so cold that it was necessary to transact business in the Mansion House. And the inclement weather seemed to symbolize the present impasse of the political scene for the Saints. Three replies had come to the letters sent to possible candidates for the presidency. John C. Calhoun of South Carolina stated that "the case of Missouri does not come within the jurisdiction of the Federal Government"; Henry Clay of Kentucky had advised the Mormons to migrate to Oregon; and Lewis Cass' reply was equally unsatisfactory.

The problem now was to determine which course to take. Why should the Saints vote for a man whose policy, based on expediency, might lead to a war of extermination against the Mormons? The Saints could not stand aloof from either political party and refuse to cast a vote for the candidate of their choice. Under these circumstances a meeting of the brethren was called at the mayor's office Monday, January 29, to determine what the course of the Saints should be in the coming presidential election. The candidates for President of the United States at that time were Martin Van Buren and Henry Clay. A discussion by the Prophet, Hyrum Smith, and the twelve brought about a resolution to form a party of their own, which must be done in full confidence of success. The twelve, with missionaries, would have to carry the campaign to the electorate. Such a campaign would be the means of bringing their views of government before the people.

When the time came for nominations for President on an independent electoral ticket, Willard Richards arose and nominated Joseph Smith to be that candidate, and the nomination was unanimously accepted. This important decision gave great hope of obtaining justice and correcting gross political abuse in high places. The Prophet outlined the procedure of electioneering. The states were each assigned to members of the twelve. Among other things, the Prophet said:

If I ever get into the Presidential chair, I will protect the people in their rights and liberties. I will not electioneer for myself. Hyrum, Brigham, Parley, and Taylor must go. . . . The Whigs are striving for a king under the garb of Democracy. There is oratory enough in this church to carry me into the Presidential chair the first slide. [^16]

During the next days, Hyrum was called in for consultation to decide on appropriate action. Plans must be ready by April 6, general conference time, for after this conference the missionaries would go forth with a message of good government supported by revealed principles of religion. On Tuesday, February 6, the Prophet wrote,

Very cold day. I spent the evening with my brother Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon, and the twelve and their wives at Elder John Taylor's, took supper and had a very pleasant time. Wednesday, 7th, an exceeding cold day. In the evening I met with my brother Hyrum and the Twelve Apostles in my office, at their request, to devise means to promote the interests of the General Government. I completed and signed my "Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States." [^17]

In this lengthy treatise one may gain a glimpse of the mind of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here the insight, magnitude, and nobility of his soul is effectively portrayed in his great regard for the founding fathers of this nation—George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and others—and in the importance he placed on integrity and regard for all peoples no matter of what color, creed, or race. He mentioned needed reforms: the foul prisons ought to be turned into seminaries of learning; slaves could be purchased and freed with money obtained from the sale of public lands; Texas should be annexed and Mexico and Canada share the blessings of this great republic; banking reforms should be made and the pay to members of Congress reduced.

The Prophet's grasp of the problem and what ought to be done was eloquently expressed in these words:

The wisdom which ought to characterize the freest, wisest, and most noble nation of the nineteenth century, should, like the sun in its meridian splendor, warm every object beneath its rays, and the main effort of her officers, who are nothing more than the servants of the people, ought to be directed to ameliorate the conditions of all, black or white, bond or free. . . . [^18]

This lengthy document was read and reread before the council. Many copies were made and published at home and abroad. The missionaries carried copies to be referred to from time to time. Perhaps, thought Hyrum and Joseph, "this action would be the means of arousing public sentiment in support of our people."

Governor Thomas Ford had recently written an article in the Warsaw Signal placing the responsibility for keeping the peace upon the citizens of Hancock County, including the Mormons. The members of the twelve were each making an appeal to his native state to recognize the injustice of a sister state (Missouri) toward 15,000 expelled citizens who had been deprived of homes, land, and property, and had suffered persecutions in the form of insults, exposure during inclement weather, intimidation, torture, rape, and murder.

No response was forthcoming from Congress. The move on the part of the brethren to organize a new political party to elect a President of their own was merely a stop-gap gesture. The Saints must exercise their franchise as citizens without becoming embroiled in conflict with either political party. But running their own candidate for President was not the answer to their difficulties. There was little chance for a new party to succeed under the circumstances. The only value to be derived from this was to plead the cause of an injured people and place the views of a modern Prophet before the citizens of the country. Perhaps at some place and time the scales of justice might be moved to ameliorate a persecuted and maligned citizenry.

If these moves for self-preservation failed, what then was to be the alternative? Hyrum knew not where the answer lay. But he was a peace-loving man who stood always for justice and forbearance, and put his trust in Almighty God. Somehow, in the end, the forces of righteousness would triumph.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Supra (before quoted) chapter XXV.
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. Vl, p. 222.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 223-224.
[^4] Ibid., p. 225.
[^5] Idem.
[^6] From William Clayton's Journal, B'k 28. Until his death, Hyrum Smith kept a record of the women's penny fund with the aid of Sister Mercy Thompson. Some paid a year in advance. Nearly $2000 had already been realized, with contributions coming in daily.
[^7] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 236-237.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 252-254.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 263-264.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 265-266.
[^11] See full account in The Contributor, April, 1884.
[^12] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, p. 272.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 281-282. Note—Orson Pratt and John E. Page assisted Elder Hyde in obtaining Congress attention.
[^14] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, p. 168.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 169-170.
[^16] Ibid., p. 188.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 197-209.
[^18] Idem.
