Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXX

Hyrum and Joseph Look Westward for a New Home

Hyrum Smith and his family noticed the ice breaking up on the Mississippi River during February of 1844. It had been an unusually cold winter, and there had been many problems to worry him. As Patriarch he felt he had to have a tentative solution to the conspiracy rising within the ranks of the Church. Something had to be done very soon to safeguard the Church from internal enemies in high places.

Another problem soon to come before the brethren was the organizing of manufacturing companies. They needed some means to relieve the poverty of the Saints and the Church. And when rumors reached Nauvoo that mass meetings were being held at Warsaw and Carthage threatening the wholesale expulsion of the Saints from Illinois, Hyrum and Joseph began to think of the possibility of moving the Saints west.

The idea of moving to the Rocky Mountains as a solution to their problem grew even more appealing. Mention had already been made to Anson Call about the part he would someday play in establishing the Church and its members in the great basin. [^1] If this idea to move west were to be realized, there remained the work of exploration and a preliminary survey of the vast regions of California and Oregon. Plans must be laid in advance to meet the impending crisis.

The brethren were painfully aware of the dilemma of the Saints. A report had come from Carthage that a mass meeting had been held at the courthouse and that a resolution had been passed to hold a "wolf" hunt the second Saturday of March, which day (March 17) had been set aside for fasting and prayer for the destruction of Joseph Smith.

The problems were discussed in a council meeting held Tuesday, February 20. Among the first topics considered was the possible location for the ultimate removal of the Saints. The council concurred with the Prophet's remarks to the twelve:

I would like you to send out a delegation and investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt out a good location where we can remove to after the temple is completed, and where we can build a city in a day and have a government of our own, get up into the mountains where the devil cannot dig us out and live in a healthful climate, where we can live as old as we have a mind to. [^2]

The following evening, Wednesday February 21, another meeting was held for the purpose of selecting a company to explore Oregon and California in order to find a site for a new city of the Saints.

So urgent was the need for a western expedition that Hyrum was summoned to a third meeting on Friday, February 23. The minutes of this meeting, written by Joseph, contain the following: "Met with the Twelve in the assembly room concerning the Oregon and California Exploring Expedition, Hyrum and Sidney present. I told them I wanted an exploration of all the mountain country. Perhaps it would be better to go direct to Santa Fe. Send twenty-five men, let them preach the Gospel wherever they go. Let that man go that can raise $500, a good horse and mule, a double barrel gun, one barrel rifle, and the other smooth bore, a saddle and bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie knife, and a good sabre. Appoint a leader and let them beat up for volunteers. I want every man that goes to be a king and a priest. When he gets on the mountain he may want to talk to his God; when with the savage nations have power to govern, etc. If we don't get volunteers, wait till after the election." [^3] A move to the west would take time. The Saints would have to be prepared.

The following Sunday morning Hyrum and Joseph addressed the Saints at the temple block; and in the evening at a prayer meeting in the assembly room, the Prophet made an important announcement which he describes thus:

. . . I prophesied that within five years we would be out of the power of our enemies, whether they were apostates or of the world, and told the brethren to record it, that when it comes to pass they need not say they had forgotten the saying. [^4]

This prophecy would see the Saints established in the West with President Brigham Young as their leader and caravans of immigrants moving in an unending stream to their new home in the mountains. Did Hyrum and Joseph foresee the cost, the disaffection and desertions of some of the leaders, the rage of their enemies, the shedding of blood? The suffering and privation that lay ahead may not have been seen. And what of Hyrum's own family? What would be their attitude; would they face the challenge under new leadership?

By the end of February, 1844, the river was cleared of ice enough for navigation. River steamers began passing on their way to the various settlements. Seasonal rains had helped to melt the ice and snow. At the moment the affairs of the temple occupied the mind of Hyrum. With navigation on the river restored, lumber, stone and building materials could be supplied.

While feverish preparations were made to explore the West and to complete the temple, a scandalous rumor was circulated around the city concerning Hyrum Smith and certain females of Nauvoo. None of the malicious reports heretofore circulated had had such an effect on Hyrum as did this one. An immediate investigation resulted in the arrest of Orsimus F. Botswick for slander. At the Mansion House, Monday, February 26, the court fined him fifty dollars. Francis M. Higbee, Botswick's attorney, gave notice that he would appeal to the municipal court and then to the circuit court. He was warned by the mayor, Joseph Smith, that if he did so and took the matter to Carthage, it would stir up the mob and bring them upon Nauvoo. [^5]

Hyrum Smith could never have been guilty of the charges made against him. Those who knew the integrity of his soul and the purity of his heart were outraged at such charges. Hyrum's life had been exemplary. The only criticism one might make would be of his living secretly the celestial law of plural marriage. Perhaps publishing the new doctrine and presenting it to the Saints for their acceptance would have allayed the many evil implications and false rumors. It seemed, however, that the new doctrine was so revolutionary and contrary to the established marriage mores of the western world that the very idea would have touched off an explosion which might have retarded, if not actually destroyed the struggling young Church.

Volunteers were making application to join the western exploration expedition. Also, at the regular council meetings the various eases of apostasy were taken up. The guilty were called in and given a chance to repent; those who failed to repent were excommunicated. Some of these apostates had persuaded some of the elders to re-baptize them without first going through the proper procedure of confession, repentance, and making full amends to the injured parties concerned. The elders who had done the rebaptisms had to be properly instructed.

By March 1, James Arlington Bennett of Long Island, New York, a recent convert to the Church, became the vice-presidential candidate on the Reform Party ticket with Joseph Smith, and the plans for electioneering took precedence over other things. The twelve met in council to make plans and assure each other of the importance of this campaign.

The first warm days of March turned the attention of the temple committee to their responsibility. Thursday, March 7, was a splendid day for a general gathering. Over eight thousand Saints assembled at 9:00 a.m. at the temple. After a hymn by the choir and the invocation by Parley P. Pratt, Hyrum Smith arose and addressed the vast assembly. His talk reflected their attitude toward completing the House of the Lord.

In a clear strong voice he said:

The object of the meeting is to stir up your minds by way of remembrance. It is necessary to have a starting point, which is to build the temple.

With the assistance of the sisters, we expect to get the nails and glass, and with the assistance of the brethren, we expect to do the rest. I will proclaim in public and in private that the sisters bought the glass and nails by penny subscriptions. "Choose ye this day whom ye will serve." [^6]

We shall call upon this vast multitude for a donation to buy powder and fuse-ropes to blast the rocks in the quarry. We want the brethren to do at least as much as the sisters.

We do not intend to finish the Nauvoo House this season, but to take all the hands and finish the temple this summer, or the walls of it, and get the roof on by December, and do off the inside next winter, and about a year from this spring we will dedicate it.

We can do anything we undertake. We have power and we can do great things. In five years the work will progress more than it has done for ten years past. . . . [^7]

When Hyrum had finished, the Prophet spoke to the people about the difficulties encountered by the police in enforcing the law. He reminded the citizens that they were the makers of the laws and that the officers were their servants. He named several members of the Church who were guilty of stirring up strife.

The meeting continued with W. W. Phelps' reading of General Smith's "Views of the Powers and Policy of the General Government of the United States." President Brigham Young and John Taylor spoke on the necessity of contributing to the temple fund, and the meeting concluded with the Prophet's speech about the feasibility of annexing Texas, Mexico, and Canada, and liberating the Negro by indemnifying their owners. After the choir sang, Brigham Young gave the closing prayer.

The warm March weather brought out the buds and made the grass grow enough so that meetings could be held out-of-doors near the temple. On Sunday, March 10, 1844 Wilford Woodruff recorded the lengthy sermon Joseph delivered on the importance of the work of Elias, Elijah, and the Messiah. That morning, the prophet's friend, King Follet, had been buried with full masonic honors. Brother Follet had been killed the day before when an accident occurred while he was digging a well. His death turned the Prophet's thoughts to the great mission of Elijah and temple work. In this sermon the Prophet spoke under the inspiration of heaven. He made it clear how those living cannot be saved without their dead, and vice versa. He also said there was no forgiveness for those who shed innocent blood, and related that the Lord had told him once that, what he asked for, he would have. Continuing, he said:

I have been afraid to ask God to kill my enemies, lest some of them should peradventure, repent.

I asked a short time since for the Lord to deliver me out of the hands of the Governor of Missouri and if it needs to be accomplish it, to take him away. The next news that came pouring from there was that Governor Reynolds had shot himself. I would now say, "Beware, O earth, how you fight against the Saints of God and shed innocent blood, for in the days of Elijah, his enemies came upon him and fire was called down from heaven and destroyed them. . . ."

The Prophet, referring to the doctrine of revelation said:

We cannot be perfect without the fathers, etc. We must have revelation from them, and we can see that the doctrine of revelation far transcends the doctrine of no revelation; for one truth revealed from heaven is worth all the sectarian notions in existence. [^8]

At this time a letter was received from Lyman Wight, member of the twelve, written from Black River Falls, Wisconsin, February 15. He, with other brethren, had been sent to the pinery of Wisconsin to secure lumber for the temple and the Nauvoo House. He spoke encouragingly of being able to get out over a million feet of lumber by July, enough for both projects. He complained of having to transport, clothe, and feed too many lazy men who pretended to assist in the work. He spoke of the friendly Chippewa and Menomanee Indians and their willingness to allow them to cut lumber. He also told of their desire to hear the gospel.

Brother Lyman mentioned the proposition of moving the Saints to Texas and the Southwest. He visioned a great work to be accomplished in taking the gospel to the natives of this region. He said he would await counsel from the brethren at Nauvoo.

The brethren at Nauvoo were hard-pressed for money to provide for the men at the pinery. Attempts were made to raise some cash by borrowing from individuals who had some to lend. The laziness of the men who had been sent for lumber may have been due, at least in part, to the inability of the Church to meet the regular payroll.

The First Presidency sent Elder Orson Pratt to the national capital and Elder Amos Fielding to England. Both were to collect money for the temple by presenting a certificate of authorization bearing the corporation seal, and the signatures of Joseph and Hyrum Smith over the words: "Presiding Elders of the whole Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^9]

Spring brought boat loads of immigrants from England, and many visitors. The Prophet's "Powers and Policy of the General Government of the United States" was being published and had received comments from publishing firms and politicians alike. Of the Prophet some said that he was "more forthright than Henry Clay." He was termed the "Great Mormon Prophet." The eyes of the country were drawn more toward the Mormons and Nauvoo. When visitors came, as others had done the year before, they were astonished at what they beheld in the horseshoe bend of the Father-of-Waters. Such integrity, thrift, and industry demanded their respect.

The river traffic had increased its tempo. The saws, hammers, and trowels heard over the city were busy on new construction. The temple was moving ahead and the farmers were preparing the soil for seeding. The Prophet at this time wrote in exultation: "Almost every stranger that enters our city is excited with astonishment that so much has been done in so short a time, but we flatter ourselves from the known industry, perseverance and diligence of the Saints, that by the return of another winter so much more will be accomplished that his astonishment will be increased to wonder and admiration." [^10]

* * *

About this time, March 26, Hyrum and Joseph learned of a conspiracy going on among the brethren in higher circles. William Law, Counselor to the First Presidency; his brother Wilson Law, an officer in the Nauvoo Legion, together with Chauncey L. Higbee, Francis M. Higbee, Dr. R. D. Foster, and Joseph H. Jackson were plotting the destruction of the Saints. An affidavit concerning the above plot was sworn to before Justice of the Peace, Daniel H. Wells, at Nauvoo. The Prophet was also told how two youths, Dennison L. Harris and Robert Scott, had attended the meetings held by the plotters and when they were asked to take the oath against the Prophet, they refused. The plotters thereupon threatened to take the boys' lives. [^11]

Characteristically, the Prophet Joseph stood at the pulpit and publicly denounced the plotters for what they were, declaring that he had no fear for what they could do, and saying: "I won't swear out a warrant against them, for I don't fear any of them; they would not scare off an old setting hen. I intended to publish all the iniquity that I know of them. If I am guilty, I am ready to bear it. . . . I am willing to do anything for the good of the people." [^12] The Prophet was as bold as a lion against his enemies.

There was a chance for the conspirators to repent, at least for the time being. Sidney Rigdon had been accused of traitorous acts and had pleaded his cause and regained, for the moment, the full confidence of the brethren.

Even though great progress was made at this time in populating Nauvoo and the neighboring settlements, there was a feeling of impending disaster. The council meetings discussed various proposals. Something had to be done. The mind of the Prophet had been on the acquisition of territory such as Texas and Oregon. If the Saints were to be moved out of their place, perhaps a way could be opened by an appeal to Congress. The government could assist the Saints and at the same time bring into the union valuable new territory and thus strengthen the nation.

The council accepted the Prophet's suggestion to memorialize Congress to allow Joseph Smith to raise one hundred thousand armed volunteers, as a United States Army officer, and proceed to Oregon and other bordering territory and make it part of the United States. This should be done to promote a peaceful occupation of these relatively non-occupied territories. Such a move would help facilitate colonization and protect citizens with the pioneer spirit who were beginning now to move into these virgin territories. The peace of any country would not be disturbed, and all treaties between other countries and the United States would be observed.

A few days later, on March 20, the Prophet addressed a Memorial to John Tyler, President of the United States, embodying in it the same sentiments as was contained in the Petition to Congress. Elder Orson Hyde was delegated to take the Memorial to Congress. The Petition was introduced by Mr. Wentworth to the House. Before its reading by Mr. Wentworth was finished, it was objected to by Mr. J. R. Ingersoll. After some discussion it was decided to let a committee, which had been appointed, go into the whole matter of the Oregon Bill. It was evident that Congress was then considering some action on the northwest region of the American continent. No further consideration was given the Prophet's proposals. [^13]

During the latter part of March and the first of April, Hyrum had been very busy. Among his extra responsibilities was that of assisting with the dedication of the recently completed Masonic Temple. On Friday, April 5, the day prior to the annual conference of the Church, over 550 members of the Masonic fraternity assembled from various parts of the world. A procession was formed at Henry Miller's house and was accompanied to the temple by the Nauvoo Brass Band. The dedicatory ceremonies were performed by Worshipful Master Hyrum Smith, and Elder Erastus Snow delivered an able Masonic address. The building was considered the most substantial and best finished Masonic Temple in the Western States.

The day after the dedication of the Masonic Temple, the annual conference of the Church convened. A unique feature of the restored Church has been its plenary meetings, to which friends and strangers as well as members have been welcome to attend. The April gathering was to include the date on which the Church was organized, April 6. Several days were designated and used for instruction, the discussion of problems, filling vacancies in priesthood quorums, hearing reports, ordaining, etc. It was a time of spiritual uplift, counseling, encouragement. The ties of the Church were strengthened by the rededication of purpose, increased loyalty and devotion of its members. Conferences provided opportunity for the people to get acquainted with their leaders, to hear their voices and feel the spirit which strengthened the bonds of love and fellowship. Over the years, each such conference was anticipated with real interest and was attended with zeal to overflowing. It was a source of testimony to both members and investigators.

The Church symbolized the greatest fraternity under God on the earth. And its conferences were like a family gathering of kindred spirits, marked by much hand-shaking, embracing, visiting, renewing old acquaintances, meeting former missionary companions.

The approaching crisis resulting from the movement of opposite forces toward each other separated the sheep and the goats, the righteous from the wicked and those of skepticism from those of great faith. The appraisal of Hyrum Smith may again be made because of the peculiar circumstances arising at this time. He did not compromise with sin when found among the charity cases of his household; he fearlessly vetoed the request of his daughter's hand in marriage by his enemy; he refuted unequivocally charges against him of immorality; his great faith in the erection of the temple and obtaining workmen and material for its early completion electrified the membership of the Church to action, and his fearlessness before traitors and the unscrupulous in the law profession exposing their sinister and wicked designs reveal the soul and character of the man second in command.

After the conference Hyrum's time was divided between his home, his official duties, and his farm east of town. He was a farmer at heart and enjoyed supervising the tasks of the farm and watching the varied landscape that accompanied the changing seasons. He and his family would often ride out to be by themselves where they could enjoy a quiet hour and temporarily forget the cares of the day. Hyrum seemed to draw strength from these quiet moments which filled his soul with the sheer joy of living.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Goudy E. Hogan, BYU, Provo, Utah.
[^2] Joseph Smith op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 302-317. The Prophet spoke three and a half hours. He dwelt on the personality of God and many important concepts.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 322-324.
[^4] Ibid., p. 326.
[^5] Ibid., p. 346-347.
[^6] From William Clayton's Journal, B'k 28. Until his death, Hyrum Smith kept a record of the women's penny fund with the aid of Sister Mercy Thompson. Some paid a year in advance. Nearly $2000 had already been realized, with contributions coming in daily.
[^7] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 236-237.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 252-254.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 263-264.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 265-266.
[^11] See full account in The Contributor, April, 1884.
[^12] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, p. 272.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 281-282. Note—Orson Pratt and John E. Page assisted Elder Hyde in obtaining Congress attention.
