Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXXI

The Last Great Conference

A soft breeze wafting in from the southwest lent a tranquil spirit to the throngs assembling at the meeting place near the temple. Mother nature seemed to have prepared for the occasion by putting on her most becoming frock of green. The trees, the grass, the flowering plants and shrubs were resplendent; and the roads leading to Nauvoo had been well traveled as was evidenced by the line of horses, wagons, and carriages, in view a short distance away.

The fourteenth annual conference of the Church was to be a significant one, not because of the increased membership in attendance nor of the nature of the sermons nor of the work of sending the most able missionaries into the eastern states to proclaim Joseph Smith a candidate for President of the United States, but because this occasion was to be the last time two key men in this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times would stand before them in their official capacity at a general conference, men who had been instruments in the hands of Almighty God in laying the foundation for the kingdom of God here upon the earth. Hyrum and Joseph Smith were to be ruthlessly murdered before another six months had passed.

This great convocation of the faithful symbolized the successful growth and power of the new religious society. It was tangible evidence of the capable leadership God had provided for his Church.

The scene which greeted their eyes as they occupied their places on the temporary lumber rostrum pleased Joseph and Hyrum. All the seats before them were filled; many around the outer fringe of the crowd were standing. At 10:30 a.m. that morning (Friday, April 5, 1844), Elder Brigham Young called the meeting to order. Next to Hyrum and Joseph sat Sidney Rigdon and William Marks, and then Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor and George A. Smith, followed by members of the high council and many elders.

The choir, a well-trained and skilfully conducted group, sang an opening hymn appropriate for the occasion. Then the Prophet Joseph arose and made a few remarks about devoting the time to instructing the Saints on the eternal principles of the gospel rather than on things too trivial to occupy the attention of so large a body. He told them that because of the attendance of so large a crowd and of the weakness of his lungs he would listen to the elders and make such comments and corrections as he saw fit. He said:

. . . Those who feel desirous of sowing the seeds of discord will be disappointed on this occasion. It is our purpose to build up and establish the principles of righteousness, and not to break down and destroy. The Great Jehovah has been ever with me, and the wisdom of God will direct me in the seventh hour. I feel in closer communion and better standing with God than ever I felt before in my life, and I am glad of this opportunity to appear in your midst. I thank God for the glorious day he has given us. In so large a congregation it is necessary that the greatest order and decorum be observed. I request this at your hands, and believe that you will all keep good order.

The invocation was offered by W. W. Phelps, after which the choir sang a second hymn. Elder Sidney Rigdon spoke of his recent ill health, saying that for five years he had been unable to take his proper place in the councils of the Church. He bore a powerful testimony of the divinity of the work. He also dwelt on the early history of the Church. John Taylor followed him to the pulpit and spoke of the importance of freedom and of the responsibility of national leaders to uphold the Constitution and support the rights of its citizens.

The proceedings continued, with only an intermission at noon, until 5:30 p.m., and resumed on schedule the next day, with Sidney Rigdon completing his discourse on church history. His sermon was one of the several spiritual and faith-promoting sermons of the conference.

The afternoon session of the second day of the conference was dismissed at 5:00 p.m., without ceremony, with the appearance of ominous looking clouds. Scarcely had the crowd dispersed when a heavy shower accompanied by wind, thunder, and lightning, struck the spot which had been so crowded short moments before.

On Sunday, April 7, the conference opened with the choir singing "Ye Slumbering Nations That Have Slept." After the opening prayer, the choir sang ''The Spirit of God like a Fire Is Burning," and the Prophet admonished the police to be vigilant in keeping order.

It was apparent that with literally thousands assembled, out-of-doors, utmost order must prevail if the proceedings were to be heard. Every available spot was occupied, even to the lumber frame work at the rear of the rostrum. Seated along this elevated place at the rear where he could hear every word was Goudy E. Hogan, a boy of fourteen, with his friends. He later wrote of this occasion:

I was sitting close behind the Prophet Joseph Smith so that I nearly touched his clothes. I had not been long in the church and was somewhat superstitious and took particular notice of his manner of dress and action. I remember that he was not a proud man. I also remember while one was preaching the Prophet spoke to the Elders that were speaking to stop for a minute. Joseph the Prophet arose from his seat and said in a loud voice owing to the large congregation that was assembled saying he wished that some of those young men on the outside of the congregation who were talking loud to the young ladies would not do so but wait and go to their homes and speak to them by the consent of their parents. Joseph later left his seat and went to the source. [^1]

During noon intermission that day thirty-five were baptized in the Mississippi River.

At 2:00 p.m. Patriarch Hyrum Smith arose to say something about the temple.

We want 200,000 shingles as we shall resume work on the temple immediately. All who have not paid their tithing, come on and do it. We want provisions, money, boards, planks, and anything that is good; we don't want any more old guns or watches. I thought some time ago I would get up a small subscription so that the sisters might do something. In consequence of some misunderstanding, it has not gone on as at first. It is a matter of my own; I do not ask it as a tithing. I give a privilege to any one to pay a cent a week, or fifty cents a year. I want it by next fall to buy nails and glass. It is difficult to get money. I know that a small subscription will bring more than a large one. The poor can help in this way. I take the responsibility upon myself and call again upon the sisters. I call again until I get about $1,000. It requires two thousand subscribers.

I have sent this subscription plan to England and the branches. I am not to be dictated to by any one except the Prophet and God. I want you to pay in your subscriptions to me and it shall always be boldly said by me, the sisters bought the glass in that house, and their names shall be written in the Book of the Law of the Lord. It is not a tax, but a free will offering to procure something which shall ever be a monument of your works. No member of the Relief Society got it up. I am the man that did it. They ought not to infringe upon it. I am not a member of the female Relief Society! I am one of the committee of the Lord's House.

I wish to accomplish something; I wish all the Saints to have an opportunity to do something. I want the poor with the purse of five dollars to have a chance. The widow's two mites were more in the eyes of the Lord than the purse of the rich; and the poor woman shall have a seat in the house of God. She who pays her two mites as well as the rich, because it is all she has. I wish to have a place in the house. I intend to stimulate the brethren. I want to get the roof in this season. I want to get the windows in the winter, so that we may be able to dedicate the House of the Lord by this time next year, if nothing more than one room. I will call upon the brethren to do something.

I cannot make a comparison between the House of God and anything now in existence. Great things are to grow out of that house. There is a great and mighty power to grow out of that house. There is an endowment. Knowledge is power. We want knowledge. We have frequently difficulties with persons who profess to be Latter-day Saints. When the sacrament will be administered in the Lord's House it will do away with a great deal of difficulty that is now in existence. If we can have a privilege and confess our faults unto God and one another every Sabbath day, it will do away with these. You sisters will have a seat in that house. I will stand on the top of that pulpit and proclaim to all what the sisters have done. When you offer up your sacraments every Sabbath you will feel well a whole week; you will get a great portion of the Spirit of God, enough to last you a week-and you will increase. We are now deprived of the privilege of giving the necessary instruction, hence we want a house.

All the money shall be laid out for what you design it. It shall not be paid for anything else. I am one of the committee. The committee tells me the quarry is blockaded; it is filled with rock. The stone cutters are wanting work. Come on with your teams as soon as conference is over. It is not necessary for me to tell who will come and do it. I will prophesy that you will do it. There is not one in the city but what will do right if he knows it, with only one or two exceptions, and they are not worth notice. God will take care of them, and if He doesn't the devil will. . . .

. . . If you hear of any one in high authority that he is rather inclined to apostasy, don't let prejudice arise, but pray for him. God may feel after him, and he may return. Never speak reproachfully or disrespectfully; he is in the hands of God. I am one of those peacemakers who take a stand above these little things. It has been intimated we should have investigations this conference. Do you think I would trouble this conference with it? If I have a difficulty with a man, I will go and settle it. Let them settle their difficulties. There is not a man who has had a difficulty who would trouble this congregation about it. We ask no favors, we can settle it ourselves. Don't think anything about persons who are on the eve of apostasy. God is able to take care of them. Let God judge; do your duty and let men alone.

Never undertake to destroy men because they do some evil thing. It is natural for a man to be led and not driven. Put down iniquity by good works. Many men speak without any contemplation; if they had given the matter a little contemplation it would not have been spoken. We ought to be careful of what we say and take the example of Jesus; cast over men the mantle of charity, and try to cover their faults. We are made to enlighten and not to darken one another; save men, not destroy them. Do unto others what you would have them do unto you. It is well enough to root out conspiracy. Do not fear, but if you are in the right track, having God to guide you, He will save you; for God will save you, if He has to destroy the wicked so as by fire.

I want to put down all false influence. If I thought I should be saved and any in the congregation be lost, I should not be happy. For this purpose Jesus effected a resurrection. Our Savior is competent to save all from death and hell. I can prove it out of the revelation. I would not serve a God that had not all wisdom and all power.

The reason I feel so good is because I have a big soul. There are men with small bodies who have got souls like Enoch. We have. We have gathered our big souls from the end of the earth. The Gospel picks the big souls out of all creation, and we will get the big souls out of all the nations, and we shall have the largest city in the world.

We will gather all the big souls out of every nation. As soon as the Gospel catches hold of noble souls, it brings them all right up to Zion. There is a thing called guiding star. The Gospel is similar. We will have a people great enough to be saved.

Popery could not write what Enoch preached. He told the people that God took him up into a high mountain, showed him the distress of the people- the destruction of the world, and he said his heart swelled wide as eternity. But adherents of Popery could not receive anything as large as that, and every man-made society is just like them. Men's souls conform to the society in which they live, with very few exceptions, and when men come to live with the Mormons, their souls swell as if they were going to stride the Republic of America. I can believe that man can go from planet to planet-a man gets so high in the mansions above.

A certain good sister came to my house and she was troubled because she heard so many big things. She thought it weakened her faith. I told her she had too much faith. She believed too much. I will tell you how you may know whether the thing is true or not. When any one comes to you with a lie, you feel troubled. God will trouble you, and will not approbate you in such belief. You had better get some antidote to get rid of it. Humble yourself before God and ask Him for His Spirit and pray to Him to judge it for you. It is better not to have so much faith than to have so much as to believe all the lies.

Before this conference closes, I want to get all the Elders together. I shall make a proclamation. I want to take the line and ax and hew you, make you as straight as possible. I will make you as straight as a stretched line. Every Elder that goes from Nauvoo to preach the Gospel, if he preaches anything else, we will silence him through the public print. I want all the Elders to meet and to understand; and if they preach anything but the pure truth, we will call them home.

The conference session ended at 3:15 p.m. After a brief intermission, another meeting was called to order and President Joseph Smith delivered the King Follett funeral sermon before twenty thousand Saints. [^2]

There seemed to be a spirit of urgency among the brethren to teach the Saints certain principles of the eternal gospel. The thousands present had been gathered from different church groups. They had been believers in the Bible, in Jesus Christ, and in many of the principles of the gospel. However, their interpretations of the gospel message varied greatly, and their previous indoctrination affected, to some degree at least, their regard for the principles laid down by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Therefore, as Hyrum, Joseph, and the twelve faced this vast audience, they felt the great responsibility of teaching, instructing, and counseling these, the charter members of the Church, who would soon be faced with the necessity of making momentous decisions. Their faith would be tried in the fires of adversity, and they would be called upon to lay down their lives for the gospel's sake. Sensing, perhaps, what lay ahead, the leaders called many meetings with sermons of long duration. They talked themselves hoarse in their efforts to be heard by all at the open air sessions.

The Sunday afternoon sermon of Hyrum Smith revealed his anxiety to complete the temple and his Christian spirit toward all men. He valued the dignity of the human personality, even of those who disagreed with him and those who were harboring the seeds of apostasy in their hearts. He was a peacemaker who counseled forbearance when people were brought before the courts. For him no decision could be made until both sides of the question were fully reviewed.

The conference continued Monday. The Prophet limited his talk because of insufficient vocal power, but he mentioned briefly the scope of Zion which included North and South America, and stated that Stakes of Zion would be established even in such large cities as Boston and New York."

On the fifth day of the conference, Hyrum Smith spoke again:

You are to vote for good men, and if you do not do this, it is a sin. Choose the good and refuse the evil. Men of false principles have preyed upon us like wolves upon helpless lambs. Damn the rod of tyranny; curse it. Let every man use his liberties according to the Constitution. Don't fear man or devil; electioneer with all people, male and female, and exhort them to do the thing that is right. We want a President of the U. S., not a party President, but a President of the whole people; for a party President disfranchises the opposing party. Have a President who will maintain every man in his rights.

I wish all of you to do all the good you can. We will try to convert the nations into one solid union. I despise the principle that divides the nation into party and faction. I want it to grow up like a green bay tree. Damn the system of splitting up the nation into opposite belligerent parties. Whatever are the rights of men guaranteed by the Constitution of these United States, let them have them. Then, if we were all in union, no one dare attempt to put a warlike foot on our soil. I don't like to see the rights of Americans trampled down. I am opposed to the policy of all such persons as would allow Great Britain or any other power to take from us Oregon, or any portion of our national territory, and damn all who attempt it. Lift up your voices like thunder. There is power and influence enough among us to put in a President. I don't wonder at the old Carthagenian lawyer being afraid of Joseph Smith being elected. [^3]

At 10:40 a.m. a call was made for preaching volunteers to march out to the green. A great company numbering 244 moved out and returned at the right of the stand.

The conference was considered a success, as the words of the Prophet testify:

The weather has been beautiful for the conference, and they have been the greatest, best, and most glorious five consecutive days ever enjoyed by this generation. There was much good accomplished. Many spectators were present from Quincy, Alton, Warsaw, Fort Madison and other towns. The large number and good order spoke well for the morality of the city. [^4]

And trouble within the church again became a reality. On April 18, within ten days after the general conference, the Twelve Apostles and high council met to hear charges against Robert D. Foster, Wilson and William Law. After careful deliberation on the part of the brethren, these three were excommunicated from the Church. They were later joined by others who hated Hyrum and Joseph, so that there were Foster's brother Charles, and also Chauncey and Francis Higbee, who met Joseph in front of his office and engaged him in an argument, drew a pistol and attempted to shoot the Prophet. Charles Foster then went to Warsaw and had several vile articles published against the Prophet.

Regular council meetings were held by the brethren. Members of the twelve were preparing to go on missions while the well-known enemies from within continued their conspiracy. Those who were cut off decided that Joseph Smith was a fallen Prophet; therefore they would organize a church of their own. The group met at Wilson Law's place on Sunday, April 28, and appointed Wilson Law to take the place of Joseph Smith, with Austin Cowles and William Law to be his counselors. A committee composed of William and Wilson Law, Austin A. Cowles, John Scott, Sr., Francis M. Higbee, Robert D. Foster, and Robert Pierce were to visit different families in the city. [^5]

About this time, William Smith, one of the twelve, was away with his family in the East doing missionary work. Having been a candidate to the Illinois State Legislature, he withdrew his candidacy in favor of his brother Hyrum Smith. The editor of the Nauvoo Neighbor wrote:

We know of no person that would be more qualified to fill this station than General Hyrum Smith (his, William's brother). We are not informed whether the General will accept of the office or not. If he will we don't know of any gentleman in Hancock Co. who would be more competent. General Smith is a man of sterling integrity, deep penetration, and brilliant talents. He is well versed in politics and unchangeable as the everlasting hills. He is a man of probity and virtue, and an unwavering patriot.

If General H. Smith will allow his name to be brought forth we go it for him; and we know from the confidence and respect that is entertained for him as a gentleman and patriot, he will be elected. What say you, General?

Hyrum Smith already had far greater responsibilities than those involved in becoming a state senator. Yet here was an opportunity for him to serve his state, and it was unfortunate that the legislature had so few men of General Smith's caliber. Yet the need for Hyrum to remain at the side of his brother Joseph was more imperative than ever. With William Law, Counselor in the First Presidency, excommunicated, and Sidney Rigdon, the other member of the Presidency, soon to go to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to hide his true feelings toward the Prophet, Hyrum was doubly needed as a loyal support on whom the Prophet could lean heavily for both consolation and advice.

The plot on the lives of Hyrum Smith and his brother Joseph was hatching and the forces of mobocracy, neither knowing nor respecting law and order, were closing in. There was little time remaining for Hyrum to accomplish what he had hoped to do.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 350-362.
[^2] Ibid., p. 367.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 373-376.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 392-397.
[^5] Ibid., p. 403.
