Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXXII

The Crisis

The spring of 1844 was unusual because of so much rain. The first week in May was marked by severe thunderstorms-but each time the clouds parted the earth appeared renewed, a verdant landscape of grass, shrubs, and trees. The young fruit trees covered with blossoms seemed to be symbols of heaven-sent blessings and gave hope and cheer to the Saints. Although the good reports from the mission field, especially from England had heartened Hyrum Smith, and a successful conference had been held from April 6 to 9, and new emigrants were coming to Zion, May 1844 was to be a troublesome month for him. As a general in the Nauvoo Legion, it was necessary for him to sit at a courtmartial for Major-General Wilson and Colonel R. D. Foster, who had spread slander against the Prophet Joseph by saying that he kept a gang about his house for the purpose of robbing and plundering, and that he got hall the plunder. They had also said that General Joseph Smith tried to get Foster to go and kill Governor Boggs. [^1]

It was very depressing to Hyrum to see two prominent men such as Wilson and Foster dropped from their high position. However, action had to be taken because these men were part of a conspiracy to destroy Hyrum and Joseph. The courtmartial was held on Thursday and Friday, May 9 and 10. On the tenth the apostates distributed among the people a Prospectus of the Nauvoo Expositor which they were going to begin publishing.

Sunday morning, May 12, the Prophet spoke at the meeting. A shower the night before had imparted a special freshness to the atmosphere for the occasion, and the Prophet's remarks were timely. He said, defending his prophetic calling: "False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets and they will prophesy so very near the truth that they will deceive almost the very chosen ones." Continuing, he explained the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead and the fulness of the ordinances for both the living and the dead. President Hyrum Smith and Elder Lyman Wight also addressed the Saints.

About this time Hyrum received an anonymous letter threatening his life. Supposedly from Joseph H. Jackson, the missive called upon him to make his peace with God, for he would soon have to die. [^2]

The brethren were kept posted on the general conditions at Nauvoo. The threats of the enemy and the apostasy among those of the higher councils did not blind them to the grand objective of Zion and the work of the Lord. A hopeful and optimistic spirit pervaded the letters sent abroad to the missionaries, and through the medium of the Times and Seasons, the membership was encouraged.

On Wednesday, May 15, an article written by the Prophet appeared in the above periodical. In it the Saints abroad were told that Nauvoo continued to flourish: New homes were being built, the temple was rapidly progressing, and the Saints continued to flock together from all parts of the continent and Islands of the sea; three shiploads of Saints had arrived from England that spring; of these many had discovered that Joseph Smith, contrary to former opinion was a gentleman and scholar. . .open, generous, and brave.

Speaking of the attitude of his enemies toward himself Joseph said in the article: "A few heartless villains can always be found who are watching for his downfall or death. . . .One or two disaffected individuals have made an attempt to spread dissention, but it is like a tale that is nearly told and will soon be forgotten."

Perhaps Hyrum, Joseph, and others were overly optimistic about conditions in Nauvoo, and more attention should have been paid to thwarting the enemy in such things as their establishment of a rival press in the form of the Nauvoo Expositor. The city council should have refused them permission to operate in order to prevent the spreading of trouble.

At this time a long letter was received from Elder Orson Hyde, reporting on the progress of the Memorial to Congress about annexing Oregon as a place of refuge for the Saints. [^3] John E. Page and Parley P. Pratt had worked with him. Major Semple, senior member of Congress from Illinois, had discouraged any possibility of Joseph Smith or other volunteers being given army status for such a move. Judge Douglas was in favor of the Mormon proposal. He said that he thought the time was ripe for the settlement of Oregon and California and that if he could command the force Mr. Smith could, he would resign his seat in Congress and would be on the march to the country in a month. Elder Hyde had obtained a map of Oregon made by Lieut. J. C. Fremont, who said the distance from Nauvoo to Umpqua and Klamet, Oregon, was seventeen hundred miles from Nauvoo, through Iowa, along the north fork of the Platte River to South Pass and on through the Rocky Mountains.

Elder Hyde attributed to two causes the indifference of Congress toward his proposal: the approaching election and the jealousy among lawmakers of the rising power of Joseph Smith and the Mormons. The temper of the present group in Congress was that if a cause might endanger their political aspirations, it should be left alone, whether right or wrong. Each man, regardless of principle, must protect his office.

Elder Hyde and Elder Pratt had drafted a bill which they had given to the judiciary committee of the Senate, asking for two million dollars for the relief of the Saints expelled from Missouri from 1836-39. By this means the elders hoped to provoke Congress into doing something for the Saints. But the hope was a vain one.

This message from Orson Hyde foreshadowed the trek of the Saints across Iowa, along the north fork of the Platte River to South Pass and on to Salt Lake Valley and the Great Basin, which would be undertaken within three short years without government aid.

The culmination of the proposal that Joseph Smith be a candidate for the presidency of the United States came on Friday, May 17, when the state convention met in the assembly room at Nauvoo. Minutes of the meeting reveal that a move was made to draft resolutions, and delegates from the various states of the Union were received by vote. The chairman, the Hon. John S. Reid, addressed the assembly, outlining the early court cases of the Prophet Joseph. He emphasized the character and worthiness of the Prophet for such a high position. [^4]

In the meantime, however, the apostates, William Law and Robert D. Foster, were at Carthage stirring up trouble. They had secured a warrant for the Prophet's arrest on a charge of adultery, and the Prophet had remained at home for several days to avoid being arrested and taken to Carthage.

On Thursday evening, May 23, Hyrum Smith came to the Prophet and cautioned him against speaking so freely against his enemies, that is, in such a way as to make his words actionable. Joseph, being highly incensed over the many lies told about him replied that six months would not roll over Hyrum's head before their enemies would swear twelve as palpable lies about Hyrum as they had about himself. [^5]

On Saturday, May 25, Joseph was advised by Edward Hunter and William Marks, who as members of the grand jury had just returned from Carthage, that there were two indictments against him: one charging him with false swearing, on the testimony of Joseph H. Jackson and Robert D. Foster; and the other charging him with polygamy, on the testimony of William Law. Francis M. Higbee had sworn so vehemently that Joseph had received stolen property that his testimony was rejected. [^6]

After a long talk with Hyrum, Dr. Richards, William Marks, and others, the Prophet decided not to avoid his accusers any longer. Considering his social station and the love of the Saints for him, it was especially difficult for him to be hiding and waiting for circumstances to develop in his favor. No doubt he had received assurance from the whispering of the Spirit that he should risk his life by facing his enemies. Hyrum's advice, and that of others, was to submit to arrest and see the charges through.

Hyrum Smith was present when the Prophet spoke from the stand on Sunday, May 26, at 10:00 a.m. He spoke against the dissenters at Nauvoo and tried to explain how certain ones had perjured themselves before the court. His remarks in this talk were tempered in contrast to those of previous talks, for he took Hyrum's advice to avoid speaking so freely against his enemies.

In his remarks Joseph compared his life to that of Paul of old, saying:

I, like Paul, have been in perils, and oftener than anyone in this generation. As Paul boasted, I have suffered more than Paul did. I should be like a fish out of water if I were out of persecution. . . . The Lord has constituted me so curiously that I glory in persecution.

The next morning, Monday, May 27, Hyrum and Joseph with twenty or more of the brethren on horseback left Nauvoo at eight o'clock for Carthage. They had decided that it was best to meet his enemies before the circuit court and have the indictments against him investigated.

The news of his going to Carthage preceded him. When they arrived at the Hamilton Hotel at Carthage, Joseph H. Jackson, Francis M. and Chauncey L. Higbee were in the hotel. Charles D. Foster had ridden out three or four miles to meet the company. In his conversation with the Prophet going into Carthage, he seemed calmer than he had been previously. Soon after the party arrived in Carthage, Charles Foster took the Prophet into a private room and in a friendly manner told him that there was a conspiracy to take his life. He later told some of the brethren, with tears in his eyes, that there were some persons very determined that Joseph should not leave Carthage alive. Jackson was seen to load his pistols and was heard to swear that he would have satisfaction of Joseph and Hyrum.

Joseph's counsel was unable to get the plaintiff to produce the particular witness for the trial. Judge Thomas treated Joseph with utmost courtesy, and it was decided to defer the court proceedings until the next term. The sheriff told the Prophet that he could go home where the sheriff would call and take bail at his own convenience. On their return to Nauvoo the brethren were detained by a thunder shower, arriving home about 9:00 p.m.

By June 1, the name of Joseph Smith was becoming widely known as a candidate for the presidency of the United States. Word came of a straw vote cast aboard the Osprey (a river steamer) in which Joseph Smith was the favorite candidate by a vote of three to one. One Joel H. Walker volunteered by letter for the proposed western movement to be headed by the Prophet. Word was received at Nauvoo that the Democrats had dropped Van Buren and substituted James K. Polk of Tennessee as their candidate for President of the United States.

At a meeting held the first Saturday in June, Hyrum Smith spoke of the Fosters, Higbees, and Laws and of their past "loyalty" to the Prophet. He said that while Joseph was under arrest during the Missouri persecutions these apostates would have been ridden out on a rail, if he (Hyrum) had not stepped forward to prevent it, because of their oppressing the poor. He also recalled Joseph H. Jackson's coming to Nauvoo and asking him for the hand of his daughter in marriage and the threats which had followed his refusal to give his permission for the marriage.

Hyrum spoke further of conspirators and of the editor of the Warsaw Signal, and of the importance of suppressing that spirit which had driven the Saints from Missouri. He recalled a number of occasions when William Law had oppressed the poor and had failed to keep his word. He also mentioned the impropriety of Wilson Law in his association with a seventeen year old orphan girl, a recent immigrant from England.

Hyrum called for the Prospectus of the Nauvoo Expositor to be read. This paper, so said the Prospectus, was to be published by the apostate faction every Friday beginning June 7, 1844. The publishers pledged to issue 52 copies to each subscriber. Among other things the Prospectus claimed that because of their particular stations, they had knowledge of the many gross abuses exercised under the "Pretended" authorities of the charter of the city of Nauvoo and by the legislative authorities of said city and of the insupportable oppression of the ministerial powers in carrying out the unjust, illegal, and unconstitutional ordinances of the same. . . . It advocated the repeal of the Nauvoo Charter.

The first issue of the Nauvoo Expositor made its appearance, as promised, on Friday, June 7. Its slander was directed primarily against the leaders of the Church, particularly against Joseph Smith, the Prophet. In its scurrilous pages the apostates achieved their designs and now waited for the reaction.

On Sunday, June 9, Hyrum Smith spoke from the stand. The Prophet was not well; his voice had been impaired by much public speaking. At six o'clock in the evening there was a meeting at the Mansion House. Something must be done to meet the crisis. It was decided that the city council should meet the next day and take whatever action seemed necessary.

At ten o'clock the following morning the city council met to investigate the merits of the Nauvoo Expositor, and after about seven hours of deliberation declared the Expositor a public nuisance. Except for one vote by Councilor Warrington, a non-Mormon, the following resolution was accepted:

Resolved, by the city council of Nauvoo, that the printing-office from whence issues the Nauvoo Expositor which may be or exist in said establishment and papers to be removed without delay in such a manner as he shall direct. Signed, George W. Harris, President, protem. W. Richards, Recorder.

The order to the mayor was as follows:

To the Marshal of said city, Greetings.

You are here commanded to destroy the printing press from whence issue the Nauvoo Expositor and remove the type of said printing establishment in the street, and burn all the Expositors and libelous handbills found in said establishment, and if resistance is offered to your execution of this order by the owners or others, demolish the house, and if anyone threatens you or the mayor or the officers of the city, arrest them who threaten you and fail not to execute this order without delay, make due return hereon. By order of City Council, Signed, Joseph Smith, Mayor.

The council adjourned at 6:30 p.m. and by 8.00 p.m. the new press of one issue, which was its first and last, was destroyed.

Joseph Smith, mayor, had given the orders to city marshal, John P. Greene, who was assisted by a squadron of the Nauvoo Legion under the direction of acting Major-General Jonathan Dunham. The establishment was forcibly entered, the press, printed paper, and fixtures carried into the street and burned. The posse then returned with the marshal and several hundred citizens to the front of the Mansion House where the mayor addressed them. He assured them of the propriety of the action and that not one hair of their heads should be hurt for it. He stated also that he cared not how many papers were published in the city if they printed the truth but said that he would never submit to having another libelous publication in the city. [^7]

Marshal Greene's reply read:

The printing press and type is destroyed . . . according to order on this 10th day of June, 1844, about 8:00 p.m., J. P. Greene, C. M.

Another order was given as follows:

Headquarters, Nauvoo Legion, June 10th, 1844. To Jonathan Dunham, acting Major General of the Nauvoo Legion. You are hereby commanded to hold the Nauvoo Legion in readiness forthwith to execute the city ordinances and especially to remove the printing establishment of the "Nauvoo Expositor," and this is what you are required to do at sight, under the penalty of the laws, provided the Marshall shall require it and need your services. Signed, Joseph Smith, Lieut.-General, Nauvoo Legion. [^8]

The brethren were aware that the owners of the new press—the Laws, Fosters, Higbees, and others—had organized a secret society to destroy Joseph and Hyrum Smith and drive the Mormons from the state. Therefore the council passed an ordinance concerning libels and false statements made for the purpose of exciting the public mind against the chartered privileges, peace, and good order, or slander of any portion of the inhabitants of said city, etc. Such disturbers of the peace should be fined, upon conviction before the mayor or municipal court, the sum of $500, or imprisoned six months, or both at the discretion of said mayor or court. Furthermore, there should be nothing in foregoing ordinances to interfere with the rights of any person to be tried by a jury or to have freedom of speech or liberty of the press, according to the most liberal meaning of the Constitution.

Minutes of the meetings of the city council recorded Friday and Saturday of that week reveal, among other things, how the council discussed the record and characters of the apostate group supporting the Expositor, which had appeared over the signatures of William Law, Wilson Law, Charles Ivans, Francis M. Higbee, Chauncey L. Higbee, Robert D. Foster, and Charles A. Foster as publishers.

Counselor Hyrum Smith was in favor of declaring the Expositor a nuisance. The best way to be rid of it was to smash the press and pi the type. He spoke of the Warsaw Signal and disapprobated its libelous course.

It was suggested that perhaps a stiff fine of three thousand dollars would deter the enemies' efforts in perpetuating the libelous sheet. But, what good would that do, reasoned Hyrum, referring to the mortgages on the property of the proprietors of the Expositor. There would be little chance of collecting damages for libels.

Thus the problem of the Expositor was met and action taken. The enemy paper evoked instant retaliation which, for the moment, thwarted their plans. Characteristically the Prophet had faced the issue forthrightly.

At 2:00 p.m., Hyrum Smith, with a large group at the courtroom, listened for about two hours to Joseph speak on passing events. The Prophet told the group that he was ready to fight if compelled by the mob to do so, for he would not be in bondage. He asked those present if they would stand by him, and they all cried "Yes!" At the close of the speech, Hyrum accompanied the Prophet to his home.

David Harvey Redfield reported to Hyrum and Joseph that just prior to the destruction of the Expositor, Charles A. Foster, speaking of the new press said, ". . . If they lay their hands upon it or break it, they may date their downfall from that very hour, and in ten days there will not be a Mormon left in Nauvoo." [^9]

The destruction of the Expositor was like the lighting of a fuse, so rapidly did the news spread. The enemy boldly predicted that great calamity awaited the Prophet and the citizens of Nauvoo.

At 10:00 a.m. Wednesday, June 12, the second day following the destruction of the Expositor, an officer arrested Joseph and Hyrum Smith with sixteen others of the city council, on a complaint made by owners of the press upon the oath of Francis M. Higbee. The writ ordered the defendants to be brought before Justice of the Peace Thomas Morrison, at Carthage, or some other Justice of the Peace, to answer the charges and be further dealt with according to law.

After the writ was read Joseph pointed out the clause, ". . . or some other Justice of the Peace," and informed the officer that they would be ready to go before Esquire Johnson or any other Justice of the peace at Nauvoo. To this the officer, David Bettisworth, swore he would be damned, but he would carry them to Carthage. He was asked if he intended to break the law, for he knew the privilege of the prisoners, and they should be permitted to exercise it. Joseph called on all present to witness his offer to go before the nearest Justice of the Peace; Hyrum did the same, and they also called upon those present to witness whether or not the officer broke the law.

The Prophet took out a writ of habeas corpus and signed a petition to the local court giving reasons for his actions. The writ for his arrest was made upon the charge of "riot." Since there was no riot in carrying out the order for the destruction of the press, the charge was not valid. In addition, the person who made the charge (Francis M. Higbee), because of his previous conduct and threats against the life of the Prophet and the city of Nauvoo, had shown malice, private pique, and corruption. Such a charge for the arrest of the city council was outright persecution against the Prophet and Hyrum and was nothing more than part of the conspiracy to throw the defendants into the hands of their enemies.

The petition of the Prophet was granted by the Municipal Court of Nauvoo, and at 5:00 p.m. the same day the defendants were acquitted of the charge and released.

On Thursday, June 13, some 300 citizens met at Carthage to organize and draw up resolutions to avenge the destruction of the Expositor at Nauvoo. The charges were very inflammatory. It was stated that the act of destruction was violent and carried out in a tumultuous manner. Specific charges were made against Hyrum Smith as follows:

And whereas Hyrum Smith did, in the presence of the City Council and the citizens of Nauvoo, offer a reward for the destruction of the printing press and materials of the Warsaw Signal, a newspaper also opposed to his interests.

And whereas the liberty of the press is one of the cardinal principles of our government, firmly guaranteed by the several constitutions of the states, as well as the United States;

And whereas, Hyrum Smith has within the last week publicly threatened the life of one of our valued citizens, Thomas C. Sharp, the editor of the Signal; . . .

Resolved, that the time in our opinion has arrived when the adherents should then be demanded at their hands; and, if not surrendered, a war of extermination should be waged to the entire destruction, if necessary, for our protection of his adherents. And we hereby recommend this resolution to the consideration of the several townships, to the Mass Convention to be held at Carthage, hereby pledging ourselves to aid to the utmost the complete consummation of the object in view, that we may be utterly relieved of the alarm, anxiety, and trouble to which we are now subjected. . . [^10]

The resolutions ended by advising the different precincts to hold themselves in readiness to obey the officer in possession of the writs whenever called upon, in summoning the posse, and were signed by John Knox, President, John Doty, Lewis F. Evans, Vice-Presidents, and W. Y. Head, Secretary.

To counteract the above proceedings the Prophet wrote a letter to Governor Ford stating briefly the details of the Expositor affair, cautioning him against believing lying reports in circulation by the enemy "that there had been a mob at Nauvoo, and blood and thunder, and swearing that two men were killed."

This communique was followed by one from John M. Bernhisel, confirming the accuracy of the Prophet's report and also containing Mr. Bernhisel's appraisal of the Prophet. John M. Bernhisel had been a boarder in General Smith's family for over nine months. He had found Joseph Smith to be a man of strong mental powers and possessed with much energy and decision of character, great penetration and a profound knowledge of human nature. He found Joseph to be a man of calm judgment, enlarged views, and eminently distinguished by his love of justice. Mr. Bernhisel said that he was kind and obliging, generous and benevolent, sociable and cheerful, and was possessed of a mind of a contemplative and reflective character. He stated further that Joseph was honest, frank, fearless, and independent, and as free from dissimulation as any man to be found.

Still speaking of the Prophet, he wrote:

But it is in the gentle charities of domestic life, as the tender and affectionate husband and parent; the warm and sympathetic friend, that the prominent traits of his character are revealed, and his heart is felt to be keenly alive to the kindest and softest emotions of which human nature is susceptible; and I feel assured that his family and friends formed one of the greatest consolations to him when the vials of wrath were poured upon his head, while his footsteps were pursued by malice and envy, and reproach and slander were strewn in his path as well as numerous and cruel persecutions, and severe and protracted sufferings in chains and loathsome prisons, for worshipping God according to the dictates of his own conscience.

He is a true lover of his country and a bright and shining example of integrity and moral excellence in all the relations of life. As a religious teacher, as well as a man, he is greatly beloved by his people. It is almost superfluous to add that the numerous ridiculous and scandalous reports in circulation respecting him have not the least foundation in truth. . . .

Another letter to Governor Ford was written by J. R. Wakefield, M.D., a stranger in Nauvoo, a guest for several weeks at the Mansion House. Speaking of the Expositor he said,

. . . It was a nuisance of the worst character and the authorities acted perfectly proper in destroying it, and in accomplishing the act there was no noise, tumult or riot. Furthermore, having remained for a few weeks at General Smith's house, I think it my duty to state that I have seen nothing in his deportment but what is correct in all his domestic relations, being a kind husband and an affectionate father, and all his affairs, both domestic and official, have not only been free of censure, but praiseworthy and ought to be initiated by every one desirous of order and peace. [^11]

The fourth such letter, dated the same day, June 14, was sent by Sidney Rigdon in the hands of Samuel James. For some time the postal service had failed to make delivery of important messages because of their being intercepted by the enemy. In his letter Sidney Rigdon appealed to Governor Ford as an intelligent man. The trouble in Nauvoo, he said, was fomented by a number of citizens in Nauvoo. These individuals had used the Warsaw Signal to communicate their difficulties to the world. He assured the governor that there had been no violence or riot in Nauvoo. [^12]

At this time Sidney Rigdon was not a member of the city council or connected in any way with the municipality of Nauvoo; hence his name was not listed among those who were arrested. He was careful to point out his status in the trouble by writing: ". . . In consequence of the difficulties now existing in this county, difficulties in which I have no concern"; and, at the end of the letter, a similar expression in these words: "I send this to your Excellency as confidential as I wish not to take any part in the affair or be known in it.

However, Sidney Rigdon gave the governor some timely advice in these words:

The citizens of this county who do not reside in Nauvoo and those of other counties have indeed no interest of a personal kind at stake in this matter. There are no persons disturbing them nor going to do so, and this great excitement does savor of something else to me than a regard for the laws. Why not let the parties, as in all other cases of the kind, settle their difficulties as the laws of the country in such cases have provided.

Have the citizens of Nauvoo ever interfered with cases of difficulty existing in other parts of the county, held public meetings to inflame the public mind in favor of one party and prejudice it against the other party? Most assuredly they have not. Why then must the citizens of this place be scourged with such attempts?

If the citizens of Hancock want the supremacy of the laws maintained, let these tumultuous assemblies disperse and let the civil officers, if resisted, do as in other cases, call for aid instead of assembling in advance and then call for persons to be brought into their midst as prisoners amidst threats and insults. [^13]

By Saturday reports were received at Nauvoo that Colonel Levi Williams had demanded the surrender of all arms belonging to the Mormons in the vicinity of Lima. Two brethren from Lima visited the Prophet and were told that when they gave up their arms they should give up their lives with them as dearly as possible.

Rumors reached Nauvoo that a company was training at Carthage and that several boxes of arms had arrived from Warsaw and Quincy. There was to be a meeting at Carthage the middle of the following week.

The primary concern of the brethren was no longer the national political scene but to assure themselves and the Saints protection against the threats of their enemies at home. The Governor was in a position to take action against the rising mob spirit, but would he do so? Should Hyrum, Joseph, and others go to Carthage for a trial on charges growing out of the Expositor affair? The events of the following week brought the answer.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 473-481.
[^2] Ibid., p. 495.
[^3] Ibid., p. 496.
[^4] Ibid., p. 499.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 508-518.
[^6] Ibid., p. 520.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 528-532.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 533-541.
[^9] Life of John Taylor, p. 125.
[^10] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 545-546.
[^11] Ibid., p. 546. Here the direct quotations of Joseph end. Concerning the Prophet's desire to have Hyrum live and the purpose of it Mr. Edward Tullidge in his Life of Joseph and the Prophet gives a different version: "I want Hyrum to live to lead the Church, but he is determined not to leave me." (Tullidge p. 491.) On what authority Mr. Tullidge makes the change is not known, but there is evidence in addition to this statement that the Prophet did desire to have Hyrum Smith succeed him in the Presidency of the Church, and even that he "ordained" him to take that place. At the October conference following the martyrdom of the brothers, President Brigham Young said: "Did Joseph ordain any man to take his place? He did. Who was it? It was Hyrum. But Hyrum fell a martyr before Joseph did." (Times and Seasons, vol. V., p. 683).
[^12] Ibid., pp. 464-471.
[^13] Ibid., 467-471.
