Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXXIII

Hyrum Smith's Decision

The reverberations of the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor echoed from town to town, from village to village, getting louder and louder and extending even to Missouri. The caldron of hate against Joseph Smith and Hyrum bubbled over in violent demonstrations.

The problem at the moment was to neutralize the supercharged atmosphere and restore a semblance of peace and understanding. Judge Jesse B. Thomas came to Nauvoo and advised Joseph Smith to go to some Justice of the Peace and have an examination of the charges specified in the writ from Justice Morrison of Carthage. Judge Thomas said that an acquittal on these charges would allay all the excitement, answer the law, and cut off all legal pretext for a mob.

This suggestion was complied with. The Prophet and Hyrum, with others previously arrested, were again arrested on the same charges on a complaint made by W. G. Ware. At 2:00 p.m. Monday, June 17, a trial was held before Justice Wells, and after a close examination they were discharged. But this court action did little to alleviate the tension.

Thomas C. Wilson brought word that fifteen hundred Missourians would assemble at Warsaw and from there would go to Carthage. Here they would be met by a company of Quincy Greys. They then would round up all Latter-day Saints in the vicinity and give them the choice of either denying Joseph Smith or leaving their homes for Nauvoo. Then on Thursday next the military body would proceed to Nauvoo and demand Joseph and Hyrum Smith and the city council of said city, and if Joseph and Hyrum Smith and the city council were not turned over to that body it would blow up the city and exterminate all the inhabitants of said city.

Colonel Isaac Morley sent a letter to the Prophet asking what to do if the mob carried out their threats. He was told to retain his arms and use them against the enemy in defense of the Saints unless prudence dictated the retreat of his troops to Nauvoo. In the event that mob militia came upon Nauvoo, he was told to do all he could do to thwart them by coming before them or following in the rear and being ready to cooperate with the main body of the Legion.

Forty gentlemen from Madison, up the river, came to Nauvoo to inquire into the difficulties. The Prophet met them at the Masonic Hall and gave them the desired information they asked for. Dr. Richards, the city recorder, read to them the minutes of the Council declaring the Nauvoo Expositor a nuisance, and the gentlemen expressed themselves satisfied.

Following the interview, Joseph addressed several thousand of the brethren, advising them to make no disturbance. He suggested that they organize and send a delegation of two or three to all the surrounding towns and villages to explain the present trouble and show people that all was peace at Nauvoo and that there was no cause for any mobs.

On this same day, Sunday, June 16, the Prophet wrote the governor of Illinois, inviting him to come with his staff on a visit to Nauvoo and investigate the whole matter without delay. He also wrote a proclamation explaining that no law had been violated in the destruction of the Expositor, that the city of Nauvoo was infested with a set of blacklegs, counterfeiters, and debauchers, and that the proprietors of the Expositor were of that class. He explained that the peace and happiness of Nauvoo demanded the destruction of the Expositor press, the virtue of their wives, and daughters demanded it, and their consciences demanded it as conservators of public peace. [^1]

By this time the anxiety of the brethren had grown to such an extent that they felt their only recourse was to recall the apostles and missionaries abroad and prepare to defend Nauvoo by force of arms.

On Monday, June 17, steps were taken to alert the police of Nauvoo and the legion to be in readiness in case of an attack. The Prophet, as Lieut. General of the Nauvoo Legion, ordered Col. A. P. Rockwood to call out his (Joseph's) guard and staff immediately to Joseph's headquarters. He also ordered the legion to parade the next day. He asked his clerk, Thomas Bullock to remain at the Masonic Hall to hear reports as they came in and make affidavits of the same.

A refutation of Hyrum Smith's purported threat against the editor of the Warsaw Signal in the form of a public announcement was published in the Neighbor as follows:

To the Public: We, whose names are undersigned, having seen in the Warsaw Signal, containing the proceedings of a meeting held at Carthage on the 13th instant, many statements calculated to arouse the indignation and wrath of the people against the citizens of Nauvoo, do certify that Hyrum Smith did not make any threats, nor offer any reward against the Signal or its editor in the City Council. Signed—John Taylor, Aaron Johnson, William Boles, George P. Styles, W. W. Phelps, Alanson Ripley, Orson Spencer, John P. Greene, George W. Harris, Phinehas Richards, Thomas Smith, Edward Hunter, Moses F. Clark, Levi Richards, Addison Everett, and Philip B. Lewis. Dated, Nauvoo, June 17th, 1844. [^2]

The Prophet's clerks made a careful recording of events as they occurred. No detail of news, reports, or action of the city council passed without its being recorded. The Prophet Joseph was aware of the great importance of written testimony of all activities, for such would be used as a basis to judge the participants.

The Nauvoo Neighbor published an editorial in its June 17 issue which read, in part:

. . . So does the simple truth calm the feelings of the irritated, and so we proceed to give the proceedings of the City Council relating to the removal of the Nauvoo Expositor as a nuisance. We have been robbed, mobbed, and plundered with impunity some two or three times and as every heart is more apt to know its own sorrows, the people of Nauvoo had ample reason, when such characters as the proprietors and abettors of the Nauvoo Expositor proved to be before the City Council, to be alarmed for their safety.

The men who got up the press were constantly engaged in resisting the authority or threatening something. If they were fined an appeal was taken, but the slander went on and when the paper came, the course and plan to destroy the press was carried out. The destruction of the city charter and the ruin of the Saints was the all-commanding topic.

Our lives, our city, our charter, and our characters are just as sacred, just as dear, and just as good as other peoples, and while no friendly arm has been extended from the demolition of our press in Jackson County, Missouri, without law, to this present day the City Council with all the laws of nuisance from Blackstone down to the Springfield Charter, knowing that if they exceeded the law of the land, a higher court could regulate the proceedings, abated the Nauvoo Expositor. . . .

All persons otherwise, who, without recourse to justice, mercy, or humanity, come out with inflammatory publication, destructive resolutions, or more especially extermination, show a want of feeling, a want of respect and a want of religious toleration that honorable men will deprecate among Americans as they would the pestilence, famine, or horrors of war. It cannot be that the people are so lost to virtue as to coolly go to murdering men, women and children. No, candor and common sense forbid it! [^3]

The above editorial reflects the point of view of the citizens of Nauvoo toward the enemy. There had been no protest of the old citizens against the Jackson County, Missouri, mob when they destroyed the press in 1833. One may ask why then should such an outburst be made against the destruction of the Expositor press? The Nauvoo paper, in comparison, was justly destroyed.

The parading of the legion was held on schedule. Tuesday morning at nine o'clock. A declaration of martial law was made by the mayor, Joseph Smith. This meant that the officers of the Nauvoo Legion, the police, and all others would strictly see that no persons or property pass in or out of the city without due orders.

At 2:00 p.m. the legion was drawn up in front the Mansion House. The Prophet and Hyrum were in full uniform, and with others occupied the top frame of a building across from the Mansion House. The Prophet spoke for an hour and a half.

This was a memorable occasion. The Prophet, Hyrum, and the loyal brethren and Saints were present to hear and ponder every word. Judge Phelps read the Warsaw Signal extra of the 17th, wherein all the "old citizens" were called to assist the mob in exterminating the leaders of the Saints and driving away the people.

The occasion with the setting was like a great stage. The cause that had brought the multitude together seemed to climax the careers of two mighty prophets and seers of modern time. Like the great leaders he was, Joseph Smith was revealed to his beloved people in this hour of crisis, dignified, fearless, a great citizen of deep feeling. He was a man raised up by God to do a certain work, and he had not failed. Standing like a granite pillar before the traditional forces of evil, he rose to heights of eloquence and inspiration. Hyrum by his side, was but a little older prototype of his younger brother. He too bore the Godly stamp of nobility. This was their finest hour; they had fulfilled their mission, and this occasion was the last time they would appear before the Saints.

The Prophet's words to his people were in part:

It is thought by some that our enemies would be satisfied with my destruction, but I tell you as soon as they have shed my blood they will thirst for the blood of every man in whose heart dwells a single spark of the spirit of the fullness of the Gospel. The opposition of these men is moved by the spirit of the adversary of all righteousness. It is not only to destroy me, but every man and woman who dares believe the doctrines that God hath inspired me to teach this generation.

The Prophet declared the innocence of the Saints and pointed out the perfidy of the law enforcement agency in pursuing a course contrary to the constitution. "It is better," he said, "to die defending your liberties than to live in a state of oppression, cruelty, and anarchy." In a solemn voice he continued: "Come all ye lovers of liberty, break the oppressor's rod, loose the iron grasp of mobocracy and bring to condign punishment all those who trample under foot the glorious Constitution and the people's rights." (Drawing his sword and presenting it to heaven he said):

I call God and angels to witness that I have unsheathed my sword with a firm and unalterable determination that this people shall have their legal rights and be protected from mob violence or my blood shall be spilt upon the ground like water and my body consigned to the silent tomb. While I live, I will never tamely submit to the domination of cursed mobocracy. I would welcome death rather than submit to this oppression, agitation, annoyance, confusion, and alarm upon alarm, any longer. . . . [^4]

Following the assembly the Prophet, with Hyrum and his staff, took command and riding in front of the legion, marched up Main Street, and returned to their former parade ground. The number on parade was very large, considering the number of elders who had been sent upon missions.

That afternoon and evening, nine messengers arrived with letters and affidavits to the Prophet. One report said that Governor Ford was not too cordial with the mob militia leaders when they called on him. They damned Governor Ford for being as bad as old Joe Smith. Apparently the governor had advised them against marching on Nauvoo.

On Wednesday, June 19, plans for complete mobilization of the legion arrived from Green Plains, and at one o'clock that day a company of volunteers arrived from Iowa. These too Joseph escorted to the parade grounds.

During the afternoon orders were given to General Dunham to have a picket-guard under Col. Markham posted on all roads leading out of the city. An inner guard under Major Jesse P. Harmon was posted in all the streets and alleys in the city and on the river bank. Orders were given to have all powder and lead in the city secured and to see that all arms were in use and that all unclaimed arms be put into the hands of those that could use them.

It was learned that there were two hundred armed men at Rocky Run precinct, two hundred at Warsaw, two hundred in Missouri, the whole receiving constant additions.

On the twentieth of June, Joseph Smith, with his staff and Major General Dunham, went to the prairie to view the ground and select a location to meet the mob so that the city would be protected. At 11:00 a.m. Joseph reviewed the legion facing the Mansion House and went to parade on the banks of the river. Later in the day an affidavit was received that arms were being sent by steamboat from St. Louis, Missouri, to Warsaw, Illinois, and that word had been sent to St. Louis that if Warsaw needed five hundred to send word by the Steamer Boreas, and the men would be sent.

The same day Joseph Smith sent a letter to John Tyler, President of the United States, asking for protection guaranteed by the Constitution in case of "insurrection and rebellion" and to save the innocent and oppressed from such horrid persecution.

The Ramus Company belonging to the Legion arrived at Nauvoo. Their captain, Almon W. Babbitt, had refused to comply with the orders to bring his company to Nauvoo, but Uncle John Smith had assured the men that they would go and return in safety. Whereupon the company put the command on Uriah H. Yoger who accompanied them to Nauvoo. Many who were poorly shod were supplied by the quartermaster.

The Prophet instructed Willard Richards to write a letter to General James Arlington Bennett of New York in answer to one he had received from him the preceding April. The letter apprised the general of the local situation and temper of the people from Illinois to Missouri, and asked him if he would bring volunteers to assist the Saints. He was told that if he failed to help in this crisis his liberties would be next to go and where would it all end? [^5]

The threats and rumours flooded in upon Joseph and Hyrum. There seemed to be no one they could appeal to who would come to their aid. There were few men who appraised the Prophet and the Saints in a favorable light.

If there were others ready to help, they failed to express themselves or to lift a hand to support justice, law, and order. It was becoming more apparent that the survival of this downtrodden, maligned, persecuted, and hated people would depend upon themselves and their God.

Conditions now had so far deteriorated that the Prophet himself wrote calling the twelve home. It is assumed that Hyrum's letter to the twelve and the missionaries abroad was never sent. Perhaps the uncertainty of the mails was the reason, for at this time the postal system to Nauvoo was so unreliable that no letters were received and none sent, because of the enemy's interference.

The danger of mob action against Nauvoo was very real. The Prophet called on Theodore Turley to prepare artillery. Brother Turley agreed and inquired if he should also repair the small arms that were out of order. The Prophet in confidence then told him that there would not be a gun fired on their part during the fuss.

Hyrum Smith, with others at the Mansion House that evening, deliberated carefully what he should do. Joseph, writing of the possible escape of Hyrum, expressed himself:

I advised my brother Hyrum to take his family on the next steamboat and go to Cincinnati. Hyrum replied, "Joseph, I can't leave you." Whereupon I said to the company present, "I wish I could get Hyrum out of the way, so that he may live to avenge my blood, and I will stay with you to see it out." [^6]

Friday, June 21, at 10:00 a.m. the Prophet reviewed the Nauvoo Legion, now on active duty and ready to repel any invasion. In the afternoon a letter was received by special messenger from Governor Ford, who had arrived at Carthage. He requested Joseph Smith to send representatives to Carthage to brief him on the Mormon version of the trouble in order for him to give an impartial judgment of the whole affair.

At 4:00 p.m. the city council met and appointed Dr. J. M. Bernhisel, Dr. Willard Richards, and Counselor John Taylor to go to Carthage. A number of affidavits were read. On Saturday, June 22, the Prophet sent a letter and affidavits to Governor Ford inviting him to come to Nauvoo and personally investigate the whole matter. He expressed their unwillingness to come to Carthage because of the great danger of their being murdered by the mob. The letter was taken by Lucien Woodworth who replaced Dr. Richards as a delegate to the governor.

In the afternoon the Prophet requested General Dunham to take the regiment of the 2nd cohort the next day and use entrenching tools and work several hours to improve their position in case of an attack.

Lyman H. Calkin, in a sworn statement, revealed that the death of Hyrum Smith was desired by one William Nesbit, on board the steamboat Ohio from St. Louis to Nauvoo. Calkin swore that Nesbit had said he would go to Nauvoo and with pistols kill Hyrum himself. When asked if he would not be afraid to kill Hyrum in cold blood, he replied, "No, I would not; I would do it in a moment if I could get an opportunity." The following day Mr. Calkin saw Nesbit in the crowd and cautioned Richard Brazier to keep an eye on him, for he had sworn to wash his hands in Joseph and Hyrum's blood. [^7]

Rumors came in of the mob moving about on the road from Carthage to Nauvoo and of the shooting of travelers. The three delegates arrived at the governor's quarters in Carthage and found him surrounded by fifteen or twenty men, among whom, according to John Taylor, were some of the worst, vilest, and most unprincipled men in creation. There were the Laws, Higbees, Jackson, and others. The governor treated the delegates very rudely. The communications of the Prophet were read to the governor in the presence of these mobocrats who interrupted the reader at almost every line with, "That's a damned lie!" and "That's a G—d—d lie!" The governor made no attempt to quiet them. It would appear that Governor Ford was completely under the mob spirit and that he had ordered the entire mob into service. In the governor's letter to the Prophet he charged him with violations of law and order based on falsehoods.

The governor kept the delegates waiting five or six hours to write his reply. In it he accused the mayor and city council of violating the Constitution by ordering the destruction of the Expositor. The writ of habeas corpus was improperly resorted to before the court with the executive and judicial branches of government combined. Also, martial law had been placed in force at Nauvoo and persons imprisoned unlawfully. The governor cited a similar act in France which caused a king to lose his throne, and said no such act had ever been committed in any of the states of America or its territories—that no civilized country can tolerate such conduct, etc. He ended the letter by a threat to use military forces if necessary to bring any one guilty from Nauvoo. It had been rumored that the Mormons had committed depredations on cattle and property. Furthermore, he would see that anyone summoned to Carthage for trial or as witness would be guaranteed safety.

The same day the Prophet wrote a lengthy reply to Governor Ford to counteract the charges. He answered the governor explaining the reasons for their actions. They had pleaded a habeas corpus only as a last resort to save them from being thrown into the power of the mobocrats who were threatening them with death. The Nauvoo Charter gave them this right, the same as the Springfield Charter, so that if the act declaring the press a nuisance was unconstitutional, then they couldn't see why the charter itself was not unconstitutional.

Continuing, the Prophet explained that martial law had been declared only to protect their lives. No property was seized or person imprisoned for the violation of the peace. He did not believe in the "union of legislative and judician power," and they did not understand such to be the case in this instance. He stated also that to come to Carthage for a second trial on the same issue and be put twice in jeopardy of life for the same offense was contrary to the Constitution. However, notwithstanding this, they would not hesitate to stand another trial according to the governor's wish were it not that they were confident that their lives would be in danger. Joseph continued:

We dare not come. Writs we are assured are issued against us in various parts of the country. For what? To drag us from place to place, (as was the case in Missouri) from court to court, across the creeks and prairies, till some bloodthirsty villain could find his opportunity to shoot us. We dare not come, though your Excellency promises protection. Yet, at times, you have expressed fears that you could not control the mob, in which case we are left to the mercy of the merciless. Sir, we dare not come, for our lives would be in danger, and we are guilty of no crime.

You say, "It will be against orders to be accompanied by others if we come to trial." This we have been obliged to act upon in Missouri, and when our witnesses were sent for by the court, (as your honor promised to do) they were thrust into prison and we left without witnesses. Sir, you must not blame us, for "a burnt child dreads the fire." Although your Excellency might be well disposed in the matter, the appearance of the mob forbids our coming. We dare not do it.

The Prophet continued by saying that the Saints had been advised by legal and highminded gentlemen from abroad to lay their grievances before the Federal Government. The appearance of things as they now stood was not only treasonable against the Saints, but also against the state of Missouri. The mass meetings of the county declared utter extermination of the Mormons, and the Legion was not called out until complaints were made to the Mayor; the citizens were afraid of their lives, etc.

The Prophet's final appeal was:

We shall leave the city forthwith to lay the facts before the General Government; . . . We implore your Excellency to cause our helpless women and children to be protected from mob violence and let not the blood of innocence cry to heaven against you. We again say, if anything wrong has been done on our part, and we know of nothing, we will make all things right if the Government will give us the opportunity. Disperse the mob and secure to us our Constitutional privileges that our lives may not be endangered when on trial. [^8]

The position and course of the Prophet was inspired by past treatment before the courts, by the mistreatment of witnesses, and the foul imprisonments from one filthy prison to another without recourse to legal procedures to defend themselves. The pattern of the enemy was all too familiar.

On Saturday afternoon, June 22, the Prophet called Hyrum, Dr. Richards, John Taylor, and John M. Bernhisel to his home to discuss the advisability of going to Washington to lay the matter before President Tyler. Before a decision was made, however, they were interrupted by the visit of two gentlemen, one, a son of John C. Calhoun who was anxious to meet the Prophet. Shortly after the interruption the council meeting was resumed, but the project of laying the matter before President Tyler was abandoned. Joseph had received an inspiration to go west with the assurance that if he did all would be well. [^9]

About 7:00 p.m. the Prophet requested Reynolds Cahoon and Alpheus Cutler to stand guard at the Mansion and not admit any strangers to the house. At sundown he asked O. P. Rockwell to go with him on a short journey and Rockwell replied that he would.

A decision had to be made immediately on what course to follow. Time was too short to appeal to the President of the United States. Soon after dusk, Joseph called Hyrum, Willard Richards, John Taylor, William W. Phelps, A. C. Hodge, John L. Butler, Alpheus Cutler, William Marks, and others to come to his home. The men retired to the upper room and according to Brother Hodge, the following conversation occurred:

"Brethren, here is a letter from the Governor which I wish to have read." After it was read through Joseph remarked, "There is no mercy, no mercy here." Hyrum said, "No, just as sure as we fall into their hands we are dead men." Joseph answered, "Yes," and then asked, "What shall we do, Brother Hyrum?" Hyrum replied, "I don't know." All at once Joseph's countenance brightened up and he said, "The way is open. It is clear to my mind what to do. All they want is Hyrum and myself; then tell everybody to go about their business and not to collect in groups, but to scatter about. There is no doubt they will come here and search for us. Let them search; they will not harm you in person or property and not even a hair of your heads. We will cross the river tonight and go away to the West!" He made a move to go out of the house to cross the river. When out of the house he told Butler and Hodge to take the Maid of Iowa (in charge of Repsher) get it to the upper landing, and put his and Hyrum's families and effects upon her; then go down the Mississippi and up the Ohio River to Portsmouth where they should hear from them. He then took Hodge by the hand and said, "Now, Brother Hodge, let what will come, don't deny the faith and all will be well." [^10]

The following was the last direct quotation of the Prophet:

I told Stephen Markham that if I and Hyrum were ever taken again we should be massacred, or I was not a Prophet of God. I want Hyrum to live to avenge my blood, but he is determined not to leave me. [^11]

Hyrum and Joseph gathered their most trusted friends around them hoping for support in their last-minute decision. The leaders of this latter-day movement always sought advice. Their desire was ever to proceed with a spirit of unity based on the full confidence and support of the people. As leaders they felt they must have the love, respect, confidence, and support of the Saints.

Hyrum concurred in the Prophet's decision to go West, and in the other emergency measures to help resolve the crisis. There had been no division of opinion on major issues. The Patriarch had consented to the action taken against the Expositor, to the declaration of martial law in Nauvoo, to the calling home of the apostles and to the decision to resist going to Carthage for trial. And it certainly was not Hyrum's intention to forsake his brother now. The die had been cast. It was either life or death for both. There was no turning back and no compromise.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mercy Rachel Thompson described Hyrum's farewell. . . . A few days after this he (Joseph) called at his brother Hyrum's to take leave of the family previous to their crossing the Mississippi River, intended to go west to the Rocky Mountains to seek out, if possible, a place of peace and safety for the Saints. His parting words to my sister Mary, as she wept at their going, were these: Sister Mary, don't feel bad, the Lord will take care of you, and He will deliver us, but I do not know how. The two brothers then started to cross the river, not knowing whether they would ever see their home again or not. But on account of the feelings expressed by some of the brethren, who should have been their truest friends, and by their urgent request sent after them, the brothers returned to Nauvoo the following day. Watching from a chamber window I saw them being rowed in a skiff across the river until they landed, and walked up the river bank to Hyrum's house, where they entered, Joseph seating himself, while Hyrum made some changes in his clothing, when they went on to the Mansion. Although I did not know that the brothers had returned home to be taken as 'lambs to the slaughter', my feelings were indescribable, and the very air seemed burdened with sorrowful forebodings. The awful scene at Carthage followed in a few days, and here all men must draw the veil, for until all the truth concerning these good men, and this black deed of their murderous foes, can be told and understood the history of this time will not be written. But the day will come when God will speak, and the martyrs and their history will be made known."—Mercy R. Thompson—The Instructor, 27:400.
[^2] Op. cit., pp. 547-550.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 551-552.
[^4] Joseph F. Smith as he remembered it as told to his descendants.
[^5] John Smith Document in his own handwriting owned by his descendants.
[^6] Joseph Smith, op. cit., pp. 553-556.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 557-558.
[^8] Attorney H. T. Reid was not the same man who defended Joseph in the early history.
[^9] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 561-565.
[^10] Ibid., p. 566.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 572-573.
