Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXXIV

Hyrum Smith at Carthage

By late June, 1844, the only way open to Hyrum and Joseph Smith to avoid massacre was to flee to the Rocky Mountains. The movement that had begun fourteen years before had no earthly sponsor. There had been no precedent established. There was no mother institution on which to lean during its formative period.

This vigorous new religion had tremendous powers of growth and rejuvenation. Whenever an attempt was made to stifle or suppress the movement by apostasy from within the ranks or by mob violence, it had modified its position and maneuvered in such a way as to keep growing. Each crisis had thus far been surmounted successfully and been followed by an upsurge in activity and growth. This "unorthodox" religion was a phenomenon no one could explain. Even the few who looked upon it with favor feared that sometime, somewhere, if it continued, it would bring trouble.

The Nauvoo Charter had made of Nauvoo a virtual state within a state, with courts, a military establishment, municipal government, educational institutions and church-controlled business in real estate. Already their capital city, Nauvoo, was outstripping other centers in population, commerce, manufacturing, religion, and social advancement. What at first appeared to be a harmless, suffering, outcast people, greatly wronged, now wore a coat of a different color. What the Mormons offered in the way of increased economic aid in paying indebtedness was soon replaced by a growing desire to get rid of this "menace" which they thought would overrun and absorb them.

Thus it was that the closing events in the life of Hyrum Smith were crowding in upon him in rapid succession. The establishment of the Church had resulted from a great revelation. Hyrum, as well as Joseph, had been designated prophet, seer, and revelator. He was a second witness to a divine plan, and the drama of his life was hastening to an inevitable climax. In this hour of crisis his role was accentuated by the decisions he was forced to make, but a pattern of comradeship had developed between him and Joseph. Here was a meeting of minds which swept aside the dread loneliness of choosing between alternatives in a crisis. The reaction of the Patriarch became a sounding board, so to speak, for the President of the Church and between the two a solution was always forthcoming regardless of the difficulty of the problem.

Thus, at the beginning of the fourth week in June, 1844, Hyrum Smith prepared to by-pass his enemies and go away with Joseph in order to preserve their lives and calm the fury of the gathering mobs. The Prophet's historians record the events of Saturday, June 22, 1844, as follows:

On this day, about 9 p.m., Hyrum Smith came out of the Mansion House and gave his hand to Reynolds Cahoon, at the same time saying, "A company of men are seeking to kill my brother Joseph and the Lord has warned him to flee to the Rocky Mountains to save his life. Good-by, brother Cahoon, we shall see you again." In a few minutes afterwards Joseph came from his family. His tears were flowing fast. He held a handkerchief to his face and followed after Brother Hyrum without uttering a word. [^1]

Between 9 and 10 p.m. Hyrum, Joseph, and Willard Richards while waiting on the bank of the river for a skiff, sent for William W. Phelps and instructed him to take their families to Cincinnati by the second steamboat, arriving at Nauvoo. When he arrived there he commenced petitioning the President of the United States and Congress for redress of grievances to see whether they would grant the Church liberty and equal rights. Joseph then said: "Go to our wives and tell them what we've concluded to do and learn their feelings on the subject; tell Emma you will be ready to start by the second steamboat, and she has sufficient money wherewith to pay the expenses. If you ascertain by tomorrow morning that there is anything wrong, come over the river to Montrose to the house of Captain John Killien, and there you will learn where we are.

About midnight, Hyrum, Joseph, and Dr. Richards called for Orrin P. Rockwell at his lodgings, and all went up the river bank until they found Aaron Johnson's boat which they got into and started about 2 a.m. to cross the Mississippi River. Rockwell rowed the skiff which was very leaky, so that it kept Hyrum and Joseph and the doctor busy bailing out the water with their boots and shoes to prevent it from sinking.

Sunday 23rd at daybreak, they arrived on the Iowa side of the river. They sent Orrin P. Rockwell back to Nauvoo with instructions to return the next night with horses for Hyrum and Joseph, and to pass them over the river in the night secretly, so that they might be ready to start for the Great Basin in the Rocky Mountains.

Hyrum, Joseph, and Dr. Richards walked up to Captain John Killien's house where they arrived at sunrise, but he being not at home, they went thence to Brother William Jordon's. About 9 a.m., Dr. Bernhisel came over the river to visit Joseph. Also Reynolds Cahoon who made some explanations respecting Governor Ford's letter.

Early in the morning a posse arrived in Nauvoo to arrest the Prophet, but as they did not find him, they started back to Carthage immediately, leaving one man by the name of Yates behind them who said to some of the brethren that Governor Ford designed that if Joseph and Hyrum were not given up, he would send his troops and guard the city until they were found if it took three years to do it.

At 1 p.m. Emma sent over Orrin P. Rockwell, requesting him to entreat Joseph to come back. Reynolds Cahoon accompanied him with a letter which Emma had written to the same affect, and she insisted that Cahoon should persuade Joseph to come back and give himself up. When they went over they found Hyrum, Joseph, and Willard in a room by themselves, having flour and other provisions on the floor ready for packing.

Reynolds Cahoon informed Joseph what the troops intended to do, and urged upon him to give himself up inasmuch as the governor had pledged his faith and the faith of the state to protect him while he underwent a legal and fair trial. Reynolds Cahoon, Lorenzo D. Wasson, and Hiram Kimball accused Joseph of cowardice for wishing to leave the people, adding that their property would be destroyed and they be left without house or home. Like the fable, when the wolves came, the shepherd ran from the flock, and left the sheep to be devoured. To which Joseph replied, "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of none to myself."

Joseph said to Rockwell, "What shall I do?" Rockwell replied, "You are the oldest and ought to know best; as you make your bed, I will lie with you." Joseph then turned to Hyrum, "You are the oldest, what shall we do?" Hyrum said, "Let us go back and give ourselves up and see the thing out." After studying a few moments, Joseph said, "If you go back, I will go with you, but we shall be butchered." Hyrum said, "No, no; let us go back and put our trust in God and we shall not be harmed. The Lord is in it. If we have to die, we will be reconciled to our fate."

After a short pause, Joseph told Cahoon to request Captain Daniel C. Davis to have his boat ready at half-past five to cross them over the river.

Hyrum and Joseph wrote the following letter:

Banks of the River Mississippi

Sunday, June 23rd, 1844, 2 p.m.

His Excellency Governor Ford:

Sir, I wrote you a long communication at 12 last night, expressive of my views of your Excellency's communication of yesterday. I thought your letter rather severe, but one of my friends has just come to me with an explanation from the Captain of your posse which softened the subject matter of your communication and gives us greater assurance of protection, and that your Excellency has succeeded in bringing in subjection of the spirits which surround your Excellency to some extent. I declare again the only objection I ever had or ever made on trial by my country at any time was what I have made in my last letter—on account of assassins, and the reason I have to fear deathly consequences from their hands.

But from the explanation, I now offer to come to you at Carthage on the morrow, as early as shall be convenient for your posse to escort us into headquarters, provided we can have a fair trial, not be abused, nor have my witnesses abused, and have all things done in due form on my honor without the show of a great armed force to produce excitement in the minds of the timid.

We shall meet your posse, if this letter is satisfactory, (if not inform me) at or near the mound, at or about two o'clock tomorrow afternoon which will be as soon as we can get our witnesses and prepare for trial. We shall prepare to take our witnesses with us and not have to wait a subpoena or part at least, so as not to detain the proceedings although we may want time for counsel.

We remain most respectability, your Excellency's humble servants,

Signed—Joseph Smith

Hyrum Smith [^2]

About 4:00 p.m. Hyrum, Joseph, the doctor, and others started back. While walking towards the river Joseph fell behind them with Orrin P. Rockwell. The others shouted for them to "Come on," to which Joseph replied, "It's no use to hurry, for we are going back to be slaughtered." He continually expressed the wish that he could get the people once more together and talk to them that night. Rockwell said that if that was his wish he would get the people together, and Joseph could talk to them by starlight.

Joseph sent the letter of this date to Governor Ford in the hands of Col. Theodore Turley and Elder Jedediah M. Grant who carried it to Carthage, arriving about 9:00 p.m. They gave the letter to Governor Ford who at first agreed to send a posse to escort General Smith in safety to Carthage. Immediately afterward, however, a Mr. Skinner came in and made a very bitter speech to the governor in which Wilson Law and Joseph H. Jackson joined, telling him naught but lies, which caused Elder Grant to ask if messengers to the governor were to be insulted in that manner. The governor treated the brethren coldly and revoked his promise, refusing to send or allow an escort to go with Joseph and saying this was an honor not given to any other citizen. He would not allow the messengers to stay in Carthage through the night and wrote orders for Joseph and Hyrum to start at ten o'clock the following morning, without an escort, threatening that if General Smith did not come at that time, Nauvoo would be destroyed and all the men, women, and children that were in it. Brothers Grant and Turley began the return journey immediately but because of the weariness of their horses did not arrive in Nauvoo until 4:00 a.m. on the 24th. They went at once to General Smith to report to him the state of excitement in Carthage. But Joseph heeded no word of their warning, being now determined to go to Carthage and give himself up to the governor. [^3]

As Hyrum, Joseph, and others neared the wharf on their return to Nauvoo, Hyrum's boy, Joseph Fielding, was playing on the bank of the river and saw the boat come in above a sandy spit which extended some distance out from the shore. As they came near, the six-year-old boy noticed the group of men leave the boat, and as they approached, the lad was happy to see his father who took him by the hand and went with him to his home.

As they neared Hyrum's home, Joseph remained with his brother while the others parted with plans to meet the following morning. After greeting his wife and children, Hyrum freshened up and while shaving, heard Joseph say, "This boy of yours, Hyrum, is pale, too much milk in his diet." To which Hyrum replied, "He should have more solid food." Hyrum then accompanied Joseph to his home for last minute preparations for the journey to Carthage early the next morning. [^4]

That night Joseph conversed with Captain Anderson who reported that the mob at Warsaw had stopped his boat and threatened to fire into her with his cannon. A letter was received from Ed. Johnson stating that it would be impossible for him to represent Joseph at the trial and recommending Mr. Adams in his place.

Joseph gave directions to obtain horses to carry them and his friends to Carthage. Although the governor had threatened to send his troops into the city, none had as yet appeared.

On Monday, June 25, Francis M. Higbee having sworn out a writ before Thomas Morrison, a justice of the peace at Carthage on the 11th instant, against Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Samuel Bennet, John Taylor, William W. Phelps, John P. Greene, Stephen C. Perry, Dimick B. Huntington, Jonathan Dunham, Stephen Markham, William W. Edwards, Jonathan Holmes, Jesse P. Harmon, John Lytle, Joseph W. Coolidge, David Harvey Redfield, Orrin P. Rockwell, and Levi Richards for riot in destroying the Nauvoo Expositor press, the property of William and Wilson Law and others on the 10th instant, and Governor Ford, having sent word by the posse that those eighteen persons should be protected by the militia of the state, they, upon the assurance of that pledge, at half-past six in the morning, started for Carthage, with Willard Richards, Dan Jones, Henry G. Sherwood, Alfred Randall, James Davis, Cyrus H. Wheelock, A. C. Hodge, and several other brethren, together with James W. Woods as counsel, accompanying them.

That morning, as Hyrum prepared to leave his home to go to Carthage, his anxious family gathered around to bid him good-bye. His twelve-year-old John watched him take his watch and chain and hang it up and replace it with an older watch. The leave-taking was very difficult. John later wrote: "Father rode his large white horse, Sam."

As his father rode away, the lad remembered how Hyrum and Joseph had often ridden together on parade in full uniform at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, and how his Uncle Joseph rode old Joe Duncan, a chestnut sorrel pacing horse and Aunt Emma rode old Charley, a jet black trotting horse. He had heard his father and Joseph preach many times and had chased balls for Uncle Joseph which was a sort of recreation (playing ball) of which he, John, was very proud. The lad remembered Joseph preaching to the Indians on the lot across the road, southwest from the Mansion House. He also remembered his Uncle Joseph's last speech on the frame opposite the Mansion. [^5]

The company paused when they got to the temple and looked with admiration first on that edifice and then on the city, and Joseph remarked, "This is the loveliest place and the best people under the heavens. Little do they know the trials that await them." As he passed out of the city, he called on Daniel H. Wells, Esq., who was unwell, and on parting from him said, "Squire Wells, I wish you to cherish my memory and not think me the worst man in the world either."

At ten minutes of ten they arrived at Albert G. Fellow's farm, four miles west of Carthage, where they met Captain Dunn with a company of about sixty mounted militia. On seeing them Joseph said, "Do not be alarmed, Brethren, for they cannot do more to you than the enemies of truth did to the ancient Saints; they can only kill the body." The company made a halt, then Hyrum, Joseph, and several others went into Fellow's house with Captain Dunn, who presented an order from Governor Ford for all the state arms in possession of the Nauvoo Legion, which Joseph immediately countersigned.

Henry G. Sherwood went up to Joseph and said, "Brother Joseph, shall I return to Nauvoo and regulate about getting the arms and get the receipts for them?" Joseph inquired if he were under arrest or expected to be arrested. Sherwood answered "No"; whereupon Joseph directed him to return ahead of the company, gather the arms, and do as well as he could in all things. Joseph then said to the company who were with him, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man and my blood shall cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall be said of me 'He was murdered in cold blood!'" He then said to Father Sherwood, "Go, and God bless you." Sherwood then rode as swiftly as he could to Nauvoo.

This order for the delivery of the state arms was evidently designed to drive the citizens of Nauvoo to desperation so that in the heat of their indignation they might commit some overt act which the governor could construe as treason and thus provide the excuse for his mob militia to destroy the Mormons.

Captain Dunn requested the company to return to Nauvoo to assist in collecting the arms and pledged his word as a military man that Joseph and his friends should be protected even if it were at the expense of his own life, and his men responded to the pledge by three cheers. Captain Dunn, no doubt, feared that the order of the governor would excite the inhabitants of Nauvoo beyond endurance and therefore chose to depend on the well-known integrity of General Smith than to risk the chances of exciting the feelings of a much-abused people. At the same time Joseph sent a messenger to the governor with the following letter:

Four miles west of Carthage Mound,

Hancock County, Illinois

Monday, 10 o'clock

His Excellency Governor Ford:

Dear Sir.—On my way to Carthage to answer your request this morning, I here met Captain Dunn, who had here made known to me your orders to surrender the state arms in possession of the Nauvoo Legion, which command I shall comply with; and that the same may be done properly and without trouble to the state, I shall return with Captain Dunn to Nauvoo, see that the arms are put into his possession, and shall then return to headquarters in his company, when I shall most cheerfully submit to any requisition of the Governor of our state.

With all due respect to your Excellency, I remain your obedient servant.

Signed—Joseph Smith [^6]

The Prophet then wrote ordering General Dunham to carry out the order of the commander-in-chief, Governor Ford, to collect the arms, and requesting that the state arms be taken to the Masonic Hall without delay.

Hyrum said to Abram C. Hodge, "You go on to Carthage and see what is going on and hear what is said on this matter."

Joseph and his company then returned with Captain Dunn, and arrived in Nauvoo at half-past two p.m.

When Hodge arrived at Carthage, he met with Rev. Mr. Dodge, who had some time previously been very kindly treated by Hyrum. He warned Hodge that as sure as Hyrum and Joseph came to Carthage, they would be killed. Hodge also saw Hamilton, the innkeeper, who, pointing to the Carthage Greys, said, "Hodge, there are the boys that will settle you Mormons." Hodge replied, "We can take as many men as there are there out of the Nauvoo Legion, and they would not be missed."

When the fact of the order for the state arms was known in Nauvoo, many of the brethren looked upon it as another preparation for a Missouri massacre; nevertheless, as Joseph requested that it should be complied with, they willingly gave up the arms.

About 6 p.m. when all the states' arms were collected, and the company was ready to start, Captain Dunn and Quartermaster-General Buckmaster made a short speech, expressing their gratitude at the peaceable conduct of the citizens of Nauvoo, and stated that while they thus conducted themselves they would protect them.

Governor Ford appeared to fear that the Nauvoo Legion, although disbanded, might avenge an outrage that might hereafter be committed on the persons of their leaders, and so thought he had better disarm them as he had previously disbanded them; yet the mob was suffered to retain their part of the states' arms, even when within a half-day's march of Nauvoo, and they in a threatening and hostile attitude, while the Nauvoo Legion had not evinced the least disposition whatever to use them, except to defend their city in case it should be attacked; and they had not set a foot outside the limits of the corporation.

Joseph rode down home twice to bid his family farewell. He appeared solemn and thoughtful and expressed himself to several individuals that he expected to be murdered. There appeared no alternative but that he must either give himself up, or the inhabitants of the city would be massacred by a lawless mob under sanction of the governor.

The company (about fifteen) then started again for Carthage, and when opposite the Masonic Hall, Joseph said, "Boys, if I don't come back, take care of yourselves; I am going like a lamb to the slaughter!" As he passed his farm he looked long upon it, and after they had passed it turned around several times to look again, at which some of the company made remarks. Joseph then said: "If some of you had got such a farm and knew you would not see it any more, you would want to take a good look at it for the last time!" When they got to the edge of the woods near Nauvoo, they met A. C. Hodge returning from Carthage. He reported to Hyrum what he had heard in Carthage, told him what his feelings were and said, "Brother Hyrum, you are now clear, and if it was my duty to counsel you, I would say, do not go another foot, for they say they will kill you, if you go to Carthage," but as other persons gathered around, nothing further was said. [^7]

About this time the Prophet received a letter from attorney H. T. Reid, [^8] accepting the offer to defend the Prophet in court, and requesting certain papers and documents on the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor. He particularly wanted to establish the fact that the press was not destroyed in a riotous or tumultuous manner.

About 9:00 p.m. the company arrived at Fellow's house four miles west of Carthage where they stopped about half an hour, and partook of such refreshments as they had brought with them. Captain Dunn and his company of mounted militia, returning with the states' arms from Nauvoo, joined them here, and escorted them into Carthage, where they arrived at five minutes before midnight and went to Hamilton's tavern. While they were passing the public square, many of the troops, especially the Carthage Greys, abused them in foul language which must have echoed in the ears of the governor and hundreds of others.

On hearing the commotion the governor put his head out of a window and called chidingly, "I know your great anxiety to see Mr. Smith, which is natural enough, but it is quite too late tonight for you to have the opportunity; but I assure you, gentlemen, you shall have the privilege tomorrow morning, as I will cause him to pass before the troops on the square, and I now wish you, with this assurance, quietly and peaceably to return to your quarters!" When this declaration was made, there was a faint "Hurrah for Tom Ford," and the boisterous crowd instantly obeyed his wish.

Tuesday morning, June 25, Hyrum and Joseph voluntarily surrendered themselves to the constable, Mr. Bettisworth, who held the writ against them. The governor had pledged his own faith, and the faith of the state of Illinois, that the Smiths and other persons should be protected from personal violence, and should have a fair and impartial trial, if they would surrender themselves to be dealt with according to law. This the governor did repeatedly affirm to legal counselors of the Smiths.

At 8:00 a.m. while in conversation with William G. Flood of Quincy, United States Receiver of Public Moneys, the Prophet was arrested by Constable David Bettisworth for treason against the state of Illinois.

Hyrum Smith was arrested at the same time, on the same writ, granted on the affidavit of Henry O. Norton:

Writ of Arrest for Treason—Hyrum Smith

State of Illinois

Hancock County

The people of the State of Illinois, to all Sheriffs, coroners, and constables, greetings:

Whereas complaint has been made before me, one of the justices of the peace, in and for the county of Hancock, upon the oath of one Henry O. Norton, that one Hyrum Smith, late of the county of Hancock and state of Illinois, did, on the 19th day of June, 1844, commit the crime of treason against the government and people of the state of Illinois aforesaid.

These are therefore to command you to take the body of the said Hyrum Smith if he be found in your county, or if he shall have fled that you pursue after the said Hyrum Smith into any county within this state, and take and safely keep the said Hyrum Smith, so that you have his body forthwith before me, to answer unto the said complaint, and be further dealt with according to law.

(Seal) Given under my hand and seal, this 24th day of June, 1844.

/s/ R. F. Smith, J. P.

At 8:30 a.m. Governor Ford called all the troops and ordered them to form a hollow square on the public ground near the courthouse; and when formed, he climbed atop an old table and addressed them, exciting the feelings of indignation against generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith which were already burning in their breasts and had been occasioned by the rumors and misrepresentations that were in circulation. The governor gave this assent and sanction to the rumors that had gathered them together, and stated that although they were dangerous men in the community, and guilty of all that they might have alleged against them, still they were in the hands of the law, which must have its course. He continued speaking twenty or thirty minutes.

At 9:15 a.m. the governor came in and invited Joseph to walk with him through the troops. Joseph asked for a few moments' private conversation with him but was refused. They then walked through the crowd with Brigadier General Miner R. Deming and Dr. Richards, to General Deming's quarters. The people appeared calm until a company of Carthage Greys flocked around the doors of General Deming in an uproarious manner, of which notice was sent to the governor. In the meantime the governor had ordered the McDonough troops to be drawn up in line so that Hyrum and Joseph must pass in front of them, the troops having requested that they might have a clear view of the Generals Smith. In a ten-minute conversation with the governor, Joseph again received that official's pledge that Joseph and his friends should be protected from violence.

From the general's quarters Hyrum and Joseph passed before the whole line of troops, Joseph being on the right of General Deming, and Hyrum on his left, with Elders Richards, Taylor, and Phelps following. Hyrum and Joseph were introduced by the governor as Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith about twenty times along the line, the governor walking in front on the left. The Carthage Greys refused to receive them by those names, and some of the officers threw up their hats, drew their swords, and said they would introduce themselves to the damned Mormons in a different style. The governor mildly entreated them not to act so rudely, but their excitement increased. The governor, however, succeeded in pacifying them by making a speech, and promising them that they would have "full satisfaction." General Smith and party returned to their lodgings at five minutes past ten.

At ten thirty, news reached Joseph at the hotel that the Carthage Greys had revolted and were put under guard by General Deming. Joseph told all his friends to come into the two rooms they occupied in the hotel, but by ten-fifty quietness was apparently restored among the Carthage Greys.

At eleven-fifteen news arrived that the Warsaw troops were near Carthage, having come of their own accord. A Mr. Prentice, United States marshal for Illinois, called to see Joseph.

At twelve-forty-eight Joseph learned that the Laws, Higbees, Fosters, and others were going to Nauvoo to plunder. When the governor called at the door with some gentlemen, Joseph informed him of what he had heard and requested that he send a guard to protect the city of Nauvoo. . . .

At two-thirty, the governor sent word that he had ordered Captain Singleton with a company of men from McDonough county, to march to Nauvoo to co-operate with the police in keeping the peace and that he would call out the legion if necessary.

Joseph wrote to Emma.

Joseph also sent a message to Orrin P. Rockwell telling him not to come to Carthage, but to stay in Nauvoo, and not suffer himself to be delivered into the hands of his enemies, or to be taken a prisoner by any one.

Israel Barlow reported that he had heard read some resolutions of the Warsaw troops to the affect that they would return to Warsaw at 3:00 p.m.; then go to Golden's Point on Thursday, and thence to Nauvoo. [^9]

Just prior to 4:00 p.m. several officers of the troops at Carthage and some others came to Hyrum and Joseph's room at the hotel to satisfy their curiosity to see the Prophet. He asked them if he looked like a desperate character. They answered "No, just the contrary" but remarked that they couldn't tell what was in his heart. Joseph replied that that was true, and that therefore, they were unable to judge him. But he assured them that he could see what was in their hearts. He said:

I can see your thirst for blood, and nothing but my blood will satisfy you. It is not for crime of any description that I and my brother are thus continually persecuted and harassed by our enemies, but there are other motives . . . and inasmuch as you and the people thirst for blood, I prophesy, in the name of the Lord, that you shall witness scenes of blood and sorrow to your entire satisfaction. Your souls shall be perfectly satiated with blood, and many of you who are now present shall have an opportunity to face the cannon's mouth from sources you think not of; and the people that desire this great evil upon me and my brethren, shall be filled with regret and sorrow because of the scenes of desolation and distress that await them. They shall seek for peace, and shall not be able to find it. Gentlemen, you will find what I have told you to be true. [^10]

At twelve minutes before four o'clock word came from the apostate group in Carthage that there was nothing against these men; the law could not reach them but powder and ball would, and they should not go out of Carthage alive.

Hyrum and Joseph, and thirteen others, were taken before Robert F. Smith, a justice of the peace residing in Carthage, on the charge of riot in destroying the printing press of the Nauvoo Expositor.

Robert F. Smith was also commander, a captain of the Carthage Greys who had already been arrested for mutiny, and was thus a greater enemy than Thomas Morrison, the justice of the peace who first issued the writ. When the defendants had been taken before Esquire Wells of Nauvoo and acquitted, the prosecution had objected, saying the writ should be returned to the justice of the peace who had issued it. The governor made the same suggestion in a letter to the Prophet. But now, with the defendants in Carthage they could overrule their own former objections by taking the prisoners before another justice of the peace, one who was known to be an even greater enemy than Justice Morrison.

Apparently sparring for time, the court, by motion of Chauncey L. Higbee, moved for an adjournment. To this move, H. T. Reid and James W. Wood on behalf of the defendants, objected strongly, but in order to have a recognition for crime committed and to prevent an increase of excitement, the defendants agreed to be bound over to the circuit court. To guarantee their appearance bail was asked in the amount of $7,500. The high sum indicated a plot to imprison them if the proper sureties could not be obtained.

The bail was pledged. Captain Smith did not call upon Hyrum and Joseph to answer charges of treason but disappeared without issuing any subpoenas for witnesses in behalf of the defendants. This seemed to be in keeping with the expression of the enemy the day before, that the law could not touch them, but that powder and ball could.

Dan Jones reported to Joseph that evening that he had overheard Wilson Law say that they would get another warrant for Joseph's arrest on the charge of treason because of what Wilson heard Joseph preach from Daniel, chapter 2 verse 44, saying that the kingdom referred to was already set up and that he (Joseph) was the king over it. Jones also heard Jackson say that he had eighteen accusations against Joseph and if one failed they would use another—they had had so much trouble in getting him to Carthage, that they would not let him get out alive.

About 7:30, Dr. Levi Richards and most of the brethren, after they had signed the bonds, left for Nauvoo, after which Hyrum and Joseph went into the governor's room for an interview. After a few minutes the governor left the room to order the captain of the guard to give the brethren some passes.

After supper, about 8:00 p.m., Constable Bettisworth came to Hyrum and Joseph's room and insisted that they should go to jail. Joseph demanded to see the mittimus (warrant of committal) which request was refused. Messrs. Reid and Wood, as counsel, insisted that the prisoners were entitled to be brought before a justice of the peace for examination before being sent to jail. The constable to their surprise, then exhibited the warrant signed by R. F. Smith, J. P.

The plot against Hyrum and Joseph was carried out carefully and skilfully. Lawyer Wood requested officer Bettisworth to wait until he could see the governor before taking the prisoners to jail. The officer said he would wait only five minutes. The governor when reached said that he could not interfere with the judicial functions of the courts and felt that the law should take its course.

As a former associate justice of the supreme court of the state, the governor knew the proceeding was illegal. When Captain Robert F. Smith, who was both a civil and a military officer, asked the governor what he should do in the face of such illegal procedure, the governor replied, "You have the Carthage Greys at your command!" Captain Smith, therefore, commanded his Greys to carry out his illegal mittimus as a magistrate, thereby practically blending the civil and military in the same person at the same time. The prisoners were thus forced into jail without an examination, after having already met the requirements of a bail for their liberty.

The governor must be held responsible for the illegal proceedings. As the chief magistrate of the state he was under oath to see that the laws were faithfully and properly executed and not, as in this instance, violated by his prompting one of his officers in a lawless course.

Elder John Taylor had gone immediately to the governor and informed him of the illegality under the law, and also reminded him of the disreputable character of those who had made the charge, and of the outrageous nature of the charges and the indignity suffered by men in their position. He stated that it was a vexatious persecution, and that they were not guilty of anything. The governor replied that it was an unpleasant affair, and looked hard, but that it was a matter beyond his control. John Taylor reminded him of his solemn promise to him and Dr. Bernhisel concerning their coming to Carthage without a guard or arms and reminded him that they had relied upon his faith and had placed themselves implicitly under his care, and had complied with all his requests, although extra-judicial.

The governor promised that he would detail a guard to see that they were protected. Elder Taylor later wrote his sentiment in these words,

I expressed my dissatisfaction at the course taken, and told him if we were going to be subject to mob rule, and be dragged contrary to law into prison, at the instance of every infernal scoundrel whose oath could be bought for a dram of whiskey, his protection availed very little, and we had miscalculated his promises.

Seeing there was no prospect of redress from the governor, I returned to the room and found Constable Bettisworth, very urgent to hurry Brothers Joseph and Hyrum to prison, while the brethren were remonstrating with him.

At the same time a great rabble was gathered in the streets and around the door, and from the rowdyism manifested, I was afraid there was a design to murder the prisoners on the way to the jail.

Without conferring with any person, my next feeling was to procure a guard, and seeing a man habited as a soldier in the room, I went to him and said, "I am afraid there is a design against the lives of Messrs. Smith; will you go immediately and bring your captain, and if not convenient, any other captain of a company, and I will pay you well for your trouble."

He said he would, and departed forthwith, and soon returned with his captain, whose name I have forgotten [it was Captain Dunn] and introduced him to me.

I told him of my fears, and requested him immediately to fetch his company. He departed forthwith, and arrived at the door with them, just at the time the constable was hurrying the brethren downstairs.

A number of brethren went along, and one or two strangers, and all of us safely lodged in prison, remained there during the night. [^11]

Attorney Wood met Captain Dunn with twenty men, they having come to guard the prisoners in jail. Mr. Wood accompanied Governor Ford to see justice of the peace (captain of the Greys) Robert F. Smith, who said his reason for issuing the warrant of committal was that the prisoners were not safe at the hotel. Mr. Wood then requested the governor to have a company of troops from some other county detailed to guard the jail.

Captain Dunn with his company, escorted Hyrum and Joseph Smith from their lodgings, together with Willard Richards, John Taylor, John P. Greene, Stephen Markham, Dan Jones, John S. Fullmer, Dr. Southwick, and Lorenzo D. Wasson, to the jail. Markham had a very large hickory cane, which he called "the rascal beater." Dan Jones had a smaller walking stick, and they walked on each side of Hyrum and Joseph, keeping off the drunken rabble, which several times broke through the ranks.

They were received by the jailer, Mr. George W. Stigall, and put into the criminal's cell; but he afterwards gave them the debtor's apartment, where the prisoners and their friends had amusing conversations on various subjects, which engaged them until late. Prayer was offered, which made Carthage prison into a gate of heaven for awhile. They finally lay down on the floor, where they all slept from about 11:30 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of June 26.

Counselor H. T. Reid, in his published statement, writes as follows:

The recital of the mittimus, so far as they relate to the prisoners, having been brought before the justice for trial, and it there appearing that the necessary witnesses of the prosecution were absent, are wholly untrue, unless the prisoners could have appeared before the justice without being present in person or by counsel; nor is there any law of Illinois which permits a justice to commit persons charged with crimes to jail without examination as to the probability of their guilt. [^12]

Apparently, nothing could be done to obtain justice for them. The court machinery set up to give every citizen a fair and orderly trial had broken down. Hyrum and his brethren were like sheep among wolves, who awaited only an opportune moment to devour them. The few hours remaining were to be filled with events which mocked law and justice, but nothing could turn the tide. Only one scene remained to complete the tragic drama.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 575-585. Note: After the interview, Col. Thomas Geddes said Governor Ford told him that the Mormons would have to be driven out sometime, and he would not interfere until it was accomplished. See Thomas Gregg History of Hancock County, page 372.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 592-593.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 594-595.
[^4] Ether 12:36-38.
[^5] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 594-601.
[^6] Ibid., pp. 602-604.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 604-609.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 610-611.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 615-620.
[^10] Ibid., p. 621.
[^11] Idem.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 571-574.
