Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXXV

The Blood of the Prophets Seals Their Testimony

The final chapter in the lives of two of God's noblemen awaited only its conclusion. The stage was set for the climactic scene. Evil men had planned well. That justice, liberty, and morality for which the founders of a great nation had given their lives was temporarily obscured by the machinations of cunning and wicked men. Although the destiny of this great land was to be a haven for the down-trodden, the persecuted, and maligned who might come to her shores, the elements of intolerance and hatred had not yet been erased. In Western Illinois and Missouri, in June 1844, the sober God-fearing element may have been in the majority, but their voice was weak and faltering when justice and liberty were being flouted by a pack of ravening wolves.

About six o'clock in the morning, Wednesday, June 26, 1844, the prisoners in Carthage Jail arose after a fitful night's rest strangely reminiscent of other nights spent under similar circumstances. About 7:30 a.m. they sat down with the jailer Stigall for breakfast. They then retired to the room upstairs, which had temporarily become the official headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The business at hand was to exhaust every possible legal means to secure justice.

Outside were a number of guards, very official looking, who demanded of people going and coming that they be identified with special passes. The prisoners were seeking a change of venue to Quincy, Adams County; therefore, several of the brethren were dispatched to the governor at the Hamilton Hotel, about a quarter of a mile away.

The prisoners felt their situation to be desperate. They were incarcerated illegally, and the mob hovered about the prison like vultures circling their prey.

Dr. Southwick was the first sent to the governor. Then, at 7:30, Markham, Wasson, and Jones took messages both to Governor Ford and to their lawyers. No reply was immediately received. Meanwhile, Mr. Stigall told them that the mob had been scheduled to attack Nauvoo the previous Wednesday but that of the 9,000 persons expected only 200 came. Runners had been sent to Missouri and all around the counties in Illinois.

Having received no reply from the governor by 8:10 a.m., Joseph sent a message by the jailer asking the governor for an interview concerning their unlawful imprisonment. The tension was somewhat relieved by the return of Markham and Jones with a message that the governor had been taken by surprise the night before and was afraid they would think he had forfeited his word about having an interview. Then at 8:45 the governor replied to their request for an interview by stating that he would come to the prison at his earliest leisure that day.

At 8:50 Lawyer Reid arrived and concluded to take a change of venue to Augusta, Hancock County, before Justice Greenleaf. A list was made of twenty witnesses they would need from Nauvoo. Finally, at 9:27, the governor, with Colonel Thomas Geddes, arrived at the jail. At the governor's request the Prophet outlined in a general way the details of the state of the country, the tumultuous, mobocratic movements of the enemy, and the precautionary measures taken by himself and the city council against the Nauvoo Expositor.

He stated that the Nauvoo Legion had been called out only to defend themselves against an attempted invasion by an infuriated mob, and that a record of all decisions, orders, and affidavits had been forwarded to the Governor. Joseph explained that the reason for their not yielding to the posse of officers who had returned to Carthage the Sunday before was that a decision of such grave import could not be made in a hurry.

John Taylor, who was present at this historic meeting, quoted Governor Ford as saying in part:

The press in the United States is looked upon as the great bulwark of the American freedom. There is a disposition on your part to suppress liberty of speech . . . you are represented to me as turbulent and defiant of the laws and institutions of your country.

Joseph then said:

Governor Ford, you, sir, as governor of this state, are aware of the prosecution and persecution that I have endured. You know well that our course has been peaceable and law-abiding, etc. . . . Was it the Mormons or our enemies who first commenced these difficulties? You know well it was not us; and when this turbulent, outrageous people commenced their insurrectionary movements, I made you acquainted with them, officially, and asked your advice, and have followed strictly your counsel in every particular. Who ordered out the Nauvoo Legion? I did, under your direction. For what purpose? To suppress these insurrectionary movements. It was at your instance, sir, that I issued this proclamation, etc.

The governor, in their conversation referred to the decision of the Nauvoo city council to take action on the press. That this was an act of making laws which should be confined to the legislature then executing such laws, was wrong, in his opinion, he said. "Concerning your being in jail," he continued, "I am sorry for that; I wish it had been otherwise. I hope you will soon be released, but I cannot interfere."

The Prophet made his defense, declaring the press a nuisance, and stating his willingness to have the courts determine the legality of what they did. Continuing he said:

I shall look to you for protection. I believe you are talking of going to Nauvoo; if you go, sir, I wish to go along. I refuse not to answer any law, but I do not consider myself safe here.

Governor Ford replied:

I am in hopes you will be acquitted, but if I go I will certainly take you along. I do not, however, apprehend dangers. I think you are perfectly safe either here or anywhere else. I cannot, however, interfere with the law. I am placed in peculiar circumstances and seem to be blamed by all parties.

Joseph then said,

Governor Ford, I ask nothing but what is legal; I have a right to expect protection at least from you; for, independent of law, you have pledged your faith, and that of the state, for my protection, and I wish to go to Nauvoo.

And the governor answered,

You shall have protection, General Smith. I did not make this promise without consulting my officers, who all pledged their honor to its fulfillment. I do not know that I shall go tomorrow to Nauvoo, but if I do, I will take you along. [^1]

After a 45 minute interview the governor left, repeating his desire to take Joseph along, perhaps to insure his own safety.

The Prophet's clerk, Dr. Willard Richards, was busy making copies of orders to John P. Greene and General Jonathan Dunham. Joseph said he had felt a great deal of anxiety about his safety since he left Nauvoo, that he had never felt before. Dan Jones and Stephen Markham spent the morning whittling with their penknives on a warped door in order to have it close properly on the latch.

Patriarch Hyrum Smith and the others took turns preaching to the guards. Some were convinced of the innocence of the prisoners, and more than one was heard to say: "Let us go home, boys, for I will not fight any longer against these men."

Hyrum tried to encourage Joseph by asking him if he didn't think that the Lord, for the sake of his Church, would release him from prison. Joseph replied, "Could my brother Hyrum but be liberated, it would not matter so much about me."

The Prophet then thought about Sidney Rigdon, and said, "Poor Rigdon, I am glad he is gone to Pittsburgh out of the way; were he to preside he would lead the Church to destruction in less than five years." [^2]

As Willard Richards wrote, John Taylor amused him by singing. Joseph, much depressed, related a dream about William and Wilson Law, and one about trying to save a steamboat in a storm.

Lawyer Reid brought a message from General Miner R. Deming that the governor had asked him to provide the prisoners with what protection was necessary. All persons were to be excluded from the jail except those with passes.

Mr. Reid said that the counsel for the prosecution had asked that the prisoners be released to answer to the charges of treason, but this was impossible until they could be released by due course of law. He stated also that since the prisoners were admitted to prison on a false mittimus, without examination, the magistrate had no more jurisdiction in the case and that he would not agree to trial unless (Captain) Justice Smith would go to Nauvoo for examination, where witnesses could be had.

Reports of threats against Hyrum and Joseph continued to come in. In the dining hall of the hotel in the presence of the governor it was common to hear such remarks as, "The law is too short for these men, but they must not be suffered to go at large"; and, "If the law will not reach them, powder and ball must."

At half past two, Constable Bettisworth came with Alexander Simpson, bearing an order demanding the release of the prisoners, but the jailer couldn't find a law authorizing him to release them. When the jailer's action was reported to Justice Smith, he asked the governor what to do. Governor Ford replied, "We have plenty of troops; there are the Carthage Greys under your command; bring them out." When this report reached Joseph, he promptly sent Lorenzo D. Wasson to get his lawyers, Reid and Woods, whom he told of the threats in these words:

We are informed that Dr. Foster has said that they can do nothing with us, only by powder and ball, as we have done nothing against the law. [^3]

At twenty minutes to four, the constable with a company of Carthage Greys under the command of Frank Warrell, marched to the jail, and by intimidation and threats, compelled the jailer to deliver Hyrum and Joseph into his hands. It was a critical moment, for the mob began to gather at the jail. Something must be done immediately.

Hyrum and Joseph surveyed the situation and putting on their hats walked boldly into the midst of a hollow square of the Carthage Greys, expecting to be massacred before they arrived at the courthouse. They politely locked arms with the worst mobocrat they could see, were followed by Dr. Richards, and escorted by a guard. Elders Taylor, Markham, and Fullmer followed, outside the hollow square, and accompanied them to the court house.

The trial commenced at 4:25 p.m. Joseph's clerk took minutes of the proceedings. Counsel for the prosecution were C. L. Higbee, O. C. Skinner, Thomas Sharp, Sylvester Emmons, and Thomas Morrison. It was finally decided to wait until witnesses could be brought from Nauvoo, and the court adjourned until twelve o'clock the next day. A second mittimus was issued for their return to jail.

At 5:30 p.m. Joseph and Hyrum were returned to jail and thrust into close confinement. John Smith came from Macedonia to see his nephews. On the way he was threatened by three mobbers who recognized him and snapped guns at him. When he arrived at the jail, guards refused to let him in. Joseph, seeing him through the window said to the guard, "Let the old gentleman come in; he is my uncle." The guards retorted that they did not care who the hell he was uncle to; he should not go in.

But when Joseph said, "You will not hinder so old and infirm a man from coming in. Come in, Uncle"; the guard searched him closely and let him into the jail, where he remained for about an hour. He asked Joseph if he should again get out of the hands of his enemies, and Joseph replied, "My brother Hyrum thinks I shall." He told Uncle John to tell Alman W. Babbitt to come and assist them on the morrow as an attorney for their trial. (At 8:15 that night when Patriarch John Smith met Lawyer Babbitt and delivered the message, Babbitt replied, "You are too late, I am already engaged on the other side.")

Dr. Bernhisel brought a note from the governor to the jailer, which read, "I would advise the jailer to keep the Messrs. Smith in the room in which I found them this morning, unless a closer confinement should be clearly necessary to prevent an escape. Signed. . .Thomas Ford, Governor and Commander in Chief.

At 6:15 p.m. a letter dated June 26 was received from William Clayton in Nauvoo. In it Brother Clayton reported that Mr. Marsh, who lived down the river, and of whom Joseph had obtained corn, pork, etc. had offered to give bail to Joseph, if needed, for any amount. Also, Captain Singleton who had come as head of the police to Nauvoo had written the governor to call them home. In his letter he told the governor that there was no trouble in Nauvoo, but that there was plenty to settle at home. He said further that while the police were at Carthage they were treated as soldiers, but since they had come to Nauvoo they had been treated as gentlemen. He ended the letter by saying, "All is peace in Nauvoo. Many threats keep coming that the mob are determined to attack the city in your absence, but we have no fears."

The thoughts of the prisoners were on preparing for the trial the following day. Reynolds Cahoon was sent to Nauvoo to secure important papers, and a message was sent to Attorney Woods to get subpoenas for Samuel James, Edward Hunter, and Philip B. Lewis, with instructions to bring with them to the governor at Springfield the papers they carried, since the governor had not seen these papers. He had started for Carthage before they arrived at Springfield.

After supper Lawyers Woods and Reid called, with Elder John P. Greene, and said that the governor and military officers had held a meeting and decided that the governor and all the troops except one company of about fifty men would march to Nauvoo at eight o'clock the next morning, in order to gratify the troops, and would return the next day. The company of fifty men was to be selected by the governor from those of the troops whose fidelity he could most rely on to guard the prisoners, and was to be left at Carthage Jail; the trial was to be deferred until Saturday, June 29. After the meeting Justice (Captain) Robert F. Smith altered the return of the subpoenas until June 29, another action taken without consulting either the prisoners or their lawyers.

After Lawyers Woods and Reid and Elder Greene returned to the Hamilton's Hotel at 9 p.m., the prisoners had prayer, with John Taylor acting as mouth. Willard Richards, John Taylor, John S. Fullmer, Stephen Markham, and Dan Jones stayed with Hyrum and Joseph.

During the evening Patriarch Hyrum Smith read and commented upon extracts from the Book of Mormon, on the imprisonments and deliverance of the servants of God for the gospel's sake. [^4] Joseph bore a powerful testimony to the guards of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, of the restoration of the gospel, and of the ministering of angels, and said that the kingdom of God was again established upon the earth, for the sake of which he was then incarcerated in the prison and not because he had violated any law of God or man.

They retired to rest late. Hyrum and Joseph occupied the only bedstead in the room, while their friends lay side by side on mattresses on the floor. Dr. Richards sat up writing until the last candle guttered out, leaving him in the dark. The report of a gun fired close by caused Joseph to arise, leave the bed, and lay himself on the floor, with Dan Jones on his left, and John S. Fullmer on his right. Joseph stretched out his right arm and said to John S. Fullmer, "Lay your head on my arm for a pillow, Brother John"; and when all were quiet they conversed in low tones about the prospects of their deliverance. Joseph gave expression to his presentiment that he had to die, and said, "I would like to see my family again," and "I would to God that I could preach to the Saints in Nauvoo once more."

Fullmer tried to rally his spirits by saying he thought Joseph would often have that privilege, and Joseph thanked him for the remarks and the good feelings expressed to him.

Soon afterward, Dr. Richards retired to the bed which Joseph had left, and when all were apparently fast asleep, Joseph whispered to Dan Jones, "Are you afraid to die?" Dan said, "Has that time come, think you? Engaged in such a cause, I do not think that death would have many terrors." Joseph replied, "You will yet see Wales, and fulfil the mission appointed you before you die." [^5]

The next morning the sun rose behind overhanging clouds to shine only dimly on a day of infamy which was to cast a dark shadow on the state of Illinois.

At 5:30 a.m. Joseph asked Dan Jones to go downstairs and inquire the reason for the disturbance during the night. Frank Warrell, officer of the guard and one of the Carthage Greys said to him in a bitter tone, "We have had too much trouble to bring Old Joe out here to let him escape alive, and unless you want to die with him you had better leave before sundown; and you are not a damned bit better for taking his part, and you'll see that I can prophesy better than Old Joe, for neither he nor his brother, nor anyone who will remain with them will see the sun set today."

Joseph directed Jones to report what he had heard to the governor. While on his way with the message, Jones listened to a speech made by the leader of an assembly of men: "Our troops will be discharged this morning in obedience to orders, and for a sham we will leave the town," he cried; "but when the governor and the McDonough troops have left for Nauvoo this afternoon, we will return and kill those men, if we have to tear the jail down."

He was applauded by three cheers from the crowd.

Captain Jones went to the governor and told him what he had heard in the night and the statements made by the officer of the guard and by the speaker whom he had heard on his way there. He earnestly solicited the governor's protection. His Excellency replied, "You are unnecessarily alarmed for the safety of your friends, Sir; the people are not that cruel."

Irritated by such remarks, Jones urged the necessity of placing better men to guard them than professed assassins, and said, "The Messrs. Smith are American citizens, and have surrendered themselves to your Excellency upon your pledging your honor for their safety; they are also Master Masons, and as such I demand of your protection of their lives."

Governor Ford's face turned pale, and Jones remarked, "If you do not do this, I have but one more desire, and that is if you leave their lives in the hands of those men to be sacrificed. . ."

"What is that, sir?" the governor asked in a hurried tone.

"It is," said Jones, "that the Almighty will preserve my life to a proper time and place, that I may testify that you have been timely warned of their danger."

Jones returned to the prison, but the guard would not let him enter. He again returned to the hotel, and found Governor Ford standing in front of the McDonough troops, who were in line to escort him to Nauvoo.

The disbanded mob retired to the rear, shouting loudly that they were only going a short distance out of town, when they would return and kill Old Joe and Hyrum as soon as the governor was far enough out of town.

Jones called the attention of the governor to the threats then made, but the governor took no notice of them, although it was impossible for him to avoid hearing them.

Jones then requested the governor to give him passports for himself and friends to pass in and out of the prison, according to his promise made to the prisoners. The governor refused to give them passes, but told General Deming to give one to Dr. Willard Richards, Joseph Smith's private secretary.

While obtaining the pass for Dr. Richards Jones' life was threatened, and Chauncey L. Higbee said to him in the street, "We are determined to kill Joe and Hyrum and you had better go away to save yourself."

At 7:00 a.m. Hyrum, Joseph, Dr. Richards, Stephen Markham and John S. Fullmer ate breakfast together. Mr. Crane ate with them and wanted to know if the report were true that Joseph had fainted three times on Tuesday while being exhibited to the troops. He was assured of the falseness of the report. [^6]

At 8:00 a.m., at Joseph's request, passes were given to C.H. Wheelock and John S. Fullmer, and at 8:20 Joseph wrote to his wife Emma, asking her to tell General Dunham to instruct the people to stay at home or go about their business and not to collect in groups. He said, however, that it was the duty of all men to protect their lives and the lives of their households, etc.

In a postscript he wrote:

Dear Emma, I am very much resigned to my lot, knowing I am justified, and have done the best that could be done. Give my love to the children and all my friends. Mr. Brewer, and all who inquire after me; and as for treason, I know that I have not committed any, and they cannot prove anything of the kind, so you need not have any fears that anything can happen to us on that account. May God bless you all. Amen.

At 9:40 a.m. Messrs. Woods and Reid called to report the decision of the governor to countermand his previous orders of marching the whole army to Nauvoo. Later, Dr. Southwick who attended the meeting told Stephen Markham that the purpose of such a gathering was to take into consideration the best way to stop Joseph Smith's career, because his views on government were widely circulated and were taking hold like wildfire. Politicians feared that if he did not get into the presidential chair this election, he would be sure to the next time; and if Illinois and Missouri would join together and kill him, they would not be brought to justice for it.

Captain Dunn and his company were ordered to accompany the governor to Nauvoo. The Carthage Greys, who had but two days before been under arrest for insulting the commanding general and whose conduct had been more hostile to the prisoners than that of any other company, were selected by Governor Ford to guard the prisoners at the jail; other troops composed of the mob whom the prisoner had found at Carthage, and had mustered into the service of the state with promises of "full satisfaction" and a march on Nauvoo, were disbanded and discharged in Carthage, although it was the duty of the governor to dismiss the troops into the hands of their several officers in order that they be marched home and there disbanded, not disbanded at a distance from home, and at a time and place when they were predisposed to acts of lawless violence, rapine and murder. And Governor Ford suffered two or three hundred men to remain encamped about eight miles off on the Warsaw road, apparently under the control of Colonel Levi Williams, a sworn enemy to Joseph, who had on many occasions threatened the destruction of Nauvoo and the Prophet's death.

Cyrus H. Wheelock states that prior to leaving Carthage he said to the governor, "Sir, you must be aware by this time that the prisoners have no fears in relation to any lawful demands made against them, but you have heard sufficient to justify you in the belief that their enemies would destroy them if they had them in their power; and now, sir, I am about to leave for Nauvoo, and I fear for those men; they are safe as regards the law, but they are not safe from the hands of traitors, and midnight assassins who thirst for their blood and have determined to spill it; and under these circumstances leave with a heavy heart."

Ford replied, "I was never in such a dilemma in my life; but your friends shall be protected, and have a fair trial by the law; in this pledge I am not alone; I have obtained the pledge of the whole of the army to sustain me."

After receiving these assurances, Wheelock prepared to visit the prison. The morning being a little rainy, favored his wearing an overcoat, in the side pocket of which he carried a six shooter. He passed the guard unmolested, and during his visit in the prison slipped the revolver into Joseph's pocket. Joseph examined it, and asked Wheelock if he had not better retain it for his own protection.

This was a providential circumstance, for most other persons had been thoroughly searched. Joseph then handed the singlebarrel pistol which had been given him by John S. Fullmer to his brother Hyrum, and said, "You may have use for this."

Hyrum observed, "I hate to use such things or to see them used."

"So do I," said Joseph, "but we may have to, to defend ourselves."

Hyrum then took the pistol.

Wheelock was entrusted with a verbal request to the commanders of the Legion to avoid all military display or any other movement calculated to produce excitement during the governor's visit. He was especially charged to use all the influence he possessed to have the brethren and friends of Joseph remain perfectly calm and quiet, inasmuch as they respected the feelings and well-being of the Prophet and Patriarch.

The prisoners also sent so many verbal messages to their families with Wheelock that Dr. Richards proposed writing them all down, fearing Wheelock might forget; but Hyrum fastened his eyes upon him and with a look of penetration said, "Brother Wheelock will remember all that we tell him, and he will never forget the occurrences of this day." [^7]

Both Hyrum and Joseph bore a faithful testimony to the Latter-day work, and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and prophesied of the triumph of the gospel over all the earth, exhorting the brethren present to faithfulness and persevering diligence in proclaiming the gospel, building up the temple, and performing all the duties connected with our holy religion.

At twenty minutes to ten, Joseph wrote a postscript to Emma as follows: "I just learned that the governor is about to disband his troops, all but a guard to protect us and the peace, and come himself to Nauvoo and deliver a speech to the people. This is right I suppose."

John P. Greene, Nauvoo city marshal, told Governor Ford that if he went to Nauvoo, leaving only the Carthage Greys to guard the jail, there was a conspiracy on foot to take the lives of Joseph and Hyrum during his absence, to which the governor replied, "Marshal Greene, you are too enthusiastic." [^8]

At 10:30 a.m. Governor Ford went to Nauvoo with that part of the troops who were most friendly to the prisoners. Despite his promise of the day before, the Governor made no offer to take Joseph Smith along. John S. Fullmer left the jail for Nauvoo to assist Wheelock in obtaining witnesses for the Saturday trial. James W. Woods, their principal lawyer also left for Nauvoo.

At 1:15 p.m. Hyrum and Joseph and Willard dined in their room; Taylor and Markham dined below. After dinner Dr. Richards was taken ill, and Joseph said, "Brother Markham, since you have a pass from the governor to go in and out of the jail, go and get the doctor something that he needs to settle his stomach," and Markham went out for medicine. When he had secured the remedies desired and was returning to the jail, a man by the name of Stewart called out, "Old man, you have got to leave town in five minutes!"

Markham replied, "I shall not do it." Then a company of Carthage Greys gathered around him, put him on his horse, and forced him out of town at the point of the bayonet.

At 3:15 p.m. the guard began threatening among themselves and telling what they would do when the excitement was over.

John Taylor liked to sing and used his voice to help dispel the gloom. He sang all fourteen verses of "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief" which seemed to meet the need of the moment. At Joseph's request he sang it again. Then Hyrum read extracts from Josephus.

The conspiracy had progressed as planned. Governor Ford was gone, and at the Carthage Jail the afternoon was waning. This Thursday, June 27, 1844, had been a day of overcast clouds and drizzling rain, even the weather seemed to accentuate the feeling of gloom.

The guard at the jail was changed at 4:00 p.m., only eight being stationed at the jail, while the Carthage Greys were camped a quarter of a mile away, on the public square.

At 4:15 p.m. Joseph commenced conversing with the guard about Joseph H. Jackson, William and Wilson Law, and others of his persecutors, and Hyrum and Dr. Richards continued conversing together until a quarter past five.

At 5:00 p.m. Jailer Stigall returned to the jail and said that Stephen Markham had been surrounded by a mob which had driven him out of Carthage, and that he had gone to Nauvoo.

Stigall suggested that they would be safer in the cell, and Joseph said, "After supper we will go in."

Mr. Stigall went out, and Joseph said to Dr. Richards, "If we go into the cell, will you go in with us?"

The doctor answered, "Brother Joseph, you did not ask me to come to Carthage—you did not ask me to come to jail with you—and do you think I would forsake you now? But I will tell you what I will do; if you are condemned to be hung for treason, I will be hung in your stead, and you will go free!"

Joseph said, "You cannot!"

The doctor replied, "I will."

Before the jailer came in, his boy brought in some water, and said that the guards wanted some wine. Joseph gave Dr. Richards two dollars to give the guard; but the guard said one was enough and would take no more.

The guard immediately sent for a bottle of wine, pipes, and two small papers of tobacco, and one of the guards brought them into the jail soon after the jailer went out. Dr. Richards uncorked the bottle, and presented a glass to Joseph, who tasted it as did also Brother Taylor and the doctor, and the bottle was then given to the guard, who turned to go out. When he was at the top of the stairs, someone below called him two or three times, and he went down.

Immediately there was a little rustling at the outer door of the jail, and a cry of surrender, instantly followed by a discharge of three or four firearms. The doctor glanced out the curtained window and saw about a hundred armed men with painted faces around the door.

The guards elevated their firelocks, and boisterously threatened the mob, discharging their firearms over their heads. The mob encircled the building. Then, some of them, rushing by the guard and up the flight of stairs, burst open the door and began the work of death. Others fired in through the open windows.

Hyrum, Joseph, and Elder Taylor all had their coats off. Joseph sprang to his coat for his six shooter, Hyrum for his single barrel, Taylor for Markham's large hickory cane, and Dr. Richards for Taylor's cane. All then plunged against the door. The balls whistled up the stairway and on the instant one came through the door. With their canes, the prisoners tried to knock aside the guns of the ruffians.

Hyrum was retreating in front of the door and had just snapped his pistol when a ball struck him on the left side of the nose, and he fell backward to the floor saying, "I am a dead man!" As he fell to the floor another ball from outside the building entered his left side and passed through his body with such force that it completely broke to pieces the watch he wore in his vest pocket, and, at the same instant, another ball from the door grazed his breast, and entered his head by the throat; subsequently a fourth ball entered his left leg.

A shower of lead was pouring into the room, much of which lodged in the ceiling just above Hyrum.

Continual discharges of musketry came into the room. Elder Taylor continued parrying the guns until they had got them about half their length into the room, when he found that resistance was vain and attempted to jump out of the window. A ball fired from within struck him in the left thigh, hitting the bone and passing through to within half an inch of the other side. He fell on the windowsill, and a ball fired from the outside struck the watch in his vest pocket, throwing him back into the room.

After he fell into the room he was hit by two more balls, one of them badly injuring his left wrist and the other entering at the side of the bone just below the left knee. He rolled under the bed, which was at the right of the window in the southeast corner of the room.

While he lay under the bed he was fired at several times from the stairway; one ball striking him on the left hip and tearing the flesh in such a manner that large quantities of blood were scattered upon the wall and floor.

When Hyrum fell, Joseph exclaimed, ''Oh, dear brother Hyrum!" and opening the door a few inches discharged his six shooter down the stairway two or three balls missing fire.

Then, seeing that there was no safety in the room and no doubt thinking that it would save the lives of his brethren in the room if he got out, Joseph turned calmly from the door and sprang into the window where two balls pierced him from the door, and one entered his right breast from without. He fell forward into the hands of his murderers, exclaiming, "O Lord, my God!"

Dr. Richards' escape was miraculous; although he was a very large man and stood in a veritable shower of lead, he emerged unscathed, with the exception of a ball which grazed the lower tip of his left ear. His escape literally fulfilled a prophecy which Joseph had made to him over a year previously that the time would come when "the balls would fly around him like hail, and he would see his friends fall on the right and on the left, but that there should not be a hole in his garment!" [^9]

Dr. Richards' description of that terrible hour follows:

. . . As his feet (the Prophet's) went out of the window my head went in, the balls whistling all around. He fell on his side a dead man.

At that instant the cry was raised, "He's leaped the window!" and the mob on the stairs and in the entry ran out.

I withdrew from the window, thinking it of no use to leap out on the hundred bayonets then around Joseph Smith's body.

Not satisfied with this I again reached my head out of the window and watched some seconds to see if there was any signs of life regardless of my own, determined to see the end of him I loved. Being fully satisfied that he was dead, with a hundred men near the body and more coming around the corner of the jail, and expecting a return to our room, I rushed towards the prison door, at the head of the stairs, and through the entry from whence the firing had proceeded, to learn if the doors into the prison were open.

When near the entry, Mr. Taylor called out, "Take me!" I pressed my way until I found all doors unbarred, returning instantly, caught Mr. Taylor under my arm and rushed by the stairs into the dungeon, or inner prison, stretched him on the floor and covered him with a bed in such a manner as not likely to be perceived, expecting an immediate return of the mob.

I said to Mr. Taylor, "This is a hard case to lay you on the floor, but if your wounds are not fatal, I want you to live to tell the story." I expected to be shot the next moment, and stood before the door awaiting the onset. [^10]

While Willard Richards and John Taylor were in the cell, a company of the mob again rushed up the stairs, but finding only Hyrum's body they turned and were again descending the stairs when there came a loud cry of "The Mormons are coming!" which caused the whole band of murderers to flee precipitately into the woods! [^11]

The time of the deadly assault was fixed by John Taylor's watch, which was struck by a ball from outside the window. The impact knocked him to the floor and smashed the time piece whose hands stopped at sixteen minutes twenty-six seconds past five o'clock.

Thus life ended for Hyrum Smith, the man who stood next to the founder of a dynamic religion, the man who had held the keys of authority jointly with his brother Joseph, the man in whom the Lord said "was no guile." His contribution to the establishment of the restored Church will stand as a monument throughout eternity. He was a peacemaker, a leader of men, a counselor, a patriarch to bless the Church. He had been a shield to Joseph, a fatherly adviser as well as a beloved brother.

Hyrum Smith could have saved his life, but he would not forsake his brother. What more can man do to show his love for a brother than to lay down his life for him? As they had been one in life so were they one in death, sealing with their blood their testimonies of a divine work.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Parley P. Pratt and his brother, William, on a mission in the state of New York on the day of the martyrdom, had an experience similar to that of other missionaries. He wrote: ". . . My brother, let us keep silent and not open our mouths. let us observe an entire and solemn silence, for this is a dark day, and the hour of triumph for the powers of darkness. . . ."
[^2] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VII, pp. 106-107.
[^3] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, p. 623.
[^4] Ibid., vol. VI, pp. 623-624.
[^5] See cut.
[^6] Mary Ann Smith Harris, Message to My Posterity, March 2, 1881, at Provo, Utah. The letter was opened the centennial year—April 6, 1930. Mary Ann remembered her mother's making a pair of pants for Hyrum and his walking back and forth. He was seldom cheerful and always looked anxious and sober. After his death her mother seldom smiled. If they could get her to laugh it was quite a feat. (Note: see Relics under bibliography for a description of Hyrum Smith's personal possessions.)
[^7] Joseph Smith, op. cit., vol. VI, pp. 624-625.
[^8] The Prophet, New York City, N. Y., quoted from E. Cecil McGavin, Nauvoo the Beautiful, pp. 186-187.
[^9] The first to view the martyrs were of course the immediate families. The following description of the events in Nauvoo following the martyrdom is by a house guest, a Mr. Richmond from Palmyra, New York.
[^10] Emma Smith Bidamon was buried next to Joseph April 30, 1879. She had married Major Lewis Bidamon December 27, 1847.
[^11] Susa Young Gates, op. cit.
