Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

Chapter XXXVI

The Widows and Orphans Mourn

When the roar of muskets had ceased and the fiends in human form with painted faces had fled into the woods of Carthage that evening of June 27, 1844, the two key men of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times lay dead in a pool of their own blood. Two witnesses had been taken to bear testimony at the throne of God that they had done all they could to carry out the divine plan.

For the moment, the powers of perdition exulted, while the heavens wept in sympathy with the mourning Saints and the stricken widows and orphans. Some wept, for the Spirit whispered to them that evil was abroad and that some great calamity had befallen. [^1]

The feeling of sorrow among the missionaries was soon understood, for the newspapers, with screaming headlines, announced the death of the Mormon leaders. And though justice and mercy were rudely insulted, a calloused world went on its way, happy in the thought that now the "Mormon menace" was at last destroyed and peace could reign undisturbed.

The life of Hyrum Smith had been one of crisis after crisis, beginning years before at Palmyra, New York. He had never known the joy of security. His place of abode had been sacrificed several times because of pressure from the enemy. He had been forced at the point of bayonets to leave his crying children and sick wife. Instant annihilation had several times hovered near, when it seemed certain that the jaws of hell would open to engulf both him and his family. And now the final blow had fallen.

When the acrid smell of gunsmoke had cleared away, and the tumult and shouting of the murderers had ceased John Taylor and Willard Richards, two stalwart friends of the martyrs, were spared to tell the story. The original intention of the mob leaders had been to kill all four prisoners, but for some unknown reason, when the mob was apprised of Joseph and Hyrum's deaths, they fled, perhaps fearing reprisal from the Mormons.

Brother Richards, not knowing how soon the killers would return, crept to the east window, past Hyrum's body, and peering out saw the body of his beloved Prophet slumped down beside the well-curb. Joseph had been shot four times from outside the jail.

Soon some people, out of curiosity, entered the jail and came into the room. Among these was a doctor. Seeing Brother Taylor's wounds, the doctor proceeded to extract one of the musket slugs from his hand using a carpenter's compass and a penknife. Such crude instruments cutting and probing the flesh increased the pain almost unbearably. Brother Taylor later said:

After sawing some time with a dull penknife, and prying and pulling with the compass, he ultimately succeeded in extracting the ball, which weighed about half an ounce. . . . He (the doctor) remarked afterward to a friend of mine that I had nerve like the devil to stand what I did in its extraction. I really thought I had need of nerves to stand such surgical butchery, and that, whatever my nerves may be, his practice was devilish. [^2]

Brother Richards could give no immediate attention to John Taylor, for he was busy arranging the coroner's inquest and seeing to the removal of the bodies from Carthage to Nauvoo.

When the coroner's jury were gathered in the room around the body of Hyrum, the name of Francis Higbee was mentioned. Hearing this name Brother Taylor said, "Captain Smith, you are a justice of the peace; I have heard his [Francis Higbee's] name mentioned; I want to swear my life against him." When Higbee heard his name mentioned, he left the place.

Brother Taylor lay from a little after five that fateful evening until two o'clock the next morning, a total of nine hours before his wounds were dressed. Most of the people of Carthage had fled fearing an attack by the Mormons; hence there was little help available.

Willard Richards sent a message to Nauvoo which read:

Carthage Jail, 8 o'clock 5 min p.m., June 27th, 1844. Joseph and Hyrum are dead. Taylor wounded not very badly. I am well. Our guard was forced by a band of Missourians from 100 to 200. The job was done in an instant, and the party fled from Nauvoo instantly. This is as I believe it. The citizens here are afraid of the "Mormons" attacking them; I promsed them no.

Signed—Willard Richards

NB—The citizens promise us protection; alarm guns have been fired.

Signed—John Taylor.

John Taylor was more severely wounded than he admitted. He signed the message, taking great pains to write legibly, in order to convey to his wife that he was quite well so that she would not worry.

In the meantime the governor was making to the Saints in Nauvoo one of the most infamous and insulting speeches that ever fell from the lips of an executive. He spoke of the destruction of the Expositor press and of placing Nauvoo under martial law, and said that one cause of excitement was the Mormons' having so many firearms, which made the public afraid that they would be used against the government. Continuing, this official said:

I know there is great prejudice against you on account of your peculiar religion, but you ought to be praying Saints, not military Saints. Depend upon it, a little more misbehavior from the citizens, and the torch, which is already lighted, will be applied, and the city may be reduced to ashes, and extermination would follow; and it gives me great pain to think that there is danger of so many innocent women and children being exterminated. If anything of a serious character should befall the lives or property of the persons who are persecuting your leaders, you will be held responsible. [^3]

The governor had been duly warned about an impending attack on the jail but felt that the promise made to him by his troops that they would protect the prisoners was a sufficient guarantee.

He had arrived at Nauvoo about four o'clock in the afternoon, and after making his speech and declining an invitation to stay overnight, he left for Carthage about 6:30 p.m. In marching up Main Street the escort performed a sword exercise, giving all the passes, guards, cuts, and thrusts and taking up the entire width of the street in an imposing show. This maneuvering was an obvious attempt to intimidate the people, for the governor had remarked in his speech that they need not expect to set themselves up against such "well disciplined troops." As they passed, the troops inspected the temple and broke off as a "souvenir" a horn from an ox replica.

When the governor and his party had proceeded about three miles from Nauvoo, they met two messengers (George D. Grant and David Bettisworth) hastening with the sad news to Nauvoo. The governor took them with him back to Grant's house, one and one-half miles east of Carthage, in order to prevent their delivering the news until he and the authorities had removed the county records and public documents, and until most of the inhabitants had left Carthage. Grant then took another horse and rode into Nauvoo that night with the news. [^4]

At Hyrum's home on Water Street, [^5] not far from the Mansion House, Mary, Hyrum's wife, was keeping vigil over a sick child. Martha Ann, three years old, had a severe case of measles accompanied by a congestion in her lungs, and she could not speak above a whisper. Her mother walked the floor much depressed in spirits. For relief she would occasionally read the Bible. Martha Ann pleaded vainly that she should come to bed. When George D. Grant knocked at the door and delivered the news, the widow stepped back and calmly exclaimed, "It cannot be possible, can it?" His answer was, "Yes, it is too true."

She fell back against the cupboard. Brother Grant helped her to a chair; and, as Martha Ann later wrote, "The news flew like wild-fire through the house, and the anguish and sorrow that was felt can be easier felt than described. But that will never be forgotten by those who were called to go through it." [^6]

At midnight another message was sent from Carthage to Nauvoo, this one from Willard Richards, John Taylor and Samuel Smith, addressed to Emma Smith and Major-General Dunham of the Nauvoo Legion. The message said that the governor had just arrived and would take proper measures. The people were advised not to rush out of the city to Carthage, but rather to stay at home, and be prepared for an attack from Missouri mobbers. It affirmed that Joseph and Hyrum were dead, but that God reigned and said that the bodies would be removed as soon as possible.

Governor Ford added a note as follows: "Defend yourselves until protection can be furnished necessary." June 27 - 1844.

General Deming of the state militia enclosed a message to Orson Spencer which said: ". . .I was at my residence when the horrible crime was committed. It will be condemned by three-fourths of the citizens of the county. Be quiet or you will be attacked from Missouri." [^7]

Samuel H. Smith, who lived at Plymouth, a few miles away from Nauvoo, on hearing of the imminent danger of Joseph and Hyrum had ridden his horse toward Nauvoo to warn his brothers of the grave danger they were in. At Bear Creek he met the mob stationed there to watch for movement of the Nauvoo Legion or any other group or person who might thwart their plans to kill the prisoners. They refused to let Samuel advance any farther toward Nauvoo.

He then went to the home of a friend and obtained a fresh mount-one of the fastest in the country, and learning that his brothers were at Carthage, hastened toward the county seat; but every out-of-the-way trail he attempted to follow was guarded by the enemy. When he was recognized by one of the guards, they attempted to kill him, pursuing him over the prairie for two hours. As his assailants would come within shooting distance and raise their guns to fire he would wheel his fast mount and dash off in another direction, only to be confronted by other guards determined to kill him.

Finally he eluded them and rode his tired steed toward Carthage. On the outskirts of the village a man warned him not to advance farther, that he would be shot if he entered the town, but he eluded the man and a few moments later a hysterical Samuel reined in his tired horse at the Hamilton House.

"Rush inside and leave your horse for me," shouted Mr. Hamilton, recognizing Samuel. The courtyard was filled with excited men who were leaping the low fence and scattering from the village. Joseph and Hyrum had just been killed.

After the murderous mob had fled from the village, Samuel helped carry John Taylor to the hotel and dress his wounds. He also assisted in preparing the bodies of his brothers for the journey to Nauvoo. The next morning he and Mr. Hamilton, with an escort of eight soldiers left Carthage, bearing the remains of the martyrs to the grief-stricken "City of Joseph."

The physical and nervous exhaustion suffered the day of the martyrdom by the tender-hearted Samuel left him with a severe fever from which he never recovered. He died one month after the burial of his two brothers. [^8]

The solemn procession which left Carthage at 8:00 a.m. had by 3:00 p.m. reached Mulholland Street, about a mile east of the temple in Nauvoo. Here it was met by a great assembly of the sorrowing citizens of Nauvoo, under the direction of the city Marshal.

The city council, the lieut.-general's staff, Major General Jonathan Dunham and staff, the acting Brigadier-General—Hosea Stout—and staff, commanders and officers of the legion, and several thousands of citizens were there. And the most solemn lamentations that ever ascended unto the Lord of Hosts rose from their throats.

About eight or ten thousand persons were addressed by Dr. Willard Richards, William Phelps, Esquires Woods and Reid of Iowa, and Col. Stephen Markham. They told the people to go quietly home.

At seven o'clock Saturday morning, June 29, the bodies were put into their coffins which were covered with black velvet fastened with brass nails, and lined with white cambric. Over the face of each corpse was a lid fastened with brass hinges, in which was a square of glass to protect the face. Each coffin was placed in a rough pine box.

At 8:00 a.m. the room was thrown open so that the Saints could view the bodies of their martyred Prophet and Patriarch, and it is estimated that over ten thousand persons visited the remains that day. A perfect living stream of people entered at the west door of the Mansion House and left by the north door from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., at which hour the family requested that the Mansion House be cleared so that they could take their farewell look at the remains. [^9]

The coffins were then taken out of the boxes into the little bedroom in the northeast corner of the Mansion and there were sealed and the doors locked. Bags of sand were then placed in each end of the boxes, which were nailed up, and a mock funeral took place, the boxes being put into a hearse and driven to the graveyard by William D. Huntington, and there deposited in a grave with the usual ceremonies.

This was done to prevent the enemies of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch from getting possession of the bodies, as they had threatened to do. As the hearse passed the meeting ground accompanied by a few men, William W. Phelps was preaching the funeral sermon.

About midnight the coffins containing the bodies were taken from the Mansion by Dimick B. Huntington, Edward Hunter, William D. Huntington, William Marks, Jonathan H. Holmes, Gilbert Goldsmith, Alpheus Cutler, Lorenzo D. Wasson, and Philip B. Lewis, preceded by James Emmett who was armed with his musket and acted as guard.

They carried the coffins through the garden, around by the pump, to the Nauvoo House, which was then built to the first joists of the basement, and buried them there.

Just as they finished interring the bodies and smoothing the ground as it was before, strewing chips of wood, stone, and other rubbish over all to make it appear the same as the rest of the ground around the graves, a heavy downpour of rain, accompanied by thunder and lightning, occurred, obliterating all traces that any tampering with the earth had been done in the vicinity.

The bodies remained in these graves in the cellar of the Nauvoo House until the fall, when they were removed by Dimick B. Huntington, William D. Huntington, Jonathan H. Holmes, and Gilbert Goldsmith, at Emma's request, to a place near the Mansion, where they were buried side by side and the bee house moved to cover the graves.

For security reasons, the above, taken from the historian's account, did not tell the exact location of the graves. The bodies were buried the second time across the street from the Nauvoo House near the Old Homestead (Joseph's former residence), under the dirt floor of the Spring House, a canopied cellar with a moist interior which provided refrigeration for food during the hot summer months. Soon afterward, the Spring House was torn down and the ground leveled. With the passing of time all knowledge of the correct location was lost. Rumors even circulated that the bodies were disinterred and taken west at the time of the exodus from Nauvoo. As years passed, tourist guides, when asked where the graves were located would point to a clump of lilacs in the yard, adjacent to the Homestead, as the approximate location. In 1926 the writer was a member of a conducted tour of Nauvoo and the guide pointed out the site of the flowering shrubs as the grave site. In 1928, the descendants explored near this location in an effort to learn the truth of the matter and uncovered the sacred tomb. Grave markers were then installed and the graves can be visited at the present time. [^10]

Mary Fielding Smith, Hyrum's widow, in later years remembered the final burial of her husband, the Patriarch. Emma had notified Mary of her intention to remove the bodies for reasons of greater security. The time for the removal was agreed upon, but for some unknown reason Emma changed the date. That night Mary went to bed with her children. About midnight she was impressed that there was something wrong. She got up and dressed, threw a shawl over her head and ran down to the spot where her husband was buried. She found the conspirators in the act of removing the bodies, and remained until she saw the removal of the bodies and knew exactly where they were placed in their new burial. [^11]

The leaders were fully aware of the cloud of persecution which hung ominously over Nauvoo. The legion was patrolling the city to guard against any surprise attack by the enemy. There was great danger of having the graves dug up to obtain a reward of a thousand dollars that had been offered for Joseph Smith, dead or alive. Therefore, extra precaution must be taken to hide the bodies of the martyrs.

The burial of Hyrum and Joseph brings to a close the story of this biography, but the narrative would be incomplete without defining both Hyrum's role in establishing the Church and his place in history. His martyrdom with that of his brother gave the growing Church of Jesus Christ a mighty upward thrust. The events immediately following his death resulted in greater faith, loyalty, and devotion of the people to the principles of this new, yet old, gospel. The Church seemed suddenly to mature. The days of deep mourning had their counterpart in the great outpouring of the spirit of peace.

The membership of the Church had been subjected over the preceding years to a variety of new experiences, experiences alternating between exaltation and emotional depression. About a year prior to the martyrdom, Joseph and Hyrum rode triumphantly through streets lined with rejoicing people; Joseph had just been providentially snatched from the custody of police officers bent on taking him to Missouri. Now, a short year later, the irony of life and death found the same multitude lining the streets, this time wrapped in the deep gloom of mourning.

Yet somehow that final, climactic scene caught them up in a surge of that heavenly spirit which welds the faithful into one great brotherhood. To them, the purposes of God Almighty had suddenly been revealed; the foundations of a mighty Church had been laid and what had been preached was profoundly true.

Although an era had come to a close, a new one was beginning, and the gold of God's crucible began to rise to the surface. The martyrs' lives became the scale on a barometer with the indicator at the highest point. Ideals and a standard of conduct had been established for the people and for generations yet to follow.

Hyrum Smith, during his last years, filled the role of Patriarch to the whole Church for which office he will be affectionately known among his people throughout eternity. He was ordained to this office by the same authority of the priesthood which ordained the patriarchs of old to the ancient office established to provide an evangelist to bless the people. From the very beginning, Adam, the Ancient of Days, blessed his posterity, and this office came down by lineage- Adam to Seth and Seth to Noah. In Genesis the line is given from Noah to his son Shem, on to Arphaxad, Salab, Eber, Peleg, Reu, Serug, Nahor, Terah, Abraham. (Genesis 11:10-26.) (Terah, the father of Abraham lost the office because of idolatry.) From Abraham to Isaac to Jacob; from Israel (Jacob) to Joseph, the oldest son of Rachel.

In this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times Joseph Smith, Sr., was ordained December 18, 1833; Hyrum Smith January 24, 1841; John Smith February 18, 1855; Hyrum G. Smith, May 9, 1912; Joseph F. Smith, October 8, 1942; and Eldred Gee Smith, April 10, 1947.

The office of Presiding Patriarch was held temporarily by others. For example, "Uncle" John Smith, the oldest living brother of the first Patriarch, held the office, as his right, until John, Hyrum's oldest son, came of age. William Smith was ordained May 24, 1845 but was not sustained by the vote of the Church because of unworthiness. He was excommunicated from the Church, October 19, 1845.

The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that this birthright of the firstborn in Israel belonged to Joseph Smith, Sr., who became the first Patriarch in this dispensation. This succession of authority from father to son is known as the "Law of Primogeniture." The office of Patriarch was intimated in a revelation given through the Prophet to Hyrum in April, a few days after the organization of the church. In this revelation the Lord said:

Behold, I speak unto you, Hyrum, a few words; for thou also art under no condemnation, and thy heart is opened, and thy tongue loosed; and thy calling is . . . unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. (D&C 23:3.)

Hyrum and Joseph as brothers fulfilled the commandment of God to establish his Church and in so doing were favored with the gift of divine revelation; they endured persecution, mobbing and death. They came out of the same mold, yet they were different in personality, in temperament, and in physical appearance. Though they were God's anointed, they were yet human beings and exhibited the weaknesses and frailties common to mankind. Frequently, in public and in private they acknowledged their faults and failings. Their evident humility endeared the brothers to the Saints and generated a feeling of brotherhood and love.

As one remembers the early years of the Smith family, he realizes that it was Hyrum who assumed the responsibility of helping to support the family after the death of his older brother, Alvin. He felt a deep sense of responsibility for his parents and his younger brothers and sisters and this affected his personality. He became serious minded and was not easily discouraged. His role in the family placed him in the background where he was occupied with family management and duties, leaving the more aggressive Joseph to assume the more spectacular role of church leadership.

It is evident, from the many failures to establish themselves prior to the organization of the Church, that the Smiths were not endowed with the gift of money management or shrewdness in business affairs. Poverty, sickness, and failure dogged their footsteps from one place to another.

Throughout his life Hyrum reflected the family's kindheartedness toward the poverty-stricken. His hospitality knew no bounds. He would divide his substance with the poor even at the risk of starving his own family. Often he would take someone who was old and infirm into his home to be fed and cared for. His faith was that "the Lord would provide."

But his kind and trusting nature invited the unscrupulous to take advantage of him.

As a result of their expulsion from Missouri, the Smiths, like many others were stripped of all they had. Then, too, there were costs incident to lawsuits, and there was sickness in the family. When the state of Illinois passed the bankrupt law, Hyrum and his brother Joseph were forced by the unjustified lawsuits of their enemies to apply for and receive freedom from paying their debts. For this act which merely accentuated their ineptness in money matters, they were maligned by their enemies.

Hyrum, like Joseph, had little formal education. He had attended Hanover Academy for just one semester when an epidemic of fever forced him to quit and return home. His sermons and letters reveal a good mind educated by private observation and study. In his brief journal there is evidence of a need for much improvement in writing. But no doubt his carelessness in writing is an indication that he wrote for his personal use and not for publication.

Missionary work was of great interest to him. When calls came he would plan to leave at the earliest moment for an indefinite period of time. His missionary zeal was contagious and he enjoyed the spirit of his calling to a high degree. His companions often said: "Hyrum is a kind and delightful companion."

His dedicated attitude toward his work and his anxiety for its success gave him a ready insight into basic principles. His advice on numerous occasions to departing missionaries was evidence of his authority in this field. He seldom overlooked saying to these groups: "Preach the first principles and let the mysteries alone."

No one could accuse Hyrum of self-righteousness or exaggerated self-esteem. Nor did the power of office go to his head so that he attempted to exercise unjust dominion over his fellows. On the other hand, he did not shrink from assuming the role of a leader in initiating the building of the temple or in sitting on the stand officiating as a high officer in the Masonic Order, or in dressing up in clothes that were the fashion of the day, or in posing for a portrait. He walked and talked with dignity and self-control, and in his ornate officer's uniform upon his favorite mount occupied his place beside Joseph at the head of the Nauvoo Legion with poise and confidence. His unassuming bearing and sober mien carried great weight among the people.

Seldom did Hyrum become unnerved or act impulsively under pressure, even when taunted and maligned by the enemy; and this quality irritated a few. When a missionary was tried in Nauvoo for certain infractions of the missionary code while on a mission in the east, he was accused among other things of calling Hyrum "an old granny." Perhaps Hyrum seemed slow in making decisions, and sometimes he was absentminded, forgetting some details he had promised to attend to. Naturally, there were those among the Saints whose ideas clashed with Hyrum's, and there were those who envied him and secretly tried to belittle him and undermine his position.

Hyrum gave few parties at his home. Perhaps his house was always fully occupied with other essential matters or was not architecturally planned for festive occasions, or perhaps his helpmate was not socially inclined. But there was seldom a time that Hyrum and his wife missed a social or a party at the home of Joseph or his friends. And at Kirtland, Hyrum opened his home for the wedding of his old friend Newell Knight and had Joseph perform the ceremony, which was an endorsement on his part of sociability.

As a Counselor, Hyrum followed a policy of nonresistance. He was always one to recommend forbearance. The long period in the Missouri jail at Liberty might have been shortened had greater effort been made to escape.

Hyrum's wisdom seemed never to be doubted by Joseph. Joseph would write or say: "What shall we do, Hyrum?" And after Hyrum's reply, Joseph would say, "That is good enough." A report of the trial of an erring brother, said that "Hyrum pleaded for mercy, Joseph for justice. . . ."

It was Hyrum who suggested to Joseph that he record the controversial revelation on plural marriage, and who first read the revelation to the high council. It was Hyrum who refused to save himself by going with his family to Cincinnati when the crisis loomed which led to his death. It was Hyrum who advised that they recross the river and return to Nauvoo to give themselves up, live or die, rather than save themselves by fleeing to the Rocky Mountains. His advice to Joseph and others was generally accepted when decisions of far-reaching importance had to be made.

Hyrum was courageous and unflinching in the face of mob threats, and calm under pressure of evil rumors about the destruction of Nauvoo. He organized drives for workmen, funds and material with which to finish the temple. His faith was undeviating, although his wisdom under the conditions may have been somewhat faulty. A careful study of Church history and of the lives of Hyrum and Joseph reveals the great influence Hyrum exerted in shaping the course, movement, and the growth of the Church during the first fourteen years.

It may be said of him that he was a temple-builder. He initiated the construction of both the Kirtland and Nauvoo Temples. He acted as the chairman of both building committees. He accepted the idea of the penny fund, suggested by Mercy Rachel Thompson, by which a sum of over $500 was raised to buy nails and glass for the temple. [^12] His ability to organize, raise money, secure labor, and inspire support for the project was utilized at a critical time in the history of the Church. There are important blessings contingent on the completion of the temples, and the name of Hyrum Smith is one of the foremost among those who have taken a leading part in building temples and encouraging the work therein.

To know Hyrum Smith and his place in the esteem of God and of men, we must examine his ecclesiastical position and his part in bringing forth new revelation in the establishment of the Church.

Hyrum was one of the eight witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and a charter member of the Church. He was ordained an elder, a high priest, a Counselor in the First Presidency, and Associate President to his brother, Joseph Smith, taking the place of Oliver Cowdery. He was a member of the Nauvoo City Council and an officer in the Nauvoo Legion.

That his place in the love of the Lord is secure is evident in these words:

And again, verily I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith; for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord. (D&C 124:15.)

The devotion and faith of Hyrum Smith both to the Church and to Joseph during the New York, Kirtland, Ohio; and Illinois periods placed upon him still greater responsibility.

The pathos and grandeur of Joseph and Hyrum's relationship is revealed in Joseph's often expressed love for his older brother. At Kirtland when trouble flared between Joseph and William, the soothing influence of Hyrum caused Joseph to exclaim:

And I pray in my heart that all my brethren were like unto my beloved brother Hyrum, who possesses the mildness of a lamb, and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ; and I love him with that love that is stronger than death, for I never had occasion to rebuke him nor he me.

In Nauvoo in 1842, when the heavy hand of oppression was on the Prophet, with some of his associates and friends turning against him, he turned for fellowship and friendly assurance to Hyrum and said of him:

There was Brother Hyrum who next took me by the hand-a natural brother. Thought I to myself, Brother Hyrum, what a faithful heart you have got! Oh, may the eternal Jehovah crown eternal blessings upon your head as a reward for the care you have had for my soul.

Oh, how many the sorrows we have shared together, and again we find ourselves shackled with the unrelenting hand of oppression. Hyrum, thy name shall be written in the Book of the Law of the Lord, for those who come after thee to look upon that they may pattern after thy works.

The strength of Hyrum in the eyes of Joseph was expressed when the Prophet was constrained to bestow a special blessing upon him. In these words he said:

Blessed of the Lord is my brother Hyrum for the integrity of his heart. He shall be girt about with strength, and faithfulness shall be the strength of his loins. From generation to generation he shall be a shaft in the hands of his God to execute judgment upon his enemies. His children shall be many and his posterity numerous, and they will rise up and call him blessed. (Church History vol. I, p. 466.)

Among God's great Prophets and seers, none have stood together as associates with so nearly equal heavenly authority and power as did Hyrum and Joseph. It is quite likely that had Hyrum been spared martyrdom he would have been chosen and sustained as the Prophet's successor in the First Presidency of the church. This fact was so declared by President Brigham Young, when the question of succession was before the people in Nauvoo.

When Hyrum and his prophet brother were felled at Carthage by the assassins' bullets, they were consigned to the ages. The blood of these martyrs had become the seed of the Church. And as Paul the ancient apostle said, "For where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the testator. For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator liveth." (Heb. 9:17-18.) The deaths of Hyrum and Joseph put the seal of divinity upon their work.

When they were approaching the hour of death the power of Prophecy overflowed when Joseph said,

I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I have a conscience void of offense towards God, and towards all men. I shall die innocent, and it shall be said of me, he was murdered in cold blood.

The same morning, after Hyrum had made ready to go—Shall it be said to the slaughter? Yes, for so it was—he read the following paragraph of Ether in the Book of Mormon, and turned down the leaf upon it:

And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity.

And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful; wherefore, thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father.

And now I . . . bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and also my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. (Ether 12:36-38.)

Hyrum was bidding farewell to those he loved, and thus expressed his forgiveness to his enemy and the gentiles. His garments were clean from the blood of this generation, and his conscience was clear.

Hyrum's and Joseph's names are "classed among the martyrs of religion; and the reader in every nation will be reminded that the Book of Mormon, and this book of Doctrine and Covenants of the church, cost the best blood of the nineteenth century to bring them forth for the salvation of a ruined world; . . . They lived for glory; they died for glory; and glory is their eternal reward. From age to age shall their names go down to posterity as gems for the sanctified." (D & C, 35:4-6.)

And thus we bring to a close the life story of Hyrum Smith who was a leading actor in God's divine drama of the latter days. He fulfilled the role foreordained to him; he helped to consummate the decreed destiny of this land, choice above all other lands. And through revelation he helped to establish the kingdom of God in the latter-days, the kingdom destined to bring peace to a troubled world.

Notes

"When I entered the Mansion I found the wife of Joseph seated in a chair in the center of a small room, weeping and wailing bitterly, in a loud and unrestrained voice, her face covered with her hands. Rev. Mr. Greene came in **** approached Mrs. Smith and exclaimed: 'Oh, Sister Emma, God bless you! **** The first words of the woman were 'Why, O God, am I thus afflicted? Why am I a widow and my children orphans? Thou knowest I have always trusted in thy law.' Mr. Greene rejoined to her that this affliction would be to her a crown of life. She answered quickly: 'My husband was my crown; for him and my children I have suffered the loss of all things; and why, O God, am I thus deserted, and my bosom torn with this ten-fold anguish?'

"I passed into the next room, and the aged mother of Joseph and Hyrum looked up to me with a gaze of wild despair, and clasping me with both hands she asked me why they had shot her dear children. . . .

"In another room the children of Joseph were huddled together, the eldest, an adopted daughter, I think, being about eighteen. Two young boys were lying on the floor, and the other two were kneeling over them, mingling their grief in one wild scream of childish despair.

"At the home of Hyrum, a little way off, the scene was not less heart rending. His wife had gathered her family of four children into the sitting room, and the youngest about four years old sat on her lap. The poor and disabled that fed at the table of her husband, had come in and formed a group of about twenty about the room. They were all sobbing and weeping, each expressing his grief in his own peculiar way. Mrs. Smith seemed stupified with horror.

"While the scenes were being enacted in the city, the bodies were on the way from Carthage. To preserve peace and prepare the citizens to endure the ordeal with resignation, a general assembly was called at 10 o'clock A.M. . . .

"The officials formed around the bodies, the masses silently opening to give them way, and as the mournful procession moved on, the women broke out in lamentations at the sight of the two crude boxes in the wagon covered by an Indian blanket. The weeping was communicated to the crowd, and spread along the vast waves of humanity extending from the Temple to the residence of the Prophet. The groans and sobs and shrieks grew deeper and louder till the sound resembled the roar of a mighty tempest, or the slow, deep, roar of the distant tornado.

"When the bodies arrived at the mansion of Mrs. Emma Smith, the people numbering eight or ten thousand, mostly Mormons, and in close sympathy with the deceased, pressed about the house and the loud wails of the mourners outside, and of the family within, were truly terrible. . . .

"The bodies were carried into the dining room, and about a dozen resolute men who could stand the scent of blood were selected to lay them out. This occupied an hour or more, and they were then arranged near the west windows of the room, and their families were brought in to take a first look at the dead husbands, children and fathers. As the door opened the Prophet's wife entered with two attendants. She advanced a few steps towards the body of Hyrum, swooned and fell to the floor. Her friends raised her up and gave her water, but she fainted again, and was carried out insensible. . . .

"Six times she attempted to see the bodies, and six times she was removed in the arms of her two attendants. Hyrum's wife next entered the room with her four children, supported by no one, she having resolved to brave the scene with her poor orphans. She trembled at every step, and nearly fell, but reached her husband's body kneeling down by him, clasped her arms around his head, turned his pale face upon her heaving bosom, and then a gushing, plaintive wail burst forth from her lips: 'Oh! Hyrum, Hyrum! Have they shot you, my dear Hyrum—are you dead, my dear Hyrum!' She drew him closer and closer to her bosom, kissed his pale lips and face put her hands on his brow and brushed back his hair. Her grief seemed to consume her, and she lost all power of utterance.

"Her two daughters and two young children clung, some around her neck and some to her body, falling prostrate upon the corpse, and shrieking in the wildness of their wordless grief. In about ten minutes Mrs. Emma Smith, wife of the Prophet, came again into the room, between two attendants, in a half swooning state. She came toward the body of Hyrum, and knowing that the sensation of feeling a cold, dead body exerted a calming effect on the human nerves, I took her hand and laid it on Hyrum's brow and in a moment her strength returned. She murmured something in a low tone that I did not hear; her eyes opened, and she said to her friends: 'Now I can see him; I am strong now.' She walked alone to her husband's bed, kneeling down, clasped him around his face and sank upon his body. Suddenly her grief found vent; and sighs and groans and words and lamentations filled the room. 'Joseph, Joseph,' she said, 'are you dead? Have the assassins shot you?' Her children four in number gathered around their weeping mother and the dead body of a murdered father, and grief that words cannot embody seemed to overwhelm the whole group. She continued to speak in low tones, but none of the words were audible save those which I have recorded.

The multitude dispersed about dark, and the next day was set apart for the people to come and see the bodies, thousands passed in at one door and out at another, from morning till night they came and went, and in the house for the livelong day the lament was heard. . . . E. Cecil McGavin, Nauvoo the Beautiful, pp. 146-147.

Of this occasion Marietta Walker, described her feelings, ". . . Not a voice was raised, not a word spoken, as the unbroken line of men, women, and children, with bowed heads and tear-stained cheeks passed by . . . Tramp! tramp! tramp! the muffled sound ascended from the rooms below to those above, each one falling on the bereaved hearts of those mourners waiting there, like the sounds of the first clods upon the coffin lid . . . Will it never end? Will the people never have done coming?"

The Prophet's son Joseph later wrote: "I remember the gathering of the crowd at the Nauvoo Mansion, and recall Dr. Willard Richards on a platform erected in the frame house or building across the road from the Mansion on the south side of Water Street and the congregation of thousands who gathered to listen to him and others detailing something of the tragedy and counseling quiet resignation." Church History, vol. VI, pp. 147-149.

Mother Lucy Smith expressed her feelings: ". . . I was swallowed up in the depth of my affliction; and though my soul was filled with horror past imagination, yet I was dumb, until I arose again to contemplate the spectacle before me. Oh! at that moment how my mind flew through every scene of sorrow and distress which we had passed, together, in which they had shown the innocence and sympathy which filled their guileless hearts. As I looked upon their peaceful smiling countenances, I seemed almost to hear them say—'Mother, weep not for us, we have overcome the world by love; we carried to them the gospel, that their souls might be saved; they slew us for our testimony, and thus placed us beyond their power; their ascendancy is but for a moment, ours is an eternal triumph."' Lucy Mack Smith.

The foregoing sentence brings to my mind a picture which beggars description: an affectionate husband, loving Father, a faithful friend, a warm hearted benefactor, being torn from wives, children, friends and dependents. The family at that time numbering twenty (20), never to see their faces more and we never to see him but a mangled bleeding corpse. Perhaps my feelings can be better imagined than described." Mercy R. Thompson—Letter to My Posterity.

During the latter part of 1844 the penny fund served a very useful purpose. The Quorum of the Twelve, the trustees and members of the building committee needed a sum of money to save some church lands. After due deliberation President Young said, "My feelings are to draw the money lying in possession of Sisters Mary Smith and Mercy R. Thompson and A. Cutler, which money has been donated by the sisters of the church, by paying one cent a week, for the purpose of purchasing the nails and glass for the Temple and which amounts to five or six hundred dollars already collected. It is considered wisdom to do this to save the church property from the hands of our enemies."

The order read:

To Mrs. Mary Smith and Mercy R. Thompson,

Dear Sisters:

We are under the necessity of raising a considerable sum of money for the use of the church within a few days. We have counseled together on the subject, and have considered it wisdom to call upon you for the money in your hands, donated by the sisters as penny subscriptions. You will therefore, please deliver the same to Bishop Whitney when he presents this order.

Done by order of the Quorum of the Twelve, for and in behalf of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Signed, Brigham Young, President of the Quorum of Twelve. Church History, vol. VII, p. 322.

---
Notas:
[^1] Martha Smith Harris, op. cit.
[^2] The family of six children included Lovina, 19; John, 14; Jerusha, 10, Sarah, 9; Joseph Fielding, 8; and Martha Ann, 5 years old. Others in the group were Mercy Rachel Thompson, her daughter, May Jane, Hannah Grinnels, George Mills, and Elder James Lawson.
[^3] Joseph Fielding, description of crossing the Mississippi River. ". . . We moved to Hyrum's farm—he said Mary and family left just prior to the mob entering Nauvoo. . . . They marched into Nauvoo; my two sisters Smith and Thompson and myself with our families had just got over the River Mississippi with all our goods except two boat loads before they came in contact with the citizens. They came and camped on the farm (Hyrum's) that I had just left.
[^4] Susa Young Gates, op. cit.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, op. cit., pp. 155-158.
[^6] Idem.
[^7] Joseph F. Smith was identified with the Church as a missionary, Counselor in the First Presidency, and President of the Church. His sons Hyrum M. Smith and Joseph Fielding Smith were apostles, and David A. Smith, a counselor to the Presiding Bishopric of the church. His oldest son John Smith was ordained presiding Patriarch at twenty-two years of age.
[^8] The unveiling of Hyrum Smith's thirty-two-foot monument, a polished shaft of Vermont granite, occurred on Thursday, June 27, 1918.
[^9] The first to view the martyrs were of course the immediate families. The following description of the events in Nauvoo following the martyrdom is by a house guest, a Mr. Richmond from Palmyra, New York.
[^10] Emma Smith Bidamon was buried next to Joseph April 30, 1879. She had married Major Lewis Bidamon December 27, 1847.
[^11] Susa Young Gates, op. cit.
[^12] In regard to the Temple Penny Fund, Mercy Thompson wrote: "At one time after seeking diligently to know from the Lord if there was anything I could do for the building up of the Kingdom of God, a most pleasant sensation came over me with the following words, 'Try to get the sisters to subscribe one cent per week for the purpose of buying glass and nails for the Temple.' I went immediately to Joseph and told him what seemed to be the whisperings of the Spirit of the still small voice to me. He told me to go ahead, and the Lord would help me. I then mentioned it to Brother Hyrum who was much pleased, and did all in his power to encourage and help by speaking to the sisters in private and public promising them they would receive their blessings in the Temple. All who subscribed the one cent per week should have their names recorded in the Book of the Law of the Lord. I was assisted by my sister Mary, and took down and kept a record of all the names, and notwithstanding the poverty of the people, we had, by the time the committee was ready for the glass and the nails in the treasury, about $500.00 which they gladly received just in time of need. Perhaps I should have mentioned while the mob was threatening to mob and massacre the inhabitants we hid up the box containing the money in a pile of brick Hyrum had intended for building had his life been spared.
