Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch ( 1963)

An Epilogue

The family of Hyrum Smith, under the continuing threat of the mob to annihilate Nauvoo, decided to join the pioneers on their trek to the Rocky Mountains. After the first wagons going west had crossed the Mississippi River, February 6, 1846, the days and nights of those left behind were full of fear and evil forebodings. Their beloved city, without its charter, was unprotected except for a temporary organization which kept the lawless elements from completely overrunning the city.

Mary Fielding Smith waited for the most opportune time to move. She had to arrange for wagons, oxen, and food, and all the other necessities for so long a journey. But her drive and courage, together with the co-operation of her young family made it possible for her to start, finally, early in September. She had watched her neighbors and friends, and the Authorities of the Church pack up a few choice belongings, load them on hastily built wagons, and take affectionate leave of those who had to wait.

The city had begun to look deserted, with the old and infirm and a few of the more needy practically the only ones remaining. The river wharf had been busy for weeks with a never ending line of white-top covered wagons moving steadily over the river onto the undulating plains of Iowa. The number of those leaving ran into the thousands.

And now it was Mary's turn to leave. She would miss the friendship and society of her widowed kinswomen, Mother Lucy Mack Smith, bereft of five sons and her husband, Emma Smith, Levira Clark Smith and Agnes Coolbirth Smith, widows of Joseph, Samuel, and Don Carlos Smith, respectively. The sad farewell was described, years later by Martha Ann Smith, then five years old:

. . . We left our home, just as it was, all the furniture, in fact everything we owned. The fruit trees were loaded with rosy peaches and apples. We bid goodby to the loved home that reminded us of our beloved father everywhere we turned. We crossed the Mississippi River on a skiff in the dusk of the evening. We bid goodby to our dear old grandmother, Lucy Mack Smith. I can never forget the bitter tears she shed when she bid us goodby for the last time. She knew it would be the last time she would see her son's family again in this life. We did not realize this so much at the time as we have since. . . . I went with my mother every day for three weeks while she worked in the Nauvoo Temple. What joy that was to me. My mother to this very day is perfect in my mind's eye. God bless her memory. [^1]

The grandmother, Lucy Mack Smith, was living at the Mansion House with Emma Smith when Mary Fielding Smith came by to bid them farewell. She had grown feeble and stood in the doorway supported by a cane in each hand as the last good-byes were said.

The evening of September 8, 1846, Hyrum's family camped on the Iowa side of the Father of Waters. [^2] They remained here several days, until they heard the cannonading of Nauvoo which began about September 12, lasting four days. [^3] Then they moved on a few miles.

The story of the family's trek to Winter Quarters and later of their crossing the plains was one of hardship and privation, and also one of faith, courage, and heroism. They remained at Winter Quarters until June, 1848, and after about six weeks arrived in Salt Lake Valley on September 23rd. [^4]

Mary Smith settled in Mill Creek, south of Salt Lake City, where with the help of her boys she expected to engage in farming. She had a small cabin built in which to do the cooking, but she and most of her family lived in the wagons during the winter of 1848. How they survived through the winter they hardly knew. They were thinly clad and in such flimsy shelter suffered intensely from the cold.

Within two years, however, with the help of her sons and daughters she had secured some valuable property. John by then was sixteen years old and able to give help a great deal. When others were unemployed and receiving church aid, Mary Smith and her family were making their own way. She was blessed with tireless energy and was the soul of thrift and industry.

Honest with all her fellow men, she was equally as honest with God as was evidenced by her payment of tithes. [^5]

But the continued toil and hardship of this frontier life were too much for her frail body, and she broke under the intense strain. On December 11, 1852, after two months of illness she died in the home of Heber C. Kimball; and it was written of her: "Mary Fielding Smith was a Saint, if ever one lived on this troubled earth. She was a heroine in her own right, by reason of her greatness of spirit and soul. She was beautiful to look upon. When she and her equally handsome sister, Mercy, came to Kirtland in 1837, trim, straight, dark-haired and dark eyed, with delicately blooming cheeks and finely molded, graceful figures, clad in dainty silks of modern grace, they were the observed of all observers. Their refined and stately ways made them a shining mark in Kirtland Society. Wherever they went they were spoken of as those 'lovely English girls.' Refinement, strength, courage, integrity, modesty and infinite sweetness and tenderness- these were the prevailing characteristics of the Fielding sisters." [^6]

* * *

The posterity of Hyrum Smith have been continuously identified with the growth of the Church ever since the Nauvoo period. His children, grandchildren, and their children have helped to pioneer the valleys of the mountains, to establish cities and towns, and to build roads, irrigation canals, and industry. Hyrum's descendants are identified with agriculture, commerce, and the professions.

Ecclesiastically, they have been active in the priesthood. Their role has been one of leadership in the Church, of helping to organize branches, missions, wards, stakes, and to build temples. Many have inherited the missionary spirit of their grandsire and have carried the gospel message to people at home and abroad. [^7]

Surely the blessings of posterity pronounced on the head of Hyrum Smith have been and are now being fulfilled. The six children who survived him followed the example of their illustrious father by marrying and rearing fine families.

The memory of Hyrum Smith has been perpetuated in this posterity and in bronze and granite and literature as well. In the Salt Lake City cemetery, at the site of the family burial plot, rises a thirty-two-foot (Vermont granite) shaft, engraved on the four sides of its base with an account of Hyrum's place and election in helping to establish the Church. [^8] On Temple Square, east in bronze, is a life-size statue of Hyrum with an appropriate inscription.

The work of Hyrum Smith has not ended. He left a rich legacy to the Church of integrity, faith, love and devotion, and set an example of intense interest in missionary and temple work. His life was the life of a creator, and his work has left the stamp of his memory forever within the church.

Notes

"The sisters had barely time after returning home from the temple where they had been working to commence preparation for the journey west. . . . Mary and the children, driven by the mob, barely escaped from the city of Nauvoo before its destruction. The mother had succeeded in getting provisions, bedding, wagons, oxteams, her husband's big white horse, and a few other necessities, loaded on a flat boat and taken across the Mississippi River to Montrose, Iowa. The children were taken across in a skiff and they and their mother spent the night in their camp on the banks of the river listening to the bombardment of the city of Nauvoo. It was September 9, 1846 when they crossed."—Richard P. Harris, "Martha Ann Smith Harris"—The Relief Society Magazine, vol. XI, p. 12.

Note—On February 9, 1922, the birthday of Hyrum Smith was commemorated by a Salt Lake Temple session, which 311 attended. President Heber J. Grant and five apostles were present.

---
Notas:
[^1] Martha Smith Harris, op. cit.
[^2] The family of six children included Lovina, 19; John, 14; Jerusha, 10, Sarah, 9; Joseph Fielding, 8; and Martha Ann, 5 years old. Others in the group were Mercy Rachel Thompson, her daughter, May Jane, Hannah Grinnels, George Mills, and Elder James Lawson.
[^3] Joseph Fielding, description of crossing the Mississippi River. ". . . We moved to Hyrum's farm—he said Mary and family left just prior to the mob entering Nauvoo. . . . They marched into Nauvoo; my two sisters Smith and Thompson and myself with our families had just got over the River Mississippi with all our goods except two boat loads before they came in contact with the citizens. They came and camped on the farm (Hyrum's) that I had just left.
[^4] Susa Young Gates, op. cit.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, op. cit., pp. 155-158.
[^6] Idem.
[^7] Joseph F. Smith was identified with the Church as a missionary, Counselor in the First Presidency, and President of the Church. His sons Hyrum M. Smith and Joseph Fielding Smith were apostles, and David A. Smith, a counselor to the Presiding Bishopric of the church. His oldest son John Smith was ordained presiding Patriarch at twenty-two years of age.
[^8] The unveiling of Hyrum Smith's thirty-two-foot monument, a polished shaft of Vermont granite, occurred on Thursday, June 27, 1918.
