Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 2

The Nature of God

IntelligenceRevelationa-Snow, LorenzoTPGod communicates continually to man. The Lord is a consistent being. He does not require the people to do that which is improper, nor does He expect of them anything unreasonable. He gives us a knowledge of what we shall do, inasmuch as we are willing to sacrifice our lives rather than go contrary to that knowledge. He opens to us the secrets of the celestial kingdom, and He is constantly communicating to us things that we never knew before. This knowledge and intelligence is growing upon us continually. (6 April 1900, CR, p. 3.)

Godlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPDevelop the character traits of godliness. Be upright, just, and merciful, exercising a spirit of nobility and godliness in all your intentions and resolutions—in all your acts and dealings. Cultivate a spirit of charity, be ready to do for others more than you would expect from them if circumstances were reversed. Be ambitious to be great, not in the estimation of the worldly minded, but in the eyes of God, and to be great in this sense: "Love the Lord your God with all your might, mind and strength, and your neighbor as yourself." You must love mankind because they are your brethren, the offspring of God. Pray diligently for this spirit of philanthropy, this expansion of thought and feeling, and for power and ability to labor earnestly in the interest of Messiah's kingdom. (May 1884, BLS, p. 487.)

Trusting in Goda-Snow, LorenzoTPMan is dependent upon God. Now it is so ordered and so arranged, that we are dependent, in a great measure, one upon another. For instance, take us as a people, we are dependent upon a being that is above us to secure our peace, our happiness, our glory, and exaltation; we are individually dependent upon the exertions of an individual who is above ourselves. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:239.)

Eye Single to Glory of Goda-Snow, LorenzoTPA man's mind should be single to the glory of God in everything that he starts to accomplish. We should consider that of ourselves we can do nothing. We are the children of God. We are in darkness, only as God enlightens our understanding. We are powerless, only as God helps us. The work that we have to do here is of that nature that we cannot do it unless we have the assistance of the Almighty. (12 May 1894, DW, 48:638.)

God, Access toGracea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe require supernatural aid. To properly discharge the obligations devolving upon us, we require supernatural aid. The character of the religion that we have espoused demands a certain course of conduct that no other religion that we know of requires of its adherents; and the nature of those demands upon us are such that no person can comply with them, unless by assistance from the Almighty. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:362.)

God, Will ofObediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPThere is safety in doing the will of God. And now all the Latter-day Saints have to do, all that is required of us to make us perfectly safe under all circumstances of trouble or persecution, is to do the will of God: to be honest, faithful, and to keep ourselves devoted to the principles that we have received; do right one by another; trespass upon no man's rights; live by every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God, and His Holy Spirit will aid and assist us under all circumstances, and we will come out of the midst of it all abundantly blessed in our houses, in our families, in our flocks, in our fields—and in every way God will bless us. He will give us knowledge upon knowledge, intelligence upon intelligence, wisdom upon wisdom. (6 October 1879, JD, 20:332.)

God, Works ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPMany forget we are working for God. Here is the great trouble with men of the world, and too much so with the Elders of Israel: we forget that we are working for God; we forget that we are here in order to carry out certain purposes that we have promised the Lord that we would carry out. It is a glorious work that we are engaged in. It is the work of the Almighty, and He has selected the men and the women whom He knows from past experience will carry out His purposes. (12 May 1894, DW, 48:638.)

CommandmentsFaith and Worksa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe need God's help to keep the commandments. In and of ourselves we cannot possibly comply with all the commandments that God has given unto us. Jesus Himself could not without divine aid from His Father accomplish His work. He said on one occasion, "I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not my own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" [John 5:30]. And we, if it was necessary for Him, our Lord, to have divine assistance, will find it all the more important to receive His assistance. (6 April 1898, CR, p. 12.)

Promisesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord's promises will be fulfilled. When the Lord makes promises, and the conditions of those promises are observed, one need not entertain the slightest doubt that the Lord will do His part and fulfill those promises. This can be relied upon. (12 June 1899, JH, p. 13.)

ProgressGod, Knowledge ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPJesus Christ grew in knowledge. When Jesus lay in the manger, a helpless infant, He knew not that He was the Son of God, and that formerly He created the earth. When the edict of Herod was issued, He knew nothing of it; He had not power to save Himself; and His father and mother had to take Him and fly into Egypt to preserve Him from the effects of that edict. Well, He grew up to manhood, and during His progress it was revealed unto Him who He was, and for what purpose He was in the world. The glory and power He possessed before He came into the world was made known unto Him. It was not a very pleasurable thing to be placed upon the cross and to suffer the excruciating torture that He bore for hours, in order to accomplish the work for which He had come upon the earth. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 3.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPGod tests men in decisions. Moses told the Lord that if He did what He proposed—destroy Israel—the nations around would say that He had undertaken a task that He could not succeed in accomplishing. Well, the Lord changed His mind, so it reads, and did not that which He had intended to do. Now, whether the Lord had a disposition in this matter to try Moses, may be a question; but the distinct understanding with Moses was that if he did not plead with the Lord all Israel would be destroyed. [See Numbers 14:12-21.] (10 April 1898, CR, p. 63.)

God, Works ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe hand of God is manifest in the world. We trace the hand of God, His Spirit, His workings upon and among all classes of people, whether Christian or heathen, that His providences may be carried out, and that His designs, formed before the morning stars sang together or the foundations of the earth were laid, may be ultimately fulfilled. He slackens not His hand, He gives not up His designs nor His purposes; but His work is one eternal round. We trace the hand of the Almighty and we see His Spirit moving in all communities for their good, restraining and encouraging, establishing governments and nations, inspiring men to take a course that shall most advance His purposes until the set time shall come when He shall work more fully and effectually for the accomplishment of His designs, and when sorrow, wickedness, evil, crime, bitter disappointments, vexation, distress, and poverty shall cease and be no more known, and the salvation and happiness of His children be secured, when the earth shall be rolled back into its pristine purity and the inhabitants thereof dwell upon it in perfect peace and happiness. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:301.)

God, Love ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPGod loves and watches over us. There is something grand in the consideration of the fact that the Lord loves us with a most ardent love. The love that a woman exercises toward her offspring cannot equal the love that God exercises toward us. He never leaves us. He is always before us, and upon our right hand and our left hand. Continually He watches over us. (6 October 1898, CR, p. 2.)

Trusting in GodDependencea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe depend upon God in all we do. We depend upon God; and in all our works and labors, and in all the success that attends us in our labors, we feel that it has been God who has wrought it. (10 October 1887, CD, 5:6.)

Atonement, Scope ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Savior's atonement was for all of humanity. When Jesus came, he came as a sacrifice not simply in the interest of Israel,...but in the interest of the whole human family, that in Him all men might be blessed, that in Him all men might be saved; and His mission was to make provision by which the whole human family might receive the benefits of the everlasting Gospel,...not alone those dwelling upon the earth, but those also in the spirit world. (4 November 1882, JD, 23:340.)

ObligationPremortal Lifea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe entered into obligations in premortality. We were with Christ at the creation of the world, and, as he did, entered into obligations; those obligations are devolving upon us now. We are here to keep our second estate, and our utmost labors should be to regain that glory we had there, when the morning stars sang together (see Job 38:7). (27 April 1891, CD, 2:222.)
