Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 3

The Gospel and Its Principles

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPA restoration was necessary. It is very evident that the authority of administering in gospel ordinances has been lost for many centuries; for no man can have this authority, except he receive it by direct revelation—either by the voice of God, as Moses did, or by the ministering of angels, as John the Baptist received his message, or by the gift of prophecy, as Paul and Barnabas received theirs (Acts 13:2). Now, it is plain that men have denied immediate revelation for many hundred years past, consequently have not received it, and therefore could not have been sent of God to administer in the fulness of the gospel. God never sends a man on business, except He reveal Himself to that man—never sends a man with a message, in other words, unless He reveal that message to him in a direct manner. The church established by the Apostles gradually fell away, wandered into the wilderness, and lost her authority (her priesthood), and, departing from the order of God, she lost, also, her gifts and graces; she transgressed the laws, and changed the ordinances of the gospel; changed immersion into sprinkling, and quite neglected laying on of hands; despised prophecy, and disbelieved in signs following (Revelation 12:6; Isaiah 25:5). In consequence of this, the Gentiles have been cut off from the fulness of gospel privileges, as Paul said to them in Romans 11:22: "If thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off." (1841, SML, p. 86.)

ChristianityCreedsMormonism and World Religionsa-Snow, LorenzoTPMormonism has modified Christianity. The influence of Mormonism upon religious thought in general is a noteworthy feature of its career. The preaching and publishing of its doctrines has had a marked effect in molding and modifying Christian views and sentiments, and in changing the creeds of the churches. Infant damnation and the never-ending torture of the soul (doctrines controverted by Mormonism) are not insisted upon by the sects as emphatically as they once were, and the "larger hope" of repentance beyond the grave—an "out-and-out" Mormon doctrine—is gradually coming to the front in the reformed conceptions of orthodox Christianity. Other points of modification are those touching the antiquity of the gospel, and progress in lieu of stagnation in the life to come. Since a Mormon poetess wrote a hymn invocation to the Eternal Father and Mother, it has dawned upon many Christian minds as a reasonable proposition that we have a Mother as well as a Father in Heaven. In divers other ways, clearly discernible to the close student of history, Mormonism has acted as a leaven upon other religious faiths. Consciously or unconsciously they have absorbed and utilized it. This is especially manifest in the growth of liberal ideas among the Protestant churches within the last half century. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:22.)

Faith and WorksWorks, Gooda-Snow, LorenzoTPThe true gospel requires works. When the gospel dispensation was introduced, gifts and blessings were obtained upon similar principles—that is, upon obedience to certain established rules. The Lord still marked out certain acts, promising to all those who would do them certain peculiar privileges; and when those acts were performed—observed in every particular—then the blessings promised were sure to be realized. Some vainly imagine that, under the gospel dispensation, gifts and blessings are obtained not by external observances, or external works, but merely through faith and repentance, through mental operations, independent of physical. But, laying aside the traditions, superstitions, and creeds of men, we will look to the word of God, where we shall discover that external works, or outward ordinances, under the gospel dispensation, were inseparably connected with inward works, such as faith and repentance. In proof of this, I introduce the following observations: The Savior says, "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?" Again, He says, "He that heareth my words, and doeth them shall be likened unto a man that built his house upon a rock." And, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." Likewise, He says, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5). These sayings of our Savior require men to perform external works in order to receive their salvation. (1841, SML, p. 78.)

Jesus Christ As Head of ChurchChurch, Truthfulness ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gospel is no human contrivance. But in the provisions of the gospel which was offered to us, there were fairness and safety; it proposed to give us, through obedience to its requirements, a perfect knowledge of its divine authenticity, so that in leaving our kindred, breaking up our social relations, and going forth from our native land, we should first become perfectly assured that it was no human contrivance, something gotten up to effect some political purpose, or satisfy some worldly ambition, to achieve some private end through human cunning and craftiness. The gospel was plain and simple in its requirements; and there would be no mistaking the precise nature and character of its blessings and promises, nor the manner and time in which they were to be reached. (23 January 1870, JD, 13:285.)

Jesus Christ As Head of ChurchChurch, Truthfulness ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe religion we have received is not a chimera. It is not something that has been devised by the cunning of man, but it is something that has been revealed by the Almighty. It is a fact. It is something that truly exists. It is something that is tangible. It is something that can be laid hold of by the minds of the Latter-day Saints. It is something that can be directly understood, and be fully comprehended, so that there can be no doubt in the mind of any Latter-day Saint in regard to the nature and character of the ultimate outcome of the course that he proposes to pursue in complying with the demands of the gospel he has received. But those demands are of a nature that perhaps would be almost appalling to the minds of individuals that were darkened, that had no light or understanding in regard to the outcome that is expected to be experienced by the Latter-day Saints, inasmuch as they continue faithful in adhering to the principles which they have espoused (19 October 1879, JD, 20:362-63.)

Religious ExperienceReligiona-Snow, LorenzoTPReligion must better man's condition. A religious system is of but little account when it possesses no virtue nor power to better the condition of people spiritually, intellectually, morally, and physically. Enoch's order of the gospel did for his people all this, and it has done the same in every instance when preached in its purity, and obeyed in sincerity. (6 March 1886, JD, 26:371.)

Jesus Christ, Relationship witha-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gospel brings us closer to God. The Lord wishes to establish a closer and more intimate relationship between Himself and us; He wishes to elevate us in the scale of being and intelligence, and this can only be done through the medium of the everlasting gospel which is specially prepared for this purpose. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:193.)

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gospel today is the same as in ancient times. But when Noah stood up before the people, he preached to them the everlasting gospel. He preached the same gospel that Adam preached. He preached the same gospel that the people of old preached. He preached the same gospel the Apostles preached. He preached the same gospel that we preach, through which a knowledge from God could be obtained as to its truth. (5 October 1882, JD, 23:291.)

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe restored gospel conforms to the scriptures. When this gospel or order of things which we have received was presented to us, we carefully compared it with the gospel recorded in the scriptures, and found it alike precisely in every particular, as regarded its forms, ordinances and the authority to administer them, its promise of the Holy Ghost and of the signs that should follow, together with a promise of a knowledge of its divinity. (23 January 1870, JD, 13:288.)

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe restored gospel is worth any sacrifice. While we are here studying the interests of Zion, of the honest in heart among the nations of the earth—how we can gather them together, that the fetters under which they are now laboring may be broken—while we are doing this, on the other hand our enemies are scheming for the destruction of these righteous principles, for the purpose of binding the yoke more strongly upon our neck, of destroying those pure and holy principles that have been revealed for the salvation of the honest in heart: principles that are calculated to exalt, to happify, and glorify.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPSuch principles have been revealed, such principles have been restored, such principles have been held forth by the Elders among the nations as you heard yesterday. For these principles this people have been driven several times; they have forsaken their homes; they have forsaken their enjoyments and the privileges they might have had among the nations; and they would now willingly burn up their dwellings, if they were so commanded. (7 October 1857, JD, 5:322-23.)

WisdomGospel of Jesus Christa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gospel makes us wise. Men may be very good, and yet they may not be very wise, nor so useful as they might be; but the gospel is given to make us wise, and to enable us to get those things in our minds that are calculated to make us happy. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:22.)

Conformitya-Snow, LorenzoTPConforming to the gospel brings blessings. I say, with propriety and consistency, that whenever a man will lay aside his prejudice, sectarian notions, and false traditions, and conform to the whole order of the gospel of Jesus Christ, then there is nothing beneath the celestial worlds that can prevent his claiming and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost and all the blessings connected with the gospel in the apostolic age. (1841, SML, p. 85.)

Earth, Cleansing ofBaptism, Necessity ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPBaptism is an essential principle. Some deem it wrong to number baptism among the essential principles ordained of God, to be attended to in obtaining remission of sins. In reply, we say that the Savior and Apostles have done so before us, therefore we feel obligated to follow their example. The destruction of the antediluvian world by water was typical of receiving remission of sins through baptism. The earth had become clothed with sin as with a garment; the righteous were brought and saved from the world of sin, even by water; the like figure, even baptism, doth now save us, says Peter (1 Peter 3:21), by the answer of "a good conscience toward God." Noah and his family were removed, and disconnected from sins and pollutions, by means of water; so baptism, the like figure, doth now remove our souls from sins and pollutions, through faith on the great Atonement made upon Calvary. (1841, SML, p. 79.)

Baptism, Mode ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPOnly one mode of baptism is taught in the scriptures. We will now occupy a moment in endeavoring to obtain a proper view of the mode in which baptism was administered. It is quite evident that there was but one way or mode in which this ordinance was to be administered, and that mode was explained to the Apostles, and strictly adhered to in all their administrations. Paul, in writing to the Saints, gives us a plain testimony in favour of immersion (Colossians 2:12; Romans 6:4). That Apostle states there that the Saints had been buried with Christ by baptism.

Baptism, Mode ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is plainly evident they could not have been buried by baptism without having been entirely overwhelmed or covered in water. An object cannot be said to be buried when any portion of it remains uncovered; so, also, a man is not buried in water by baptism unless his whole person is put into the watery element. This explanation of the Apostle upon the mode of baptism very beautifully corresponds with that given by our Savior: "Except ye be born of water. " To be born of a thing signifies being placed in that thing, and emerging or coming forth from it; to be born of water must also signify being placed in the womb of waters, and being brought forth again. (1841, SML, pp 82-83.)

Baptism, Necessity ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPBaptism brings blessings. Baptism in water forming a part of the gospel of Christ, we notice therefore that the servants of God, in early ages, were very particular in attending to its administration; also, it is evident that unless peculiar blessings actually were experienced through baptism, they would have neglected enforcing its observance. If, as some suppose, that faith, repentance, and prayer answer the purpose, in receiving the fulness of gospel privileges, then it is very evident that baptism was a vain and useless work, and had no need to be observed. Naaman would have been performing a vain and foolish work when washing seven times in Jordan's waters, had it been in his power to have been recovered from his affliction merely through faith, repentance, and prayer. Also, Noah and his family were very foolish in performing an external work, in building an ark, provided they could have obtained the same blessing through faith, repentance, and prayer. Furthermore, the Israelites, could they have obtained forgiveness of sins through faith, repentance, and prayer, it would have been folly in them to offer up animals for that purpose. So also under the gospel dispensation, the three thousand people on the day of Pentecost, who were baptized in one day, were very unwise and foolish in submitting to the trouble of baptism, provided the same blessings could have been realized by exercising only faith, repentance, and prayer. (1841, SML, p. 81.)

Blessings of the Faithfula-Snow, LorenzoTPThe blessings of the gospel are not fully comprehended. I presume to say that we do not all of us fully comprehend the blessings and privileges that are prepared in the gospel for us to receive. We do not fully comprehend and we do not have before our view the things which await us in the eternal worlds, nor, indeed, the things which await us in this life and that are calculated to promote our peace and happiness and to answer the desires of our heartsÂ�.

Blessings of the Faithfula-Snow, LorenzoTPWhere is the man that will turn aside and throw away those prospects that are embraced in the gospel which we have received? In it there is satisfaction, there is joy, there is stability, there is something upon which to rest our feet, there is a sure foundation to build upon, and upon which to yield that which is required of us. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:312, 314.)

UnityGospel Principlesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gospel unifies its followers. The gospel binds together the hearts of all its adherents; it makes no difference, it knows no difference between the rich and the poor; we are all bound as one individual to perform the duties which devolve upon us. (31 January 1877, DN, 25:834.)

Gospel Principlesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gospel teaches all necessary things. The gospel tells us how to be great, good, and happy. The Spirit of the gospel of Christ teaches all things that are necessary for our present and future welfare. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:21.)

SacrificeGospel Standardsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gospel has been shown by revelation. This scheme of life, this gospel as proclaimed by Joseph Smith, has been shown to us by the revelations of the Almighty, that it is undeniably His will, His word, and His message; not only this, but we find within ourselves a fixed purpose, an unalterable resolution to do, if need be, what many of us have already done—show the sincerity of our convictions of these solemn truths through sacrificing all we possess, not even holding our lives as dear to us as this religion (23 January 1870, JD, 13:286.)

Gospel Standardsa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe have received a gospel of persecution and sacrifice. The gospel that we have received from the beginning is a gospel of persecution and a gospel of sacrifices. It is a gospel and work that requires the utmost diligence in order that we may receive that power, that faith, and that intelligence from the Almighty to such an extent that we may be fully prepared to cope with all the difficulties that may beset our path. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:244-45.)

SacrificeGospel Standardsa-Snow, LorenzoTPAn important item which was put forward prominently wherever this gospel was announced was that its followers should have abundance of persecutions, and would probably, in the progress of their new life, be compelled to make the most serious sacrifices of wife, children, houses and lands, spoiling of goods, and even life itself, perhaps. No persons are properly prepared to enter upon this new life until they have formed within themselves this resolution. (23 January 1870, JD, 13:290.)

Apostasy of Individualsa-Snow, LorenzoTPLaying aside the gospel is dangerous. Nothing can be more foolish than the idea of a man laying off his religion like a cloak or garment. There is no such thing as a man laying off his religion unless he lays off himself. Our religion should be incorporated within ourselves, a part of our being that cannot be laid off. If there can be such a thing as a man laying off his religion, the moment he does so he gets onto ground he knows nothing about, he gives himself over to the powers of darkness. (9 October 1867, JD, 12:148.)

Spirit WorldCharactera-Snow, LorenzoTPA strong character is an asset in the spirit world. I am under the strongest impression that the most valuable consideration, and that which will be of the most service when we return to the spirit world, will be that of having established a proper and well-defined character as faithful and consistent Latter-day Saints in this state of probation. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:189.)

Teaching, Gospela-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Latter-day Saints need repetition. It is like the schoolboy, however, when he commences to learn the alphabet. The letter A is pointed out to him by the teacher, and tells him what it is and asks him to please remember it. The next letter, B, is pointed out, and the boy is asked to remember that. The teacher then returns to A. What letter is that? The boy has forgotten and it has to be repeated by the teacher. Will you please remember it now? The boy says, "O yes, I'll remember it." He feels sure that he can remember it now. But when the teacher returns to the letter once more, the boy has forgotten it again. So they go through the alphabet, having to repeat each letter over and over again. It is the same with the Latter-day Saints. We have to talk to them, and keep talking to them. (7 October 1899, CR, p. 27.)

Experiencea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must learn by experience. Sailors and mariners become wise, useful, and qualified for their stations only by experience. Storms, tempests, and hurricanes have to occur in order to give them that experience. If all was calm, and storms never arose at sea, where would the mariner get the experience that is necessary for him to have, that when storms do occur and difficulties arise, when the ship sails out upon the ocean, he shall be prepared to manage and guide his vessel safely into port? If there are individuals on board that have never experienced storms, or perhaps have never ventured away from land before, when storms arise, you see that trepidation of spirit that you do not witness in those that have had experience.

Experiencea-Snow, LorenzoTPSo it is with ourselves in the gospel of Jesus Christ: we have to learn by the things that take place around us and act in the stations assigned us by the circumstances that transpire and the experience we gain. (7 October 1857, JD, 5:322.)

Tithes and OfferingsGenerositya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord will not prosper the uncharitable. Yet here are men among us who call themselves Latter-day Saints, who do not impart of their substance according to the law of the gospel. I say God is displeased with such covetousness, and He will never prosper the Latter-day Saints who are guilty of such miserly conduct. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:368.)

Gratitudea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should feel gratitude regardless of our circumstances. I have thought sometimes that one of the greatest virtues the Latter-day Saints could possess is gratitude to our Heavenly Father for that which He has bestowed upon us and the path over which He has led us. It may be that walking along in that path has not always been of the most pleasant character; but we have afterwards discovered that those circumstances which have been very unpleasant have often proved of the highest advantage to us. We should always be pleased with the circumstances that surround us and that which the Lord requires at our hands. (6 April 1899, CR, p. 2.)

Blessings of the Faithfula-Snow, LorenzoTPOur blessings depend on whether we obey or ignore the gospel. When these things were opened up to our view—the principles of the gospel and the glory of the celestial worlds—it was then our privilege to enjoy its blessings to a certain extent, just as though we had been translated into the celestial worlds; it was our privilege to enjoy a certain amount of the blessings that pertain to those laws. And just so far as we have conformed to these laws that pertain to our temporal salvation, just so far as we have obeyed the instructions given to us in regard to our temporal union, just so far we stand in prosperity before God and before the world; just so far as we have been induced to open our hearts to display the principles of philanthropy in the exercise of our religion, just so far do we stand this day approved of the Almighty God; just so far have we secured the implements or the means to defend ourselves against the approaching evils; just so far in all our settlements, cities, towns, or villages, as we have observed these laws that pertain to our temporal obligations, just so far has prosperity attended our exertions, and just so far as the spirit of union prevailed in our midst, and we have advanced ourselves in these principles. And just so far as we have ignored these things, just so far do we stand weak today before God and before the world. (8 April 1880, CR, p. 80.)

Blessings of the Faithfula-Snow, LorenzoTPThis, then, was the gospel order in the days of the Apostles—belief on Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost. When this order was understood and properly attended to, power, gifts, blessings, and glorious privileges followed immediately; and, in every age and period, when these steps are properly attended to, and observed in their proper place and order, the same blessings are sure to follow; but, when neglected, either wholly or in part, there will be either an entire absence of those blessings or a great diminishing of them. (1841, SML, p. 84.)
