Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 5

Progressing Toward Perfection

Perfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPPerfection comes in stages. When the Latter-day Saints received the gospel in the nations afar, and when the voice of the Almighty to them was to leave the lands of their fathers, to leave their kindred as Abraham did, so far as they complied with this requirement, so far they were walking in obedience to this law; and they were as perfect as men could be under the circumstances, and in the sphere in which they were acting; not that they were perfect in knowledge or power, etc., but in their feelings, in their integrity, motives, and determination. And while they were crossing the great deep, providing they did not murmur nor complain, but obeyed the counsels which were given them, and in every way comported themselves in a becoming manner, they were as perfect as God required them to be.

Perfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord designs to bring us up into the celestial kingdom. He has made known, through direct revelation, that we are His offspring, begotten in the eternal worlds; that we have come to this earth for the special purpose of preparing ourselves to receive a fulness of our Father's glory when we shall return into His presence. Therefore, we must seek the ability to keep this law, to sanctify our motives, desires, feelings, and affections, that they may be pure and holy, and our will in all things be subservient to the will of God, and have no will of our own except to do the will of our Father. Such a man in his sphere is perfect, and commands the blessing of God in all that he does and wherever he goes. But we are subject to folly, to the weakness of the flesh, and we are more or less ignorant, thereby liable to err. Yes, but that is no reason why we should not feel desirous to comply with this command of God, especially seeing that He has placed within our reach the means of accomplishing this work. This I understand is the meaning of the word perfection, as expressed by our Savior and by the Lord to Abraham. A person may be perfect in regard to some things and not others. A person who obeys the Word of Wisdom faithfully is perfect as far as that law is concerned. When we repented of our sins and were baptized for the remission of them, we were perfect as far as that matter was concerned. Now, we are told by the Apostle John that "we are the sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." (7 April 1879, JD, 20:189.)

DiligencePerfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPWhen we are overcome we should try again. The Latter-day Saints expect to arrive at this state of perfection; we expect to become as our Father and God, fit and worthy children to dwell in His presence; we expect that when the Son of God shall appear, we shall receive our bodies renewed and glorified, and that "these vile bodies will be changed and become like unto his glorious body." These are our expectations. Now let all present put this question to themselves: Are our expectations well founded? In other words, are we seeking to purify ourselves? How can a Latter-day Saint feel justified in himself unless he is seeking to purify himself even as God is pure—unless he is seeking to keep his conscience void of offense before God and man every day of his life? We doubtless, many of us, walk from day to day, and from week to week, and from month to month, before God, feeling under no condemnation, comporting ourselves properly, and seeking earnestly and in all meekness for the Spirit of God to dictate our daily course; and yet there may be a certain time or times in our life, when we are greatly tried and perhaps overcome; even if this be so, that is no reason why we should not try again, and that, too, with redoubled energy and determination to accomplish our object. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:189-90.)

Perfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPPeter and Abraham achieved gradual perfection. There was the Apostle Peter, for instance, a man valiant for the truth, and a man who walked before God in a manner that met with His divine approval; he told the Savior on a certain occasion that though all men forsook Him he would not. But the Savior, foreseeing what would happen, told him that on that same night, before the cock crowed, he would deny Him thrice and he did so. He proved himself unequal for the trial; but afterwards he gained power, and his mind was disciplined to that extent that such trials could not possibly affect him. And if we could read in detail the life of Abraham, or the lives of other great and holy men, we would doubtless find that their efforts to be righteous were not always crowned with success. Hence we should not be discouraged if we should be overcome in a weak moment; but, on the contrary, straightway repent of the error or the wrong we may have committed, and as far as possible repair it, and then seek to God for renewed strength to go on and do better.

AbrahamPerfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPAbraham could walk perfectly before God day after day when he was leaving his father's house, and he showed evidences of a superior and well-disciplined mind in the course he suggested when his herdsmen quarreled with the herdsmen of his nephew Lot. There came a time in Abraham's life, however, which must have been very trying; in fact anything more severe can scarcely be conceived of; that was when the Lord called upon him to offer as a sacrifice his beloved and only son, even him through whom he expected the fulfillment of the great promise made him by the Lord. But through manifesting a proper disposition he was enabled to surmount the trial, and prove his faith and integrity to God. It can hardly be supposed that Abraham inherited such a state of mind from his idolatrous parents; but it is consistent to believe that under the blessing of God he was enabled to acquire it, after going through a similar warfare with the flesh as we are, and doubtless being overcome at times and then overcoming until he was enabled to stand so severe a test. "Let this same mind be in you," says the Apostle Paul, "which was also in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God." Now every man that has this object before him will purify himself as God is pure, and try to walk perfectly before Him. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:190.)

DiligencePerfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPSeek perfection as fast as possible. We have our little follies and our weaknesses; we should try to overcome them as fast as possible, and we should inculcate this feeling in the hearts of our children, that the fear of God may grow up with them from their very youth, and that they may learn to comport themselves properly before Him under all circumstances. If the husband can live with his wife one day without quarreling or without treating anyone unkindly or without grieving the Spirit of God in any way, that is well so far; he is so far perfect. Then let him try to be the same the next day. But supposing he should fail in this his next day's attempt! That is no reason why he should not succeed in doing so the third day. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:190-91.)

Discouragementa-Snow, LorenzoTPDo not be discouraged. If the Apostle Peter had become discouraged at his manifest failure to maintain the position that he had taken to stand by the Savior under all circumstances, he would have lost all; whereas, by repenting and persevering he lost nothing but gained all, leaving us too to profit by his experience. The Latter-day Saints should cultivate this ambition constantly which was so clearly set forth by the Apostles in former days. We should try to walk each day so that our conscience would be void of offense before everybody. And God has placed in the Church certain means by which we can be assisted, namely, Apostles, and prophets, and evangelists, etc., "for the perfecting of the Saints," etc. And He has also conferred upon us His Holy Spirit, which is an unerring guide, standing, as an angel of God, at our side, telling us what to do, and affording us strength and succor when adverse circumstances arise in our way. We must not allow ourselves to be discouraged whenever we discover our weakness.

Discouragementa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe can scarcely find an instance in all the glorious examples set us by the prophets, ancient or modern, wherein they permitted the evil one to discourage them; but on the other hand they constantly sought to overcome, to win the prize, and thus prepare themselves for a fulness of glory. The prophet Elijah succeeded. He so walked before God that he was worthy to be translated. And Enoch was found worthy to walk with God some 300 years, and was at last, with his people, taken up to heaven. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:191.)

PerfectionLife, Purpose ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPSeek to be perfect, as our Father is. We are told that in the latter days "there shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; for the child shall die an hundred years old." And in another scripture we are told that the age of the infant shall be as the age of a tree, and that it shall not die until it shall be old, and then it shall not slumber in the dust but be changed in the twinkling of an eye. But in those days people must live perfectly before the Lord, for we are told in the same passage, that "the sinner," instead of being favored, "being an hundred years old, shall be accursed." When we once get it into our minds that we really have the power within ourselves through the gospel we have received to conquer our passions, our appetites, and in all things submit our will to the will of our Heavenly Father, and, instead of being the means of generating unpleasant feelings in our family circle, and those with whom we are associated, but assisting greatly to create a little heaven upon earth, then the battle may be said to be half won. One of the chief difficulties that many suffer from is, that we are too apt to forget the great object of life, the motive of our Heavenly Father in sending us here to put on mortality, as well as the holy calling with which we have been called; and hence, instead of rising above the little transitory things of time, we too often allow ourselves to come down to the level of the world without availing ourselves of the divine help which God has instituted, which alone can enable us to overcome them. We are no better than the rest of the world if we do not cultivate the feeling to be perfect, even as our Father in heaven is perfect. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:191.)

Spiritual LifeSpiritualitya-Snow, LorenzoTPUltimate perfection is possible. If I were asked to name the greatest achievement of Mormonism, however, I should have to speak of its spiritual triumphs, manifest in its effects upon the lives, characters, and disposition of its converts; in the wonderful religious awakening and reformation that has taken place in their souls as the result of the acceptance and practice of its principles. The great hope that has been kindled in their hearts; the expulsion of doubt; the assurance that their sins are forgiven and washed away; that through the medium of the Holy Spirit they are actually brought into communion with God; the promise not only of salvation, but of exaltation in the life to come, conditioned upon obedience and faithfulness here; the knowledge imparted of the pre-existence and the hereafter, the perpetuity in heaven of family relationships formed on earth, man's true relationship to God, with all that it implies in the way of progress and ultimate perfection—all these give a peace, a sense of security to the soul, a moral and spiritual elevation that passes understanding and constitutes the greatest boon that religion can bestow. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:23.)

Laws, Divinea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord has established laws to produce perfection. The design of the Lord in regard to ourselves, in regard to His people generally, is to bring them to that state and fulness of knowledge, and to that perfection which their spiritual organizations are susceptible of receiving or arriving at. There are certain laws established from all eternity for the purpose of effecting this object. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:183.)

Laws, Divinea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord will not require the impossible. The Lord never has, nor will He require things of His children which it is impossible for them to perform. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:192.)

Perfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPTry hourly to be perfect. Try, keep trying daily and hourly in all your avocations, in all your walks of life, in all your associations, to be perfect, even as our Father in Heaven is perfect. (May 1884, BLS, p. 486.)

Perfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPPerfection requires constant rapport with the Spirit. In order to arrive at the state of perfection that David did when he poured out his soul to the Lord in the prayer that I have referred to ("Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me"), we must be true men and true women; we must have faith largely developed, and we must be worthy of the companionship of the Holy Ghost to aid us in the work of righteousness all the day long, to enable us to sacrifice our own will to the will of the Father, to battle against our fallen nature, and to do right for the love of doing right, keeping our eye single to the honor and glory of God. To do this there must be an inward feeling of the mind that is conscious of the responsibility that we are under, that recognizes the fact that the eye of God is upon us and that our every act and the motives that prompt it must be accounted for; and we must be constantly en rapport with the Spirit of the Lord. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:190-91.)

WorldlinessPerfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should set our hearts on things above. Jesus when on earth said to His disciples: "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in heaven is perfect." This is what we should all strive after. There is no necessity for Latter-day Saints to worry over the things of this world. They will all pass away. Our hearts should be set on things above; to strive after that perfection which was in Christ Jesus, who was perfectly obedient in all things unto the Father, and so obtained His great exaltation and became a pattern unto His brethren. Why should we fret and worry over these temporal things when our destiny is so grand and glorious? If we will cleave unto the Lord, keep His commandments, pattern after His perfections and reach out unto the eternal realities of His heavenly kingdom, all will be well with us and we shall triumph and obtain the victory in the end. (8 October 1898, DW, 57:513.)

Death, Physicala-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints should prepare to be called from life. All men and women who are worthy to be called Latter-day Saints should live hour by hour in such a way that if they should be called suddenly from this life into the next they would be prepared. The preparation should be such that we should not fear to be called away suddenly into the spirit life. It is our privilege to so live as to have the spirit of light and intelligence to that extent that we shall feel satisfied that all will be well if we should be called away at any hour. (6 October 1899, CR, p. 2.)

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must conform to the will of God. In order for us to effect the purposes of God, we shall have to do as Jesus did—conform our individual will to the will of God, not only in one thing, but in all things, and to live so that the will of God shall be in us. We have the same priesthood that Jesus had, and we have got to do as He did, to make sacrifice of our own desires and feelings as He did; perhaps not to die martyrs as He did, but we have got to make sacrifices in order to carry out the purposes of God, or we shall not be worthy of this holy priesthood, and be saviors of the world. (4 November 1882, JD, 23:341-42.)

Perfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is our duty to be perfect. It certainly is possible to advance ourselves toward the perfections of the Almighty to a very considerable extent, to say the least. In fact, we are commanded to be perfect, even as our Father in Heaven is perfect. From everything that arises, whether it be of a disagreeable nature or of a pleasant character, we should derive information and secure power to serve ourselves in the path of exaltation and glory over which we are moving. (6 October 1898, CR, p. 2.)

Perfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPWe ought to improve ourselves and move faster toward the point of perfection. It is said that we cannot be perfect. Jesus has commanded us to be perfect even as God, the Father, is perfect. It is our duty to try to be perfect, and it is our duty to improve each day, and look upon our course last week and do things better this week; do things better today than we did them yesterday, and go on and on from one degree of righteousness to another. (6 April 1898, CR, pp. 13-14.)

Spiritualitya-Snow, LorenzoTPOur spirituality should grow like a child to manhood. We can easily see the improvements that the people are making. It is like the babe that passes from a state of infancy to childhood, and thence to manhood. You cannot tell the particular moments of its growth and increase in stature; you cannot point out the particular day, hour, or minute in which it increases; but you are all the time perfectly aware that it is gaining, growing, becoming greater continually. It is precisely so in regard to ourselves spriritually. If we are doing our duty, though we cannot point out the moment, the day, or the particular time when we receive the increase of knowledge, wisdom, or power, yet we know and feel conscious, as we reflect back, that we have gained. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:21.)

Progressa-Snow, LorenzoTPEach day should be our best so far. Each last day or each last week should be the best
