Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 6

Obedience and Dedication

ForgivenessObediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord expects obedience. Well, my brethren and sisters, I desire to encourage you in the work of righteousness. I feel to bless you. It is the desire of the First Presidency that you may be blessed. We wish to bear with the people in their weaknesses and frailties. We also desire that you will bear with our weaknesses and infirmities. We want to be forgiving and kind towards the Latter-day Saints. We ask them to be lenient and charitable towards us. The Lord wishes to show leniency towards His children on earth, but He requires of them true repentance when they transgress or fail in any duty. He expects their obedience and that they will endeavor to cast aside all sin, to purify themselves and become indeed His people, His Saints, so that they may be prepared to come into His presence, be made like unto Him in all things and reign with Him in His glory. To accomplish this they must walk in the strait and narrow way, making their lives brighter and better, being filled with faith and charity, which is the pure love of Christ, and attending faithfully to every duty in the gospel. (8 October 1898, DW, 57:514.)

Determinationa-Snow, LorenzoTPObey God under all circumstances. This work in which you and I are engaged can only prosper and be forwarded through the blessings of God upon our faithful and honest exertions and our determination to accomplish the labors for which we have come into this existence. When we look back upon the experiences through which we have passed, we easily understand that our prosperity has been dependent upon our honest endeavors to accomplish the work of God, to labor in the interest of the people, and to rid ourselves as far as possible of selfishness. This having been so in the past, we can well believe that our future progress will depend upon our determination to do the will of God under all circumstances, and the aid which He shall give to us. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 1.)

Obediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPObedience brings blessing. The Lord has placed before us incentives of the grandest character. In the revelations which God has given, we find what a person can reach who will travel this path of knowledge and be guided by the Spirit of God. I had not been in this Church more than two years when it was clearly shown to me what a man could reach through a continued obedience to the gospel of the Son of God. That knowledge has been as a star continually before me, and has caused me to be particular in trying to do that which was right and acceptable to God. (3 November 1894, DW, 49:609.)

Blessings of the FaithfulObediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPObedience always precedes blessings. In early ages of the world, also in the days of the Apostles, people came into possession of spiritual powers and various privileges by obtaining an understanding of, and faithfully attending to, certain rules which the Lord established; as, for instance, Abel, obtaining information that offering up sacrifices was an order instituted of God, through which men might receive blessing, he set himself to work, observed the order, and performed the sacrifice, whereby he obtained glorious manifestations of the Most High. Again, when the antediluvians had corrupted themselves, and the time arriving at which destruction was coming upon them, the Lord revealed a course whereby the righteous might escape; accordingly, all who understood and observed that course, were sure to realize the blessing promised. Joshua, before obtaining possession of Jericho, had to observe certain steps appointed of God. The steps having been properly taken, according to commandment, the object immediately fell into his possession. Another instance: the case of Naaman, captain of the Syrian host. It appears that being afflicted with the leprosy and hearing of Elisha the prophet, he made application to him for the removal of that affliction. The prophet, having the Holy Ghost upon him, informed him that by washing in Jordan's waters seven times he might be restored. At first, Naaman thought this too simple and was displeased, and disposed not to conform—not to make use of means so simple. After due consideration, however, humbling himself, he went forth complying with the rules; when, lo! the blessing directly followed. (1841, SML, p. 77.)

Devotiona-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should be devoted, not lukewarm. Knowing our religion to be true, we ought to be the most devoted people on the face of the earth to the cause we have embraced. Knowing as we do, or should know, that the gospel we have received promises all our hearts can wish or desire, if we are faithful, we ought to be very faithful, devoted, energetic, and ambitious in carrying out the designs and wishes of the Lord, as He reveals them from time to time through His servants. We ought not to be lukewarm, or negligent in attending to our duties, but with all our might, strength, and souls we should try to understand the spirit of our calling and nature of the work in which we are engaged. (9 October 1867, JD, 12:146.)

Determinationa-Snow, LorenzoTPLiving the gospel requires determination. We should strive earnestly to establish the principles of heaven within us, rather than trouble ourselves in fostering anxieties like the foolish people of the Tower of Babel, to reach its location before we are properly and lawfully prepared to become its inhabitants. Its advantages and blessings, in a measure, can be obtained in this probationary state by learning to live in conformity with its laws and the practice of its principles. To do this, there must be a feeling and determination to do God's will. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:191.)

Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must dedicate our time, talents, and ability. If we as elders fail to keep the covenants we have made, namely, to use our time, talents, and ability for the upbuilding of the kingdom of God upon the earth, how can we reasonably expect to come forth in the morning of the First Resurrection, identified with the great work of redemption? If we in our manner, habits and dealings, imitate the Gentile world, thereby identifying ourselves with the world, do you think, my brethren, that God will bestow upon us the blessings we desire to inherit? I tell you no, He will not! In all our business occupations we must prove ourselves better than any other people, or we forfeit all. We must build ourselves up in the righteousness of heaven and plant in our hearts the righteousness of God. Said the Lord, through the prophet Jeremiah, "I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people." This is what the Lord is endeavoring to do, and this He will accomplish in us if we conform to His will. (31 January 1877, DN, 25:834.)

Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPBe ready to live or die for truth. When the three Hebrew children, for instance, had been brought to a certain position, cast into the fiery furnace because of their undying faith and integrity, they could not after all perhaps have been placed in more pleasing and agreeable circumstances. A holy being, it is said, appeared and walked with them, side by side in the midst of the flames; and so with Daniel under similar circumstances. Did they wait to see what God would do for them? No; it was "move on" with them. They knew that in the hands of their Master were held the issues of life and death, and that to die in Him is to live, live eternally, to go on, on to perfection until they should become even like unto Him; and having a living, an abiding faith, and a knowledge of the true and living God, they were ready to live and they were ready to die for the truth. (7 April 1882, JD, 23:153.)

Obediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPOur desire should be to do God's will. Jesus said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise" (John 5:19). He came into this life to do the will of His father, and not His own will. Our desire and determination should be the same. When things come up that require an exertion on our part, we should bring our wills into subjection to the will of the Father, and feel to say, what is the will of our Father, whom we have here in the world to serve? Then every act that we perform will be a success. We may not see its success today or tomorrow, nevertheless it will result in success. (6 October 1899, CR, p. 2.)

Dutya-Snow, LorenzoTPPerform your duties in spite of difficulties. Do not falter; continue to do your duty, whatever it may be, whether pleasing or displeasing; be the servants and handmaidens of God to the very utmost. In the past His blessings have been upon us just so far as we have served Him in faithfulness; they will be so in the future. There is no occasion for any man who has the manifestation of the Lord in this line to be discouraged. When our surroundings are not so agreeable as might be wished, think how much worse they might be. Be contented with our conditions. Improve them when opportunity arises, but do not worry about them. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 3.)

Diligencea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must exert ourselves until our duties become natural. An individual, undertaking to learn to play upon a flute, at first finds a difficulty in making the notes; and in order to play a tune correctly there is a great deal of diligence and patience required. He has to go on, to pause, to turn back and commence afresh. But after a time he is enabled, through a great deal of exertions, to master that tune. When called upon to play that tune afterwards, there is no necessity for remembering where to place the fingers, but he plays it naturally. It was not natural at the first; there had to be a great deal of patience and labour, before it became natural to go through with the tune.

ActionDiligencea-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is just so in regard to matters that pertain to the things of God. We have to exert ourselves and go from grace to grace, to get the law of action so incorporated in our systems, that it may be natural to do those things that are required of us. The son cannot always see the intrinsic benefit of a father's counsel when it is given, but that which he does know is that his father has a right to give that counsel; he also knows that he is in duty bound to act in accordance with that counsel and that knowledge. By acting in that way he will feel well, and he will do his duty. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:186-87.)

Actiona-Snow, LorenzoTPNever stand still. I would say, let the motto be to every elder in Israel, and to every person worthy to be called a Saint: "Fear not, and never stand still, but move on." Let the farmer go forward making improvements, plow and sow and reap; and those engaged in proper and useful enterprises continue to do what seems good according to the Spirit of God that may operate upon them, and let every man be faithful and very diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and cultivate the desire to do good to those around him; and if, in reflecting on the past, we find we have not acted strictly in accordance with the dictates of our consciences and duty, let us make ourselves right before God and man, that we may be prepared for every event that may transpire. (7 April 1882, JD, 23:152.)

Actiona-Snow, LorenzoTPThere is no stopping place in the Lord's program. It may appear through our ignorance in not understanding fully the ways of the Lord and His purposes, that in our onward march in carrying out the program before us, we sometimes come to a stopping place for the time being. But the fact is, there is no such thing in the program—and there cannot be, providing the people continue their labors putting their trust in the promises of God. (7 April 1882, JD, 23:152.)

Eye Single to Glory of Goda-Snow, LorenzoTPDevoting ourselves to God brings success. There is a course for every person to pursue in which there will be no failure. It will apply to temporal as well as spiritual matters. The Lord has given us the keyword in these verses that I have read from the Doctrine and Covenants: "If your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God." That is the key by which a person can always be successful. (12 May 1894, DW, 48:637.)

Servants of Goda-Snow, LorenzoTPI pray that I may always serve the Lord. This is what I ask my Father in yonder worlds, that my circumstances ever may be such that I can perform His work and labor as an active agent in His hands to accomplish His purposes on the earth. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:243.)

Blessings of the Faithfula-Snow, LorenzoTPThe faithful will receive all that the Father has. I devoted myself to be worthy to receive something that no mortal man can receive except through the spirit and power of the Holy Ghost, and the Lord has shown me things and made me to understand them as clearly as the sun at noonday in regard to what shall be the outcome of those Latter-day Saints that are faithful to their callings. Jesus says: "He that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him" (D&C 84:37-38). (10 April 1898, CR, p. 62.)

Blessings of the Faithfula-Snow, LorenzoTPThe faithful will be crowned as kings and queens. God bless the Latter-day Saints and pour out His Spirit upon you. May you be faithful to your God, faithful to your families, and conduct yourselves with prudence in all things, and labor for the interests of the kingdom of God, and that we may not be among the foolish virgins, but be found worthy to be amongst those who will be crowned as kings and queens and reign throughout eternity. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:246.)

Diligencea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should be diligent in God's service. Having received the light of the everlasting gospel, and partaken of the good things of the kingdom, and being of the seed of Israel and heirs to great and glorious promises, we should labor with fidelity and diligence to accomplish what God has designed to do through us. We should be men and women of faith and power as well as good works; and when we discover ourselves careless or indifferent in the least, it should be sufficient for us to know it in order to mend our ways and return to the path of duty. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:194.)

Kingdom of Goda-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should renew our covenants before God and the holy angels that we will, God being our helper, serve Him more faithfully during the ensuing year than we have in the past, that our public and private life, our actions and the spirit and influence we wield may be in keeping with the motto, "The Kingdom of God or nothing." (8 April 1880, CR, p. 81.)

Life, Purpose ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPOur great purpose in life is to do the Father's will. We came into the world for a great purpose, the same as Jesus, our elder brother, to do the will and works of our Father. In this there is peace, joy and happiness, an increase of wisdom, knowledge, and the power of God; outside of this are no promised blessings. Thus let us devote ourselves to righteousness, help each and all to be better and happier; do good to all and evil to none; honor God and obey His priesthood; cultivate and preserve an enlightened conscience and follow the Holy Spirit; faint not, hold fast to what is good, endure to the end, and your cup of joy shall be full even to overflowing, for great shall be your reward for your trials and your sufferings under temptations, your fiery ordeals, your heart yearnings and tears; yea, our God will give you a crown of unfading glory, and make you kings and queens in the midst of your posterity, to rule in righteousness through the countless ages of eternities. (May 1884, BLS, p. 487.)

Obediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPOur eternity depends upon our keeping the commandments now. I find in reflecting on life that this world is short compared with eternity; that our intelligence, the divinity within us, has always existed, was never created, and will always exist through all eternity. In view of these facts, it becomes us as intelligent beings, to realize that this life closes in a few days, then comes the life which is eternal; and in proportion as we have kept commandments, we have the advantage [over] those who failed to make those improvements. (27 July 1891, CD, 2:259-60.)

Obediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should always seek to do the Lord's will and give him the credit. I feel that whatever I have accomplished that it is not Lorenzo Snow, and the scenes that have brought me to this position as President of the Church—it is not Lorenzo Snow, but the Lord who has done it. When Jesus was upon the earth he made this remarkable expression;...and it is before me constantly in all of my labors: "I can of myself do nothing; as I hear I judge, and my judgment is just." Now why did he say that his judgment was just? He says, because "I seek not my own will but the will of my Father who sent me" (John 5:30). That is the principle ... that I have endeavored to act upon ever since it was revealed to me that my Father in Heaven and your Father in Heaven exists. I have endeavored to do his will....It is the Lord that you honor when you honor me and my counselors and the Quorum of the Twelve. We have discovered a long time ago, every one of us, that of ourselves we could do nothing. Only so far as we followed that principle which Jesus followed, when he was in the world, has success followed our efforts; and it will be so with you. (7 April 1899, DN, p. 10.)
