Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 8

Joseph Smith, the Prophet

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPI know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. A word or two about Joseph Smith. Perhaps there are very few men now living who were so well acquainted with Joseph Smith the Prophet as I was. I was with him oftentimes. I visited with him in his family, sat at his table, associated with him under various circumstances, and had private interviews with him for counsel. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God; I know that he was an honorable man, a moral man, and that he had the respect of those who were acquainted with him. The Lord has shown me most clearly and completely that he was a prophet of God, and that he held the holy priesthood. (7 October 1900, CR, p. 61.)

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe mission of Joseph Smith was to preach the gospel. Joseph Smith received a revelation and commandment from the Lord to go forth and preach the gospel of salvation to the nations of the earth, with power and authority to baptize those who would repent of their sins and be immersed in water for the remission of them; he was also commanded to preach the gathering to them, that a people might be drawn together who would be willing to harken to the voice of the Lord and keep His laws, that a righteous seed might thereby be preserved when the great day of His wrath should come. (9 October 1869, JD, 13:254.)

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPChrist revealed Himself to Joseph Smith. We testify to the whole world that we know, by divine revelation, even through the manifestations of the Holy Ghost, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, and that He revealed Himself to Joseph Smith as personally as He did to His Apostles, anciently, after He arose from the tomb, and that He made known unto him those heavenly truths by which alone mankind can be saved. (6 October 1876, JD, 18:298.)

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPJoseph was chosen by God. Joseph Smith, whom God chose to establish this work, was poor and uneducated, and belonged to no popular denomination of Christians. He was a mere boy, honest, full of integrity, unacquainted with the trickery, cunning and sophistry employed by the politicians and the religious hypocrite to accomplish their ends. Like Moses he felt incompetent and unqualified for the task, to stand forth as a religious reformer, in a position the most unpopular, to battle against opinions and creeds which have stood for ages, having had the sanction of men, the most profound in theological obedience; but God had called him to deliver the poor and honest-hearted of all nations from their spiritual and temporal thraldom. (23 January 1870, JD, 13:287.)

Smith, Joseph, Jr.a-Snow, LorenzoTPJoseph was devoted to the interest of mankind. Joseph Smith, the Prophet, with whom I was intimately acquainted for years, as well as I was with my brother, I know him to have been a man of integrity, a man devoted to the interests of humanity and to the requirements of God all the days in which he was permitted to live. There never was a man that possessed a higher degree of integrity and more devotedness to the interest of mankind than the Prophet Joseph Smith. I can say this from a personal acquaintance with him. (10 April 1898, CR, p. 64.)

Smith, Joseph, Jr.a-Snow, LorenzoTPJoseph Smith was an extraordinary man. I had an intimate acquaintance with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, for a number of years. The position he occupied before the world and the declarations which he made were of an extraordinary character. It was a position which no individual before or since has attempted to assume. I know Joseph Smith to have been an honest man, a man of truth, honor, and fidelity, willing to sacrifice everything he possessed, even life itself, as a testimony to the heavens and the world that he had borne the truth to the human family. (5 October 1889, JH, p. 5.)

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPJoseph said his work was finished. A few months previous to this murder, Joseph, in giving instructions to the Twelve in relation to the building up of Zion, preparatory to the coming of the Son of God, informed them that his work was finished on the earth, and from that time the responsibility of carrying the gospel to every nation devolved upon them; and, as he bid farewell to some friends, on leaving for Carthage, he said: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I have a conscience void of offence towards God, and towards all men; I shall die innocent, and it shall yet be said of me—he was murdered in cold blood." An intimate acquaintance with those men from the early rise of the Church to their martyrdom, justifies the writer in bearing this testimony that he knows they were virtuous, honorable and righteous men—men whom God loved, and whom all good men would have respected, loved and honored had they known their true character. (1851, BLS, pp. 157-58.)

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPJoseph Smith was empowered to usher in the fulness of times. Joseph Smith declared that an angel from heaven revealed to him the golden plates of the Book of Mormon, containing the gospel, and that other heavenly messengers ordained him to the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods, thus empowering him to ordain others, to preach faith and repentance, to baptize by immersion in water for the remission of sins, and to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost; in short, to do all things necessary to be done to usher in the dispensation of the fulness of times. Included in this declaration was the promise that all who obeyed the gospel should experience the same miraculous gifts and powers that were enjoyed by the disciples anciently. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:2-3.)
