Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 10

Sharing the Gospel

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPOur salvation depends on our sharing the gospel. I had never intended to be a preacher, and it was nothing but a perfect knowledge that it was my duty to do so, that I was willing to go forth upon this business—a knowledge that my salvation depended upon my going forth and proclaiming these glad tidings to the world, and I went, and could testify to every man and woman in any nation or community wherever I traveled, that I was authorized to preach the gospel and administer in its ordinances, which pertain to a knowledge of eternal life, a knowledge of time and eternity, and thus establish the divine authenticity of my mission. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:242-43.)

Saviors of Mena-Snow, LorenzoTPSeeking the salvation of men brings joy and eternal glory. I close by saying to you and the faithful men laboring under your direction, that inasmuch as they shall continually seek unto the Lord in humility, having an eye single to His honor and glory, and desiring in their hearts the salvation of the souls of men, and doing all they can to bring about their salvation, they shall have joy beyond expression in their labors in the flesh, and shall at last be made partakers with the Father and the Son of things too great and glorious for mortality to conceive or contemplate. (12 September 1901, MS, 58:596.)

Saviors of Mena-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should be saviors to our fellowmen. This, then, should be our aim and object: to learn to make ourselves useful, to be saviors to our fellowmen, to learn how to save them, to communicate to them a knowledge of the principles that are necessary to raise them to the same degree of intelligence that we have ourselves. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:22.)

Teaching, Gospela-Snow, LorenzoTPWe grow by sharing the gospel. Let a man remember that there are others that are in darkness and that have not advanced so far in knowledge, wisdom, and intelligence, and let him impart that knowledge, intelligence, and power unto his friends and brethren, inasmuch as he is farther advanced than they are, and by so doing he will soon discover that his mind will expand, and that light and knowledge which he had gained would increase and multiply more rapidly.

Servicea-Snow, LorenzoTPI have heard Brother [Heber C.] Kimball state that when he was very much downhearted, he would find somebody worse than himself, and endeavor to comfort him up, and by so doing he would comfort himself, and increase in spirit and in life. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:241.)

Mission of the Churcha-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is our obligation to spread the gospel. No sooner had the Saints become fairly settled in these valleys than the servants of the Lord turned their attention again to the great missionary work which rested upon the Church.

Mission of the Churcha-Snow, LorenzoTPWe were in the midst of poverty and struggling to make the land habitable, but we could not neglect the obligation we were under to spread the gospel abroad; for the Lord had given forth the command that it should be preached in all the world. It is one of the evidences of the divinity of this work that in the midst of all their driving and persecutions the Latter-day Saints have faithfully sought to carry out this command of the Lord. (16 August 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Missionaries, Calling ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPServing a mission brings honor and glory. In this life we send our missionaries into the world. We select our young men and give them missions to travel among the nations. It is not one of the most pleasant things that might be imagined for a young man to start out, not having had any experience, to go to a land and among a people that he knows nothing at all about, and in many instances does not even understand their language. He realizes that he will have trials, troubles, and difficulties to cope with, and many things of an unpleasant character. In one sense of the word, he parts with his friends unpleasantly; but it is an important duty that he feels now called upon to perform, and there will arise from the performance of these duties honor, and eventually glory and exaltation. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:737-38.)

Missionaries, Calling ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit influences elders to serve. It is a strange thing that among the thousands of letters which I have received from those who have been called to go upon missions—mostly young men—I do not think of but one case where a refusal was given. Why is this? It is because the spirit of love and of immortality, the Spirit of the Almighty, is upon these young elders, and they have received manifestations which inspire them to do that which otherwise no inducement could prompt them to do. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 3.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPThe missionaries' business is to make people happy. We are laboring, striving, and struggling for the deliverance of the honest in heart throughout the world; we are laboring for the establishment and continuance of holy principles.

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPThere are men on this stand whose testimony you have heard; and those very men would suffer themselves to be cut in pieces, inch by inch, before they would suffer those principles to be trampled upon. It is their business to make people happy—to put them in possession of eternal life, so that sorrowing and crying may cease from the earth. (7 October 1857, JD, 5:324.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPMissionaries should pray for power to save souls. The question will arise, what am I here for? To sow the seeds of life in the hearts of those who are in this audience; and the prayer should arise in your heart, "O Lord, may it be so; may I have power through thy Spirit to touch the hearts of these thy people." That very short prayer is all that an elder needs to make. It is all you need to make. "May I say something to save these souls." This is what the First Presidency and all your brethren want you to do. (December 1899, IE, 3:129.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPHonest hearts appreciate divine truth. This system of religion, in its nature, in the character of its origin, the manner of its operations, and in the purposes for which it was designed, coupled with the fact that people of honest hearts can and will appreciate divine truth, is such that it cannot be destroyed. A man who is honest, full of integrity and love for the interest and happiness of mankind, having explored this long untrodden path, and made this glorious discovery, will not and cannot keep silent, but despite of threats and opposition, however fierce and terrific, will boldly declare the glorious fact, spreading and multiplying this divine intelligence, and if so required, seal this testimony with his own life's blood. (6 March 1886, JD, 26:376.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPFind the way to the hearts of men. The humility you display and the Spirit of the Lord resting upon you, will show your fitness for the position you are called to occupy. Try to understand human nature and act accordingly, in order to make everyone happy and everything agreeable.

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPI remember an incident related by Brother George A. Smith: He was on a mission, traveling without purse or scrip. He had been turned away from several houses and badly treated. He had always told those to whom he applied for entertainment that he was a "Mormon," and after he had traveled some distance and the day was drawing to a close, he began to fear that he would obtain neither food nor shelter and perhaps be unable to accomplish his mission. In order to avoid this, he concluded to adopt another plan. Journeying a little farther, he came to a house and found the owner putting up a loom. Brother Smith went right to work and assisted him. After they had finished their task, he began to talk to the man about his stock and his farm, and so forth. During the conversation, it began to rain, and Brother Smith, who all this time had not mentioned that he was a "Mormon," started to go, but the man insisted upon his staying to dinner, and would not permit him to leave his house that night.

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPThere is a way to reach every human heart, and it is your business to find the way to the hearts of those to whom you are called on this mission. (December 1899, IE, 3:127-28.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPThe missionaries' love for the people will revolutionize the world. The Apostle John remarked in his day, "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren." This love begotten in the hearts of the missionary elders of our Church for the peoples of the earth, comparative strangers to them, and in the hearts of the people for the elders who bear to them the gospel message, is in itself testimony sufficient to convince the honest heart that its source is divine, and that God is with us. This sacred and holy feeling, awakened within us by the Holy Ghost, has already distinguished us as a community from the rest of the human family; and this is the feeling that will yet revolutionize the whole world, and convince unbelieving man that God is not only the Father of us all, but that we are His friends and servants. I have joy even now in contemplating the days of my missionary labors. The feelings produced by these peculiar experiences have become part and parcel of my very being; and from the nature of things they must necessarily not only continue to remain so, but to expand and reach out until they shall find satisfaction in nothing short of the redemption and salvation of our Father's house. (12 September 1901, MS, 58:595.)

Works, Gooda-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should do good to those who do not receive the gospel. Well, we expect to do good; it is our duty, as the servants and ministers of God upon the earth, to do good to His offspring. This is our mission, and it is as much our duty to do good to those who do not receive the gospel, as it is to do good to ourselves; and God will give us the opportunity, just according to our desires, despite the efforts of evil-minded men. Our business is to save, not to destroy, and as we improve and advance, and develop the attributes of deity within us, God will remove from our path the impediments and obstacles to our progress that are found therein; and the bitter branches, as they increase or manifest themselves, will be removed one after another, until the people of God have all the opportunity they desire to do good to the world. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:309.)

Obediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord does not require the impossible. The Lord never has, nor will He require things of His children which it is impossible for them to perform. The elders of Israel who expect to go forth to preach the gospel of salvation in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among a people who are full of evil and corruption, should cultivate this spirit especially. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:192.)

Plan of Salvationa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord desires to save all men. When the Lord calls an individual or a class of individuals out from the world, it is not always with an object to benefit that particular individual or individuals. The Lord has not in view merely the salvation of a few people called Latter-day Saints, who have been or who may be gathered into these valleys, but the salvation of all men, the living and the dead. (4 November 1882, JD, 23:338.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPThe missionaries promise knowledge from God. What is their prediction that is of such high importance to all people? Why, this: Having stated before the congregations of the world that they are authorized to preach the gospel of life and salvation, that they are authorized to promise the gift of the Holy Ghost, that shall lead into all truth and show things to come, and shall testify in reference to their authority, then to make this prediction—that such as will obey the simple principles of the gospel shall receive a perfect knowledge, a knowledge not by the reading of books, the scriptures or any past revelations that may have been given, but they shall receive a knowledge of this from God Himself. (5 October 1897, CR, p. 30.)

Friendshipa-Snow, LorenzoTPMissionary work brings friendships. If you want to secure the friendship and affections of our friends, go to work and comfort them with that light which you have received, remembering those blessings came down from God, and that by doing this you are only doing what every man should do.

Friendshipa-Snow, LorenzoTPThose of you who have got the priesthood, go and make friends among the individuals by whom you are surrounded; or select one and try to start his feelings, his faith, his circumstances, and his mind, and try to enlighten them, and if they are sinners, endeavor to save them from their sins, and bring them from their bondage in which they are placed, to participate in the light and liberty which you participate in, for in this way you can do good through the information which the Lord has imparted to you. In this way you will discover that their minds will be drawn out towards you, and their affections will be gained and centered upon you. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:241.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPMissionaries are ambassadors of heaven. The elders laboring in the vineyard should never lose sight of the fact that they are ambassadors of heaven, bearers of good and glad tidings to peoples who know not the Lord, whose knowledge of Him cannot possibly extend beyond the story told of Him in holy writ. This kind of knowledge is not sufficient either to save or condemn, it being merely hearsay or knowledge born of tradition. (12 September 1901, MS, 58:595.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPMissionary work is God's work. We send our elders to preach the gospel. Who sends them? President Woodruff? In one sense, no. The God of Israel sends them. It is His work. There is no mortal man that is so much interested in the success of an elder when he is preaching the gospel as the Lord that sent him to preach to the people who are the Lord's children. He begot them in yonder world, and they came here because the Lord wanted them to come. (12 May 1894, DW, 48:637.)

TemptationMissionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPElders should avoid the temptations of the world. I do hope and pray that no elder laboring under your presidency will so far forget himself as to fall a prey to the allurements of the world. There is but one safe way to steer clear of them, and that is to shun evil, yea, even the very appearance of evil. Temptation in some form or other will be presented to them. This is the business of the enemy of our salvation; but it is the business of the elders of Israel to rise above temptation, and in order to do this successfully they must keep themselves unspotted from the world. And I desire to say to them through you, that inasmuch as they cultivate and cherish the spirit of their mission, and realize the importance of their high calling in Christ Jesus, and live in the spirit of the same, they will be able to stand as guides and saviors to the people, reflecting to them the light of heaven, and be unlike other men; but if they trespass on the ground of the enemy and partake of the spirit of the world, they will be shorn of their strength and become like other men, fit only to return home to sup the sorrow of the fallen, and to cause the hearts of their loved ones to mourn because of their condition. (12 September 1901, MS, 58:596.)

Missionary Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPMissionaries should not be discouraged. When the Prophet Joseph Smith sent out the first elders to a foreign land, he foresaw the reception that would be accorded them, and he told them that while a comparative few would receive them as God's servants, the masses would reject them, and pay heedless regard to their message. This has been the lot of God's servants from the beginning of time, and we must be content with the results of faithful labors, even if but few through us are brought to a knowledge of the truth. The elders should not be discouraged. They should constantly bear in mind that none cometh to the Son except the Father draweth them; and that therefore, if people cannot receive the Spirit of the Father, they cannot receive the doctrines of His Son, and as a consequence cannot be made partakers with us of the heavenly word. (12 September 1901, MS, 58:596.)

Influencea-Snow, LorenzoTPOur influence affects people. You exert a certain degree of influence, and be it ever so small, it affects some person or persons, and for the results of the influence you exert you are held more or less accountable. You, therefore, whether you acknowledge it or not, have assumed an importance before God and man that cannot be overlooked. (6 October 1876, JD, 18:299.)

Missionary Lifea-Snow, LorenzoTP"I returned and was well entertained." I was once traveling in a strange country on a mission, and had been refused entertainment many times, and my chances for sleeping in a haystack were very good. Presently I came to a hotel. We usually avoided such places, but my affairs were desperate, and I approached the proprietor and told him that I was without means, preaching the gospel, and asked him to give me entertainment. He replied that he was running his hotel to make money, and that I was very welcome to a room in his house and meals at his table upon payment of the regular prices for such commodities. I started to go away, but, upon a little reflection, returned to the man, and again told him that I was a humble elder of the Church of Christ, preaching the gospel, warning the people and calling upon them to repent and turn unto the Lord. I quoted to him the words of the Savior, recorded in Matthew 25:31-46, where He tells of the coming of the Son of Man in His glory, when He shall divide the sheep from the goats and shall bless those on His right hand because they ministered unto Him, but shall cast out those on His left hand, because they ministered not unto Him; and when those on His left hand shall ask when they saw the Son of Man in want and ministered not unto Him, He shall say unto them, "Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me." After having quoted these things, and borne testimony that I was a humble disciple of Jesus Christ, I started to leave him, but he called after me, saying, "Where are you going? Come in here and eat, and stay as long as you desire." I returned and was well entertained, and no word was ever said to me about paying for the same. (December 1899, IE, 3:128.)

Kingdom of Goda-Snow, LorenzoTPThe restored gospel cannot be destroyed. Should the prominent men of this Church, together with tens of thousands of its elders, be swept away by our enemies, the gospel would still survive, and with unabated force and vigor, still continue its irrepressible operations. So long as one solitary elder, however unlearned, obscure or possessing an honest heart, remain alive upon the earth, these holy and sacred truths will be avowed and vindicated, order and proper authority continue their peaceful and happy reign, and elders with hearts overflowing with love and heaven-born zeal, go forth to the nations, churches spring up in every land and clime, Saints increase and multiply and gather together, the kingdom of God continue to be established, and the suggestive and inspired sayings of the prophet Daniel be literally and emphatically accomplished. (23 January 1870, JD, 13:291-92.)

Voice of Warninga-Snow, LorenzoTPThe voice of warning must be sounded. To my brethren in the priesthood I beg to offer a few words of counsel, instruction, and exhortation. Upon you rest high and sacred responsibilities, which relate not only to the salvation of this generation, but of many past generations, and many to come. The glorious ensign of Emmanuel's kingdom, once again established in the world, must be unfurled in every nation, kingdom, and empire: the voice of warning—the voice of the Bridegroom, "Prepare ye, prepare ye the way of the Lord," must be carried forth unto all people. You are the ones whom the Lord has chosen for this purpose, even the horn of Joseph, to "push the people together." Surely you cannot be too anxiously, nor too industriously engaged, seeking how best, the manner most useful to yourselves and mankind, to magnify your holy and sacred offices. (1 December 1851, MS, 13:362; BLS, p. 192.)

Teaching, Gospela-Snow, LorenzoTPGospel conversations should be conducted in the right spirit. The Savior has commanded not to cast pearls before swine. I am sorry to say that this instruction is not always sufficiently regarded by those to whom our Lord has given, through the everlasting covenant, His pearls of wisdom, knowledge, and precious gifts. The consequence is, we lose blessings instead of retaining them—a decrease of the Holy Spirit follows, instead of an increase, and our minds become darkened.

Teaching, Gospela-Snow, LorenzoTPWhat I allude to is this: we too frequently engage in conversation concerning things of the kingdom of God, with persons of a wrong spirit; and feeling overanxious to make them see, understand and acknowledge the light presented, we urge on, and persist in the conversation until we partake of the spirit of those with whom we are conversing. We ought to be particularly guarded against falling into errors of this kind.

Teaching, Gospela-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is very easy to understand when conversation is attended with profit. We then feel our minds enlightened, and the power of God resting upon us through the Holy Spirit—ideas flow into our minds, and we express them with ease, freedom, and calmness.

Teaching, Gospela-Snow, LorenzoTPConversation conducted in this spirit proves highly profitable, not only to ourselves, but also to those with whom we converse; and after its close, our hearts are drawn out in gratitude to the Most High for the privilege of imparting the glorious truths of the gospel to the children of men. (13 May 1841, BLS, p. 59.)

BeliefGod, Knowledge abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints must help the world not lose faith in God. We dedicate our lives which we hold as not dear to us, in order that the world may understand that there is a God in the eternal worlds; in order that they may understand that God has something to do at the present time with the affairs of the children of men. The world is passing into feelings and opinions of infidelity. Even among the Christian portions of the human family, thousands and tens of thousands, though they are not willing to confess it because of being unpopular, do not believe that God has anything to do with the children of men. We have to stand forth and make sacrifices in order that that belief and knowledge may come to the children of men. (29 July 1887, CD, 1:43.)
