Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 11

Priesthood: Honoring the Power of God

Callings, Magnifyinga-Snow, LorenzoTPMagnifying priesthood callings requires our highest efforts. In building up the kingdom of God, which is the work assigned us, our whole attention and highest efforts are demanded, that we may be qualified, through the Holy Spirit, to properly magnify our respective callings in the holy priesthood. (7 October 1873, JD, 16:273.)

Priesthood Officesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe priesthood is the channel for exaltation. There is a certain channel by and through which the Lord intends to exalt His sons and daughters, to remove wickedness from the earth and to establish righteousness, and that channel is the priesthood, which God has established and shown clearly the nature and character of the various officers and duties thereof. The Apostles and the Seventies, it is their business by the appointment of the Almighty, to look after the interests of the world. The Seventies and the Twelve Apostles are special witnesses unto the nations of the earth. The business of the high priests, the elders and the bishops is to look after the interests of these various organizations that I have mentioned. (6 October 1901, CR, p. 61.)

PriesthoodSpirit of Prophecya-Snow, LorenzoTPMen must administer salvation to continue in the priesthood. Men who wish to retain their standing before God in the holy priesthood must have the spirit of prophecy, and be qualified to administer life and salvation to the people; and if they cannot do it to the world, they must do it at home, in their families, in their shops, and in the streets, that their hearts may be inspired with words of life at their firesides, in teaching the gospel to their children and to their neighbors. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:157.)

Priesthooda-Snow, LorenzoTPThe priesthood is given to bring happiness. The object of the priesthood is to make all men happy, to diffuse information, to make all partakers of the same blessings in their turn. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:22.)

Priesthooda-Snow, LorenzoTPWho would dishonor his priesthood? And now, where is the man among you [who], having once burst the veil and gazed upon this purity, the glory, the might, majesty and dominion of a perfected man, in celestial glory, in eternity, will not cheerfully resign mortal life—suffer most excruciating tortures—let limb be torn from limb, sooner than dishonor or resign his priesthood. (1 December 1851, MS, 13:363; BLS, p. 195.)

Callings, MagnifyingOffice, Seekinga-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should honor our callings. I remember reading an anecdote when a boy of a man who, through his wisdom and patriotism, had gained great renown, but who through envy was assigned to a position which was considered very degrading. On entering upon its duties it was said that he made this significant remark: "If the office does not honor me I will honor the office." Much difficulty would be avoided, and our condition and situation would be much more encouraging if we all honored the office in which we are called to act. We are told that the Lord himself made clothes for our first parents, or, in other words, on that occasion, acted as tailor; also that Jesus Christ was a carpenter. Now the Savior must have been an honorable and honest carpenter or he never could have merited the position he afterwards occupied. If we could get the brethren and sisters to see the importance of acting honestly and faithfully in their respective callings, much of the annoyances and troubles we now experience would be averted, and the work of God would roll on with redoubled rapidity, and all His purposes would be more rapidly and speedily accomplished; and besides, as a people, we would be better prepared than we now are for the dispensation of His will. (31 January 1877, DN, 25:834.)

Humilitya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord chooses humble men. The Lord has not chosen the great and learned of the world to perform His work on the earth. It is not those who have been trained and educated in the colleges and seminaries of learning, but humble men devoted to His cause whom He has chosen to take charge of the affairs of His Church, men who are willing to be led and guided by the Holy Spirit, and who will of necessity give the glory unto Him knowing that of themselves they can do nothing. (8 October 1898, DW, 57:513.)

Priesthood, Qualifying fora-Snow, LorenzoTPPriesthood holders are to qualify for the Spirit. High priests, seventies, and ye elders of Israel, are you this day prepared with wisdom and power to officiate for the living and the dead, and to lay a pure and holy foundation through your wives and children, that salvation may go forth to the rising generations? Or have you neglected qualifying yourselves in your holy callings, and let the cares of the world occupy your entire thoughts and attention, and your minds become dull, your spiritual armor rusty and but little room found in you for the Holy Ghost to abide?

Priesthood, Qualifying fora-Snow, LorenzoTPBrethren, your eye should be single to the glory of God, to harkening to the counsel of the living prophet and to the building up of Zion; then your bodies would be filled with spirit, and your understandings with light, and your hearts with joy, and your souls would be quickened into eternal life with the power of the Holy Ghost. You would then become the depositories of that wisdom and knowledge which would qualify you to be saviors unto your brethren and your posterity. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:154-55.)

Priesthood Callingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPProper use of the priesthood leads to eternal glory. To my brethren in the priesthood I beg to offer a few words of counsel, instruction, and exhortation. Upon you rest high and sacred responsibilities, which relate not only to the salvation of this generation, but of many past generations, and many to come. The glorious ensign of Emmanuel's kingdom, once again established in the world, must be unfurled in every nation, kingdom, and empire: the voice of warning—the voice of the Bridegroom, "Prepare ye, prepare ye the way of the Lord," must be carried forth unto all people. You are the ones whom the Lord has chosen for this purpose, even the horn of Joseph, to "push the people together." Surely you cannot be too anxiously, nor too industriously engaged, seeking how best, the manner most useful to yourselves and mankind, to magnify your holy and sacred offices.

Priesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is the priesthood that will give you character, renown, wisdom, power, and authority, and build you up here below among the children of men; and above, exalt you to peace and happiness, to glory, to thrones and dominions, even through countless eternities. This world, in its kingdoms and empires, possesses, in some degree, glory and greatness, faintly shadowing forth what is embraced in regions above; but here, to these, is joined little happiness, little durability.

Eternal LifeIncreaseExaltationPriesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe world we seek offers to its inhabitants unfading glory, immortal renown, and dominions of continued increase, where families grow into nations, nations into generations, generations into worlds, worlds into universes: this is the path of the priesthood—the path of the Holy Ones. Well did the Apostle say, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things that God hath prepared for them that love Him, but God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, even the deep things of God."

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Snow, LorenzoTPAuthoritative rule is not the proper rule by which to govern Saints, but rather seek to administer in the spirit of humility, wisdom, and goodness, teaching not so much by theory as by practice. Though one teach with the eloquence of an angel, yet one's good practice, good examples, one's acts constantly manifesting whole-heartedness for the interests of the people, teach much more eloquently, much more effectually. Very few indeed have enough moral courage to be strictly honest, faithful, virtuous, and honorable in all positions—these few will hold the priesthood and receive its fulness, but no others.

GodlinessVirtuea-Snow, LorenzoTPPurity, virtue, fidelity, and godliness must be sought ambitiously, or the crown cannot be won. Those principles must be incorporated with [in] ourselves—woven into our constitutions—becoming a part of us, making us a center, a fountain of truth, of equity, justice, and mercy, of all that is good and great; that from us may proceed the light, the life, the power, and the law to direct, to govern, and assist to save a wandering world—acting as the sons of God, for and in behalf of our Father in heaven. We expect, in the Resurrection, to exercise the powers of our priesthood—we can exercise them only in proportion as we secure its righteousness and perfection. These qualifications can be had only as they are sought and obtained; so that in the morning of the Resurrection we will possess those acquisitions only which we secured in this world! Godliness cannot be conferred, but must be acquired—a fact of which the religious world seems strangely and lamentably unconscious.

Servicea-Snow, LorenzoTPSeek to benefit others, and others will seek to benefit you—he that would be great, let him be good, studying the interests of the whole—becoming the servant of all, whereby he will secure to himself most of the wisdom and power of God, the love, esteem, and veneration of His people.

Priesthood CallingsPriesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe elders must become persons of the highest responsibility. The happiness of people, nations, and of generations, will depend upon the right and faithful exercise of the powers of their offices. If, in a lesser sphere of action, they fail to be trustworthy, who will depend upon them in the greater? In view of the vast responsibilities to be placed upon men in this high calling, they are in a measure left to themselves, to act upon their agency. If they pass onward to the close of this probation, without being overthrown by evil powers, keeping their spirits pure, and, through the power of the Holy Ghost, educate and build themselves up in those qualifications essential to such exaltations, then in due time God will elevate them to those positions. (1 December 1851, MS, 13:362-63; BLS, pp. 192-94.)

Priesthood Callingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPA priesthood holder should be faithful regardless of his calling. Now the question is, do we sense our position, do we comprehend fully the nature of the work we have undertaken to consummate? I am sometimes led to believe that some of our brethren, elders in Israel, are too ready and willing to shirk to obligations they are under by reason of their covenants, the faith they once possessed seems to be almost exhausted, and they appear to settle down into the quiet satisfaction of a mere nominal membership in the Church. There are others who think because their names are not very widely known, because they are perhaps only employees, occupying narrow spheres, that it does not matter much what habits they contract, or what kind of examples they set before their brethren. But then, if they held responsible positions, such as the Presidency of the Church, or a counselorship, or if they belonged to the Quorum of the Twelve, or were they president of the high council, or of the high priests or seventies, then they would consider it important how they conducted themselves. Herein they manifest great weakness or gross ignorance, their lamp is either growing dim or they never sensed the position they assumed in taking upon themselves the responsibilities of the gospel. (6 October 1876, JD, 18:299.)

Office, SeekingPriesthood Callingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe are told in the parable of the Savior that the kingdom of heaven is as a householder who delivered his goods to his servants as he was about to travel into a far country. To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one. The one that received the five talents went and traded, and made other five talents, doubling the portion that had been entrusted to him, and he also that received two talents went and gained other two. But he that received the one talent, went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money. He doubtless considered that his responsibility was so small that he could not do much, and consequently he would not exercise a talent so inferior. Does not this apply directly to the condition of some of our elders? Says one, "I am only a carpenter, or a tailor, or peradventure only a hod-carrier, therefore it cannot matter much how I deport myself, whether I do or do not honestly discharge my duties in my humble sphere. But it would be very different if I were acting in some more responsible and prominent position."

Office, SeekingPriesthood Callingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPStop, my brother; do not allow yourself to be deceived by such alluring sentiments. It is true you may only be a hod carrier, but remember you are an elder in Israel, you are an ambassador of the Lord Jesus Christ, and if you are in the line of your duty you are in possession of that which the world cannot give nor take away; and you are held accountable to God for the honest use of the talent over which he has made you steward, whether it be large or small.

Priesthood Callingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTherefore, let it be understood and always remembered by those who may be called to follow the humbler occupations in life, that it is absolutely necessary, for their growth and progress in the kingdom of God, that while acting therein they master the situation, that they establish and form a character and a living name by which they may be known and distinguished hereafter among the sons of God. I respect the man occupying the humblest position, if he is faithful in the sphere in which he acts, and is truly an honest man; I deem him just as honorable as any person who may act in a higher position. The Lord does not require so much of the man who possesses but one talent, as of him who possesses more than one; but, according to that which he hath, so shall it be required of him. Let all, therefore, be encouraged, and seek to improve the talents they severally possess; and let him who may have the one talent use it and not hide it in the earth; that is, let him who may be endowed with little ability improve himself, and not complain because nature may not have been so propitious to him as to his more fortunate brother. Let us all be satisfied with our lot in life, and should it not be so desirable as we could wish, we should seek with becoming diligence to improve it, ever feeling grateful for our earthly being, and more especially for the Spirit of God we have received through obedience to the gospel. (31 January 1877, DN, 25:834.)

Priesthood Callingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPPriesthood leaders are to feed the Lord's sheep. I will now say, let every man who stands in an official station, on whom God has bestowed His holy and divine priesthood, think of what the Savior said to the Twelve Apostles just before He went into the presence of His Father: "Feed my sheep." And He continued to say this until His Apostles felt sorrowful that he should continue to call upon them in this manner. But, said He, "Feed my sheep." That is, "Go forth with your whole heart, be devoted wholly to my cause. These people in the world are my brethren and sisters. My feelings are exercised towards them. Take care of my people. Feed my flock. Go forth and preach the gospel. I will reward you for all your sacrifices. Do not think that you can make too great a sacrifice in accomplishing this work." He called upon them in the fervor of His heart to do this work.

Priesthood Callingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPAnd now I call upon all who hold this priesthood, the presiding officers of this stake, and the bishops, and the high council, to go forth and feed the flock. Take an interest in them. Did you ever lose a child, and the parting struck keenly into your souls? Transfer a little of this deep feeling to the interests of the Saints over whom you are called to preside, and in whose interests you have received the holy priesthood. Work for them, and do not confine your thoughts and feelings to your personal aggrandizement. Then God will give you revelation, inspiration upon inspiration, and teach you how to secure the interests of the Saints in matters pertaining to their temporal and spiritual welfare. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:372.)

Stake Presidentsa-Snow, LorenzoTPStake presidents should look after the Saints under their charge. This church is now nearly seventy-two years of age, and we are not expected to do the work of the days of our youth, but to do greater, larger, and more extensive work. The Lord is coming one of these days, and He is interested in the work that you ought to be doing and anxious to be doing. You ought to do all that you possibly can, and leave everything in your business affairs that you wisely can do and attend to these matters. The presidents of these fifty stakes should consider the people in their respective stakes, in their various dominions. They should regard them as their own family, as their sons and daughters; and take as deep an interest in them as they ought to take in their own wives and children. It should be their thought by day and by night, how and in what way they can be most serviceable to their respective charges. Oh! brethren, do remember these things that I am now talking about; do not forget them. You presidents, when you retire to your rest, you probably can spend half an hour before you go to sleep, and let your thoughts run over your several jurisdictions. See wherein, either physically, financially, or spiritually, you can help, and what can be done best in advancing the interests of your official family. These bishops, however wise and energetic they may think themselves—and the most of them certainly are very wise and energetic—need to be looked after. It is not the duty of the Apostles to look after them. (6 October 1901, CR, pp. 60-61.)

Leadershipa-Snow, LorenzoTPLocal Church leaders should take initiative in reforming the Saints. I wanted to say this, and to speak it with energy and in a way that you will not forget it, that you cannot forget it. It is a wonderful responsibility, and the Lord expects it of you. You ought to know how the laws of God are observed in your respective localities—how the Sabbath is kept; whether the young people are swearing, and off at midnight when they ought to be at home; how the parents govern and control them; how far the people are paying their tithing correctly; what they are doing in regard to their meetinghouses, their schoolhouses, and their houses of amusement; whether they are expending their time and means too much in these directions, or not enough; and what you can do in helping them along. Look at these things, and everything that pertains to the happiness of your children, the members of this family of yours, see what you can do about it. And the Lord God of Israel will help you in this, because it is just what He wants you to do. It is the duty that He has placed upon you to discharge, and He certainly will help you. But when you take any other course—when you depend upon the Apostles to reform your respective stakes—you are doing that which you have no business to do. Do it yourselves, you presidents of stakes and counselors, you high councilors, and you bishops. (6 October 1901, CR, p. 61.)

ExaltationApostlesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThere are greater things than being an Apostle. It is a great thing, we say, for a man to be an Apostle; yet there are things you can look forward to which are greater than this. A man has no reason to envy his friend because he happens to get a little higher than himself. The glory that is before us is open to every man and every woman, through this gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, glory, and exaltation in the fulness thereof. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 56.)

Apostlesa-Snow, LorenzoTPAn Apostle must possess divine knowledge and authority. It becomes proper for me to explain some essential qualifications of an Apostle.

Apostlesa-Snow, LorenzoTPFirst, an Apostle must possess a divine knowledge, by revelation from God, that Jesus lives—that He is the Son of the living God.

Apostlesa-Snow, LorenzoTPSecondly, he must be divinely authorized to promise the Holy Ghost; a divine principle that reveals the things of God, making known His will and purposes, leading into all truth, and showing things to come, as declared by the Savior.

Apostlesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThirdly, he is commissioned by the power of God to administer the sacred ordinances of the gospel, which are confirmed to each individual by a divine testimony. Thousands of people now dwelling in these mountain vales, who received these ordinances through my administrations, are living witnesses of the truth of this statement. (15 February 1886, MS, 48:110.)

PriesthoodMediumsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe priesthood is the channel for knowledge and salvation. The priesthood or authority in which we stand is the medium or channel through which our Heavenly Father has purposed to communicate light, intelligence, gifts, powers, and spiritual and temporal salvation unto the present generation. (May, 1841, MS, 2:39.)

General Authoritiesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe General Authorities are united in trying to help the people. Here are my counselors. We are one. We are united. We do not quarrel with each other....Here we have twelve men sitting in front with us—Twelve Apostles....[T]hey are with us heart and soul. We are united together. We do not quarrel with each other. We do not slander one another, but we go where counsel requires and we are heart and soul together. What for? Not to make ourselves rich, not to make ourselves wealthy, but to see what we can accomplish in the interests of the people, and we are laboring continually to see what we can do. We come together every week and we talk about what we can do for the people. (5 October 1900, CR, p. 5.)

Office, Seekinga-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should never seek a position but rather to do our duty in the priesthood. I never sought to be a High Priest, to be a Seventy, to be an Apostle, to be President of the Apostles, and especially President of the Church. I never sought such a thing. I never looked for it; I never asked the Lord that I might receive a position of this nature and character. I did seek, however, to be an Elder in Israel, that I might go forth and bear testimony of these things which God so perfectly revealed to me....That was the only position I ever sought, asked for, or prayed for; but I have always prayed when the Lord called me to any position that he would endow me with wisdom and knowledge that I might discharge the duties that pertained to that position. (7 April 1899, DN, p. 9.)
