Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 12

Following the Brethren

Following the Brethrena-Snow, LorenzoTPFollow the Brethren and all will be well. If you will be as faithful and united as the First Presidency and Twelve are faithful and united, and will follow us as we follow Christ, all will be well with you. We are determined to perform our duty and to serve the Lord and labor for the benefit of His people and the accomplishment of His work. We are your servants in the Lord and desire your welfare and the welfare of all mankind. (8 October 1898, DW, 57:513.)

Following the Brethrena-Snow, LorenzoTPFollow the living prophet. The people are under obligation to obey the counsel that is given; they are necessarily required to apply the counsel of the living prophet, because that counsel possesses those objects. No man can be more happy than by obeying the living prophet's counsel. You may go from east to west, from north to south, and tread this footstool of the Lord all over, and you cannot find a man that can make himself happy in this Church, only by applying the counsel of the living prophet in this life; it is a matter of impossibility for a man to receive a fulness who is not susceptible of receiving and carrying out the living prophet's counsel. An individual that applies the counsel of this Church is bound to increase in all that is good, for there is a fountain of counsel which the Lord has established. He has made it, has deposited that counsel, that wisdom and those riches, and it will circumscribe all that pertains unto good, unto salvation; all that pertains unto peace and unto happiness; all things that pertain to glory and to the exaltation of the Saints in this world and in the world to come. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:184.)

Following the Brethrena-Snow, LorenzoTPFollowing the prophet brings safety. When the enemy is near, and when the stormy clouds arise, and the war clouds approach, even then we can feel free and quiet, and be satisfied that all is right in Israel. It is only for us to be ready to do our duty, to serve our President with all our heart, with all our might, with all our feelings, with all our property and energies, and with all things that the Lord has put into our hands. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:314.)

Following the Brethrena-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit teaches us to follow the Brethren. The Holy Spirit of light, that brings intelligence to us and an understanding of sacred things, belongs to every member of the Church. They have a right to pass their opinion upon those that are presiding over them. The works and the labors that the officers perform in the presence of this people may be known and understood by every member of the Church—in a general way, at least. There may be some things that the First Presidency do, that the Apostles do, that cannot for the moment be explained; yet the spirit, the motives that inspire the action can be understood, because each member of the Church has a right to have that measure of the Spirit of God that they can judge as to those who are acting in their interests or otherwise. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 54.)

Priesthood OfficesHonora-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should honor the callings of priesthood holders. Here are brethren before and around us in this congregation who have received from God a holy, sacred priesthood, to minister in His name. Divine authority and appointment was given Saul, which David regarded so sacredly that he did not dare to raise his hand against him, although a mortal enemy and one who was preventing him from ascending the throne that God had given him. How do we regard these our brethren—their sacred appointments? David would not even allow his servant to touch Saul.

Priesthood OfficesHonora-Snow, LorenzoTPHe was not like the Quaker of whom I heard when I was a boy. He had a dog which displeased him. Now, the Quakers do not believe in killing anybody, not even a serpent. This Quaker wished to stand by his principles, but he wanted to get rid of this dog. So he turned him out in the streets, and called out so that everybody could hear, "Mad dog, mad dog." The result was the people stoned the dog to death.

Priesthood OfficesHonora-Snow, LorenzoTPThere was something grand in this trait of character which David exhibited on that occasion as well as on many others. How do we feel under such circumstances? How do we feel sometimes in regard to our friends and neighbors who hold the holy priesthood? Do we slander them, and call "Mad dog, mad dog," so that others will slander them also? Or do we seek to sustain them as our brethren? Do we try to ascertain their faults and weaknesses, or do we try to ascertain their good qualities? Do we regard as sacred that priesthood and that authority which they hold, as David did in the case of Saul? Or is it otherwise with us? (6 May 1889, DW, 38:763.)

Sustaininga-Snow, LorenzoTPRaising a hand is not enough in sustaining our leaders. It is an easy thing for us to rise here and raise our right hands in token of our approval of what is presented before us. I can do that without any trouble, and so can you. But there is something involved in this rising here and raising our right hands in approval of the propositions presented; there is a meaning to it; something that ought to be well considered, and that is, acting in the future in accordance with this manifestation of our approval. Now, I know—and I know it well; nobody can know it better—that if this mighty priesthood and these Latter-day Saints that are before me will act up to that which they have approved by raising their right hands and in accordance with the motives that undoubtedly inspired them, the progress of this Church will be more rapid than it has been in the past. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 54.)

Counsela-Snow, LorenzoTPThe purpose of our leaders' counsel is to bring happiness. Counsel that is given to us, when it comes from the proper authority, is given for a certain purpose; and that purpose is our happiness, so far as the present time is concerned; it is for the purpose of adding happiness unto us in the present state, and also for the purpose of communicating benefits unto us in a state hereafter. Upon this principle is counsel established, upon the principle of doing our fellowmen good; for the purpose of doing them good here and hereafter. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:183.)

Counsela-Snow, LorenzoTPFollow your local leaders. It requires more energy and more strength of purpose in a man to follow out the counsel of one who is just above him than it does to follow a man that is a long way ahead of him. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:315.)

Counsela-Snow, LorenzoTPWise counsel benefits the giver. No man can give counsel to anyone, but what it has a tendency to benefit himself as well as others. We are so constituted and organized, that we cannot counsel that which will contribute to the benefit and exaltation of others without at the same time contributing to our own good. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:184.)

Counsela-Snow, LorenzoTPPray for the Brethren at conference time. When the Brethren arise to speak you should ask the Lord to let them say something that you want to know, that they may suggest something to you that will be of some advantage. If you have any desire to know certain matters that you do not understand, pray that these brethren in their talks may say something that shall enlighten your mind in reference to that which troubles you, and we will have a grand and glorious conference, a better one than we have ever had before. Strange as it may appear, our last conference always seems the best, and may this be the case; and you brethren and sisters, let your hearts rise up to the Lord and exercise faith while our brethren are talking to you. We will not be disappointed, and you will not go home, you will not retire from this conference, without feeling you have been greatly and abundantly blessed. (5 October 1900, CR, p. 5.)

Conferencesa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe assemble to learn the will of God. On occasions of this kind, when we are assembled together to learn the will of God, it is of importance that we exercise faith, and have the spirit of prayer, that the Lord will cause something to be said that will instruct, and give us such information and knowledge as will be of use and service in our daily walk and under the circumstances that surround us. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:341.)

Conferencesa-Snow, LorenzoTPOur being edified at conference depends on us. It becomes necessary that we prepare our hearts to receive and profit by the suggestions that may be made by the speakers during the progress of the conference, which may be prompted by the Spirit of the Lord. I have thought, and still think, that our being edified does not so much depend upon the speaker as upon ourselves. (6 October 1898, CR, p. 1.)

Conferencesa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should pay attention at conference. At these general conferences it is the privilege of everyone who attends to receive instruction, suited to his individual needs and benefits, of great worth, and if we pay proper attention to what is said and exercise the proper faith, there will be no disappointment. (5 October 1897, CR, p. 29.)

Public SpeakingInstructiona-Snow, LorenzoTPThe message matters most, not the style of oratory. I have noticed on the part of the people what I have attributed to weakness. They come together, some of them, more for the purpose of being pleased with the oratory of their speaker, for the purpose of admiring the style in which he may address them, or they come together more for the purpose of seeing the speaker or speculating in regard to his character, or the true relationship that he sustains to the Lord in the priesthood, than for the purpose of receiving instructions that will do them good and build them up in righteousness. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:182.)
