Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 13

The Plan of Salvation

Plan of Salvationa-Snow, LorenzoTPGod's plan is for universal salvation. God loves His offspring, the human family. His design is not simply to furnish happiness to the few here, called Latter-day Saints. The plan and scheme that He is now carrying out is for universal salvation; not only for the salvation of the Latter-day Saints, but for the salvation of every man and woman on the face of the earth, for those also in the spirit world, and for those who may hereafter come upon the face of the earth. It is for the salvation of every son and daughter of Adam. They are the offspring of the Almighty, He loves them all and His plans are for the salvation of the whole, and He will bring all up into that position in which they will be as happy and as comfortable as they are willing to be. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:308.)

Premortal Lifea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe made covenants in pre-earth life. I often ask myself, what am I in the world for? Where did I come from, and where am I going? Well, we have learned something in regard to this. We have learned that we existed with God in eternity before we came into this life, and that we kept our estate. Had we not kept what is called our first estate and observed the laws that governed there, you and I would not be here today. We are here because we are worthy to be here, and that arises, to a great extent at least, from the fact that we kept our first estate. I believe that when you and I were in yonder life we made certain covenants with those that had the control that in this life, when we should be permitted to enter it, we would do what we had done in that life—find out the will of God and conform to it. I have not the least idea that I would be here today talking to you, unless it was distinctly understood in that life that when I came into this I would be obedient to the will of God as it should be revealed. Of course, we have forgotten these things; but the Lord is beginning to illuminate our understandings and is bringing to our recollection certain things in regard to how we were there, and for what we have come into this world. What you and I now want to know is how to secure the position we occupied in the other life when we go back, and that which will naturally be added to us in consequence of the experience that we had in this life; for the Lord has told us that those who would keep their second estate, glory should be added upon their heads forever and ever. It seems to me that no man or woman can afford to do anything in this life only that which, directly or indirectly, will be in conformity to the will of God. (12 May 1894, DW, 48:637.)

Life, Purpose ofPremortal Lifea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe chose to be on earth. We are in the world for a purpose. We are not here accidentally. We came here because we were willing to come, and because it was the wish of our Father in Heaven that we should come. We undoubtedly saw very clearly that there was no other way for us to secure what the Father had in store for us. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 2.)

First Estatea-Snow, LorenzoTPSome did not keep their first estate. We came into this world because we kept our first estate in the midst of all the trials and difficulties in the other life. It was not all of the family of God that preserved themselves in their first estate. One-third part of the host of the children of God, His offspring, traveled in a different direction, and were not worthy to come into the world. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:738.)

Premortal Lifea-Snow, LorenzoTPLife's difficulties were known in premortal life. I dare say that in the spirit world, when it was proposed to us to come into this probation, and pass through the experience that we are now receiving, it was not altogether pleasant and agreeable; the prospects were not so delightful in all respects as might have been desired. Yet there is no doubt that we saw and understood clearly there that, in order to accomplish our exaltation and glory, this was a necessary experience; and however disagreeable it might have appeared to us, we were willing to conform to the will of God, and consequently we are here. (4 November 1893, DW, 47:609.)

RelationshipsPremortal Lifea-Snow, LorenzoTPPre-earth life affects relations here. We have not come into this world accidentally. It is my opinion that there has been an inspiration to bring about certain relations that we are forming here in this life, and most likely they arise because of certain relations that existed in our previous life. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:737.)

Life, Purpose ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints have special missions here. Now, there are several thousand Latter-day Saints before me, and there is not one but has a work to perform. We did not come into this world accidentally. We came for a special purpose, and it was undoubtedly through certain arrangements in the other life where we dwelt that we came into this life. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:737.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord will test the Saints. The Latter-day Saints have done wonders; but they cannot cease from doing wonders in the future. There will be greater things demanded of the Latter-day Saints than have ever been demanded since the organization of the Church. The Lord has determined in His heart that He will try us until He knows what He can do with us. He tried His Son Jesus. Thousands of years before He came upon earth, the Father had watched His course and knew that He could depend upon Him when the salvation of worlds should be at stake; and He was not disappointed. So in regard to ourselves. He will try us, and continue to try us, in order that He may place us in the highest positions in life and put upon us the most sacred responsibilities. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:532.)

Second Estatea-Snow, LorenzoTPEarth life is necessary to prepare us for exaltation. Circumstances were of that nature that men and women never could be exalted and receive the fulness of glory unless they passed through this ordeal. They had to come to the earth, which was called the second estate. We had a first estate, in which we dwelt, moved, and had a being. We knew one another there. And in consequence of having kept our first estate, we had the privilege of coming unto this estate, in order to pass through the ordeal and get that necessary experience and education that should prepare us to sit upon thrones and govern and control our posterity worlds without end. We came here because we were sent here and because we were willing to come. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:737.)

Old Agea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should desire to live long upon the earth. Among us, I am happy to say, old age is honorable, and regarded as a blessing from the Lord. It is our duty to desire to live long upon the earth, that we may do as much good as we possibly can. I esteem it a great privilege to have the opportunity of living in mortality. The Lord has sent us here "for a wise and glorious purpose," and it should be our business to find out what that purpose is and then to order our lives accordingly. (2 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Individualitya-Snow, LorenzoTPOur identity will always remain the same. In considering ourselves and how we have been organized and what we are doing, we discover that there is immortality connected with us. We are immortal beings. That which dwells in this body of ours is immortal, and will always exist. Our individuality will always continue. Eternities may begin, eternities may end, and still we shall have our individuality. Our identity is insured. We will be ourselves and nobody else. Whatever changes may arise, whatever worlds may be made or pass away, our identity will always remain the same; and we will continue on improving, advancing, and increasing in wisdom, intelligence, power, and dominion, worlds without end. Our present advancement is simply a starting out, as it were, on this path of immortality. Whatever may have been our past, how long we may have existed before this, or whether there ever was a time when we did not exist, there is one thing sure—our being in the future will never be annihilated, never destroyed. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 2.)

ProgressDiligencea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must progress or lose what we have. We should labor for perfection so far as possible, and seek to go onward. There is no man or woman who can stand still any great length of time. In this path over which we are moving we are very likely to go backward if we undertake to stand still or act indifferently. We must push forward, because as the Church moves on, it is very evident that things of a more difficult character are occurring constantly, and we will find it far from easy to overcome them. Unless we improve as we move along we will find it very difficult to magnify our callings and to perform the work required at our hands. Latter-day Saints should not permit themselves to stand still. It is a privilege we have to serve the Lord and enjoy His spirit in our labors, but many of the people lose that portion of happiness that they might enjoy because of not reflecting seriously upon their duties and acting wisely and prudently. (6 April 1898, CR, p. 12.)

Second Estatea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must work for our own exaltation. I cannot imagine anything that is so vastly important as to work for and obtain one's own individual exaltation and glory. That undoubtedly is one great purpose for which we came into the world. When we lived in the other life we had no doubt some understanding with reference to our duties in this life when we were permitted to come to this our second estate. And very likely we put ourselves under certain obligations that we would discharge certain duties devolving upon us when we came here into our second estate. And we had rendered ourselves worthy to come upon this earth for the purpose of securing those blessings that could only be obtained by observing the laws pertaining to our present estate. (6 April 1898, CR, p. 12.)

Infant Baptisma-Snow, LorenzoTPInfant baptism is unnecessary. Faith and repentance go before baptism, and baptism before the remission of sins and the reception of the Holy Ghost. Hence, we see the useless and unscriptural practice of baptizing infants. They cannot exercise faith and repentance, qualifications necessary previous to baptism; then why require the outward work? (1841, SML, p. 78.)

Temple Worka-Snow, LorenzoTPTemple work is the most important work. We feel when we go into these temples that we enjoy the Spirit of the Lord more fully than in any other place. They are the Lord's buildings, and His most important work is carried on within their walls. We are satisfied—at least I am, and I believe many of the brethren look upon it in the same light—that the most important work that Latter-day Saints can do on this earth is that of opening the door for the salvation of their kindred dead. There is but one way in which men can receive salvation, exaltation, and glory, and that is through the order of baptism and the ordinances connected therewith. No mortal man or woman will ever receive celestial glory unless he or she has been baptized, receiving this ordinance personally or by proxy. That is the order that God has established. (3 April 1897, DW, 54:482.)

Templesa-Snow, LorenzoTPTemples are places for us to be taught and prepared. It looks to me now, the way things are moving, that our temples are the grand places where people will be taught and prepared for the things they will have to endure in the not far distant future. (3 April 1897, DW, 54:482.)

Temple OrdinancesMarriage, Eternala-Snow, LorenzoTPTemple work is essential to salvation. Now, in our temples we allow persons to come in, after they have traced their ancestry, no matter how far back, and to be baptized for their dead father, grandfather, and great grandfather and so on, just as far as they can trace their line. Then we allow them to have the wives sealed to their husbands all along the ancestry line, as far as they can trace it. Take the case of a virtuous young man who lived before the gospel was introduced to the children of men. He desired to get him a wife and to raise a family. That desire is a proper desire.

Temple OrdinancesMarriage, Eternala-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is obeying the first commandment. Well, he married a wife, and he raised a family; but he never had the privilege of receiving the gospel, as you and I have. However, he taught his family the principles of morality, and was affectionate and kind to his wife and children. What more could he do? He should not be condemned because he did not receive the gospel; for there was no gospel to receive. He should not lose his wife because when he married her he could not go into a temple and have her sealed to him for time and eternity. He acted according to the best knowledge that he had, and she was married to him for time.

Temple Ordinancesa-Snow, LorenzoTPWhen we go back into the other life and find our dead friends living there, if we have not performed the labor that is necessary for their exaltation and glory we shall not feel very happy and it will not be a very pleasant meeting. We ought not to wait for opportunities to be pleasant and agreeable always; but we should strive, even if it takes a little sacrifice on our part, to put ourselves in a condition to perform this labor.

Temple Ordinancesa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe welcome the brethren and sisters when we see them in this temple. It is the same in all the other temples. We desire anxiously that the brethren and sisters should not neglect this important work. Do you know what will be the main labor during the thousand years of rest? It will be that which we are trying to urge the Latter-day Saints to perform at the present time. Temples will be built all over this land, and the brethren and sisters will go into them and perhaps work day and night in order to hasten the work and accomplish the labors necessary before the Son of Man can present His kingdom to His Father. This work has got to be accomplished before the Son of Man can come and receive His kingdom to present it to His Father. Every son and daughter of God will have the opportunity necessary for exaltation and glory, either by themselves or by their friends. For there is but one way by which exaltation and glory can be secured. We have to be baptized for the remission of sins and have hands laid upon us for the reception of the Holy Ghost. These and other ordinances are absolutely necessary for exaltation and glory; and where individuals have lived when the gospel has not been accessible, these things can be attended to by their friends. We have come into the world now in order to do these things—at least, it is one of the chief objects of our coming. We cannot lay too great stress upon the importance of this work. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:738.)

Jesus Christ, Passion ofJesus Christ, Atonement througha-Snow, LorenzoTPIt was difficult for Jesus to accomplish the Atonement. Jesus, the Son of God, was sent into the world to make it possible for you and me to receive these extraordinary blessings. He had to make a great sacrifice. It required all the power that He had and all the faith that He could summon for Him to accomplish that which the Father required of Him. Had He fallen in the moment of temptation, what do you suppose would have become of us? Doubtless at some future period the plan would have been carried out by another person. But He did not fail, though the trial was so severe that He sweat great drops of blood. When He knelt there in the Garden of Gethsemane, what agony He must have experienced in contemplating His sufferings on the cross! His feelings must have been inexpressible. He tells us Himself, as you will find recorded in section 19 of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, that His suffering was so great that it caused even Him "to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that [He] might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." But He had in His heart continually to say, "Father, not my will, but Thine be done." It was a dark hour for Him; and every man and woman who serves the Lord, no matter how faithful they may be, have their dark hours; but if they have lived faithfully, light will burst upon them and relief will be furnished. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:531.)

Spirit Prisona-Snow, LorenzoTPMissionary work is more successful in spirit prison than on earth. A wonderful work is being accomplished in our temples in favor of the spirits in prison. I believe, strongly too, that when the gospel is preached to the spirits in prison, the success attending that preaching will be far greater than that attending the preaching of our elders in this life. (4 November 1893, DW, 47:609.)

Spirits in Prisona-Snow, LorenzoTPAll will eventually accept the gospel. The antediluvians rejected the word of God; but they were the sons and daughters of God, and He did not reject them, only for a time. After twenty-five hundred years had passed away the Lord revealed Himself to them again and gave them another opportunity. Then they no doubt accepted, generally if not altogether, that which they refused in the days of Noah. The people of this generation may not receive our testimony here, but they will receive it at some future time, from us or from some other servants of God. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 3.)

Stake PresidentsBishopsa-Snow, LorenzoTPBishops and stake presidents are sentinels to guard the temples. The bishops and presidents of stakes should stand as sentinels, and they should not allow any to pass by them into the temple that are unworthy. It is something like what we learn in the temple about a time that is coming when persons who go into the celestial kingdom will have to pass by the angels and the gods. (3 April 1897, DW, 54:482.)

Resurrectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPNothing is more beautiful than a resurrected being. We know that in the future, after we have passed through this life, we will then have our wives and our children with us. We will have our bodies glorified, made free from every sickness and distress, and rendered most beautiful. There is nothing more beautiful to look upon than a resurrected man or woman. There is nothing grander that I can imagine that a man can possess than a resurrected body. There is no Latter-day Saint within the sound of my voice but that certainly has this prospect of coming forth in the morning of the First Resurrection and being glorified, exalted in the presence of God, having the privilege of talking with our Father as we talk with our earthly father. (5 October 1900, CR, p. 4.)

Posteritya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe faithful will stand before multitudes of their own posterity. You who are seated here will have opportunities of standing in the presence of multitudes, and I can easily imagine, yonder in the next life, after we have passed along perhaps a thousand years or more, that many of you who are here today will have an audience before you of your own posterity. I am as sure of it as I am that I am talking to you; I know it just as well as I know anything. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 55.)

Plan of Salvationa-Snow, LorenzoTP"Mormonism" is the original plan of salvation. Mormonism, a nickname for the real religion of the Latter-day Saints, does not profess to be a new thing, except to this generation. It proclaims itself as the original plan of salvation, instituted in the heavens before the world was, and revealed from God to man in different ages. That Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and other ancient worthies had this religion successively, in a series of dispensations, we, as a people, verily believe. To us, the gospel taught by the Redeemer in the meridian of time was a restored gospel, of which, however, He was the author, in His pre-existent state. Mormonism, in short, is the primitive Christian faith restored, the ancient gospel brought back again—this time to usher in the last dispensation, introduce the Millennium, and wind up the work of redemption as pertaining to this planet. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:1-2.)

DestinyPlan of Exaltationa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe control our destiny. The ultimatum of our travel in this path of exaltation will bring to us the fulness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to stand in the presence of our Father, to receive of His fulness, to have the pleasure of increasing in our posterity worlds without end, to enjoy those pleasant associations that we have had in this life, to have our sons and our daughters, our husbands and our wives, surrounded with all the enjoyment that heaven can bestow, our bodies glorified like unto the Savior's, free from disease and all the ills of life, and free from the disappointments and vexations and the unpleasant sacrifices that we are making here. We portray in our minds the glories that are before us, and we know that if we are faithful there will be no disappointment in the securing of these blessings. The power to prevent us from receiving these things is not in the hands of any man; it lies within ourselves. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:530.)
