Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 14

Self-Control: Overcoming Temptation

Self-Controla-Snow, LorenzoTPLearn to control your actions. In all your acts and conduct, ever have the consciousness that you are now preparing and making yourselves a life to be continued through eternities. Act upon no principle that you would be ashamed or unwilling to act upon in heaven—employ no means in the attainment of an object that an enlightened conscience disapproves. When feelings and passions excite you to action, let principles pure, honorable, and virtuous govern you. (1 December 1851, MS, 13:363.)

Self-Deniala-Snow, LorenzoTPSelf-denial preserves character. Our character, as Latter-day Saints, should be preserved inviolate, at whatever cost or sacrifice. Character approved of God is worth securing, even at the expense of a lifetime of constant self-denial.

Self-Deniala-Snow, LorenzoTPWhile thus living we may look forward far away into the spiritland, with full assurance that when reaching that happy clime, we shall be crowned with the sons and daughters of God, and possess the wealth and glory of a celestial kingdom. (10 January 1886, JD, 26:368.)

Self-Controla-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must learn to govern ourselves. We have received principles of truth, but not in blindness. We do not walk in blindness, but we walk in the light of truth. We know what we are about and what will be the result of our faithfulness. But we should be wise and prudent; we should learn to govern ourselves, to control our passions, and to bring all our faculties and powers into perfect obedience to the mind and will of God, so that these bodies, which God has given to us, may be governed and controlled in all respects as He would wish. (6 October 1899, CR, p. 2.)

Devotiona-Snow, LorenzoTPTotal devotion overcomes temptations. It is impossible for Latter-day Saints to move along in the path of glory we are now treading unless they devote themselves fully and wholly to the work and make the preparation which is absolutely necessary to meet and overcome the temptations that might otherwise overpower us. (6 October 1898, CR, p. 2.)

Temptationa-Snow, LorenzoTPWithstand Satan. God admires the men and women today who pursue a course of rectitude and who, notwithstanding the powers of Satan that are arrayed against them, can say, Get thee behind me Satan, and who live a righteous, a godly life, and such people have influence with God and their prayers avail much. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:191.)

Temptationa-Snow, LorenzoTP"Get behind me, Satan!" You may expect, if your lives are spared to the common age of man and womanhood, to encounter obstacles in the path of life which will test to the uttermost your best resolutions, and some of you may be tempted to swerve from the path of truth and honor, and, like Esau, feel to relinquish the glories of eternity for a few passing moments of gratification and pleasure; then, my dear children, seize your opportunity to emulate the example of our Savior when offered the glory of this world, if he would stoop to an act of folly; he replied to his tempter, "Get behind me, Satan!" (May 1884, BLS, p. 486.)

Temptationa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must fortify ourselves against temptation. So soon as we discover ourselves in a fault, we should repent of that wrongdoing and as far as possible repair or make good the wrong we may have committed. By taking this course we strengthen our character, we advance our own cause, and we fortify ourselves against temptation. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:192.)

Temptationa-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is better to suffer a thousand deaths than to discard true principles. I wish to offer a word of caution to my brethren that you may beware, and commit no grave errors when brought into positions of trial and temptation. Some, unfortunately, have disregarded this injunction, and have imprinted a stain upon their character, and a blot upon their record which cannot be erased in time—perhaps not in eternity. These are fearful mistakes. Better suffer a thousand deaths than succumb to the force of persecution by promising to discard a single principle which God has revealed for our glory and exaltation. (10 January 1886, JD, 26:368.)

Hypocrisya-Snow, LorenzoTPSome Church members are unfit for fellowship with the Saints. There are those among us who are recognized as members of this Church who take a vast amount of pains to be favorably known by those around them, but whose real character, or the inwardness, so to speak, of such people, is veiled or disguised, being to all outward appearance reputable Latter-day Saints, but whose inward character, the character that is written indelibly upon their own hearts, would, if known, render them unfit for the association and fellowship of the people of God. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:190.)

Temptationa-Snow, LorenzoTPGreater temptations lie ahead, but the Saints will overcome. We are considerably advanced in the knowledge of the things of God, and are qualified to act in His behalf; yet we are not entirely out of the wilderness, if I may be permitted to use that expression. The time will come when we shall overcome the world and every temptation that can be advanced to affect us. We are now advancing to that point; but we have not yet reached it. And now comes a time when the Latter-day Saints will probably be subjected to temptation greater and more subtle than we ever again will experience as a people. But let me tell you that after we have passed through the scenes that are now before us, the clouds will break; and as President Woodruff has said, we will stand on a much higher plane of righteousness, of faith, power, and influence than ever before. We will have the approval and blessings of the Almighty, and we will have influence with the world. They will respect us more than they ever have done. (6 May 1889, DW, 38:763.)

Holy Ghost, Loss ofHypocrisya-Snow, LorenzoTPSearch me, O God. "Search me, O God, and know my heart and see if there be any wicked way in me." (Psalm 139:23-24.) If we as a people could live so as to be able at all times to bow before the Lord and offer up a prayer like this, what a delightful thing it would be, what an attainment we should have acquired in righteousness and good works! To every person who has at heart the preparing of himself for the great change, that is the work of regeneration, I would recommend that he adopt this prayer of David, and see how near he can live according to the light that he has, so as to make it in all sincerity part of his devotions to God. Many fail in coming up to this standard of excellence because they do things in secret where mortal eye cannot penetrate, that has a direct tendency to alienate them from the Almighty, and to grieve away the Spirit of God. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:190.)

Repentancea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should repent for the right reason. Undoubtedly it is too much the case with some that they consider and fear the publicity of the wrong they commit more than committing the wrong itself; they wonder what people will say when they hear of it. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:192.)

Repentancea-Snow, LorenzoTPRepentance brings the Spirit. If you see that you have weaknesses which have brought you into some trouble, do not be discouraged; but repent of that which you have done wrong, by which you have lost more or less of the Spirit of God, tell the Lord what you have done, and resolve in your hearts that you will do it no more. Then the Spirit of the Lord will be upon you. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 56.)

Self-Controla-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should govern ourselves wisely under all conditions. Whatever may be the difficulties or the temptations that a person may labor under, he should so govern and control himself that in every condition he may act wisely and in a way that will increase his intelligence, power, and faith. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 55.)

TemptationPreparationa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints should prepare for the difficulties ahead. It is our privilege as Latter-day Saints to seize upon those opportunities that are afforded us to make a proper preparation for the scenes that are before us and in which we may be called to act; and as the difficulties which we have to meet shall increase upon us perhaps and become harder to overcome, we need more strength in order to resist the temptations and to discharge the obligations that devolve upon us. (10 April 1898, CR, pp 61-62.)

Plan of Exaltationa-Snow, LorenzoTPNo external force can keep us from celestial glory unless we allow it. It is interesting to contemplate and estimate the abilities we have received from the Lord to continue prosperous, notwithstanding the opposing forces that have been brought to bear upon us. No external power can prevent us from attaining to the high destiny marked out for us on the condition of faithfulness. We did not lay out the path to salvation for ourselves. It was delineated by God before the earth was organized. The Lord has seen fit to make known the path. It depends upon ourselves as to whether we continue to travel on that road which leads to celestial glory. (5 April 1890, CD, 2:33-34.)

Dutya-Snow, LorenzoTPWhen things go wrong, do your duty and you will be given power. When things go against you, when everything seems black, do your duty and you will become strong men, powerful men; the sick will be healed under your ministrations; devils will flee from you; the dead will rise; and everything that was ever done by man since the days of Adam, you will be able to do through the power of God and through a proper ambition. (7 April 1899, DN, p. 9.)
