Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 15

The Power of the Spirit

Spirit of Jesus ChristHoly Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit of God and the Holy Ghost are not the same. There was a certain blessing connected only with obedience to the gospel, that was the gift of the Holy Ghost. When people received the ordinances of the gospel they were promised that they should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Savior, who undoubtedly knew best about the nature and character of this gift, said it should lead all who received it into all truth and show them things to come. It should be more than that spirit which proceeds from God, filling the immensity of space and enlightening every man that comes into the world, the gift of the Holy Ghost should lead into all truth, and show them things to come. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:303.)

Mormonism and World ReligionsSpirit of Jesus ChristHoly Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThere is a great difference between the possession of the Holy Ghost and the mere possession of the Spirit of God. Everybody has the Spirit of God, that is, the honest-hearted, those who are living according to the best light they have. All Christian churches have it, those who seek truth and righteousness. The Baptists, if they are honest, have it; so have the Presbyterians and the Methodists; so also have all Christian and heathen nations. You go to China, and all honest-hearted people there have the Spirit of God; in fact we are told that this is the light that lights every man that comes into the world; but to say that all have the Holy Ghost, the gift that was promised to those who obeyed the gospel, it is not so. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:304.)

Light of Christa-Snow, LorenzoTPPeople possess the Spirit of God in varying degrees. We believe that God is no respecter of persons, but that He confers blessings upon all His children in proportion to the light they have, or in proportion as they proceed according to the light and knowledge they possess in the different circumstances of life that may surround them. We believe that the spirit which enlightens the human family proceeds from the presence of the Almighty, that it spreads throughout all space, that it is the light and life of all things, and that every honest heart possesses it in proportion to his virtue, integrity, and his desire to know the truth and do good to his fellow men. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:300-301.)

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gift of the Holy Ghost is a principle of revelation. This gift of the Holy Ghost is a different principle from anything that we see manifested in the sectarian world. It is a principle of intelligence, and revelation. It is a principle that reveals things past, present, and to come, and these gifts of the Holy Ghost were to be received through obedience to the requirements of the gospel as proclaimed by the elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in these days. (6 October 1879, JD, 20:330.)

We should seek the Spirit in every act. "As I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30).

Eye Single to Glory of Goda-Snow, LorenzoTPThat is a wonderful saying, and there is a great deal in it. Now, what we want is to have that spirit in every act of our lives and in every undertaking, whether temporal or spiritual, and not think of self. We should try to ascertain how we should spend the money and the information that God has given us. The answer is simple—for the glory of God. Our eye should be single to the glory of God. That is what we have left the other life for and come into this. We should seek to promote the interests of the Most High God, and to feel as Jesus felt, "I can of mine own self do nothing." Inasmuch as we act today and tomorrow, this week and next week, in the interest of God, and have our eye single to His glory, there can be no failure. (12 May 1894, DW, 48:637.)

Holy Ghost as Comfortera-Snow, LorenzoTPWe need the Comforter. We need assistance. We are liable to do that which will lead us into trouble and darkness, and those things which will not tend to our good; but with the assistance of that Comforter which the Lord has promised His Saints, if we are careful to listen to its whisperings, and understand the nature of its language, we may avoid much trouble and serious difficulty. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:341.)

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe made a covenant to follow the Spirit. When we received this gospel, we covenanted before God that we would be led, that we would be governed, and would follow the suggestions of the Holy Spirit, that we would follow the suggestions of the principle that gives life, that gives knowledge, that gives understanding of the things of God, that communicates the mind of God; and that we would labor for the accomplishment of the purposes of God in the salvation of the human family, adopting as a motto of life, "The kingdom of God, or nothing." (8 April 1880, CR, p. 79.)

Holy Ghost as ComforterHoly Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit is our friend. The Spirit is in every man and every woman so that they need not walk in the darkness at all, and it is not always necessary for them to come to the President of the Church, or to the Twelve, or to the elders of Israel to get counsel; they have it within them. There is a friend that knows just exactly what to say to them. From the time we receive the gospel, go down into the waters of baptism and have hands laid upon us afterwards for the gift of the Holy Ghost, we have a friend, if we do not drive it from us by doing wrong. That friend is the Holy Spirit, the Holy Ghost, which partakes of the things of God and shows them unto us. This is a grand means that the Lord has provided for us, that we may know the light, and not be groveling continually in the dark. (9 April 1899, CR, p. 52.)

Inspirationa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit was never needed more than now. We are entirely dependent upon the spirit of inspiration, and if there ever was a time, since Adam occupied the Garden of Eden, when the Spirit of God was more needed than at the present time, I am not aware of it. (6 May 1889, DW, 38:762.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit will lead us to do right. What can we wish for more than is comprehended in our religion? If we will stand firm upon the rock, and will follow the Spirit that has been placed in our bosoms, we shall act right in the way of our duties—we shall act right to those who are placed over us—we shall act right, whether in the light or in the dark. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:314.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must depend on the Spirit. We ought to understand—and I presume that we do generally—that the work which we have come into this life to perform cannot be done to the glory of God or to the satisfaction of ourselves merely by our own natural intelligence. We are dependent upon the Spirit of the Lord to aid us and to manifest to us from time to time what is necessary for us to accomplish under the peculiar circumstances that may surround us. It is the privilege of Latter-day Saints, when they get into difficulties, to have supernatural power of God, and in faith, day by day, to secure from the circumstances which may surround us that which will be beneficial and advance us in the principles of holiness and sanctification, that we may as far as possible be like our Father. (6 October 1898, CR, p. 2.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPListening to the Spirit is not enough. Now, if we really desire to draw near to God; if we wish to place ourselves in accord with the good spirits of the eternal worlds; if we wish to establish within ourselves that faith which we read about and by which ancient Saints performed such wonderful works, we must, after we obtain the Holy Spirit, hearken to its whisperings and conform to its suggestions, and by no act of our lives drive it from us. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:192.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe can do nothing without the Spirit. We have not the power to do anything without the assistance of the Spirit of the Lord. (9 April 1857, JD, 5:65.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe impossible may be accomplished with the Spirit. There are many important things required at our hands, and many things which we can do, when assisted by the Spirit of the Lord, which may at times seem almost impossible to accomplish. (6 April 1898, CR, p. 12.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit enables us to face every difficulty. "The spirit is given to every man to profit withal. To one is given faith." Not a common ordinary faith, which some people pretend to at the present day; but a faith which enables its possessors to be sawn asunder, to be cast into dens of lions, fiery furnaces, and to undergo tortures of every description. This was the kind of faith that the Holy Ghost conferred upon those who possessed it, enabling its possessor to stand in the midst of every difficulty, defy every opposition and lay down his life, if necessary, for the cause that he had espoused. There was an almighty inspiring power in this faith, given by the Lord through the Holy Ghost, which no other principle could communicate. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:303.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should sacrifice to obtain the Spirit. As Saints of God, elders of Israel, we should be willing to devote time and labor, making every necessary sacrifice in order to obtain the proper spiritual qualifications to be highly useful in our several callings. And may the Lord inspire every heart with the importance of these matters that we may seek diligently and energetically for the gifts and powers promised in the gospel we have obeyed. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:195.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe ancient Israelites were without the Spirit. [Elder Snow read Exodus 14:10-15.] It appears that the children of Israel at the time referred to in the passage I have read, were not very well acquainted with the Lord, or with His ability to carry out His purposes. They, however, had not the opportunities of becoming acquainted with Him, as have the Latter-day Saints. They had seen some of the works of the Lord wrought in the presence of the Egyptians as well as in their own presence; but their hearts had not been touched, neither had their understandings been enlightened by the intelligence of the Holy Spirit, as has been the case with the Latter-day Saints; and therefore, when they were brought to face the Red Sea, which, to all human appearance, was impassable, and with the armies of the Egyptians pressing close upon them, their hearts failed them. (7 April 1882, JD, 23:150.)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit removes part of the veil. I see before me this afternoon thousands of people who have received the gospel of Christ from among the various nations of the earth. They have made sacrifices which have astonished the world at large. Leaving all that was near and dear to them they have come and settled in these mountain vales, exposing themselves to danger both upon sea and land, and journeyed to a place of which they knew comparatively little. What inspired them to do this? The Spirit of God opened their understanding; it removed part of the veil which hung between them and the knowledge of God, and they became convinced by His power and intelligence of a supernatural nature that there was something which could not be reached through any other source of life, through any other system or order of things than the gospel which had been proclaimed to them. (5 October 1889, JH, p. 5.)

Revelationa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe may receive revelation every day. There is a way by which persons can keep their consciences clear before God and man, and that is to preserve within them the Spirit of God, which is the spirit of revelation to every man and woman. It will reveal to them, even in the simplest of matters, what they shall do, by making suggestions to them. We should try to learn the nature of this spirit, that we may understand its suggestions, and then we will always be able to do right. This is the grand privilege of every Latter-day Saint. We know that it is our right to have the manifestations of the Spirit every day of our lives. (9 April 1899, CR, p. 52.)

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe greatest principles come through the Spirit. Of course we learn a great many things through reflection and by the exercise of the intelligence which we have acquired through the cultivation of the principles of truth; but those things which are of the greatest importance to the Latter-day Saints are derived through the revelations of the Holy Spirit. Many principles of vast importance, principles that will assist greatly through all the scenes of life, may be developed through the revelations of the Holy Spirit on occasions of this kind when we come together to hear the word of the Lord through His servants. (5 October 1882, JD, 23:288.)

Conferencesa-Snow, LorenzoTPWhat we gain from general conference depends on our closeness to the Spirit. I wish to remind the Latter-day Saints that the advantages we receive today or tomorrow, while gathered here, will be according to the spirit that we exercise individually. The elders may address you here, and yet no particular advantage is secured unless you have the Spirit and exercise the faith that it is our privilege to exercise, that we may be blessed to understand such things as may be spoken. (6 October 1900, CR, p. 23.)

Conferencesa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe need the Spirit in order to speak. You know that it is impossible for us to address a congregation of Latter-day Saints in a manner to satisfy ourselves, unless we have the promptings of the Spirit of the Almighty. (6 May 1889, DW, 38:762.)

Conferencesa-Snow, LorenzoTPPray that speakers will be guided by the Spirit. One of the greatest prayers that a man can offer, so far as I understand prayers and their consistency, is that when an elder of Israel stands before the people, he may communicate and tell some thoughts to do the people good, and build them up in the principles of truth and salvation. Prayers of this kind are as agreeable in the ears of the Lord as any prayers that an elder of Israel can possibly offer, for when an elder stands before the people he should do so realizing that he stands before them for the purpose of communicating knowledge, that they may receive truth in their souls and be built up in righteousness by receiving further light, progressing in their education in the principles of holiness.

Conferencesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThis cannot be done, except by a labor of mind, by an energy of faith, and by seeking with all one's heart the Spirit of the Lord our God. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:182.)

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit, not miracles, brings faith. The nature and the character of those teachings that come from the priesthood are such that we comprehend them; the Spirit manifests them unto us as they are. By it we learn our duties to God and man. We are taught by it to shun the evil and cleave unto that which is good. We understand this, if we are in the path of duty. It is not miracles that produce within us that living faith of which President Young so frequently speaks; but we learn the nature and character of our religion. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:21-22.)

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit teaches us our duty. We may increase in knowledge and power, and in our ability to build up the kingdom of God upon the earth, and that, too, by our diligence, our humility, and faithfulness to the covenants we have made. We do not require miracles to enable us to perform the duties of today. We know, from defending the teachings of the servants of God, that we are right—that the Spirit from on high accompanies us. We know that we are right as well as the Lord does. How do we know this? Because Deity is within us, and that Spirit of Deity that is within us teaches us that we are the sons of God; it teaches the sisters that they are the daughters of God, and by it we are all taught that we are the children of our Father in Heaven. Therefore we know if we are in the line of our duty. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:22-23.)

Religious Educationa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should seek education of the Spirit. I feel to say a word or two in reference to education. There are very few people who have arrived at the age of fifty and upwards who feel like studying mathematics; they do not feel like attending school and applying their minds to the acquisition of the sciences, but there is a kind of education worthy the best attention of all, and in which all ought to engage—that is the education of the Spirit. As we advance in life we one and all ought to be less passionate, more spiritually minded. (9 October 1867, JD, 12:147.)

Religious Educationa-Snow, LorenzoTPAll knowledge is prompted of the Spirit. Every unfoldment of the nineteenth century in science, in art, in mechanism, in music, in literature, in poetic fancy, in philosophical thought, was prompted by His Spirit which before long will be poured out upon all flesh that will receive it. He is the Father of us all and He desires to save and exalt us all. (1 January 1901, MFP, 3:335.)

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit brings happiness. All this trouble and vexation of mind is but a matter of the present; and if we keep the light of the Spirit within us, we can so walk in the gospel that we can measurably enjoy happiness in this world; and while we are traveling onward, striving for peace and happiness that lie in our path, in the distance, we shall have a peace of mind that none can enjoy but those who are filled with the Holy Spirit. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:313.)

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPMake up your minds to live by the Spirit. Make up your minds to live humbly and in such a way that you will always have the spirit of the Lord to be your friend, to make suggestions to you from time to time as shall be needed under the peculiar circumstances in which you may be placed....I do desire, and it is something that you should desire, to have that humility, and that meekness, and that simplicity, to enjoy the spirit of revelation. It is your privilege, every one of you, to have enough of the spirit of revelation to know exacly what is proper for you to do. It is your privilege to know when men speak by the spirit of God and whether the counsel they give is proper or not. (7 April 1899, DN, p. 9.)
