Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 16

Sacrifice, Suffering, and Trials

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints must be willing to sacrifice all. We have found the treasure in the field, we have found the pearl of great price, and now we have got to give all that we have for it, at one time or another. The Lord has said that He will prove us even unto death, to see whether we will stand by the covenants we have made with Him. Some Latter-day Saints have things in their possession which are so valuable to them that they would prefer death to the loss of those things. We have to deal with facts, not a mere ideal. In one sense, it is a hard thing for us to sell all that we have that we may secure these glories that have been opened to our view; but it will pay us in the end. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:530-31.)

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPMen who are not willing to sacrifice are worth little. The Lord very possibly may cause a heavy pressure to bear upon us, such as will require great sacrifice at the hands of His people. The question with us is, will we make that sacrifice? This work is the work of the Almighty, and the blessings we look for which have been promised, will come after we have proven ourselves and passed through the ordeal. I have no special word to this people that there is, or that there is not, before them a fiery ordeal through which they will be called to pass; the question with me is, am I prepared to receive and put to a right and proper use any blessing the Lord has in store for me in common with His people; or on the other hand, am I prepared to make any sacrifice that He may require at my hands? I would not give the ashes of a rye straw for any religion that was not worth living for and that was not worth dying for; and I would not give much for the man that was not willing to sacrifice his all for the sake of his religion. (7 April 1882, JD, 23:155.)

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should be a self-sacrificing people. Now, the Lord having manifested to the Latter-day Saints this principle of immortality and continuance of advancement, in the past they have shown most clearly and fully that they have been willing to sacrifice whatever they might possess and to go through the most undesirable experiences rather than turn aside from the path of exaltation and glory and give up the hopes God had inspired within them. Having had these grand and glorious prospects, which no language can express, unfolded to our view, we ought to be the best, the most virtuous and the most self-sacrificing people on the face of the globe. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 2.)

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPBe willing to sacrifice as Esther was. It may become necessary in the future—and this is the point I wish to make—for some of the Saints to act the part of Esther, the queen, and be willing to sacrifice anything and everything that is required at their hands for the purpose of working out the deliverance of the Latter-day Saints. (5 October 1882, JD, 23:290.)

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe greatest sacrifices require the Spirit. No mortal man could have done what Abraham did—taking up on Mount Moriah his only son as a sacrifice—except he were inspired and had a divinity within him to receive that inspiration. We read of these extraordinary manifestations in the lives of the prophets. We find men at the present day that never could have done what they have done, never could have made the sacrifices they have, unless there had been a receiving and comprehending of the language of divinity—the Spirit. (10 April 1898, CR, p. 64.)

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPSome have sacrificed all for the kingdom of God. It has proved very truly with the Latter-day Saints what Jesus said on a certain occasion, when He compared the kingdom of God to a man seeking pearls. Having found one of very great value, he went and sold all that he possessed that he might secure that pearl. Then again He compared it unto a man that found a treasure in a field, which, having found, he went and sold everything that he possessed in order that he might come in possession of that treasure. That has been the case with the Latter-day Saints. We have been called to suffer and to sacrifice that which was more dear to ourselves than our lives, and some have been called to sacrifice their mortal existence, having been placed in circumstances that they could not avoid suffering the loss of their lives. We are called upon daily to make sacrifices. (10 April 1898, CR, p. 62.)

Sacrificea-Snow, LorenzoTPSacrifice brings the treasures of eternity. We are His Saints, His Sons, and His daughters, and all things are open to us; the treasures of time and of eternity are ours—everything is ours, if we will serve our God in faithfulness, even to the sacrifice of all we possess. There lies the preparation for happiness hereafter. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:317.)

Sufferinga-Snow, LorenzoTPSuffering leads toward exaltation. I suppose I am talking to some who have had worry and trouble and heart burnings and persecution, and have at times been caused to think that they never expected to endure quite so much. But for everything you have suffered, for everything that has occurred to you which you thought an evil at that time, you will receive fourfold, and that suffering will have had a tendency to make you better and stronger and to feel that you have been blessed. When you look back over your experiences you will then see that you have advanced far ahead and have gone up several rounds of the ladder toward exaltation and glory. (15 June 1901, DN, p. 1.)

SanctificationSufferinga-Snow, LorenzoTPSanctification requires suffering. Take it individually or take it collectively, we have suffered and we shall have to suffer again; and why? Because the Lord requires it at our hands for our sanctification. (7 October 1857, JD, 5:323.)

Sufferinga-Snow, LorenzoTPOur suffering is for the same reason as Christ's. It has not been with the Latter-day Saints the most delightful thing that could be imagined to suffer as they have suffered—and what for? For the same as Jesus suffered, to a certain extent—for the salvation of the world. And although in this life very many of them may not receive that which we offer to them, the day will come, through the progress of things in eternity, when they will receive it, and they will be thankful that we came into the world and suffered in their interests as we have. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 3.)

Sufferinga-Snow, LorenzoTPDo not compromise to avoid suffering. Some of our brethren have queried whether hereafter they could feel themselves worthy of full fellowship with prophets and Saints of old, who endured trials and persecutions; and with Saints of our own times who suffered in Kirtland, in Missouri, and Illinois. The brethren referred to have expressed regrets that they had not been associated in those scenes of suffering. If any of these are present, I will say, for the consolation of such, you have to wait but a short time and you will have similar opportunities, to your heart's content. You and I cannot be made perfect except through suffering; Jesus could not. In His prayer and agony in the Garden of Gethsemane, He foreshadowed the purifying process necessary in the lives of those whose ambition prompts them to secure the glory of a celestial kingdom. None should try to escape by resorting to any compromising measures. "All who journey soon or late, Must come within the garden gate, And kneel alone in darkness there, And battle hard, yet not despair." (10 January 1886, JD, 26:367.)

Sufferinga-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should be willing to suffer for each other. Now when a man is not willing to sacrifice for the benefit of his brethren, and when he knows that he trespasses upon the feelings of his brethren, and yet he has not that love which will enable him to make satisfaction, that man is not right before the Lord, and where is the love of that individual for his brother?

Sufferinga-Snow, LorenzoTPWhen one brother is not willing to suffer for his brother, how is it in his power to manifest that he has love for his brother? I tell you it is in our folly and weakness that we will not bear with our brethren, but if they trespass upon our rights we immediately retaliate, and if they tread upon our toes we immediately jump upon theirs, the same as the people do in the Gentile world, where it is thought necessary to act in a state of independence, and to defend oneself against aggressors.

Sufferinga-Snow, LorenzoTPIt is all nonsense for us any longer to act upon this principle, for there is a day coming that we will have to suffer for each other, and even be willing to lay down our lives for each other, as Jesus did for the Twelve Apostles in His day, and as they did for the cause which He established. When I see a brother that has been trespassed against, and then he turns round and jumps upon the offender, then I say, how far is that brother from the path of duty, and I say to him you must learn to govern yourself, or you never will be saved in the kingdom of God. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:158.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPMortality is a school of suffering and trials. We are here that we may be educated in a school of suffering and of fiery trials, which school was necessary for Jesus, our Elder Brother, who, the scriptures tell us, "was made perfect through suffering." It is necessary that we suffer in all things, that we may be qualified and worthy to rule, and govern all things, even as our Father in Heaven and His eldest son, Jesus. (1 December 1851, MS, 13:363.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPSalvation is impossible without trials. Peter, James, and John came down from heaven and ordained men to preach the gospel; we have that priesthood, and we must expect to suffer more or less as Jesus suffered. It is impossible for us to work out our salvation and accomplish the purposes of God without trials or without sacrifices. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:245.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPGod is feeling after us. God is now feeling after us, and will disclose our secret thoughts. It would be well to purify and prepare ourselves, and in the language of the Psalmist, call upon God, saying, "Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting."

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPIf we succeed in passing through the approaching fiery ordeals with our fidelity and integrity unimpeached, we may expect at the close of our trials, a great and mighty outpouring of the Spirit and power of God—a great endowment upon all who shall have remained true to their covenants. (10 January 1886, JD, 26:366.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTrials prove our dependability. The trials and temptations have been very great to many of our people, and more or less, perhaps, to all of us. The Lord seems to require some proof on our part, something to show that He can depend upon us when He wants us to accomplish certain things in His interest. The reason is that the condition in which we will be placed in the future, as time passes along, as eternity approaches, and as we move forward in eternity and along the line of our existence, we shall be placed in certain conditions that require very great sacrifice in the interests of humanity, in the interests of the Spirit of God, in the interest of His children and our own children, in generations to come, in eternity. Jesus Christ the Son of God was once placed in a condition that it required the highest effort in order to accomplish what was necessary for the salvation of millions of the children of God. It required the highest effort and determination that had to be exercised before the Son of God could pass through the ordeal, the sacrifice that was necessary. (5 October 1900, CR, p. 2.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThere are tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints that can testify to the truth of this work. They know it for themselves; but I fear there are too many that have not secured that assurance that is absolutely necessary, because every man and every woman will be tried to see how far he or she has an understanding in regard to these principles. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:738.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPSevere trials bring perfect faith. "But you have need of patience, that after you have done the will of God, you may receive the promise," a caution which should not be forgotten. Many of you may have severe trials, that your faith may become more perfect, your confidence be increased, and your knowledge of the powers of heaven be augmented; and this before your redemption takes place. If a stormy cloud sweep over the horizon of your course in this land, as in America—if the cup of bitter suffering be offered and you be compelled to partake—if Satan is let loose among you, with all his seductive powers of deceiving and cunning craftiness—if the strong relentless arm of persecution is against you, then, in that hour lift up your heads and rejoice that you are accounted worthy to suffer with Jesus, the Saints, and holy prophets, and know that the period of your redemption approaches. (1 December 1851, MS, 13:364; BLS, pp. 196-97.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTrials are blessings in disguise. They the Saints may be afflicted and pass through numerous trials of a severe character, but these will prove blessings in disguise and bring them out brighter and better than they were before. The people of God are precious in His sight; His love for them will always endure, and in His might and strength and affection, they will triumph and be brought off more than conquerer. They are His children, made in His image and destined through obedience to His laws to become like unto Him. (8 October 1898, DW, 57:514.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Latter-day Saints, by being wise and prudent, can make this life a tolerably happy one. We need not live in misery; we need not feel that we are sacrificing all the time, but that what we call sacrifices prove a blessing to us, which we would not receive were it not for this experience. Everything that transpires affecting us individually may be made a blessing, and will be a blessing to us if we act wisely and prudently. (6 October 1899, CR, p. 2.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPDo not shrink from trials. Brethren and sisters, you and I have received light and intelligence, and we know whereof we speak; we know that these principles that we have espoused are true. We know that if we are faithful, and if we do not shrink from under the various trials and afflictions that may arise, that our salvation is secure. We know there is a place in yonder worlds for every man and woman who prove faithful to their covenants. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:243.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPWithout trials there is no deliverance. Where the Lord plants us, there we are to stand: when He requires us to exert ourselves for the support of these holy principles, that we are to do; that is all we need to trouble ourselves about; the rest our Heavenly Father will take care of. But it need not surprise us that difficulties and storms arise—that we see hurricanes playing about us—that we see war-clouds gather thick and fast about us; this need not be surprising. Where there is no trial there can be no deliverance; where there is no temptation, the power of God cannot be made manifest to any great extent. (7 October 1857, JD, 5:323.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPOnly by the Spirit can we overcome trials. We are bound to rise and to advance in power and in influence in the midst of the world. There may, as has been suggested by one of the speakers, be opposition to meet of a nature that we have never met before; such things have come in the past, and will come in the future; but I will assure you that if we will do our duty with a determination that we will be prepared for everything; we will go through successfully any future difficulties that may arise no matter how serious they may be. We have done wonders; we have passed through difficulties and made sacrifices that are marvelous, when we consider their nature. And we have done, and will do in the future, that which we never could have done unless we had educated ourselves by the Spirit and power of God. We are a mighty people, and growing mightier as trials and difficulties arise. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 55.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord will help us overcome trials. From the time of our receiving the gospel to the present, the Lord has from time to time given us trials and afflictions if we may so call them; and sometimes these trials have been of that nature that we have found it very difficult to receive them without murmur and complaint. Yet at such times the Lord blessed us and gave us sufficient of His Spirit to enable us to overcome the temptations and endure the trials. In going through these trials and troubles we are doing no more than did the captain of our salvation. We are told by the Apostle Paul that He was made perfect through sufferings. And even He, the Son of God, at times found it very difficult. For example, in the Garden of Gethsemane, when the time approached that He was to pass through the severest affliction that any mortal ever did pass through, He undoubtedly had seen persons nailed to the cross, because that method of execution was common at that time, and He understood the torture that such persons experienced for hours. He went by Himself in the garden and prayed to His Father, if it were possible, that that cup might pass from Him; and His feelings were such that He sweat great drops of blood, and in His agony there was an angel sent to give Him comfort and strength. Even the Son of God required miraculous help under those extraordinary circumstances. So we have needed it at times, and so we may in the future. (4 November 1893, DW, 47:609.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord knows how to help us overcome difficulties. We have found undoubtedly in our experience that it requires something of a desirable nature to incite us to action. If a person had a strong idea that there was a very precious mine undiscovered in one of these mountains east he would travel along the road to secure its discovery, and would be willing to make many sacrifices and perform much labor and toil in order to get at that mine, and he would endure the scorn that he might hear daily while endeavoring to reach this. This is natural. The Lord knew our natures and dispositions, and He knew exactly what to place before us in order to stimulate us to that course of action which will enable us to overcome the various difficulties that arise in our path of progress. (3 November 1894, DW, 49:609.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPMany difficulties arise through indifference. God bless you, my brethren and sisters. Do not be discouraged. The path may be rough, but much of its roughness arises from our own indifference and carelessness. It would be much smoother if we would diligently observe the commandments of God and keep the Spirit of the Lord continually in our hearts. Yet, after all, there are sacrifices to make, but in making these sacrifices there is a possibility of having enjoyment in the anticipation of what will be the final result. (3 November 1894, DW, 49:610.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTrials have caused many to fall. Latter-day Saints possessing the highest abilities have fallen. I could refer to many in the days of Kirtland, and right along till the present time, where persons have been blessed with great abilities, and have accomplished a great deal for the cause of God; but when trials and obstacles arose in their path, they failed to perform their duties, and turned away and became apostates to the Church, and all their past labors amounted to nothing. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:244.)

Gates of HellTrialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe gates of hell shall not prevail against us. Now, Latter-day Saints, how is it with us? We have received the gospel. We have received the kingdom of God, established on the earth. We have had trouble; we have been persecuted. We were driven from Ohio; we were driven from Missouri; we were driven from Nauvoo; and once we were driven for a time from this beautiful city [Salt Lake City]. Many have lost thousands of dollars; lost their homes and all they had, and some of the brethren have seen their wives and children lay down their lives because of the hardships they had to experience during these changes, these persecutions, these revolutions, and these drivings. The people have looked with astonishment at the willingness of the Latter-day Saints to suffer these things. Why do we do this? Why do we adhere to these principles that have caused us at times so much grief and sacrifice? What is it that enables us to endure these persecutions and still rejoice? It is because we have had revelations from the Almighty; because He has spoken to us in our souls and has given to us the Holy Ghost, which is a principle of revelation wherever it exists and is promised to every man, as in the days of the former Apostles, who will believe, repent of his sins and be immersed in water for the remission of them by those who have the authority from the Lord to administer this ordinance. Jesus, when He was among the children of men, said that He would build His church upon this principle of revelation and the gates of hell should not prevail against it. (6 April 1900, CR, pp. 2-3.)

JobTrialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPJob's victory over his trials is a consolation to the Lord's people. I wonder if there are a few here within the sound of my voice that have feelings of this kind, like old Job had, for instance. A poor man who wondered why his children were taken from him; why his herds were destroyed and why his houses, his dwelling, went up in flames, and why he was left without anything. He formerly was a very wealthy man, then was left without anything. Well, his friends came about him. They were supposed to be friends. They were friends formerly. They came about him and wanted to show him that these evils came upon him because he had failed to do his duty in the past; because he had committed some sin. That was the kind of ideas that they communicated to him. But there was nothing of the kind. It was not so. They were vastly mistaken. The Lord had a certain position in which He sought to place Job in the future at some future time when years and years had rolled away perhaps, and He wanted to try him. He wanted to educate him so that he would not complain, no matter how illy he thought himself treated by the Lord. That was a glorious trial of Job's. It has come down in history, his experiences and his trials; and it has been a wonderful consolation to the people of the Lord to read the history of his experiences and his trials and how well he passed through them. (5 October 1900, CR, p. 4.)

JobTrialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should seek to be like Job. The religion that we have received, the principles of exaltation and glory that you and I have received, bring upon us persecution, or else they are not those principles which we thought they were. They bring upon us trouble upon the right hand and upon the left, but we should seek to be calm and cool as Job learned to be calm and cool under circumstances of the most unhappy character. We should learn to do this and there are things that are provided for us by which we can learn this. Think now of how much worse you and I might be, and then think of what superior blessings we actually possess. (5 October 1900, CR, p. 4.)

RejoicingTrialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints can glorify God by rising above their trials. The world, which knows not the purposes of God, may think that "Mormonism" is now about to be destroyed, that the voice of the Latter-day Saints and the priesthood will never be heard again throughout the world; but when these dark clouds thicken about us, and the Saints are put to the test, it is then that God is more glorified, in the fact that we are ready to show our willingness to pass through the fiery ordeal. We make no complaint, but feel thankful that we are able to show how precious is to us the religion which we have espoused. Let us go on rejoicing. (5 October 1889, JH, p. 5.)

Perseverancea-Snow, LorenzoTPDo not cease to persevere. I have noticed that many young ladies, and young men, too, start in to learn music, but get discouraged, and, failing to persevere, they do not succeed in accomplishing that which they undertook. You may notice the same thing among the Latter-day Saints. Persons get baptized, and they feel to rejoice in the gospel and that which is unfolded to them. They prosper well for a time, but after awhile they cease to persevere; they become soured, perhaps, at some things they experience in their acquaintance with their brethren who, perchance, are not wise, and they turn their backs upon the principles in which they took so much delight in the beginning, and go into darkness. (3 April 1897, DW, 54:482.)

Enduring to the Enda-Snow, LorenzoTPThose who endure to the end will receive all things. It is a grand position that we occupy. Our future is glorious. We could not desire more for our happiness than has been prepared for us. Those who endure unto the end shall sit upon thrones, as Jesus hath overcome and sat down upon His Father's throne. All things shall be given unto such men and women, so we are told in the revelations we have received. In view of these prospects, what should we not be willing to sacrifice when duty requires? (9 October 1898, CR, pp. 55-56.)

Blessingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPDon't be discouraged if blessings don't come immediately. Never mind if we do not receive the advantages of our sacrifices today. We will have them at some future time;...have faith in the Lord. Do not get discouraged if you do not get just exactly what you want, it will come by and by; do not worry about it at all. (7 April 1899, DN, p. 10.)

Trialsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTribulations are essential if spiritual improvement is to occur. We have passed through many trying scenes since this work was established. There is no other way in which the Saints can make spiritual improvement and be prepared for an inheritance in the celestial kingdom than through tribulation. It is the process by which knowledge is increased and peace will ultimately be established universally. It had been said that if all our surroundings were peaceful and prosperous now, we would become indifferent. It would be a condition that would be all that would be desired by a good many ....; they would not stretch out after the things of eternity. (5 April 1888, CD, 1:89)
