Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 17

The Ways of the World

Forget Worldly Matters. We should endeavor as far as possible to forget all worldly matters which grieve and vex us, and fix our minds upon the Lord, having a sufficiency of His Holy Spirit that we may be enabled to receive such knowledge and suggestions as will help us in our onward path.

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPI believe there never was a time since the organization of this Church and kingdom of God upon the earth when it was more necessary than now for us to obtain spiritual aid and blessings, in order that we may be prepared for the great event which seems now to be rapidly approaching. (5 October 1889, JH, p. 4.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPSome who were faithful succumb to love of the world. There are men among us upon whom the Spirit of the Almighty once rested mightily, whose intentions were once as good and pure as those of angels, and who made covenants with God that they would serve Him and keep His commandments under every and all circumstances; and many of such were ready and willing to leave their wives and children to go or come as the case might be in the interest of the cause they had espoused. But how is it now with some of those elders? They do not feel so today. Their affections are set upon the things of this world which the Lord has enabled them to acquire, that they wait now until they are called, and in many instances when called, they obey more out of a desire to retain their standing and position than a real heart-felt love of the labor to which they may have been called.

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPThis is the condition of all men, no matter how well they start out, who allow their thoughts and affections to run after the world and its ways, and it is a plain and indisputable proof that when this is the case with men they love the world more than they love the Lord and His work upon the earth. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:194.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPToo often we stoop to the level of the world. One of the chief difficulties that many suffer from is that we are too apt to forget the great object of life, the motive of our Heavenly Father in sending us here to put on mortality, as well as the holy calling with which we have been called; and hence, instead of rising above the little transitory things of time, we too often allow ourselves to come down to the level of the world without availing ourselves of the divine help which God has instituted, which alone can enable us to overcome them. We are no better than the rest of the world if we do not cultivate the feeling to be perfect, even as our Father in Heaven is perfect. (7 April 1879, JD, 20:191.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe cares of this life lead to weakness. It is the case with many in this community that instead of preparing themselves for positions in the eternal world, they have been satisfied with the cares of this life, and attending to those things which have been for the comfort of themselves and their wives and children; they have been satisfied in exercising themselves in this small way of ambition. They have forgotten the salvation of their forefathers, and that on them lay the responsibility of laying a holy and pure foundation upon which their posterity may build and obtain life and salvation, and upon which the generations to come might return back to their pristine purity. Instead of being sanctified this day as the people might have been had they sought it diligently, they are weak in their intellects, weak in their faith, weak in their power in reference to the things of God, and many of them this day, setting aside their being saviors of men, are incapable of administering salvation to their individual wives and children. This, brethren, whatever you may think about it, is a solemn consideration. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:155.)

Materialisma-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should not be satisfied with the perishable things of time. We have received a gospel that is marvelous in its operations: through obedience to its requirements we may receive the choicest blessings that have ever been promised to or bestowed upon mankind in any age of the world. But, like the child with the toy or the plaything, we too often satisfy ourselves with the perishable things of time, forgetting the opportunities we have of developing within us the great, the eternal principles of life and truth. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:193.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPOur actions should not be motivated by worldly approval. Some are induced to do certain things in order to receive the approbation of their friends, and if their acts fail to draw forth favorable comments or to be recognized, they feel as though their labor had been lost and what good they may have done was a total failure. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:192.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must overcome the world. The god of the world is the gold and the silver. The world worships this god. It is all-powerful to them, though they might not be willing to acknowledge it. Now it is designed, in the providence of God, that the Latter-day Saints should show whether they have so far advanced in the knowledge, in the wisdom and in the power of God that they cannot be overcome by the god of the world. We must come to that point. We have also got to reach another standard, a higher plane; we have got to love God more than we love the world, more than we love gold or silver, and love our neighbor as ourselves. (6 May 1889, DW, 38:763.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPWorldliness impedes spiritual progress. There is no doubt, speaking of the people as a whole, that we are greatly improving in the sight of God. But although this is undoubtedly the case, I am convinced there are persons among us endowed with spiritual gifts and susceptible of cultivation that could be exercised, if they chose, to a far greater extent than they are, and who could move much faster in the ways of holiness and get much nearer to the Lord. But the spirit which attends the things of this world is operating upon them to that extent that they do not increase those spiritual powers and blessings; they do not place themselves in that close relationship to the Lord that it is their privilege. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:194.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPBeware of the ways of the world. Ye toiling millions who, in the sweat of your faces earn your daily bread, look up and greet the power from above which shall lift you from bondage! The day of your redemption draweth nigh. Cease to waste your wages in that which helps to keep you in want. Regard not wealth as your enemy and your employers as your oppressors. Seek for the union of capital and labor. Be provident when in prosperity. Do not become a prey to designing men who seek to stir up strife for their own selfish ends. Strive for your rights by lawful means, and desist from violence and destruction. Anarchism and lawlessness are your deadly foes. (1 January 1901, MFP, 3:334.)

Worldlinessa-Snow, LorenzoTPWorldliness harms our relationship with God. If, after the expiration of fifty years, we as a community do not stand in that high relationship to God that we could wish, the fault is not in the Lord, it is not for the lack of information placed before us, but that lack is in ourselves; it arises from our ignorance or neglect, or from a desire, peradventure, to serve the spirit of the world instead of the Spirit of God. (8 April 1880, CR, p. 80.)

Envya-Snow, LorenzoTPDo not envy your neighbor. If we are poor, and have not as much as our neighbor possesses, do not envy him, and do not worry about it. As I said in the beginning of my remarks, there is an eternity before us, and we shall always be ourselves, and nobody else, and what we do not gain today we will gain tomorrow, or some other time. (5 April 1901, CR, p. 3.)
