Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 18

The Family: An Eternal Unit

FamilyEarth, Replenishinga-Snow, LorenzoTPWe are to multiply and replenish the earth. One of the first commandments that God gave when He introduced the human family upon this little globe upon which we dwell was that they should multiply and replenish the earth. That was a matter of the highest importance, or God would never have given that commandment. It was of the utmost importance that the earth should be peopled with the sons and daughters of God. (1 June 1895, DW, 50:737.)

Marriage, WivesMarriage, Husbandsa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should work to establish union in the family. Should there not be union in the family? Should there not be union with the husband, who is the high priest in his family and expects to be with them in the next life? Should there not be a perfect union with him and his wife, and his sons, his daughters, his sons-in-law, and his daughters-in-law? Most assuredly there should. And why should any man be satisfied, why should any husband and father of a family rest satisfied until he effects a perfect union, that is, just as far as a perfect union can be accomplished? And in this matter the father should make himself just as perfect as a man can in this life be made perfect before his family. And the wife should make herself just as perfect as a woman can possibly do in this life. And then they are prepared to make their children just as perfect as they are willing and are capable of being made perfect. And the father and the mother should be very careful. The wife should never in the presence of her children speak disrespectfully of her husband. If she thinks her husband has done wrong (he might have done), she should never speak of it in the presence of her children. She should take him out of the presence of her children and there tell him of his faults, in a pleasant way, but never in the presence of the children speak disrespectfully of the father. And the father the same. He has no right to speak disrespectfully of his wife in the presence of her children. And I pray God to give the husband and wife the spirit and the understanding to correct themselves in such matters. I know that a great many of the difficulties that now appear, and the disrespect that we find in reference to the priesthood among young people arises from this fact, that there have been difficulties in the home circle, and there has been disrespect expressed in their presence, of the father by the mother, or of the mother by the father. Now, I know these things are so. (5 October 1897, CR, pp. 32-33.)

Marriage, Wivesa-Snow, LorenzoTPFamily unity must prevail in Zion. If you ever secure a union in any family in Zion, if you ever secure that heavenly union which is necessary to exist there, you have got to bind that family together in one, and there has got to be the Spirit of the Lord in the head of that family, and he should possess that light and that intelligence which, if carried out in the daily life and conduct of these individuals, will prove the salvation of that family, for he holds their salvation in his hands.

Marriage, Wivesa-Snow, LorenzoTPHe goes to work, and associates his feelings and affections with theirs as far as lies in his power, and endeavors to secure all those things that are necessary for their comfort and welfare, and they on the other part have got to turn round and manifest the same feeling, the same kindness, and the same disposition, and to the utmost of their ability manifest feelings of gratitude for the blessings which they receive.

Marriage, Wivesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThis is necessary, that there may be a oneness of feeling, or oneness of sentiment and a corresponding affection, that they, being one, may be bound together in this way. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:243.)

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPA father should counsel his children according to their needs. A father, in communicating counsel to his son, should in the first place prepare himself to communicate those proper counsels which will suit the condition of his son. It is his privilege to extend happiness to himself; it is his privilege to increase his own happiness, and in increasing his own happiness he should extend it throughout his family dominions. And when he is increasing his own happiness, his own glory, his own authority, he at the same time is increasing that of his children, provided that counsel which he reveals is all the time that which is best for his family. If good counsel was not established for the benefit of the individual that communicates it, also of those who receive it, it would be of no service. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:184.)

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPOur children follow our example. The husband has to learn to give proper counsel and direction; he has to learn how to manage his wife and his children, and it takes him some time to learn how to manage wisely and to bestow comfort upon each member of his family.

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPOur children, if we are diligent in cultivating in ourselves the pure principles of life and salvation, will grow up in the knowledge of these things, and be able with greater facility than ourselves to promote the orders of heaven and establish happiness and peace around them. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:315.)

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPRighteous fathers instruct their children. It is the business of the father to be qualified to teach and instruct his children, and to lay principles before them, so that by conforming to those instructions they can be the most happy that their natures are susceptible of in a state of childhood, while at the same time they learn the principles upon which they can gain the most happiness and enjoyment in a state of manhood. Those children are under obligations to follow their father's counsel precisely, so long as the counsel which the father gives is calculated for this express purpose. They are under obligations to follow that and carry it out in its design and in its object, and the moment they break off and separate themselves from the father they become like a branch that is separated from a tree; they no longer flourish nor bring forth fruit. The branch that is cut off from the tree ceases to have the life giving power, ceases to bring forth fruit. Let a person be cut off from this Church and he no longer remains a wise director and counselor for his children, but only so long as he has the privilege of receiving and having counsel in which is deposited that wisdom and knowledge and power that can give life to those that are around him. (18 January 1857, JD, 4:184-85.)

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPFathers should teach the words of life to their families. It becomes the duties of fathers in Israel to wake up and become saviors of men, that they may walk before the Lord in that strength of faith, and that determined energy, that will insure them the inspiration of the Almighty to teach the words of life to their families, as well as to teach them when they are called into this stand. Then all our words will savor of life and salvation wherever we go, and wherever we are. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:158.)

Marriage, Husbandsa-Snow, LorenzoTPA husband should value his wife. To the husbands I say: Many of you do not value your wives as you should—unless you are different from any audience of this size that I have ever had before me. Be kind to them. When they go out to meeting, you carry the baby at least half the time. When it needs rocking, and you have not much to do, rock it. Be kind when sometimes you have to make a little sacrifice to do so; feel kind anyway, no matter what the sacrifice. (20 July 1901, JH, p. 4.)

Marriage, Husbandsa-Snow, LorenzoTPHusbands and fathers should be sensitive. The men ought to be more fatherly at home, possessing finer feelings in reference to their wives and children, neighbors and friends, more kindly and godlike. When I go into a family I do admire to see the head of that family administering to it as a man of God, kind and gentle, filled with the Holy Ghost and with the wisdom and understanding of heaven. Men and women can increase their spiritual knowledge. (9 October 1867, JD, 12:148.)

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPFathers should seek the Spirit. The men who are sitting here this day ought to be, when in the presence of their families, filled with the Holy Ghost, to administer the word of life to them as it is administered in this stand from Sabbath to Sabbath. When they kneel down in the presence of their wives and children they ought to be inspired by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, that the husband may be such a man as a good wife will honor, and that the gift and power of God may be upon them continually. They ought to be one in their families, that the Holy Ghost might descend upon them, and they ought to live so that the wife through prayer may become sanctified, that she may see the necessity of sanctifying herself in the presence of her husband, and in the presence of her children, that they may be one together, in order that the man and the wife may be pure element, suitable to occupy a place in the establishment and formation of the kingdom of God, that they may breathe a pure spirit and impart pure instruction to their children, and their children's children. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:155.)

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPFamilies progress by sustaining the father. If a father, for instance, had a large, extensive family, his object would be to do them good, to promote their interest and happiness, to put into their hands power, knowing that they could not accomplish much alone, and that they would have to take or obtain assistance from that family. The son that would take the deepest interest—that would devote himself the most faithfully to promote the designs of the father and head of that family, for the happiness and prosperity of the whole, would increase in power and influence faster than any other one; for the father would be disposed to put as much power and influence into his hands as it would be possible for him to receive, and as would be for the benefit of the family.

Fatherhooda-Snow, LorenzoTPThat would be the principle upon which all the members of that family would increase in knowledge, influence, and power above others. It would be by having the faculty, the feeling, and the disposition and desire to carry out the mind of the father, and that, too, for the benefit and exaltation of the whole family. (9 April 1857, JD, 5:63.)

Honoring Father and Mothera-Snow, LorenzoTPHonor your father and mother. I would plead with you, my young brethren and sisters, to honor your fathers and your mothers, that your days may be long in the land which the Lord hath given to them and to you. Be obedient and loving to them; and after they have climbed to the summit of the hill of life, perhaps through many a hard-fought struggle, and begin to descend, try to do all in your power to make the road smooth and pleasant for them. By their devotion to you and to your welfare they have proved themselves worthy of your affection, and God expects you to be loyal to them. He has honored them in the past, and will yet honor them more abundantly; but their joy will not be fully complete if their children disregard their wishes and are untrue to them and to God. I therefore say to you, observe this commandment which God has given, to honor your fathers and your mothers. It is a commandment which carries with it the promise of longevity, and if you obey it there is every prospect for you to live to be as old as your parents, and even older.

Honoring Father and Mothera-Snow, LorenzoTPLet your feet tread in the same path of advancement and progress as your parents; let your hearts beat in unison with theirs for the welfare of truth and righteousness, and by and by you will rejoice with them worlds without end. (2 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Single AdultsMarriagea-Snow, LorenzoTPAll will have an opportunity to marry. A lady came into our office the other day and asked to see me on a private matter. She informed me that she felt very badly, because her opportunities for getting a husband had not been favorable. She was about thirty years of age, and she wanted to know what her condition would be in the other life, if she did not succeed in getting a husband in this life. I suppose this question arises in the hearts of our young people, especially the marriageable sisters and the young widows; and some very foolish doctrine has been presented to some of the sisters in regard to this and other things of a kindred nature. I desire to give a little explanation for the comfort and consolation of parties in this condition. There is no Latter-day Saint who dies after having lived a faithful life who will lose anything because of having failed to do certain things when opportunities were not furnished him or her. In other words, if a young man or a young woman has no opportunity of getting married, and they live faithful lives up to the time of their death, they will have all the blessings, exaltation, and glory that any man or woman will have who had this opportunity and improved it. That is sure and positive. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:547.)

Marriage, EternalPosteritya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord has promised an endless reign over our offspring. An endless reign over our offspring, from all eternity to all eternity. Now, this is actually what the Lord has promised. It is not anything that man has devised to entertain the imaginations of people; but it is the word of God. (3 April 1897, DW, 54:481.)

Marriage, EternalPosteritya-Snow, LorenzoTPThink of the promises that are made to you in the beautiful and glorious ceremony that is used in the marriage covenant in the temple. When two Latter-day Saints are united together in marriage, promises are made to them concerning their offspring, that reach from eternity to eternity. They are promised that they shall have the power and the right to govern and control and administer salvation and exaltation and glory to their offspring worlds without end. And what offspring they do not have here, undoubtedly there will be opportunities to have them hereafter. What else could man wish? A man and a woman in the other life, having celestial bodies, free from sickness and disease, glorified and beautified beyond description, standing in the midst of their posterity, governing and controlling them, administering life, exaltation, and glory, worlds without end. (3 April 1897, DW, 54:481.)

Marriage, Eternala-Snow, LorenzoTPFamilies should seek exaltation. Let families put themselves in possession of all the good they can—be in a position to do right, and be continually in the path to exaltation and glory. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:316.)
