Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 19

Women and the Relief Society

Womena-Snow, LorenzoTPThank God for women. The thought has impressed itself upon me that the brethren of this Church, myself included, have been wonderfully favored of the Lord in having the companionship and assistance of such faithful, loyal wives and mothers as He has blessed us with. It is difficult to imagine what we should have done or what progress the work of the Lord would have made without them. When we have been absent on foreign missions, their missions at home have generally been no less arduous than ours abroad; and in the midst of trial and privation they have exhibited a patience, a fortitude, and a self-help that has been truly inspiring. Thank God for the women of this Church. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Women, Roles ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPWomen stand by the priesthood. It has always been a source of pleasure to me to notice how faithfully you sisters of the Relief Society have stood by the servants of the Lord under all circumstances. You have ever been found at the side of the priesthood, ready to strengthen their hands and to do your part in helping to advance the interests of the kingdom of God; and as you have shared in these labors, so you will most certainly share in the triumph of the work and in the exaltation and glory which the Lord will give to His faithful children. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Womena-Snow, LorenzoTPWomen are entitled to the Spirit. The Spirit of the gospel teaches every man who lives in the line of his duty that he is in the path of right, and so it does every woman. By it she knows she is walking in the path of truth and life. It is this Spirit which teaches the sisters as well as the brethren the right from the wrong; and she has a perfect right to know the truth of her religion—to have a knowledge for herself that the principles of her profession are divine. Is there anything wrong or mysterious in this? No. It is because she is a child of God, and therefore she is capacitated to know as he knows—to comprehend the principles of her religion, its divine origin, and its tendency onward and upward. (7 April 1861, JD, 9:23.)

Womena-Snow, LorenzoTPWomen should be patient with each other. It is so with you women. If any of you have more knowledge and influence than the others, more is required of you; you have the more to endure. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:316.)

Womena-Snow, LorenzoTPIf the Lord has made one woman more perfect than another, and given her more intelligence than her sisters, let her show more mercy and patience in overlooking their faults. By this means a wife will gain influence and favor with her husband, with her sisters, and with her Heavenly Father. She thus advances herself and puts herself in a position to enjoy all that is for the righteous. The whole is summed up in this—Do right. (11 October 1857, JD, 5:316.)

Women, Roles ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPSisters should be encouraged to honor the marriage covenant. I ask you, my sisters, in your visits to the homes of the Latter-day Saints, to carry this influence wherever you go. The Lord has clearly shown to you the nature of your relationship to Him and what is expected of you as wives and mothers. Teach these things to those whom you visit, especially to the young ladies. Encourage marriage among them, and impress upon them the sacredness of that relation and the obligation they are under to observe that great commandment which was given of God to our first parents, to multiply and replenish the earth. This is all the more necessary, in view of the present tendency in the world to disregard that law and to dishonor the marriage covenant. It is saddening to note the frequency of divorces in the land, and the growing inclination to look upon children as an encumbrance instead of as a precious heritage from the Lord. These evils should not gain a foothold among the people of God, and you, my sisters, as members of the Relief Society and as mothers in Israel, should exercise all your influence against them and in favor of pure motherhood and faithfulness to the marriage covenant. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

RecreationWomena-Snow, LorenzoTPSisters should indulge in recreation. Proper recreation and amusement are good things, and I am glad to see you sisters indulging in a little rest and recreation, for you who work so hard day after day in your homes and in the Relief Society certainly deserve all the enjoyment you can get. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

DivorceMarriage, Wivesa-Snow, LorenzoTPWives, be faithful to your husbands. Wives, be faithful to your husbands. I know you have to put up with many unpleasant things, and your husbands have to put up with some things as well. Doubtless you are sometimes tried by your husbands, on account perhaps of the ignorance of your husbands, or perchance at times because of your own ignorance. I wonder if any of my sisters whom I am now addressing ever saw a time when they wished they had a better husband and perhaps entertained the idea of getting a divorce. I tell you how I used to do when I was president of the Box Elder Stake of Zion. Once in a while a woman would come to me with the information that she had been abused by her husband and she wanted a bill of divorce. "What has your husband done?" I would ask. Well, he had done such and such things. "Have you ever done wrong?" said I. Well, she thought perhaps she might have done wrong sometimes. "Have you ever prayed that your husband might be a better man?" She did not know that she had prayed for him very hard, because at times he had been so abusive that she could scarcely exercise much faith in that direction. "Well," said I, "you go home and think about it; see if you have not been unwise sometimes and offended your husband; and go into a secret place and pray for him." I had at that time some very nice apples growing in an orchard which I had planted in an early day. One tree especially yielded some choice red apples, and I would pick six apples from that tree and give them to her, three for herself and three for her husband, and I would ask her to be sure and give him those three apples without saying that I gave them to her for that purpose. "Then," I said to her, "if things do not get better, in about two or three months come to me again and I will see what I can do for you." Well, the apples I gave and what I said to her accomplished the object. (20 July 1901, JH, p. 4.)

Relief Societya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Relief Society has a noble purpose. The mission of the Relief Society is to succor the distressed, to minister to the sick and feeble, to feed the poor, to clothe the naked, and to bless all the sons and daughters of God. No institution was ever founded with a nobler aim. Its basis is true charity, which is the pure love of Christ, and that spirit has been manifested in all the ministrations of the Society among the people. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Relief Societya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Relief Society has a promising future. The future of the Society is full of promise. As the Church grows, its field of usefulness will be correspondingly enlarged, and it will be even more potent for good than it has been in the past. If all the sisters will rally to the support of the Society, it will accomplish a mighty work and be a continued blessing unto the Church. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Relief Societya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Relief Society is a valuable adjunct to the priesthood. The Relief Society has been and is one of the most valuable adjuncts to the priesthood. It is in every deed a "help in government." And no wise bishop will fail to appreciate the labors of the Relief Society in his ward. What could a bishop do without a Relief Society? I would say to all the bishops in the Church, encourage the sisters of the Relief Society, and support them in their work of charity and benevolence, and they will prove a blessing to you and to the people. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Relief Societya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Relief Society makes better wives and mothers. It might be thought by some that the labors connected with membership in the Relief Society would cause those sisters who belong to it to neglect their household duties. But this is not so. I will venture to say that the best wives and mothers and the most efficient housekeepers among us are members of the Relief Society, and I would advise the brethren to encourage their wives to join the society, where they can do so; for it would be a good thing to have the influence of this organization in every home. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Relief Societya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Relief Society exemplifies pure religion. The Apostle James said that "pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." Accepting that as true, the members of the Relief Society have most surely exemplified in their lives pure and undefiled religion; for they have ministered to those in affliction, they have thrown their arms of love around the fatherless and the widows, and they have kept themselves unspotted from the world. I can testify that there are no purer and more God-fearing women in the world than are to be found within the ranks of the Relief Society. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)

Relief Societya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Relief Society is performing a grand mission. I feel to say, God bless the officers and members of the Relief Society. You are performing a grand mission, and I would exhort you to not weary in well-doing. We are all aiming for celestial glory, and the grandeur of the prospects before us cannot be expressed in human language. If you will continue faithful to the work in which you are engaged, you will attain unto this glory, and rejoice evermore in the presence of God and the Lamb. This is worth striving for; it is worth sacrificing for, and blessed is the man or the woman who is faithful unto the obtaining of it. (9 July 1901, JH, p. 5.)
