Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 20

Becoming One

Onenessa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints must become one to accomplish the Lord's work. The Latter-day Saints are trying to do the work that Israel failed to do, and that the former Saints did not accomplish; and we can only do it by becoming one even as the Father and the Son are one, and this in order that the world may believe that we are sent of God. We have got to be perfect, and come to the measure of the stature of Christ Jesus, in order that the world may know that Jesus has sent and commissioned His Apostles, and restored the holy priesthood. If we have division in our midst; if we be divided either spiritually or temporally, we never can be the people that God designs us to become, nor can we ever become instruments in His hands of making the world believe that the holy priesthood has been restored, and that we have the everlasting gospel. (4 November 1882, JD, 23:341.)

Onenessa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must effect a perfect union to attain exaltation. I believe there is a way by which perfect union can be effected if we will but understand things aright. Jesus urged upon His disciples the necessity of union—that the same should be promoted among them as existed between Himself and His Father. We must perfect ourselves before we can attain to the great exaltation and glory which have been promised unto the faithful. We should at all times be willing to make sacrifices for the gospel's sake, no matter how disagreeable the duty may sometimes be. (5 October 1889, JH, pp. 4-5.)

Unitya-Snow, LorenzoTPEach has a responsibility for unity. Had Moses, for instance, having done all that he did, had he delivered Israel from Egyptian bondage, and having done all that he could and all that mortal man could do for their redemption, having done all in his power, and been willing to lay down his life and to sacrifice everything that he had to accomplish that work, would he have secured the people to himself, and have brought about that union which was so necessary, without any exertion on their part? No, most assuredly it would not have been accomplished, for there had to be a return, an exertion on their part, in order to secure that union and that love, and to secure that fellowship between them and him, which it was necessary should exist, and so it is in reference to Jesus Christ; though He has sacrificed Himself and laid the plan for the redemption of the people, yet unless the people labor to obtain that union between Him and them, their salvation never will be accomplished. Thus we see that something has to be done by each party, in order to secure each other's friendship, and to bind us together as a community. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:240.)

Unitya-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must become united to see God. We have just got to feel, brethren, that there are other people besides ourselves; we have got to look into the hearts and feelings of others, and become more godly than what we are now.

Unitya-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should be bound together and act like David and Jonathan as the heart of one, and sooner let our arm be severed from our bodies than injure each other. What a mighty people we would be if we were in this condition, and we have got to go into it, however little feelings of friendship we may have in exercise at the present time. I can just tell you that the day will come when we must become united in this way if we ever see the presence of God. We shall have to learn to love our neighbors as we love ourselves. We must go into this, however far we are from it at the present time, yet no matter, we must learn these principles and establish them in our bosoms. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:245.)

Unitya-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should seek the interests of others. Now you take a man that is continually looking after the interests of the people around him, and let him feel to bless anything and all things that belongs to his brethren, and he will in this way establish happiness in himself and around him. Let a man take the opposite course, and instead of blessing and laboring for the benefit of others, find fault and pull down, will he make the same improvement? Assuredly he will not. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:245-46.)

Feelingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPAlways consider the feelings of others. The things of God have been revealed to this people, that they may go to work and obtain more faith and more confidence in God than any other people upon the face of the whole earth. We have to eat, drink, and clothe ourselves, as well as other people, but in gaining these things we should regard sacredly each other's rights. When two individuals are bound together, as they eventually must be if they ever stand in the presence of God, rather than to take a course to injure each other's feelings, when they are united as they should be and as they will be, they would sooner have a limb severed from their body, they would sooner suffer anything that could be executed upon them than to disturb or hurt each other's feelings. There would be the same love that existed between David and Jonathan. Before David would do anything to disturb the feelings of Jonathan, he would have suffered a hundredfold of trouble to come upon himself. I think we sometimes pass by those things which are of such great importance. I often think of the little anecdote that is recorded in the Bible about the sons of the prophets. On a certain occasion, when the sons of the prophets were cutting timber, it appears that the axe fell off the handle into the water, and it seemed there was a great disturbance in the feelings of the young prophets. Why, says one, Master, the axe was borrowed, and it seems there was quite an anxiety about the axe on account of its being borrowed property. I have thought that had the circumstance transpired in these days the expression would have been on this wise, "O, it is no matter, Master, the axe was borrowed." But in those days they had feelings in regard to their neighbors, and in consequence of this the power of God could be manifested for the purpose of raising the axe from the bottom of the water. Thus we see they had feelings of interest for the welfare of their neighbors and friends as well as for themselves. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:243.)

Feelingsa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe have got to know that it is our business to learn to secure the peace and happiness of those that are around us, and never take a course to trample upon the feelings and rights of our neighbors. Let a man go and trample upon the rights of a brother, and how long would it take him to destroy that feeling of confidence that had heretofore existed between them? It will take a great while. This is what we have to place our eye upon; I feel it so; in all our thinking, in all our movements, and in our secret meditations, we want to let our minds reflect upon the interests of all around; and to consider that they have rights and privileges as well as ourselves; we ought to have this firmly established in our minds. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:245.)

Unitya-Snow, LorenzoTPUnity will turn people in our favor. And I will say to the Latter-day Saints—you may call it prophecy if you choose—that if this people will be united and will keep the commandments of God, God will turn the popular sentiment of this nation in our favor; the nation will feel disposed to bestow upon us favor instead of persecution and destruction. (5 October 1882, JD, 23:292-93.)

Onenessa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must be one with each other. We have got to attend to our duties, make use of that intelligence which is given us, that we may be one with each other. The high priesthood have got to do this, every husband must do this, that he may be full of the Holy Ghost, that he may be the means of sanctifying his wife and his children, and that he may be an instrument in the hands of the Lord of extending the kingdom of God, and of aiding in the accomplishment of His purposes. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:157.)

Friendshipa-Snow, LorenzoTPBy building up our friends we build ourselves. Now an individual, in order to secure the highest and greatest blessings to himself, in order to secure the approbation of the Almighty, and in order to continually improve in the things pertaining to righteousness, he must do all things to the best advantage. Let him go to work and be willing to sacrifice for the benefit of his friends. If he wants to build himself up, the best principle he can do it upon is to build up his friends. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:243-44.)

Onenessa-Snow, LorenzoTPPriesthood holders should learn to be one with their brethren. The high priests and seventies, they ought to be one with the Twelve Apostles, and they ought to learn to echo our sentiments as we echo those of the First Presidency, for we must all learn to be one. (4 January 1857, JD, 4:159.)

Heavena-Snow, LorenzoTPWe can enjoy heaven on earth. Now if you want to get heaven within you, and to get into heaven, you want to pursue that course that angels do who are in heaven. If you want to know how you are to increase, I will tell you, it is by getting godliness within you.

Heavena-Snow, LorenzoTPLet angels be here, do you suppose that they would enjoy themselves here? They would until they felt disposed to leave. Well just so individuals can enjoy heaven around them in all places. We have got to go to work and do this; we must go to work and establish heaven upon this earth, notwithstanding the evils that are around us, the devils that are around us, and notwithstanding the wickedness that exists, still we have got to go to work and establish heaven upon this earth.

A person never can enjoy heaven until he learns how to get it, and to act upon its principles. (1 March 1857, JD, 4:246.)
