Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 21

The Last Days

Jesus Christ, Second Coming ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPFaithfulness will prepare us for the Second Coming. If you are on a moving train of cars, as long as you sit still and occupy your seat that train will take you to the point you wish to go; but if you step off the cars it will be dangerous, and it may be a long time before another train will come along. It is the same with us—if we are living right, doing our work, we are going along, and if we are keeping our covenants, we are doing the work of God and accomplishing His purposes, and we will be prepared for the time when Jesus the Son of God will come in honor and glory, and will confer upon all those who prove faithful all the blessings that they anticipate, and a thousand times more. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:244.)

Preparationa-Snow, LorenzoTPHow many have their lamps trimmed? How many now here are ready—having oil in their vessels, and lamps trimmed, and prepared for coming events?

Preparationa-Snow, LorenzoTPI am not sorry, nor do I regret on account of the near approach of these fiery ordeals. The Church, no doubt, needs purifying. We have hypocrites among us, milk-and-water Saints, those professing to be Saints, but doing nothing to render themselves worthy of membership; and too many of us have been pursuing worldly gains, rather than spiritual improvements, have not sought the things of God with that earnestness which becomes our profession. Trials and afflictions will cause our hearts to turn towards our Father who has so marvelously wrought out our redemption and deliverance from Babylon. (10 January 1886, JD, 26:367-68.)

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPThe wicked will destroy themselves. Our object is the tempral salvation of the people as much as it is for their spiritual salvation. By and by the nations will be broken up on account of their wickedness. The Latter-day Saints are not going to move upon them with their little army; they will destroy themselves with their wickedness and immorality. They will contend and quarrel one with another, state after state and nation after nation, until they are broken up, and thousands, tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands will undoubtedly come and seek protection at the hands of the servants of God, as much so as in the days of Joseph when he was called upon to lay a plan for the salvation of the house of Israel. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:309.)

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPA cloud is gathering in blackness. There is rapidly coming something that will try you, perhaps as you have never been tried before. All, however, that is necessary for us to do now is to see where our faults and weaknesses lie, if we have any. If we have been unfaithful in the past, let us renew our covenants with God and determine, by fasting and prayer, that we will get forgiveness of our sins that the Spirit of the Almighty may rest upon us, that peradventure we may escape those powerful temptations that are approaching. The cloud is gathering in blackness. Therefore, take warning. (6 May 1889, DW, 38:762-63.)

Signs of the Timesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe last days will try men's hearts. The signs of the times, and the rapid approach of scenes that will try the hearts of the Latter-day Saints and their integrity, demand that we now seek earnestly the Spirit of God, and divine assistance, for it will certainly be needed in the scenes now rapidly approaching. We have needed it in the past. We can easily see that if we had not been in the possession of the Spirit of God to direct us through many of the scenes through which we have passed, we should not have been in the enjoyment of our present prospects of exaltation and glory, and our circumstances would have been much less favorable. And if we have needed the Holy Spirit in the past, we may truly understand that it will be needed in the future. (6 May 1889, DW, 38:762.)

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints will be preserved as Noah was. We should understand that the Lord has provided, when the days of trouble come upon the nations, a place for you and me, and we will be preserved as Noah was preserved: not in an ark, but we will be preserved by going into these principles of union by which we can accomplish the work of the Lord and surround ourselves with those things that will preserve us from the difficulties that are now coming upon the world, the judgments of the Lord. (5 October 1900, CR, pp. 4-5.)

Nationsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe rulers of nations should prepare for the Lord's return. Awake, ye monarchs of the earth and rulers among nations, and gaze upon the scene wherein the early rays of the rising Millennial day gild the morn of the twentieth century! The power is in your hands to pave the way for the coming King of Kings, whose dominion will be over the earth. Disband your armies; turn your weapons of strife into implements of industry; take the yoke from the necks of the people; arbitrate your disputes; meet in royal congress, and plan for union instead of conquest, for the banishment of poverty, for the uplifting of the masses, and for the health, wealth, enlightenment, and happiness of all tribes and peoples and nations. Then shall the twentieth century be to you the glory of your lives and the lustre of your crown, and posterity shall sing your praises, while the Eternal One shall place you on high among the mighty. (1 January 1901, MFP, 3:334.)

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPThe spirit of speculation will affect the Saints in the last days. I remember very clearly the troublous times which were experienced in Kirtland some fifty-three years ago. At that time a spirit of speculation pervaded the minds of the people of this nation. There were money speculations, bank speculations, speculations in lands, speculations in city lots, speculations in numerous other directions. That spirit of speculation rose out of the world, and swept over the hearts of the Saints like a mighty wave or rushing torrent, and many fell, and apostatized. Singular as it may appear, this spirit of speculation pervaded the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and the Quorum of the Seven Presidents of Seventies; indeed, there was not a quorum in the Church but was more or less touched with this spirit of speculation. As that spirit increased, disunion followed. Brethren and sisters began to slander and quarrel one with the other, because their interests were not in harmony.

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPWill this be the case with the Latter-day Saints I am now addressing? I fear it is coming, but how far it will affect you it is not for me to say. (May 1889, DW, 38:767.)

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPThe desert has blossomed. Yet here in this region of salt, alkali, and sagebrush, all but treeless and waterless, a region condemned by Webster, decried by Bridger, and shunned by the overland emigrant as a valley of desolation and death, Mormonism set up its standard and proceeded to work out its destiny. Beneath its touch—the touch of untiring industry, divinely blessed and directed—the desert blossomed, the wilderness became a fruitful field, and cities and towns sprang up by hundreds in the midst of the once barren waste. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:4.)

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPNations shall be broken up. We have received revelation and, accordingly, we are here in these mountain valleys, and we are going to stay here. We shall cultivate our farms, and lay foundation for a time when the nations shall be broken up. Multitudes will then flee to these valleys of the mountains for safety, and we shall extend protection to them. You may say, shall you require them to be baptized and to become Latter-day Saints? Not by any means. If a gentleman comes into my neighborhood, a stranger, I will say, "Will you have something to eat? Is there anything I can do for you?" I am not anxious to make a "Mormon" of him, not by any means; we extend the hand of charity just as far as people are willing to allow us; but when, as I said at the beginning, people are crowding upon us, persons who are determined to destroy us and have not the principles of humanity in their bosoms, we cannot exercise that charity in their behalf that we desire. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:309.)

JerusalemNew JerusalemLast Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPThere will be a universal gathering to America and Palestine. Mormonism teaches that prior to the Millennial reign of peace, there is to be a universal gathering of scattered Israel, the lineal descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; meaning not only the Jews, but also the "lost tribes" and such of the chosen seed as have for generations been mixed with other peoples. This gathering, which includes the converted Gentiles, is preliminary to the glorious advent of the King of kings, and the resurrection of those who are Christ's at His coming. The places of assembly are America and Palestine, the former taking chronological precedence as the gathering place of "Ephraim and his fellows," while the "dispersed of Judah" will migrate to and rebuild Jerusalem. Here, upon the American continent, will be reared Zion, a new Jerusalem, where the Saints will eventually assemble and prepare for the coming of the Messiah. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:2.)

Jackson CountyLast Days, Prophecies Abouta-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord will not come until Jackson County is built up. President Smith was talking yesterday about the land of Zion. Yes, surely, this entire continent is the land of Zion, and the time will come when there will be temples established over every portion of the land, and we will go into these temples and work for our kindred dead night and day, that the work of the Lord may be speedily accomplished, that Jesus may come and present the kingdom to His Father. He is coming soon, too. But we will not hear His voice until we build up Jackson County. Now we should make the preparation for this. We are not only going to have Zion throughout this continent, but we will have it over the whole earth. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:546.)

Jesus Christ, Second Coming ofPerfectiona-Snow, LorenzoTPJesus will come. We ought to improve ourselves and move faster toward the point of perfection. It is said that we cannot be perfect. Jesus has commanded us to be perfect even as God, the Father, is perfect. It is our duty to try to be perfect, and it is our duty to improve each day, and look upon our course last week and do things better this week; do things better today than we did them yesterday, and go on and on from one degree of righteousness to another. Jesus will come by and by, and appear in our midst, as He appeared in the day when upon the earth among the Jews, and He will eat and drink with us and talk to us, and explain the mysteries of the kingdom, and tell us things that are not lawful to talk about now. (6 April 1898, CR, pp. 13-14.)

Priestcrafta-Snow, LorenzoTPGod will destroy the unrepentant. I say, in the name of Jesus Christ, the Holy Ghost having borne witness, that the anger of God is kindled against the abominations, hypocrisy, and wickedness of the religious world, and from the heavens has He uttered His voice in anger against those who "divine for money and teach for hire"; and unless they speedily repent, and be baptized for the remission of their sins, receiving the message the Almighty is now sending unto all people, they will be destroyed by the brightness of the coming of the Son of Man, which is now at hand—even at your doors—O ye inhabitants of the earth! (1841, SML, p. 87.)

Last Days, Prophecies AboutPriesthood Powera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe time will come when the Lord will pour out greater power upon the priesthood. My young friends, you have opportunities that I did not have.... You have opportunities of the grandest character, great and glorious, to prepare yourselves for the time when the world shall be in such a condition that much more power will be required to perform the duties that will be imposed on us than is required today; and you are the ones that the Lord expects will take that course by which you will be worthy of receiving that extra power in your priesthood that has not been required up to the present time. When the world gets into confusion, and war upon war occurs among the nations of the earth, and you go forth as it were with your life in your hands, nothing can preserve you from the difficulties that will lie in your pathway but the power of the Lord—a power to be exercised that is not required at the present time. Now you will remember these things, my brethren, at some future time. (7 April 1899, DN, p. 9.)
