Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 22

Tithing: A Preparatory Law

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPPay a full tithing. The time has now come for every Latter-day Saint, who calculates to be prepared for the future and to hold his feet strong upon a proper foundation, to do the will of the Lord and to pay his tithing in full. That is the word of the Lord to you, and it will be the word of the Lord to every settlement throughout the land of Zion. After I leave you and you get to thinking about this, you will see yourselves that the time has come when every man should stand up and pay his tithing in full. The Lord has blessed us and has had mercy upon us in the past; but there are times coming when the Lord requires us to stand up and do that which He has commanded and not leave it any longer. What I say to you in this stake of Zion I will say to every stake of Zion that has been organized, There is no man or woman that now hears what I am saying who will feel satisfied if he or she fails to pay a full tithing. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:533.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPPart of tithing is no tithing at all. Now, I do not know how we can be justified in admitting people into our temples when they neglect this law of tithing. Of course, this has been done, and there have been hundreds, probably thousands, that have gone into our temples without paying one cent of tithing; and thousands have gone in there that have not paid a full tithing—and a part of a tithing is no tithing at all, no more than immersing only half a person's body is baptism. I do not know how bishops can justify themselves in giving recommends to such persons—they cannot after they hear what we have to say to them. When persons do not conform to the law to that extent that they can sanctify the land, and thus become unworthy to stand among the people of God, how can we be justified in conferring upon them the highest blessings that God ever bestowed upon man since the world began?

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPBrethren, I want you to think of these things; for the Lord has manifested to us most clearly that these things cannot go along in this way. It is now time for us to wake up, turn our attention to the Lord, and do our duty. (12 June 1899, JH, p. 13.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPGive a trifle more than is required. Another temptation is, How much money shall I give? That is a very strong temptation to most of us, I presume. Speaking of tithing as Brother Brigham has, how much of this tithing shall I give? Cannot I reserve a portion to myself? The Lord is very rich and I doubt if He will be troubled at all if I withhold a little for myself; and so a little to oneself is withheld. But that very little that is reserved will trouble that man, if his conscience is like the consciences of most of the Latter-day Saints. It will trouble him more or less in the day time, and also when he thinks of it at night. He does not have that happiness that it is his privilege to enjoy—it goes from him. One of the best things to do under such a temptation as that is to give, so as to be sure, a trifle more than is required. (9 April 1899, CR, p. 51.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPNever forget your tithing. God bless the Latter-day Saints. I want to have this principle so fixed upon our hearts that we shall never forget it. As I have said more than once, I know that the Lord will forgive the Latter-day Saints for their past negligence in paying tithing, if they will now repent and pay a conscientious tithing from this time on. But it would be woeful to think of the results if the Latter-day Saints had failed to listen to the voice of the servants of the Lord. It is God's truth that the time has now come when He will not look favorably upon our negligence of this principle. I plead with you in the name of the Lord, and I pray that every man, woman, and child who has means shall pay one-tenth of their income as a tithing. I beseech you to do this for the time has now come when the Lord is prepared to bestow upon us the choicest blessings. Our enemies are upon our path, and will if possible make us trouble. If we are unfaithful in this matter the same results will follow us as followed the people in Jackson County. (7 October 1899, CR, p. 28.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord will not protect those who neglect tithing. Through our nonobservance of this principle we have no promise but that we shall be driven from here as were the people in Jackson county. We cannot claim an inheritance in Zion, nor that the land has been sanctified as the Lord required. It is only through the wonderful mercies of the Lord that we have been protected and blessed with food, raiment, and shelter as we have been for many years past; it is not because we have proved ourselves worthy of these blessings by doing what the Lord has commanded. But now I tell you, in the name of the Lord, the time has come when it will not do for you and me to neglect our duties any longer in this respect. (12 June 1899, JH, p. 13.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTeach children to pay tithing. Now, I have shaken hands with over eight hundred children, and I want to see those children grow up and become 80, 90, 100, or 140 years of age; and this will surely be the case if you will teach them these things that I am talking to you about today. Teach them to pay their tithing while they are young. You mothers, teach your children that when they get any money they should pay one-tenth of it to the Lord, however little it may be. Educate them to pay their tithing in full. Then we will have a people prepared to go to Jackson County. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:546.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTithing is a lower law. The law of tithing is a lower law, and was given of God. But the law of tithing does not forbid us obeying a higher law, the law of celestial union in earthly things. And the fact that we do not feel satisfied in simply obeying the law of tithing shows that it is a lesser law. Do you feel justified simply in obeying the law of tithing? Why, then, do you contribute to our temples and to bringing the people from the old countries, and to this object, and that, in thousands of ways, after you have properly and justly complied with the law of tithing? The fact that you do these things shows that you are not satisfied in merely obeying the law of tithing. In these contributions you are acting just as God designed you should act—by the light of the Holy Ghost that is in you. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:368.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPAnd so far as the law of tithing is concerned, there is about it something that is not of the same nature and character as the law of the united order. It was added because the people were not willing to comply with this noble and high celestial law, whereby they could act according to the light that is in them, and the power of the Almighty, by which they should be inspired. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:367.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTithe paying brings temporal and spiritual blessings. After the law of consecration was given, and the covenants entered into with the Lord by the people in Jackson County were broken, the Lord gave another law (tithing) six years later which was vastly different from the law of consecration. We are now under that law; and the same promises have been made to us if we will keep that law as were made to the people in Jackson County; the land will be sanctified, and we shall be counted worthy to receive the blessings of the Lord and to be sustained and supported in our financial affairs and in everything we do, temporal as well as spiritual. And it is a very small matter indeed, so far as sacrifice is concerned, in comparison to the giving of our entire property over to the bishop, and then receiving from him only a portion of it again as circumstances might demand. (12 June 1899, JH, p. 13.)

United OrderTithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTithing prepares us for the united order. Now, I will say in regard to the matter of tithing, I think that law was given to the Latter-day Saints, one object being to prepare them for and conduct them to the united order, that they might not fall into the same error as the people who were driven from the state of Missouri, but gradually be inducted into these higher principles. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:345.)

Law of ConsecrationTithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPTithing replaced the broken law of consecration. There was no one man in the Church that could have bought that land (Jackson County, Missouri); there were no two men, or half a dozen men, or a hundred men that could have bought it. The people as a general thing were poor. There were no rich men that received the gospel in those early days. But by combination and union they could have secured the means to carry out the purposes of the Almighty in regard to the purchase of that country. They failed because of their love for money. In a revelation after this we are told that they failed to give their names as they were commanded. The Lord sent elders throughout the states where there were Latter-day Saints, to collect means for this purpose; and the people in Jackson County were required to observe the law of consecration. But they failed to do it, and therefore the lands were not secured. The Lord could have sustained the people against the encroachments of their enemies had they placed themselves in a condition where He would have been justified in doing so. But inasmuch as they would not comply with His requirements, the Lord could not sustain them against their enemies. So it will be with us, or with any people whom the Lord calls to comply with His requirements and whom He proposes to confer the highest blessings upon, as He has in reference to us, and as He did in reference to the people in Jackson County.

Tithes and OfferingsLaw of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPThere having been a failure in regard to this law of consecration—a failure so serious that it resulted in great misery to the people of God—a few years after that the Lord gave another law for the Saints to observe in place of the law of consecration. It is called the law of tithing. If we look upon this law in its proper light, we will see the importance of it and the danger that will result if we fail to observe it. (7 October 1899, CR, p. 24.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints must sanctify the land by paying tithing. The first principle of action to the Latter-day Saints is to sanctify the land by keeping this law of tithing and placing themselves in a position where they can receive the ordinances that pertain unto exaltation and glory of our dead. (7 October 1899, CR, p. 28.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPThis law of tithing is one which, if it is not kept, the land shall not be sanctified unto those who disobey it, and it shall not be a land of Zion unto them. This is a plain and simple statement and can be understood by the most ignorant. Here we have been getting into debt to the Lord. (1 January 1901, MFP, 3:315.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Snow, LorenzoTPOur temporal salvation depends on our paying tithing. The poorest of the poor can pay tithing; the Lord requires it at our hands, to lay this matter plainly before the people, and we are going to do it. It is the temporal salvation of this Church, it depends upon obedience to this law. (August 1899, IE, 2:794.)
