Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 23

Consecration and the United Order

Order of EnochUnited Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe purpose of the united order is to unite and exalt the Saints. There are revealed, plainly and clearly, principles which are calculated to exalt the Latter-day Saints, and preserve them from much trouble and vexation; yet, through lack of perseverance on our part to learn and conform to them, we fail to receive the blessings that are connected with obedience to them. These principles of union, which the Latter-day Saints in former times ignored, and in consequence of disobedience to them were driven from Missouri, are called by different names—united order, order of Enoch, the principles of union of the celestial law, etc. When we search the revelations of God in regard to them, we see that wherever the gospel of the Son of God has been revealed in its fulness, the principles of the united order were made manifest, and required to be observed. The system of union, or the order of Enoch, which God has taken so much pains to reveal and make manifest, has been and is for the purpose of uniting the Latter-day Saints, the people of God, and preparing them for exaltation in His celestial kingdom; and also for the purpose of preparing them here on this earth to live together as brethren, that they may become one in all matters that pertain to their worldly affairs, as well as their spiritual interests; that they may become one—one in their efforts, one in their interests—so that there shall be no poor found in the midst of the Latter-day Saints, and no moneyed aristocracy in the midst of the people of God, but that there should be a union, an equality. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:342.)

Compiler's note: The law of consecration and the united order, implemented in the 1830's and then discontinued, were given to the Prophet Joseph Smith as a part of the restoration of all things. While each Latter-day Saint certainly should strive to dedicate his time, talents, and means to the advancement of the kingdom of God consistently with authorized Church programs, any reinstitution of the law or establishment of a related organization would be improper unless done under the direction of the living prophet.

Law of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe process of consecrating is liberal and generous. Now, this law, the united order, was given in 1831-32. Men were commanded consecration of property. Bishop Partridge, seeing there was some misunderstanding, wrote to Joseph for an explanation in regard to the matter. Joseph, in answer, says that in matters of consecration it should be left to the judgment of the consecrator how much he should give and how much retain for the support of his family, and not exclusively to the bishop; for, if so, it would give the bishop more power than a king possessed. There should be a mutual understanding between them, otherwise it should be left to a council of twelve high priests. Now where is the Latter-day Saint that cannot see a liberality, a generosity, in this matter, and be willing to submit to this tribunal? I would be willing to submit to the high council of this stake of Zion, or the high council of any other stake of Zion, and say, "Here is my property; say how much I ought to retain for my wives and children, and how much shall go into the common property of the Church." But I think my bishop and myself could settle the business at once. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:371.)

Law of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPLay all upon the altar. Let us go forth and do precisely as we are told; and just as fast as we increase, so will we have to use that spiritual knowledge which is given unto us in a way that will aid in building up the kingdom of God: and it is just so with what little property and means you have got; it must all be upon the altar. You must get rid of this little, mean, nasty spirit, and walk in the light of God. Let your minds expand, and be on hand for every duty that is placed upon you.

Law of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPThere are men right before me who have done but little for the kingdom of God, and who, if they knew what would be for their good, would go within twenty-four hours and say to President Young, "There is a thousand, or five or ten thousand dollars, which I will donate for the benefit of the kingdom. There are men who will do this at the present time; but by and by all the Saints of God will more generally learn the principle and obey it. (9 April 1857, JD, 5:66.)

StewardshipLaw of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPStewardships require giving our all. Now this law is very distinctly portrayed, and the Lord has made it so plain that He is determined that no man shall misunderstand Him. When He speaks He speaks in such a manner that there can be no dispute. He is not satisfied with telling it over once, He tells it the second and the third time; so that there can be no misunderstanding in regard to the mind of the Lord with reference to this law of a man's giving all, except that which is needed for his support, unto the Lord's storehouse. An observance of this law is what He says is required of every man in his stewardship. So that if the Latter-day Saints are appointed unto stewardships, or are satisfied to act as stewards before the Lord, this law is in force, and this law they should observe. I believe many do walk in the spirit of this law to a certain extent; and have complied with it, no doubt, in a manner in which they are justified before God; while some, perhaps, have paid no regard to it whatever. Some so far ignore these principles that they become very miserly and covetous. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:368.)

Law of ConsecrationMaterialisma-Snow, LorenzoTPParting with goods is a test. Take the man who has a large share of this world's goods, and examine what kind of a man he is; try his spirit, and you will generally find that it is often one of the greatest trials that can come upon him, to be called upon to part with any of his property. (9 April 1857, JD, 5:64.)

Law of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPConsecration will prepare us for Zion. The law of consecration, which is in advance of the law of tithing,... is a principle which, as sure as I am speaking, you and I will one day have to conform to. When that day comes we will be prepared to go to Zion. (7 October 1900, CR, p. 62.)

Law of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPLet every man seek the interest of his neighbor. Now a whole people, enlightened by the principles of high heaven in regard to these matters—filled with the Spirit of God, with the spirit of understanding, the spirit of philanthropy, every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, having an eye single to the glory of God, putting his means into the Lord's treasury, and no man saying that anything is his, except as a steward before God—would be a pillar of financial strength, a sublime picture of holy union and fraternity, and equal to the most extreme emergencies. Then when any misfortune befalls a man, such as the burning of his property, or failure or trouble in his department of business, he could go to the treasurer and say, "I have need of a certain amount to assist me in my stewardship. Have I not managed the affairs of my stewardship in a wise manner? Can you not have confidence in me? Have I ever misused the means put into my hands? Has it not been wisely controlled? If so, give me means to help me in my stewardship, or to build up this industry that is needed for the general interests of the whole." Well, it is to be given to him. There is confidence reposed in him because of his past conduct, and the course which he has pursued. He has due right in exercising his talents according to the light of the spirit that is within him. He understands fully the circumstances in which he is placed, and governs himself according to the obligations that rest upon him. He is found to be a wise, economical manager; and he is assisted in his stewardship to the extent of the means that he should have. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:370-71.)

Law of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPConsecration is a celestial law. This persecution and expulsion [from Missouri] never would have occurred had the people observed the law which the Lord required. That law was simply the law of consecration—a law of the celestial kingdom. It was a law which, if observed, would have made the people the richest and wealthiest of any people in the world. There would not have been a poor Latter-day Saint in their midst. Every man would have had all he needed to make him happy and comfortable, so far as financial matters were concerned. But the law was rejected and the covenant broken; therefore the consequences came. (12 June 1899, JH, p. 13.)

Law of Consecrationa-Snow, LorenzoTPBlessings come to those who obey the celestial law. I trust, my brethren, that we may devote ourselves entirely to the service of our God in the establishing of His Zion on the earth, zealously laboring in the interest of truth and righteousness on the earth, until it shall become a joy to us to be so engaged, that it may become second nature to us to serve God and keep His commandments, and to observe the celestial law, and that we may so enjoy the Holy Spirit in our hearts that we may overcome the world and establish the celestial law in our minds and establish it in our practice; that we may so understand ourselves and our privileges that we may in this life secure a considerable portion of the blessings that pertain to the celestial law, and which are to be enjoyed in the celestial glory; that so far as God gives us power in the earth, so far as He gives us possessions, houses and lands, flocks and herds, that these possessions shall become sanctified by our doings and actions. (8 April 1880, CR, p. 81.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord established the united order. The Lord, in Kirtland, established a united order. He called certain individuals, and united them by revelation, and told them how to proceed; and every man who would subscribe fully to the united order will proceed in the same manner. He told those people and the Church afar off to listen and hearken to what He required of men in this order, and of every man who belonged to the church of the living God—that all that they received above what was necessary for the support of their families was to be put in the Lord's storehouse, for the benefit of the whole Church. This is what is required of every man in his stewardship. And this is a law that is required to be observed by every man who belongs to the church of the living God. Now, this is one of the main features of the united order. We are not going to stop here, in these valleys of the mountains. Many of us expect to go forth and build up the center stake of Zion; but before we are called, we must understand these things, and conform to them more practically than many of us do at the present time. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:346.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe united order is a celestial law. There is a widow, whose income is ten dollars; she pays one for tithing, and then has to appeal to the bishop for support. Here is a rich man who has an income of one hundred thousand dollars, and pays ten thousand for his tithing. There remains ninety thousand, and he does not need it, but the poor widow requires much more than she had before complying with the law of tithing.

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPNow what would be the operation of the celestial law? The widow has not enough for her support, therefore nothing is required of her by the celestial law, or the law of the united order. This rich man with his ninety thousand dollars, continues to increase his riches, pays his tithing fully, and yet wholly disregards the law of stewardship, or the law of temporal union. I cannot believe that a Latter-day Saint is justified in ignoring the higher law. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:369.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe celestial law is to be lived voluntarily. We cannot be forced into living a celestial law; we must do this ourselves, of our own free will. And whatever we do in regard to the principles of the united order, we must do it because we desire to do it. Some of us are practicing in the spirit of the united order, doing more than the law of tithing requires. We are not confined to the law of tithing. We have advanced to that point that we feel to soar above this law. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:346.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe united order is no small thing. Before this church was organized, in April 1830, there were given revelations touching the united order; and from the day the first revelation was given in regard to these principles, there have been given a great number of revelations making the principle of the united order very plain to the understanding of those who wish to comprehend them. The principles and system have been pointed out in various revelations very distinctly, so that the Saints might not err. The Lord has shown us that He considered this order no small matter, but a subject of vast importance; so much so, in fact, that He has pronounced severe penalties on those who disobey its principles, and promised most important blessings to those who receive it and conform to its requirements. Doctrine and Covenants 78, 82, 85, 101. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:342.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe united order is for spiritual and temporal unity. The purpose of the [united] order is to make the members of the Church equal and united in all things, spiritual and temporal; to banish pride, poverty, and iniquity; and introduce a condition of things that will prepare the pure in heart for the advent of the world's Redeemer. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:23.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe united order requires godliness. "It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him." This spirit should influence us in all our dealings. If we all acted in keeping with its sacred whisperings, there would be little difficulty in the establishment and working of the united order, for all would then be faithful in the performance of their several duties. (31 January 1877, DN, 25:834.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe united order was not just for Missouri. Wherever there is a people of God, the principles of the united order are applicable, if they would receive and obey them. Some have thought that the united order was to be kept only by the people who should go up to the land of Missouri. Now this, I believe, is incorrect. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:343.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe united order is like Noah's ark. We should understand that the Lord has provided, when the days of trouble come upon the nations, a place for you and me, and we will be preserved as Noah was preserved, not in an ark, but we will be preserved by going into these principles of union by which we can accomplish the work of the Lord and surround ourselves with those things that will preserve us from the difficulties that are now coming upon the world, the judgments of the Lord. (5 October 1900, CR, pp. 4-5.)

United Ordera-Snow, LorenzoTPThe united order must be based on righteousness. The principles of the united order are sacred, and I assure you we will never go back to Jackson County, Missouri, there to build up the New Jerusalem of the latter days, until there is a perfect willingness on our part to conform to its rules and principles. Many years have transpired since we received the revelation of the united order, and in one sense that long period of time bespeaks negligence on our part in not more fully obeying it. The very principles of that order, in my estimation, were given for our temporal and spiritual salvation. In order to derive the benefit that God designed should flow from them, they must be established and systematized on the principle of righteousness, each person learning to love his neighbor as himself. For us to undertake to deal with them on any other principle would virtually open the way to bitter disappointment. (5 April 1877, JD, 18:375-76.)

United OrderOrder of Enocha-Snow, LorenzoTPObedience would bring safety and union. Now, were the Saints all acting in the spirit of these revelations, what a happy community we would be! We would all be safe, and no man would need remain awake at night thinking what he should do for his family to keep them from begging their bread, or going to the bishop, which perhaps is only one degree better. And there would be a union that would be in accordance with the union of Enoch and his people, when they were taken to the world above—a union pleasing to the Almighty, and according to the principles of the celestial world. (19 October 1879, JD, 20:371.)
