Lorenzo Snow, Teachings of Lorenzo Snow ( 1984)

Chapter 26

A Personal Testimony and Various Counsel

Testimonya-Snow, LorenzoTPThe faithful share a knowledge of the truth. I had been a member of this Church but a short time when I obtained, by a divine manifestation, a clear, explicit, and tangible demonstration of the truth of this work. Thousands and tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints, men and women, in private life, can testify to the same experience; and though I may know many principles in regard to this doctrine, which in their limited experience they may not understand, yet in that one fact they are equal to me in knowledge, equal to the messengers who have administered to them this gospel. (6 March 1886, JD, 26:375,)

Scriptures, Study ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe should search the revelations more diligently. There are principles which are revealed for the good of the people of God, and clearly manifest in the revelations which have been given. But in consequence of not being more persevering and industrious, we neglect to receive the advantages which they are designed to confer, and we think, perhaps, that it is not necessary to exert ourselves to find out what God requires at our hands, or in other words, to search out the principles which God has revealed, upon which we can receive very important blessings. (21 April 1878, JD, 19:342.)

Submissivenessa-Snow, LorenzoTPI have tried to submit completely to the Lord's will. I can assure you, brethren and sisters, that I had no ambition to assume the responsibility which now rests upon me. If I could have escaped it honorably I should never have been found in my present position. I have never asked for it, nor have I ever asked the assistance of any of my brethren that I might attain to this position; but the Lord revealed to me and to my brethren that this was His will, and I have no disposition to shirk any responsibility nor to decline to occupy any position that the Lord requires me to fill. I have tried to serve Him, to overcome the weaknesses of the flesh and to bring myself with every power and faculty of my nature into complete subservience to His will, so that I might eventually reach the highest glory which it is possible for man to attain. (8 October 1898, DW, 57:513.)

Obediencea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe humble and obedient will receive knowledge from God. I testify before this assembly, as I have testified before the people throughout the different states of the Union, and throughout England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Italy, Switzerland, and France, that God Almighty, through my obedience to the gospel of Jesus, has revealed to me, tangibly, that this is the work of God, that this is His kingdom which Daniel prophesied should be set up in the last days. I prophecy that any man who will be humble before the Lord, any man who will, with childlike simplicity, be baptized for the remission of his sins, shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, which shall lead him into all truth and show him things to come; he shall receive a knowledge from the Almighty that His kingdom has been established in these latter days, and that it shall never be thrown down or be left to another people. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:306-7.)

KillingAnimalsa-Snow, LorenzoTPKilling for sport is wrong. In Adam-ondi-Ahman, while gradually recovering from the effects of a malignant fever which had detained me a fortnight in Far West, under the constant and skillful nursing of my sister Eliza, for some time I was unable to either do or read much. One day, to while away the slowly passing hours, I took my gun with the intention of indulging in a little amusement in hunting turkeys, with which that section of the country abounded. From boyhood I had been particularly, and I may say strangely, attached to a gun. Hunting in the forests of Ohio was a pastime that to me possessed the most fascinating attractions. It never occurred to my mind that it was wrong—that indulging in "what was sport to me was death to them;" that in shooting turkeys, squirrels, etc., I was taking life that I could not give; therefore I indulged in the murderous sport without the least compunction of conscience.

KillingAnimalsa-Snow, LorenzoTPBut at this time a change came over me. While moving slowly forward in pursuit of something to kill, my mind was arrested with the reflection on the nature of my pursuit—that of amusing myself by giving pain and death to harmless, innocent creatures that perhaps had as much right to life and enjoyment as myself. I realized that such indulgence was without any justification, and feeling condemned, I laid my gun on my shoulder, returned home, and from that time to this have felt no inclination for that murderous amusement. (BLS, pp. 27-28.)

Work of the Lorda-Snow, LorenzoTPGod will accomplish His work. As a servant of God I bear witness to the revelation of His will in the nineteenth century. It came by His own voice from the heavens, by the personal manifestation of His Son and by the ministration of holy angels. He commands all people everywhere to repent, to turn from their evil ways and unrighteous desires, to be baptized for the remission of their sins, that they may receive the Holy Ghost and come into communion with Him. He has commenced the work of redemption spoken by all the holy prophets, sages, and seers of all the ages and all the races of mankind. He will assuredly accomplish His work, and the twentieth century will mark its advancement towards the great consummation. (1 January 1901, MFP, 3:334-35.)

Fulness of the Gospela-Snow, LorenzoTPWe possess the fulness of the gospel. We, the Latter-day Saints, profess to have received from God the fulness of the everlasting gospel; we profess to be in possession of the holy priesthood—the delegated authority of God to man, by virtue of which we administer in its ordinances acceptably to Him; and we testify to the whole world that we know, by divine revelation, even through the manifestations of the Holy Ghost, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, and that He revealed Himself to Joseph Smith as personally as He did to His Apostles anciently, after He arose from the tomb, and that He made known unto him these heavenly truths by which alone mankind can be saved. (31 January 1877, DN, 25:834.)

Self-Knowledgea-Snow, LorenzoTPWe need to examine ourselves. It would be well to examine ourselves, hold communion with ourselves in the secret closet, to ascertain how we stand as elders in Israel before the Lord, so that if need be we may renew our diligence and faithfulness, and increase our good works. (6 May 1882, JD, 23:193-94.)

Progressa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Saints have advanced. We can look back now and we can see that we have advanced. We have not stood still, but we have been moving along and gradually increasing our growth. The child grows from childhood to boyhood, and from boyhood to manhood, with a constant and steady growth; but he cannot tell how or when the growth occurs. He does not realize that he is growing; but by observing the laws of health and being prudent in his course he eventually arrives at manhood. So in reference to ourselves as Latter-day Saints. We grow and increase. We are not aware of it at the moment; but after a year or so we discover that we are, so to speak, away up the hill, nearing the mountain top. (6 April 1899, CR, p. 2.)

Calling and Electiona-Snow, LorenzoTPNothing should deter us from making our exaltation sure. Our prospects are sufficiently grand and glorious to cause us to put forth every exertion that we possibly can, in order to secure the blessings that are before us. Nothing should deter us from the exercise of every power that God has bestowed upon us, to make our salvation and exaltation sure. (6 October 1899, CR, p. 2.)

Mormonism and World Religionsa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe do not berate others. Mormonism is pursuing its traditional policy: "minding its own business" and doing unto others as it would be done by. It does not spend its time berating and abusing other churches and religions, all of which it recognizes as doing good in their various spheres. It simply proclaims itself as a greater measure of truth as the fulness of the everlasting gospel: facing fearlessly all creeds, all systems, and inviting comparison between its doctrines and theirs. (2 January 1902, MS, 64:23.)

Examplea-Snow, LorenzoTPExample teaches better than words. Though one teach with the eloquence of an angel, yet one's good practices, good examples, one's acts, constantly manifesting whole-heartedness for the interests of the people, teach much more eloquently, much more effectually. (1 December 1851, MS, 13:362; BLS, p. 193.)

Earth, Destiny ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe earth will be translated. The whole earth is the Lord's. The time will come when it will be translated and be filled with the Spirit and power of God. The atmosphere around it will be the Spirit of the Almighty. We will breathe that Spirit instead of the atmosphere that we now breathe. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:546.)

Mother in Heavena-Snow, LorenzoTPWe have a mother in heaven. We are the offspring of God. He is our Father, and we have a Mother in the other life as well. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 56.)

The Lord raised up reformers. We can trace the providences of the Almighty in raising up certain individuals to establish religious organizations, and we see in these things the workings of the Spirit of God for the general interest of the human family. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:304.)

Constitution of the United StatesUnited States of Americaa-Snow, LorenzoTPAmerica's founders were inspired. We look upon George Washington, the father of our country, as an inspired instrument of the Almighty; we can see the all-inspiring Spirit operating upon him. And upon his co-workers in resisting oppression, and in establishing the thirteen colonies as a confederacy; and then again the workings of the same Spirit upon those men who established the Constitution of the United States. In a revelation contained in the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says: "And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land by the hands of wise men, whom I raised up unto this very purpose." We see the hand of the Lord in these things. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:304.)

Constitution of the United Statesa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord framed the American Constitution. We trace the hand of the Almighty in framing the constitution of our land, and believe that the Lord raised up men purposely for the accomplishment of this object, raised them up and inspired them to frame the Constitution of the United States. (14 January 1872, JD, 14:301.)

Manifesto of 1890a-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Manifesto came from God. When we were placed in certain circumstances with our wives and children, and the nation was pursuing us with the intention of destroying us, the Lord opened our way in a manner that we never expected. Very few indeed thought our deliverance would come in the way which the Lord saw proper to bring it. A sacrifice had to be made—a greater one than had ever been made before. The Church itself depended upon the Saints acting in a wise and prudent manner, and making the sacrifice that was required at that time. The word of the Lord came to President Woodruff. When that Manifesto was issued, you knew what it meant. Some were alarmed. They thought the Church would go to pieces; thought they were breaking their covenants; thought the Lord had withdrawn from them. But that Manifesto was issued by the command of the Lord; and the Saints humbled themselves before the Lord and bowed to the requirement, The heavens rejoiced and God smiled upon us. He blessed His people, and delivered us from our enemies, and they were brought to shame and disgrace. They thought to destroy the Latter-day Saints, but they failed in their attempt. Nevertheless, we had to make the sacrifice, and it was right that we should. The Lord could have delivered us in some other way, had He so wished; but He knew best, and that was the course He required us to pursue and the sacrifice He desired us to make. We made it, and He has blessed us wonderfully from that time to the present. He has given us power among the nations, and in various ways the people have been raised in the estimation of the world. Men of great wisdom have looked upon us, though they may have been silent, and they have honored the course we have taken. The Lord required that of us. (18 May 1899, MS, 61:532.)

Let us try to be better. Let us decree in our hearts, let us inwardly testify to the Lord, that we will be a better people, a more united people at our next conference than we are today. This should be the feeling and determination of every man and woman present in this solemn assembly. I feel in my heart that I will try to be more devoted than I have been in the past to the interests of the kingdom of God and the carrying out of His purposes. (9 October 1898, CR, p. 55.)

God, Manifestations ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPGod has revealed Himself to me. There is no man that knows the truth of this work more than I do. I know it fully; I know it distinctly. I know there is a God just as well as any man knows it, because God has revealed Himself to me. I know it positively. I shall never forget the manifestations of the Lord; I never will forget them as long as memory endures. It is in me. (5 October 1897, CR, p. 32.)

God, Manifestations ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPI have received a perfect testimony. I have been engaged in promulgating the principles of the gospel for the past fifty years, and I have received for myself a perfect testimony that this is the power of God unto salvation. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:241.)

God, Manifestations ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPI am one that has received from the Lord the strongest revelation concerning the truth of this work. That manifestation was with me powerfully for hours and hours; and whatever circumstances may occur in my life, as long as memory lasts this perfect knowledge will remain with me. (7 October 1900, CR, p. 61.)

God, Manifestations ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Spirit of God enveloped my whole system. Elder Sherwood, at that time one of the right hand men of the Prophet's, said to me, "Brother Snow, have you received the Holy Ghost since you were baptized?" That question struck me almost with consternation. The fact was, while I had received all I needed perhaps, I had not received that which I had anticipated; and after Brother Sherwood put this question to me I felt dissatisfied, not with what I had done, but with myself. With that feeling I retired in the evening to a place where I had been accustomed to offer my devotions to the Lord. I knelt down under the shade of a tree, and immediately I heard a noise over my head like the rustle of silken garments, and there descended upon me the Spirit and power of God. That will never be erased from my memory as long as memory endures. It came upon me and enveloped my whole system, and I received a perfect knowledge that there was a God, that Jesus, who died upon Calvary, was His Son, and that Joseph the Prophet had received the authority which he professed to have. The satisfaction and the glory of that manifestation no language can express! I returned to my lodgings. I could now testify to the whole world that I knew, by positive knowledge, that the gospel of the Son of God had been restored, and that Joseph was a prophet of God, authorized to speak in His name, just as Noah was in his day. (20 July 1901, JH, p. 3.)

God, Manifestations ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPMy testimony was revealed from heaven. Having become convinced by reasoning, and by listening to the testimony of others who had received these principles, I became satisfied that it was my duty to experiment upon these principles, that I might be able to test the results. This I consequently did, and there followed the same testimony and the same experiences, so far as the knowledge of the divinity of these principles was concerned, as followed obedience to this gospel as proclaimed by the Apostles in former times. And this knowledge could not be disputed. It was not only acknowledged intellectually, but the inspiration of the Holy Ghost imparted to me a knowledge as physical and as demonstrative as that physical ordinance when I was immersed in the waters of baptism; . . . as I had passed through the atmosphere into the element of water, so my experience, knowledge, and testimony were full and complete—so complete, indeed, that from that day till the present moment, through all of the vicissitudes of life through which I have passed, I have no more doubted the truth of these principles than I do now that I behold this audience, and I never can doubt it. As long as memory continues and reason shall assert its throne, I never can permit the powerful testimony and knowledge that was communicated to me to remain silent. It was revealed to me. The heavens were opened over my head, and the power of God and the light of the Holy Ghost descended and elevated my whole being, and gave me the most perfect knowledge that Jesus was the Son of God. It was not the result simply of opinion or belief, as is the case in many other things, but it was a knowledge far beyond that of belief or opinion. I knew that God had sent His angels and restored the fulness of the gospel as taught in ancient times; that He sent angels to authorize Joseph Smith, and gave him authority to administer in the ordinances of the gospel, and to promise the Holy Ghost to all who would be obedient. (18 April 1887, MS, 49:242.)

Posteritya-Snow, LorenzoTPParents can secure their posterity. God has fulfilled His promises to us, and our prospects are grand and glorious. Yes, in the next life we will have our wives, and our sons and daughters. If we do not get them all at once, we will have them some time, for every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess that Jesus is the Christ. You that are mourning about your children straying away will have your sons and your daughters. If you succeed in passing through these trials and afflictions and receive a resurrection, you will, by the power of the Priesthood, work and labor, as the Son of God has, until you get all your sons and daughters in the path of exaltation and glory. This is just as sure as that the sun rose this morning over yonder mountains. Therefore, mourn not because all your sons and daughters do not follow in the path that you have marked out to them, or give heed to your counsels. Insasmuch as we succeed in securing eternal glory, and stand as saviors, and as kings and priests to our God, we will save our posterity. (4 November 1893, DW, 47:610.)

Life, Purpose ofa-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord has reserved some of his strongest children to come forth in these challenging times. I understand very distinctly, as no doubt most of you do, that we have come into the world for a special purpose, to prepare ourselves to enjoy the higher and greater glory and to a more favorable extent than we did when we left the [premortal] state of existence. We have come to help ouselves and to carry on the purposes of our Father in Heaven. We did not come into this world accidentally, but by a certain order. Men and women have been kept back by the Lord for thousands of years to come into the world under these peculiar circumstances when the hardest of difficulties would have to be encountered, and the strongest of men and women would be required; and that is the class of people I see before me today, and that I see before me at other times when the Latter-day Saints are collected together. (7 April 1899, DN, p. 10.)

Futurea-Snow, LorenzoTPThe Lord has wisely obscured our view of the future. We need not trouble about the future....If we had been made acquainted with the trials through which we have already passed, we would have been discouraged. As it is, our experience has increased our faith. So in regard to our future. It is wisely obscured from our views. I know what my trials have been; I know not what they will be. On every emergency the Lord has given me needed succor. For this I feel thankful. I have never seen the day when I was discouraged, as I could always see glorious blessings ahead. (5 April 1890, CD, 2:34.)

Friendshipa-Snow, LorenzoTPWe must be friends to all mankind. We should be friends everywhere and to everybody....We must learn to extend our charity and labor in the interests of all mankind. This is the mission of the Latter-day Saints—not simply confine it to ourselves, but to spread it abroad, as it of necessity must be extended to all mankind. (10 October 1887, CD, 5:7.)

Woodruff, Wilford
