As we learn in the Mutual theme for 2015, it is a sacred privilege to serve God. It is our hope that this year each of us will learn to serve with greater commitment in the way the Savior has instructed—with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. How can we do that? Here are some ideas.

First, we serve with all of our hearts. We understand this to mean that your service of God must be motivated by your love for Him and His children. “Our love of the Lord will govern the claims for our affection, the demands on our time, the interests we pursue, and the order of our priorities.” You show the Lord your love when you keep His commandments (see D&C 42:29). You serve in your home and strengthen your family. You magnify your calling and reach out to those who need a friend. You find family names to take to the temple.

Second, we serve with all of our might. Physical labor and diligent effort are required. Missionary work requires stamina and endurance. You serve with might when you attend to the needs of others, “such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally” (Mosiah 4:26).

Next, we serve with all of our mind. Your thoughts must be clean and pure, centered on the Savior. You have covenanted to always remember Him. You seek the guidance of the Holy Ghost through scripture study and prayer. As you align your thoughts, words, and actions with the mind and will of God, you recognize the needs of others and are worthy and ready to serve.

Finally, we serve God with all of our strength. One way to obtain strength is to exercise faith in the Savior’s Atonement. You repent and sanctify yourself through obedience to His commandments. You feel the Savior’s enabling power and witness miracles as you serve in the strength of the Lord (see Alma 26:12).

As you serve God with your whole soul, He promises that you will be cleansed from sin and prepared to stand before Him and receive His eternal glory.
