Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Preface

The year was 1986. Because of my work with women's issues, I had been asked to consider writing a book about current challenges facing women and the choices available to them. It seemed time for a moderate voice; much of the dialogue at the time was strident, radical, and harsh. After some pondering and following a suggestion by my doctor that a personal health problem might be best addressed with rest, I agreed to take a couple of weeks away from the pressures of a very busy life in Washington, D.C. A friend, Mary Foulger, offered her vacation home in Palm Desert, California. I asked my good friend and former assistant, Carol Petranek, if she would join me for a long weekend, suggesting we would start on the book.

The evening after our arrival, with carefully tabulated research all laid out and a then-hard-to-obtain computer at our fingertips, we paused to watch the sunset from the terrace, organize our plan of attack, and pray for direction. During that half hour of quiet and prayerful musing, a thought pierced my heart. It was as clear and distinct as any thought I have ever had: "You are on the wrong path. You are to write a book about Mother Eve and provide correct information about her role." Inherent in this message was a promise that many of the troubles now confronting women and men would be laid to rest with a correct characterization of the events and motivations of the great drama in and around the Garden of Eden.

The subject of Mother Eve was not one on which I had focused. I questioned Carol, "What do you know about Mother Eve? Are you troubled by what you know?" We then began a search of the Bible, which, as most have found, addresses this subject in a cursory manner. Yet a careful review of the scriptures of the Restoration gave us important new knowledge. We pored through the well-stocked bookshelves of my friend's home. A review of two books by Hugh Nibley revealed that he had thought extensively about this subject. I didn't know him, except by reputation, but nonetheless placed a call. He generously responded, outlining scripture references, sources in literature, ancient manuscripts, operas, and apocryphal materials I should seek out. After I had studied all of these, I should feel free to discuss them with him. His mind is one of the great treasures of our time. That evening I also called one of the Brethren, whose mentorship I valued, and asked for sources and advice. He kindly referred me to several talks and sources that were not well known. Thus began my journey with Eve. I thank them both for setting my feet on a correct course.

I have consulted and sought exchanges of ideas and materials with hundreds of sources. To all who responded so generously, please accept my heartfelt thanks.

Because this work has been so long in process and has often been shelved for two or three years at a time, I will surely omit thanking some of those who were of great help. Those to whom this book is dedicated have played a vital role, each in his or her own way. Early in the work, another beloved friend, Clare Hardy Johnson, and I shared information, phone calls, and thoughts on this subject quite frequently. Later we were introduced to Lucile Tate, whose insights were illuminating and important.

But it is my husband, Pierce, whom I thank most of all. From the night I called to tell him of this new direction to the present day, he has been an invaluable sounding board, priesthood protector, voice of reason, and champion of Mother Eve. He is and has been my partner in the truest sense, in this and in all my endeavors.

I also thank our eldest son, Tom. It was his gentle (and not so gentle) prodding over the years that caused me again and again to pull the work from the shelf. He would remind me that it wasn't fair that others not have this information and insight, particularly his four sons and his daughter, Heather Caitlin.

To all who have so generously counseled with me, taken my calls, searched for whatever obscure materials I might request, read the manuscript, or moved the manuscript to the next level by providing valuable input or access, I say, "Thank you." May the result in some way repay your effort.

Lastly, there would be no knowledge of absolute truth were it not for the words and writings of prophets and apostles, ancient and modern. I thank them reverently and with deepest gratitude for their lives, their faithfulness, their testimonies, and their belief in the women of this Church and in our magnificent Mother Eve. I have diligently sought to discuss the essential truths of the Garden story by relying on their enlightened words and on revealed scripture.

Nonetheless, the responsibility is my own for the ideas, questions, thoughts, and conjectures presented in this book. And I do acknowledge that some of what is offered here must be considered conjectureinformed, I believe, but conjecture nonetheless. Because it is essential to have a clear accounting of source materials for a subject so doctrinally profound, you will find notes in the back of the book to document the quotations I have used.

Although much more is known on this subject than the secular world would suspect, much is yet to be revealed. It seems likely that clarification will continue to occur as prophets are inspired to speak further on these vital subjects.

In these pages I have occasionally referred to ancient records called the Apocrypha. When the Prophet Joseph Smith was engaged in his inspired translation of the King James Version of the Bible, he inquired whether the noncanonical books of the Apocrypha should be translated. He received this reply: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning the ApocryphaThere are many things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated correctly; there are many things contained therein that are not true. ... Therefore, whoso readeth it, let him understand, for the Spirit manifesteth truth; and whoso is enlightened by the Spirit shall obtain benefit therefrom; and whoso receiveth not by the Spirit, cannot be benefited" (D&C 91:1-6). As readers, we must seek our own confirmation about ideas and information we receive.

The object of this book is to shed light, not heat, for it is clear that division between male and female may yet prove to be the most powerful weapon in Satan's arsenal for confounding the work of the Lord. From the time of creation, God envisioned the male-female relationship as one of partnership and support. That is the pattern given by God and the only way his work can effectively move forward. Only when women and men come to understand the significance of that first partnership, as they ponder the illuminating statements uttered by our prophets concerning Eve, "the mother of all living" (Moses 4:26), can they begin to use it to benefit their own lives.

For me, this decades-long journey has culminated in a wonderful confirmation of the perfection of the plan and of God's love for all His children. I have a fuller understanding of the role of our Savior, Jesus Christ, as the Creator of this earth and of His glorious atoning sacrifice. With my research has come an absolute testimony of the eternal truths and illuminating light brought to us through the restoration of the gospel and the voices of our prophets.

Through it all, my love for Father Adam and Mother Eve and my gratitude to them have become active and eternal.
