Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Mother, Matriarch, Mentor

Who is this woman, the Mother of All Living, this Eve, who with Adam, the mighty premortal Michael, Ancient of Days, aided the Creator as this world was organized?

Why do we find her persona imprinted on virtually all cultures, all societies, and all religions? Why have these selfsame religions, societies, and cultures used her story to determine appropriate activities for women, to justify ecclesiastical positioning, and to extend or withdraw privileges and legal access to families, properties, and position?

What is her import that God would design a genetic fingerprint, a marker, whereby all children who have ever been or who will ever be born on this earth can be linked through their mothers to that first mother, Eve?

How could the actions of this righteous, grand, and noble daughter of our Heavenly Father have been so misunderstood? How could her ultimate gift to mankindmortal life itselfhave been overlooked?

How has the story of Eve shaped civilization's notion of woman? Or is it really the other way around? Could the attitude of civilization toward women have shaped the story it has told about Eve, a story told not only in theology but also in art, music, literature, law, and social custom?

With a soul hungering for truth and light as a body hungers for food, I began my search. Some time later I was asked to write the entry on Eve for the Drawing on research shaped by the words our prophets have used to describe this first of all women, I wrote:

"Eve, first woman of earthly creation, companion of Adam and mother and matriarch of the human race, is honored by Latter-day Saints as one of the most important, righteous, and heroic of all the human family. Eve's supreme gift to mankind, the opportunity of life on this earth, resulted from her choice to become mortal."

The first clues to Eve's true magnificence I came upon were written by Elder Bruce R. McConkie: "As there are no words to extol the greatness of the Ancient of Days unto whom thousands and thousands shall minister and before whom 'ten thousand times ten thousand' shall stand in a day of judgment, so "1

"Evea daughter of God, one of the spirit offspring of the Almighty Elohimwas among the noble and great in preexistence. She ranked in spiritual stature, in faith and devotion, in conformity to eternal law with Michael."2

Christ and Adam were fellow servants in the premortal existence. Christ, the beloved and chosen of the Father, was foreordained to be the Savior of the world, and Adam, as the great Michael, was foreordained to be the first man and the head of the human race. Elder McConkie reminds us that "we cannot doubt that the greatest of all female spirits was the one then chosen and foreordained to be 'the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh [Mary].' (1 Nephi 11:18.) Nor can we do other than suppose that Eve was by [Adam's] side, rejoicing in her own foreordination to be the first woman, the mother of men, the consort, companion, and friend of mighty Michael.

"Christ and Mary, Adam and Eve, Abraham and Sarah and a host of mighty men and equally glorious women composed that group of 'the noble and great ones,' to whom the Lord Jesus said: 'We will go down, for there is space there, and will take of these materials, and will make an earth whereon these may dwell.'"3

From this statement we learn that Eve was at Michael's side before the foundations of the earth were set in place. Further, Eve's role was vital, for she was actively engaged in the planning and preparations that would shape our sphere. Eve was not merely a player on the stage after the Creation. As the leaders of the Church have taught, she was one of those "taking the materials and making the earth" (see Abraham 4). Certainly many of us were also privileged to participate. Elder Marion G. Romney told us that "he [Adam] was taught concerning the preexistence, the creation of the earthwhich he himself had participated in."4 Elder McConkie elaborated on this idea, telling us that Christ and Michael presided over much of the creative work, and then asked, "Can we do other than conclude that Mary and Eve and Sarah and myriads of our faithful sisters were numbered among them?"5

When I learned this concept of active participation in the creation process, I could barely contain my joy and gratitude. My first thought was, "I hope I helped design my beloved dogwood trees and assisted in planning the awesome majesty of mountain peak and ocean depth." Only later did I think of the far more significant role we women might have played in helping to shape spirits or organize bodies: "For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth" (Moses 3:5).

Enhancing our collective consciousness of Eve and women's worth, Elder McConkie gave this grand testament: "Certainly these sisters labored as diligently then, and fought as valiantly in the war in heaven, as did the brethren, even as they in like manner stand firm today, in mortality, in the cause of truth and righteousness."6

Was Eve a Partner in the Garden?

It seems Eve's role as an organizing, contributing partner in the Creation was just the beginning. President J. Reuben Clark helped us see the Garden and Eve's place in it. He told us that after Christ had fashioned the world and filled it with beautiful flowers, lofty forests, grasses and grains, and multitudes of living creatures, after Adam, the Ancient of Days, the Patriarch of all mankind, had been placed in the Garden, the key to the glorious arch of temporal, earthly creation for mankind was still missing. So Eve was sent to build, to organize, through the power of the Father, the bodies of mortal men, to be a creator of bodies under the faculties given her by the priesthood of God, that God's design and the great plan might meet fruition. President Clark reminded us that this was her calling, her blessing, bestowed by the priesthood: "a function as divinely called, itself."7

President Ezra Taft Benson taught: "In the beginning, God placed a woman in a companion role with the priesthood. The Gods counseled and said that 'it was not good that the man should be alone; wherefore, I will make an help meet for him.' (Moses 3:18.) Why was it not good for man to be alone? If it were only man's loneliness with which God was concerned, he might have provided other companionship. But he provided woman, for she was to be man's helpmeet. She was to act in partnership with him."8

Eve was foreordained to be a partner, an organizer, a builder, and a creator of forms so that the great plan might be fulfilled. Certainly these essential and empowering roles directly contradict the images of "eloquent passivity" or "incipient sinner" that have permeated society's perception of Eve.

What Do We Know of Eve's Role in the Hereafter?

Modern revelation tells us much about the magnificence of Eve. In his vision of the redemption of the dead, President Joseph F. Smith saw the prophets assembled in paradise: "Among the great and mighty ones who were assembled in this vast congregation of the righteous were Father Adam, ... and our glorious Mother Eve, with many of her faithful daughters who had lived through the ages" (D&C 138:38-39).

The Prophet Joseph Smith gave us insights into the grandeur of our first Mother. Zebedee Coltrin remembered that he and Oliver Cowdery had shared a vision with the Prophet. Joseph Smith took Brothers Coltrin and Cowdery by the arm and said, "Let's take a walk." After arriving at a place "where there was some beautiful grass, and grapevines and swamp birch interlaced, President Joseph Smith then said, 'Let us pray.'

"[They] all three prayed in turnJoseph, Oliver, and [Zebedee]. Brother Joseph then said, 'Now brethren, we will see some visions.'

". . . The heavens gradually opened, and [they] saw a golden throne, on a circular foundation, and on the throne sat a man and a woman, having white hair and clothed in white garments. They were the two most beautiful and perfect specimens of mankind [he had] ever [seen]. Joseph said, 'They are our first parents,' Adam and Eve.

"Adam was a large broad-shouldered man, and Eve, as a woman, was as large in proportion."9

Both visions attest to the rightness of Eve's action and of the acceptability of her contribution, for they showed Eve her life on earth. She had fulfilled her important assignment gloriously. Exalted, she continues her reign, side by side with mighty Adam.

The richness of this ongoing dialogue of modern-day prophets gives a clearer perspective of the role our first parents played and continue to play in the plans of heaven for this earth. It speaks to the importanceindeed, to the essential naturenot only of the actions of our first parents but of women's individual worth.

Notes
