Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

With Credential and Title

After God had created the world, all the creatures who were to dwell thereon, and Adam himself, He was ready for the ultimate and most perfect of His creations. President Gordon B. Hinckley said: "Then as His final creation, the crowning of His glorious work, He created woman. I like to regard Eve as His masterpiece after all that had gone before, the final work before He rested from His labors."1 President J. Reuben Clark said, "So came Eve ... the last created being in the creation of the world, without whom the whole creation of the world and all that was in the world would have been in vain and the purposes of God have come to naught."2

In the world we find significant clues to where people fit in our lives by their titles. If someone's title is "president," we know we can expect from that individual leadership and authority, and we know that we will likely need to subordinate ourselves to that person. The title "sister" generally signifies a positive and supportive relationship, whether in a family or an institution. The title "creative director" suggests a person filled with perceptive ideas and equipped with the training and skills necessary to execute those ideas. In all of these cases we respond only if the title is relevant to us. We anticipate what the role means and then form our actions and expectations accordingly.

What would Adam's expectations and attendant behavior be toward the woman he woke to find by his side in Eden? What would Eve's action be on learning of her title?

We learn from restored scripture that Adam, upon awakening in the Garden, understood that his newly created companion was to be called Eve. That is the name God the Father had already given her, as explained in Moses 4:26: "And Adam called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living; for thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women, which are many."

Eve's assignment and stewardship as the Mother of All Living was endorsed, issued, codified, and sanctified by God the Eternal Father so that His purposes for His children might be realized. Eve's relationship and future contracts were not only with Adam but also with God.

Trusted by God and revered by all the spirits of heaven, Eve was both blessed and burdened with the knowledge this title conveyed. No spirit could come to earth, gain a body, and thereby be allowed to work out his or her own salvation if Eve did not choose to make possible the fall to mortality. Yet, after the creation of Adam and Eve, their memory of this assignment was undoubtedly but a spiritual whisper to them. Likening to our first parents the scripture written by the apostle John about the Savior, "he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace" (D&C 93:12), we can assume that the education of Adam and Eve also followed such incremental steps.

The teaching process began as both their memories were challenged by the clear identification of Eve's correct title, which surely sparked a memory of their previously accepted assignment and gave indication of spiritual stature. Such a reminder likely awakened thoughts, evoked questions, and became the subject of prayers for understanding.

Companion and Equal

The Bible tells us of God's careful concern as He reflected on His newly created world and pronounced all things that were made "very good." We are introduced to Eve: "And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, that it was not good that the man should be alone; wherefore, I will make an help meet for him" (Moses 3:18).

It seems that some of the original purpose and power of the term helpmeet has been lost through the ages. In today's vernacular, helpmeet would seem to indicate a person of lesser stature, a subject, a subordinate. Yet a careful examination of this venerable expression yields an alto-gether different meaning. "Even with or equal to" is the meaning attributed to it by the Oxford English Dictionary.3 That definition adds clarity and gives us a more correct image.

The original text of Genesis 2:18 is even more enlightening. According to biblical scholar David Freedman, the Hebrew word translated there into English as "help" is ezer. This word is a combination of two roots, one meaning "to rescue," "to save," and the other meaning "to be strong." Just as the roots merged into one word, so did their meanings. At first ezer meant either "to save" or "to be strong," but in time, said Freedman, ezer "was always interpreted as 'to help,' a mixture of both nuances. Ezer appears twenty-one times in the Old Testament."

In contrast, k'enegdo, another Hebrew word used in Genesis 2:18 to describe Eve, appears only once. Freedman pointed out that in late rabbinical commentaries k'enegdo means "equal" <$>and stated that in his view "there is no basis for translating k'enegdo as 'fit' or 'appropriate,' as the traditional translators do when they describe the woman as a 'fit helper.'" He concluded, "When God creates Eve . . . , His intent is that she will beunlike the animals'a power (or strength) equal to him.'"4

Thus, it seems that through imprecise translation, our understanding of the powerful words used originally to describe Eve's role have been diminished. As a result, our understanding of the intended role of Mother Eve has also been diminished. Suppose we had all, male and female alike, been taught to understand Genesis 2:18 as something like the following: "It is not good that man should be alone. I will make him a companion of strength and power who is equal with him."

A more accurate understanding of the original words of Genesis 2:18 clearly coincides with what the restored gospel teaches us about Mother Eve. In fact, President Howard W. Hunter taught: "The Lord intended that the wife be a helpmeet for man (meet means equal)that is, a companion equal and necessary in partnership."5

Adam and Eve were not unequally yoked. Eve was created as a suitable partner for Father Adam, the first of the human race on this earth. Created in the exact image of her heavenly parents, Eve came to Adam uniquely prepared to perform her assigned duties, to act as a companion with the first high priest in mortalityto be a partner with him.

Collectively and individually we would be better served if the correct meaning of our English term helpmeet were well understood and incorporated into our writing, thinking, and speaking. If mankind historically had accepted this more careful and correct interpretation, perhaps attitudes, laws, and customs would be different, and the relationships that God intended between men and women, between husband and wife, between women and society would function more easily.

The potential effect on women who gain an accurate understanding of who Eve isand who she has always beenis difficult to overestimate. I spoke of Eve one evening to my nearly eighty-year-old sister-in-law, who had recently returned from serving a mission. A few days later she sent me a letter, which read in part: "I was very excited about what you have found and still am, especially the origin and meaning of the word helpmeet and the implication it gives to Eve's position. I sat frozen, actually feeling the blood drain from my face, awed, with a joyous feeling I will never forget, butcrying at the same time! I wondered why I should feel all this emotion. Suddenly this thought came to my mind clearly: It's trueI am who I always thought I was!"

Notes
