Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

There Was No Other Way

Perhaps the most harmful misperception in the entire Garden saga is the idea that another way for humankind to enter mortality would have been found had Eve not partaken of the fruit of the tree of knowledge. I've heard many people ask, "Isn't this choice alone responsible for the fact that we must face this bleak telestial proving ground?" Theologically and socially this misunderstanding wreaks havoc on the souls of mankind. It also works in opposition to God's eternal plan, for the entirety of the plan is built upon the foundation of the Fall, that first and fundamental exercise in agency.

A matter of such theological importance is best explored and clarified by the words of prophets, for no one else has authority. That the Fall was foreordained could not be stated more clearly than in these words of Brigham Young: "The Lord knew they would do this, and he had designed that they should."1

"Adam and Eve did the very thing the Lord intended them to do. If we had the original record we would see the purpose of the Fall clearly stated and its necessity explained," taught President Joseph Fielding Smith as he reminded us of how much has been lost to our understanding.2

President J. Reuben Clark spoke in unequivocal terms of the importance of the choice made in Eden. On it "depended the whole Plan of the Great Council in Heaven, because those who kept their 'first estate,' must have opportunity to come to earth, to obtain mortal bodies, that they might then be proved in this 'second estate,' 'to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them ... and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever' (Abraham 3:25-26)."3

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Adam, our father, and Eve, our mother, must obey. They must fall. They must become mortal. Death must enter the world. There is no other way. They must fall that man may be."4

President Boyd K. Packer taught: "The plan is not based on chance, nor on accident. It is based on purpose, on agency, on choice. It accords with laws which were in force long before the plan was ever laid down. All of it has order; all of it was planned for us."5

There is a reason others do not know this truth, for it has been lost from the account in Genesis. But there is no reason for those who believe in the scriptures of the Restoration and in the words of living prophets to be so unenlightened.

A one-paragraph summary of the grand plan of happiness can be found in a prophetic and historic document issued by the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, entitled "The Family: A Proclamation to the World." This summary reads in part: "In the premortal realm, spirit sons and daughters knew and worshiped God as their Eternal Father and accepted His plan by which His children could obtain a physical body and gain earthly experience to progress toward perfection and ultimately realize his or her divine destiny as an heir of eternal life."6

The Fall, a Planned Event

The Fall was an actual occurrence. The word fall describes what actuallyphysically and spirituallytranspired. Although there is much allegory and symbolism in the Garden story, the Fall was one of three events (the Creation, the Fall, and the Atonement) planned for in the councils of heaven that all might experience the great plan of happiness. Only when she and Adam were freed from the confining transitional state of the Garden of Eden could Eve be about her mission.

Brigham Young put the Fall into context, assuring us that this fall puts man in his correct place in the universe: "The earth was framed and brought into existence and man was placed upon it, it was near the throne of our Father in heaven. And when man fellthough that was designed in the economy, there was nothing about it mysterious or unknown to the Gods, they understood it all, and it was all plannedbut when man fell, the earth fell into space, and took up its abode in this planetary system, and the sun became our light."7

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote that the three most important events of time and eternity are the Creation, the Fall, and the Atonement: "The three things without which either all things would vanish away, or the whole purpose of existence would come to naught."8 These three events are inseparably intertwined, for the atonement of Christ through which salvation comes is built on the foundation of the fall of Adam and Eve. It was necessary that Adam and Eve and their posterity become subject to sin, that thereby we all might be privileged to work out our own salvation.

Progression

Because Eve's role, along with Adam's, was foundational and in accordance with eternal law, it can be put into perspective by a careful study of the stations in which Adam and Eve found themselves as they progressed through premortality and into mortality. There were three spheres, or realms, and three distinct body states through which they passed. The spheres were premortal, paradisiacal, and mortal. The corresponding body states were spirit, paradisiacal, and mortal. Let us examine the process more closely so that we may clearly understand what took place.

Premortal Sphere, Spirit Bodies

In the premortal heavenly sphere, our first parents began their training and grew in faith, obedience, and abilities, as did we. It was there, as spirit beings, that they accepted their majestic, essential assignment. In this sphere, spirits wait for their opportunity to claim their priceless temporal bodies, which are absolutely necessary to their eternal progression.

Paradisiacal Sphere, Paradisiacal Bodies

The paradisiacal sphere was the place of learning prepared for our first parents. We call it the Garden of Eden. While they were in this sphere, the paradisiacal, premortal bodies of Adam and Eve functioned without blood. In the Garden they were given the great commandment to multiply and replenish the earth. Elder Dallin H. Oaks explained: "When Adam and Eve received the first commandment, they were in a transitional state, no longer in the spirit world but with physical bodies not yet subject to death and not yet capable of procreation." To fulfill the paramount commandment to multiply and replenish the earth, they had to transgress that "barrier between the bliss of the Garden of Eden and the terrible trials and wonderful opportunities of mortal life."9

For generations theologians and lay persons alike have pondered the whys and what-ifs of the actions of Adam and Eve. Did they have any idea of what they were about? Was their act willful disobedience? Was it a sin? The answer is contained in the scriptures of the Restoration. The Fall was planned, Lehi stated, because "all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" (2 Nephi 2:24). Noting that Eve was the first to transgress the limits of the Garden of Eden to initiate the conditions of mortality, Elder Oaks taught us that "her act, whatever its nature, was formally a transgression but eternally a glorious necessity to open the doorway toward eternal life. Adam showed his wisdom by doing the same. And thus Eve and 'Adam fell that men might be' (2 Nephi 2:25)."10

Mortal Sphere, Mortal Bodies

Elder Russell M. Nelson explained the change that had to take place before Adam and Eve could obey the commandment to bear children: "Their bodies of flesh and bone were made in the express image of God's. In that state of innocence, they were not yet mortal. They could have no children, were not subject to death, and could have lived in Eden's garden forever. Thus, we might speak of the Creation in terms of a paradisiacal creation.

"If that state had persisted, you and I would still be stranded among the heavenly host as unborn sons and daughters of God. The great plan ... would have been frustrated."11

Because God's world is based on eternal laws, its ordinances are based on those selfsame laws. Elder Russell M. Nelson also advised that such an eternal law was explained to Adam and Eve: "Should they eat from 'the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,' their bodies would change; mortality and eventual death would come upon them. But partaking of that fruit was prerequisite to their parenthood." He noted: "While I do not fully understand all the biochemistry involved, I do know that their physical bodies did change; blood began to circulate in their bodies. Adam and Eve thereby became mortal. ... Accordingly, we could speak of the fall of Adam in terms of a mortal creation because 'Adam fell that men might be.'"12

God has decreed laws for existence in all spheres. We know that as astronauts travel into space, earthly bodies must accede to rules of interplanetary environment. Yet, those rules are minuscule compared to the quantum changes required for Adam and Eve to enter mortality and function in that sphere.

Elder Boyd K. Packer helped us to understand the final complexities of this momentous journey. He reminded us that Elder Orson F. Whitney had described the Fall as having "a twofold directiondownward, yet forward. It brought man into the world and set his feet upon progression's highway."13 Elder Packer also taught us that "a transformation had taken place which made them a little lower than angels."14

Is There a Difference between a Transgression and a Sin?

Elder Boyd K. Packer taught further that "the Fall came by transgression of a law, but there was no sin connected with it. There is a difference between transgression and sin. Both always bring consequences. While it may not be a sin to step off a roof, in doing so, you become subject to the law of gravity and consequences will follow. ... The fall of man was made from the presence of God to this mortal life."15

Elder Dallin H. Oaks explained in a general conference address, "For reasons that have not been revealed, this transition, or 'fall,' could not happen without a transgressionan exercise of moral agency amounting to a willful breaking of a law (see Moses 6:59). This would be a planned offense, a formality to serve an eternal purpose." He further explained how a transgression can be just that and not a sin: "Some acts, like murder, are crimes because they are inherently wrong. Other acts, like operating without a license, are crimes only because they are legally prohibited. Under these distinctions, the act that produced the Fall was not a sininherently wrongbut a transgressionwrong because it was formally prohibited."16

The Prophet Joseph Smith assured us that "Adam did not commit sin in eating the fruits, for God had decreed that he should eat and fall."17

Lehi explained that "if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen" (2 Nephi 2:22) but would have remained in the same state in which he was created. "And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Nephi 2:23).

We have learned that Adam and Eve were without sin and in a state of absolute innocence until they transgressed by partaking of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Had they not partaken, every living thing would be in Eden these unknown number of years later as it was thenbird, beast and crawling thing, along with Adam and Eve. We all would be waiting within the bounds of premortality to come to earth and claim our mortal bodies.

We have learned that Adam and Eve, and all who were to follow after them, must be put in a probationary state that they might realize the full measure of their creation, that they might elect righteousness over sin, that they might not only choose good but choose to do good. Elder B. H. Roberts reminded us that "the 'Fall' was as much a part of God's earth-planned life for man as the 'redemption' provided for him; indeed there would have been no need of redemption but for the 'Fall,' and no redemption would have been provided but for anticipation of that 'Fall.'" This was the will of God. This was the Plan. That which is named the Fall should surely be identified as "the beginning of the rise of man."18

Our Return Home

Elder Russell M. Nelson reminded us: "As we grow older, our broad chests and narrow waists have a tendency to trade places. We get wrinkles, lose color in our haireven the hair itselfto remind us that we are mortal children of God, with a 'manufacturer's guarantee' that we shall not be stranded upon the earth forever."19

This blessed promise of a return home finds us retracing the same steps upward that Adam and Eve took downward. This seems to be the order of the universe, the established pattern we must honor. As we close our stay in mortality, we lay our mortal bodies down. We enter paradise in the postmortal spirit world and go about the work of preparing for the Savior's final coming to earth and our subsequent resurrection. We can then return to the eternal sphere as resurrected beings with body and soul inseparably connected, to dwell forever with our Father.

Life is indeed one grand, eternal rounda hallowed journey ever moving toward ultimate salvation. And through this grand tour we are ever learning, ever growing, striving toward a perfected, exalted state.

Notes
