Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

And They Were One

Perhaps the most familiar of all biblical stories having to do with Adam and Eve is the story of woman being created from Adam's rib. On this belief many hang the assertion that Eve is inferior and subject to Adam and that the same pattern is true for women today. Our modern-day prophets have spoken plainly and positively to put the biblical account into perspective. President Joseph F. Smith felt this misperception important enough to issue a statement, signed by the First Presidency, informing us that "all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner."1

Eve "was placed on earth in the same manner as was Adam, the Mosaic account of the Lord creating her from Adam's rib being merely figurative," Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught.2 "Without question she was like unto her mighty husband, Adam, in intelligence and in devotion to righteousness, during both her first and second estates of existence."3

President Spencer W. Kimball stated that the account of the rib "of course, is figurative."4 Eve was not an afterthought!

What Can We Learn from This Symbolism?

Hebrew scholars point out that the biblical word tsela, translated "rib" in Genesis 2:22, really means something like "side." The normal use of this word is in describing sacred architectural elements such as portions of the temple, the ark of the covenant, or the tabernacle. The Hebrew word did not have any "early form," and there is no reason to believe that it once meant "side" but later took on the meaning of "rib." Only in the Eden story is the word translated "rib." This closer examination of the Hebrew helps us to understand that we are to see Adam and Eve as two perfect and equal human beings created by the same Supreme hand and endowed with the same noble intellects and instincts.

Perhaps the concept of God as the master builder of sacred human forms did not occur to those who translated the ancient biblical record. As President Gordon B. Hinckley has stated, Eve was the crowning work of creation after He had completed all else.5 Hugh Nibley sheds further light on the use of this word in the scriptures: "The word rib expresses the ultimate in proximity, intimacy, and identity. When Jeremiah speaks of 'keepers of my tsela' (Jeremiah 20:10), he means bosom friends, inseparable companions. Such things are to be taken figuratively, as in Moses 3:22 and Genesis 2:22, where we are told not that the woman was made out of the rib or from the rib, but that she was the rib, a powerful metaphor."6

Let us examine once again the biblical account of the creation of Eve to see if we can gain deeper insights. We learn that "the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam" (Genesis 2:21). Eve was created, and then Adam was awakened. The word awake seems to indicate that the advent of Eve is the harbinger of a profound spiritual awakening for Adam and, by extension, for us all.

In line with both these concepts, Eve, having been "rived" from Adam, was like him in being the embodiment of wisdom, perfect intelligence, and spiritual awakening and was recognized by Adam as the "better half" of himself. A remnant of this symbolism is evidenced in some cultures in love songs or love poetry that ofttimes refer to a woman as the "better half" or "the light of my life."

Eternal Marriage

The words so poignantly used in Genesis to describe Eve's relationship to Adam, "Bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh" (Genesis 2:23), constitute an ancient covenant pledge. This phrase seems to be a formula designed to advance two important principles: It places man and woman on an equal footing regarding their humanity as it sets them apart from the animals.7 Additionally these are words used to bind the man and the woman together in joyous interdependency. Adam and Eve are entering into a covenant marriage. By the use of these words we know that he embraces her as his being, his essence. Their future identity will be as one.

We are assured by our prophets that this ceremony refers not only to a marriage but to an eternal marriage. "Adam and Eve were joined together in marriage for time and for all eternity by the power of that everlasting priesthood," Elder Russell M. Nelson reminded us.8 President Joseph Fielding Smith assured us, "Adam and Eve were married by the Lord while they were yet immortal beings in the Garden of Eden and before death entered the world."9

Imagine the glory and solemnity of such a ceremony. These newly created beings of light rejoiced that they were together in this unimaginably beautiful Eden. Now they were privileged to seal their love. Scripturally, God uses an altar as the place where we make holy covenants. Thus we can imagine Adam and Eve kneeling at a holy altar as God instructs them on their oneness and unity. They pledge together to be, in every sense, one flesh, as instructed by God. With such a pledge, they agree to put aside their own desires, to join together to meet each other's needs and assist in the fulfillment of each other's mission.

It is important to our understanding of their later actions to know that theirs must have been a poignant and near perfect love, perhaps the grandest of all love stories. Pledged to each other and having responded to their assignments in the work of creating this world, they now could act together for the good of all waiting spirits. If we view their later actions in this light, the subtle shadings and searing beauty of their story come alive. At this sealing ceremony, they may have also been reminded of their responsibility to waiting spirits, for therein lies the glory of marriage and the purpose of their creation.

"Naked" as Symbolic

In paradisiacal Eden, the divinely orchestrated eternal marriage of Adam and Eve was sealed. Hugh Nibley has said that in connection with this ceremony Adam and Eve were told to "put on your garments of glory."10 If indeed Adam and Eve were clothed in robes of unparalleled magnificence, as referenced in other Hebrew texts, we must search for the symbolic richness in the next verse: "And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed" (Genesis 2:25).

The adage that a picture is worth a thousand words seems to be particularly valid in these scriptural and liturgical representations. Such phrasing evokes in our minds the vivid image of a couple who stand before God in absolute purity. Nothing will be allowed to come between them and Him. They unashamedly present themselves to be directed and guided by Him.

Naked is used similarly in other religious texts. President John Taylor used that imagery when he reminded us that "all things, we are told, are naked and open before Him with whom we have to do."11 We use that term today in religious, legal, and social contexts to mean "open, without embellishment, without disguise, unashamed, available, stripped of guile." As defined here, the word seems instructive about the relationship we should cultivate with God.

What of a Temple in Eden?

The temple, that absolutely necessary link between earth and heaven, is God's house. It is, in a sense, His home away from home, the place where He dwells when He visits this sphere. That is one of the reasons we are a temple-building people.

That God visited in Eden we are assured. Eden is at times referred to as a prototype of all temples, which are by their design, purpose, and dedication areas of sacred space, made holy because God's presence can be found there. Eden in a paradisiacal state was itself as a temple. There God walked and talked with Adam and Eve; there they worshipped, learned of the ordinances, and made sacred covenants.

As we understand that in Eden a sacred and binding sealing was performed, in which Adam and Eve were united in eternal marriage, we gain further insight into the importance of temple worship and temple sealings in our own lives. We in essence enter Eden when we enter the temple, for there, as in Eden, we are in a place wherein God can dwell, wherein we can make covenants, receive ordinances, and learn all that is necessary to find our way back to our heavenly home.

Cleave unto Your Wife

The love story of Adam and Eve continues as God begins His tutoring of how marriages work best. Vital to us and instructive to all couples contemplating marriage is the next verse in Genesis: "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh" (Genesis 2:24). It seems that God wished to be certain that Adam and Eve and all their posterity understand that a married couple are to give top priority to their union. After marriage couples are released to each other and are charged to become agents unto themselves, to create a "sovereign kingdom," so to speak. Their thoughts and actions are to be unified and purposeful. Their strength is to be found in their oneness and in their identifying themselves to all others as a whole unit. The husband's work will be the wife's, and the wife's work will be the husband's. By using such language with Adam and Eve, God advises us that all such contracts and covenants should be jointly made and jointly honored. The marriage commitment of Adam and Eve, like all future marriage commitments, was to be a partnership in the truest and most honorable sense.

Notes
