Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

And He Called Their Name Adam

Some have been confused about whom God is addressing as He walks and talks with His beloved children in the Garden of Eden. As we read scripture designating Adam as the addressee, many assume God is speaking only of or to the man Adam. Such an assumption would lead to the belief that Eve stood by throughout the entire Garden period without a voice, without acquiring knowledge, without a significant role. Fortunately, as Latter-day Saints we know that such was not the case. Eve was neither a silent nor a silenced partner, nor, taught President Spencer W. Kimball, should Latter-day Saint women be any less.1

President Kimball gave us further insight as he taught from the scriptures: "'And I, God, blessed them [Man here is always in the plural. It was plural from the beginning.] and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over [it].' (Moses 2:27-28.)

"And the scripture says,

"'And I, God said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man [not a separate man, but a complete man, which is husband and wife] in our image, after our likeness; and it was so.' (Moses 2:26.)"2

Moses 6:9 tells us: "In the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam" (emphasis added). Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "The name of Adam and Eve as a united partnership is Adam. They, the two of them together, are named Adam. This is more than the man Adam as a son of God or the woman Eve as a daughter of the same Holy Being. Adam and Eve taken together are named Adam, and the fall of Adam is the fall of them both, for they are one."3

Unless a scripture speaks of the man Adam individually, the reference is to both Adam and Eve. When a scripture refers to Adam, or mankind, as plural, the pronoun used is they or them. It also appears that when the Lord is speaking of man or mankind, He is referring to both men and women. In the two places in Genesis where the singular word for Adam is found, the singular becomes pluralexclusive becomes inclusivewith the simple use of the pronoun them: "Let us make man in our image ... and let them have dominion. ... So God created man ... male and female created he them" (Genesis 1:26-27; emphasis added).

There can be no question but that Eve was included in the dialogue in Eden and in Eden's teaching. She, with Adam, was to have dominion. Hers was to be not a passive but rather a pivotal role in this phase of the plan. Being aware of inclusive language, we can feel confident that God's instructions, concerns for, and advancement of principles and laws were directed to Eve as they were to Adam.

Similarly, God's words today are directed to women as well as men. His teachings are for female and male alike. He is just as concerned today that women understand the scriptures, that they teach and articulate scriptural principles in their families and Church callings, and that they apply them to their own lives and extend them to the larger community. He has a great interest in His daughters learning and respecting the meaning and use of the priesthood and in their claiming this power for their good.

We read in the book of Moses about God's plan for this unity in purpose and action. Adam and Eve prayed together, counseled together, heard the voice of the Lord together, learned together, labored together, taught their children the gospel together, and bore the responsibilities of parenthood together (Moses 5:1-12).

We are reminded of the equity of eternal principles by Elder Neal A. Maxwell: "We share in a single system of salvation. We strive to walk the same straight and narrow path. We read the same scriptures. We frequent the same holy temples of God, participating in its holy ordinances. We partake of the same sacrament and share spiritual gifts. We are called to serve in the kingdom of Godand releasedby the same divine authority. We depend on the same Atonement for immortality, and upon obeying the same commandments for eternal life. We are to cultivate the same celestial attributes and to develop the same righteous reflexes."4

Elder Bruce C. Hafen has commented that Elder Maxwell and his wife, Colleen, exemplify this equity of eternal principles by the way they live: "No wonder Neal has often told Latter-day Saint congregations that for too long the women of the Church have been the Christians while the men have been the theologians. Stirred by Colleen's example he has encouraged a sharing and balancing of these functions, so that all Latter-day Saint men and women might seek to be both Christians and theologians."5

What Knowledge Had Eve Acquired?

For centuries the debate has raged about whether Eve acted in knowing agency in the Garden. It is as though a light has been turned on in a dark room when we read this exchange between God and Enoch as recorded in the book of Moses: "And I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency" (Moses 7:32). In fact, the commandment to multiply and replenish the earth was given to Adam and Eve before they were told not to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil (Moses 2:28; 3:17).

Elder John A. Widtsoe taught: "Such was the problem before our first parents: to remain forever at selfish ease in the Garden of Eden, or to face unselfishly tribulation and death, in bringing to pass the purposes of the Lord for a host of waiting spirit children. They chose the latter.

"This they did with open eyes and minds as to consequences. The memory of their former estates may have been dimmed, but the gospel had been taught them during their sojourn in the Garden of Eden. They could not have been left in complete ignorance of the purpose of their creation."6

Why, then, is there such an unusual amount of uninformed and inappropriate discussion in the world concerning what Eve, this preeminent woman, understood of her mission?

Heavenly Preparation

We know that Eve's learning began even before she was placed in the Garden. For her, as for us, life in the first estate was a time of growth in all matters and in the development of skills and talents relevant to her roles. We know that Jesus was the Creator and that mighty Michael and his beloved Eve worked as active aids to Him throughout the creation of the earth.

This joyous daughter of Deitylike Jeremiah, whose "mission was known and preparedall because of the special talents and powers he came to have while yet a spirit being"7would have been carefully schooled in matters relating to purpose, plan, and agency. Eve would have come to the Garden with those traits and talents, supported by the knowledge, wisdom, and judgment she had developed during long ages in the presence of the Divine.

Additionally, we know that we neither choose nor call ourselves. The pattern has been established. When properly called, we are set apart by those in authority. Eve had been chosen, and her mission and calling as the Mother of All Living had been made known to her. It would not be unreasonable to suppose that she had been promised that should she choose to carry out her calling, she would be blessed with the knowledge, courage, and freedom to execute that calling as she was prepared and as was timely.

Learning in the Garden

Joseph Smith and Brigham Young spoke of the knowledge given to Adam and Eve in the Garden. The Prophet Joseph taught that "Adam received commandments and instructions from God: this was the order from the beginning."8 Brigham Young added that "Adam was as conversant with his Father who placed him upon this earth as we are conversant with our earthly parents."9

God the Father walked and talked with His beloved children in the Garden. Because they were the very ones and the only ones who could bring to pass mortal life so that His own promises to all His children can be fulfilled, we can feel confident that God did not visit them to speak of trifling matters. Each meeting was surely a time of important instruction and learning.

Such learning was undoubtedly according to the pattern the Savior Himself followed. As John spoke of Christ's glory he recounted, "And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace ... but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness; and thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first" (D&C 93:12-14).

It gives us pause to wonder how long Adam and Eve spent in the Garden weighing the two apparently conflicting commandments. Brother Hugh Nibley has suggested that by the time they were tempted by the being who symbolically is called a serpent, Adam and Eve had concluded that they must partake of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, for the Hebrew text indicates that all that transpired did so in a systematic fashion.10 It seems apparent that they went from precept to precept, from truth to truth.

Symbolism of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge

For Adam and Eve, as for us, the tree and its fruit evoke images of the quintessential dilemmas of life. First, we are ever aware of those two great gifts that we know make us like unto God: the knowledge of good and the knowledge of evil. Next, we are aware of the two great opposites, death and life, with all their attendant physical and spiritual ramifications. And finally, we recall the importance of the righteous use of agency, which often requires enormous courage and the willingness to accept the consequences, known and unknown, of our actions.

When viewed in this way, the tree and its fruit also become glorious symbols representing deep spiritual realities. Neither the tree nor the fruit of the tree had power in themselves to give mortal life. Only God has authority to confer such life.

The tree and its fruit were placed in the midst of the Garden, that it might be ever in Adam and Eve's sight and in their minds as a point of focus in continuing discussion with their heavenly teachers. It was called "the tree with forbidden fruit" because its fruit contained within it the elements of death. We know that mortal death was planned for in the councils of heaven and is the very reason Christ would come to earth as the son of a mortal woman to make the atoning sacrifice and pay for our sins.

Robert L. Millet reminded us of the symbolic nature of the term fruit in all our stages of progressiondownward, forward, and upward. "In regard to the Fall, it should be sufficient for us to know that Adam and Eve and all forms of life are required to partake of the fruits of mortality before we can partake of the fruits of immortality in the Resurrection. Further, men and women cannot partake of the fruit of the tree of lifethat is, gain eternal lifewhile they remain in their sins; mortal man simply cannot inherit immortal glory. ... Repentance and redemption always and forevermore precede exaltation."11 Of course, we must have complied with the laws of God relevant to each stage of our progression in order to taste the fruits of that stage.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie advised, "What is meant by partaking of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is that our first parents complied with whatever laws were involved so that their bodies would change from their state of paradisiacal immortality to a state of natural mortality."12 Elder James E. Talmage stated that the Fall was "the means of winning title to glory, exaltation, and eternal lives."13

Lest we forget, the very reason a world was created, agency adopted as the central principle, and a Savior provided was so that Eve and Adam would choose to descend to a mortal sphere where all might have the opportunity to claim mortal bodies and begin their time of testing. It defies logic that these concepts, essential to the integrity of the plan, would not have been discussed in some detail with Adam and Eve. Without some knowledge of right and wrong, there can be no true exercise of agency.

Enough knowledge of the great plan adopted in the Council in Heaven had been made known to Eve and to Adam to enable them to act with informed agency. They had walked with, talked with, and been taught by God the Father, Christ, angels, and other beings who came as angels of light. They were blessed with a covenant marriage. They knew of Eve's mission as the Mother of All Living. So prepared, they were ready to carry out their mission.

Notes
