Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

The Enticer

We arrive at the question crucial to the story: Did Eve partake of the fruit with the understanding that she must do so to inaugurate mortal life, or was she completely deceived? It is at this point that laws, customs, and cultures assume sin and ignorance on the part of Eve and place them in absentia upon the heads of all her daughters.

Satan appeared in that pastoral and peaceable setting and engaged Eve in conversation, focusing her attention on the fruit and making many claims. The scriptural account does not speak of her motives. We're not shown if she differentiates the truth ("your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil"; Genesis 3:5) from the half-truth ("ye shall not surely die"; Genesis 3:4). We are given no insight into Eve's recognition of this moment as the opportunity to begin the journey that would lead to the fulfillment of her grand mission. But we do know something of her intellect, her nature, and the teachings that had been given as God and others walked and talked with Adam and Eve in the Garden. Elder John A. Widtsoe told us that the Lord had warned them of the challenges they would face on earth.1 And we recall President Joseph Fielding Smith's words: "The simple fact is, as explained in the Book of Mormon and the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the fall was a very essential part of the divine plan. Adam and Eve therefore did the very thing that the Lord intended them to do. If we had the original record, we would see the purpose of the fall clearly stated and its necessity explained."2

The necessity of opposition may seem to require that Satan play a key role in this drama. I believe that Satan had to be allowed into the Garden, which was, after all, God's world. It thus seems to me that Satan could not have entered the Garden of Eden unless God permitted him to do so. The principles of opposition and choice were explained by Nephi: "Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other" (2 Nephi 2:16). Such opposition in all things is a foundational principle, necessary to agency. Nor would Satan necessarily have seemed out of place in the Garden, for Nephi also tells us of "that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light" (2 Nephi 9:9).

The Richness of

We read in the biblical text that Satan beguiled Eve. Knowing the negative modern connotations of the word used to explain Satan's hold over Eve, I wondered how this magnificent woman could have been beguiled. Sensing this was another word whose true meaning might have been lost after so many centuries of translation, I spoke again with Dr. Nehama Aschkenasy. She explained that the Hebrew word which has come to be translated as beguiled is a rare verb form of unusual depth and richness. Because it is a form no longer in use, it is almost impossible to translate. "It is safe to say that it indicates an intense multilevel experience which evokes great emotional, psychological, and/or spiritual trauma."3

Aschkenasy wrote of this in her book Eve's Journey. The use of this word in the biblical narrative "makes it clear that Eve was motivated by a complex set of inner drives, anchored not only in her physical, but also in her intellectual nature."4 She further indicated her belief that this intense, multilevel experience caused Eve to step back, reevaluate, reassess, and ponder the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

As I pondered this thought, I<\p>recalled a beautiful exposition on the theme of conscience by Elder Boyd K. Packer. He broke the word conscience into its parts: science, meaning "to know," and con, meaning "with." Thus conscience means to know within one's self. Elder Packer said: "Our conscience might be described as a memory, a residual awareness of who we really are, of our true identity. It is perhaps the best example of the fact that we can become aware of truths because we feel them rather than by knowing them because we perceive them through the physical sense."5 Such appears to have been Eve's conscience.

Surely some time passed while Eve and Adam evaluated and reevaluated the two conflicting commandments that required a considered use of their power of agency. Could it have been a year, a decade, a century, even more? God's time is not our time, so we do not know.

We gain some insight into Eve's thought process from Moses 4:12, which indicates that her exchange with Satan (or the series of exchanges) had evoked in Eve a review of the total range of the human experience: "And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it became pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make her wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and also gave unto her husband with her, and he did eat" (emphasis added). Eve was uttering a truth regarding the tree and what it stood for, advises Elder B. H. Roberts. He notes: "Let it be observed that the tree of knowledge, even though the tree of death, is nowhere called an 'evil tree,' or its fruit bad. ... Rather to the contrary: it is included among the trees 'pleasant to the sight, and good for food,' in the same verse in which it is named (Gen. 2:9)."6

This scripture seems to indicate that Eve recognized that the tree and the fruit, both powerful symbols, were also essential gifts of mortal life. Let us examine these gifts more closely that we may see what Eve surely recognized. Remember, we are told that she sawnot thought or imagined or believedbut saw "that the tree was good" for various uses (Genesis 3:6). We know from the scriptural record that Eve became aware of the tree and its fruit, which represented food, beauty, enlightenment, and knowledge. As food, the fruit itself assured that nourishment for the body and nourishment for the soul would be available, suggesting that physical and spiritual hunger could be assuaged. As beauty, the fruit foreshadowed a world that could be filled with things pleasing, ennobling, and enrichinga place where her work as mother of a human race could begin. As enlightenment and knowledge, the fruit symbolized the precious knowledge of good and evil that would make Adam and Eve and their posterity "as gods." Through right choices they could be assured of salvation. She and Adam and their posterity would be in a position to exercise agency, to show mercy, and to grow in judgment. After that recognition, which offered assurance that she would not be leading the waiting spirits into a death from which there was no rising, a world in which there were no promises, Eve partook.7

Often it is suggested that Eve partook of the fruit without knowing but that Adam did know. A passage in the New Testament, 1 Timothy 2:14, is used to support that assertion. The scripture reads: "Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression." Stephen E. Robinson, professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University, suggests that such language may have come about in part by means of an apostate "Adamic paradigm" for ordering human society.8 Throughout history the story of Adam and Eve has been shaped to fit the needs of a given time. Language was called upon to justify the practices of an apostate church within the context of a larger society, in which women were not to be seen or heard. In that larger society, woman's role had become one of near total subjugation. The Savior set many examples to challenge such attitudes and practices but without much success.

As the gospel has been restored in this dispensation, the correct interpretation of the story of Adam and Eve began to emerge from the lips of modern-day prophets. We now know that this story is central to our understanding of who we are, why we are here, what our mission is, and where we are going. It explains beginnings, middles, and ends. It teaches us about relationships between men and women, husbands and wives, families and society. It adds enormously to our understanding of self as a literal child of God created in His image. Is it possible that a corrected understanding of Mother Eve and the Garden story is part of the restoration of all things?

Because this issue has been so negatively addressed through the centuries, let us examine again the basic facts. Eve, along with Adam, had been taught by God the Father and by Jesus Christ. She had a long history of being taught in the premortal existence as well as in Eden. She had developed wisdom, judgment, and evaluative powers, having received spiritual guidance and sacred ordinances. She was in a unique position to draw on knowledge and light. Eve likely did not have a total picture of all that was meant for humankind upon entry into mortality, any more than we know when we begin a new phase of life what it will bring. But, as we have learned, Eve was sufficiently prepared for a proper exercise of agency.

A Testament to Mother Eve

Some years ago my valued colleague Clare Hardy Johnson and I had long discussions on this crucial point. She sent me a powerful letter, which I quote in part: "To allege Eve acted without intending to inaugurate mortal life for mankind, that she was not mindful of her calling as the Mother of All Living and her charge to multiply and replenish the earth, is to indict her with misconduct that is contrary to the behavior of righteous women throughout the scriptures." Clare noted correctly that seeking after pleasure, satisfying curiosity, and usurping power is not a pattern of righteous women. It is contrary both to their performance and to their innate natures.

As an impassioned advocate for our beloved mother Eve, Clare declared that to accept the idea of a "lucky guess" is to "deny her knowledge, ignore her wisdom, reject her unselfishness, impugn her faithfulness, and mock her courage. It is to suggest that mankind's passage into mortality was not the result of the free and informed choice of a noble parent, but a fortunate accident."

God does give us agency, and we have access to the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, which enlightens us, guides us, stirs premortal memories within us, and helps us make decisions in accordance with God's will. Thus, none of us need choose blindly.

Satan, the Unwitting Catalyst

Hugh Nibley said that Eve "sees through Satan's disguise of clever hypocrisy, identifies him, and exposes him for what he is,"9 a deceiver hoping to interject himself into the plan and thereby gain authority over the bodies and souls of mortal man. Elder John A. Widtsoe advised, "The role of Satan in this drama is not difficult to understand. He seeks to overthrow the work of God. By inducing Adam and Eve to disobey the Lord, he thought to have them in his power. He forgot, or did not know, that by their very 'disobedience' the purposes of the Lord with respect to his spirit children would be accomplished. The temptation of Eve turned upon him to the defeat of his evil designs. This often is the fate of evil."10

Scattered throughout literature are references to the evil one who opposed the plan presented in the grand heavenly council, led a rebellion, and was cast out of heaven with his followers to become an unwilling agent in the carrying out of that very plan upon the earth. In many places this evil one is named Mephistopheles. This name, in its original context, is used to denote the ultimate frustration of the evil one, who with the worst intent can only contribute to the exaltation of man by providing the opposition necessary for testing him during the time of his mortal probation. Brother Nibley wrote that ancient lore held that Eve "outwits the serpent and trips him up with his own smartness."11

Moses 4:6 records the multiple layers of this story. This profound restored scripture takes away all the mystery, erases all the blame, and puts the matter into proper context: "And he [the serpent] sought also to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world" (emphasis added).

Could anything be stated more plainly? Lucifer sought to trick or fool Eve. His purpose was to claim the bodies of the waiting spirits for himself and his minions. His hope was to thwart the divine mission to which Adam and Eve had been foreordained. In the Garden story, Satan's disguise as a snake indicates one who is crafty, designing, and dangerous. But rather than thwart Eve's foreordained mission, the adversary became the catalyst that caused Eve to reevaluate that mission and brought its purposes and necessity into clearer focus. With such focus Eve was confronted with a clear and tangible choice.

Satan's Anger, Then and Now

Imagine Satan's anger when he found it was he, not Eve, who had been duped, that he was but a tool used to trigger the plan of mortality. The grand message is that Satan's ruses are often turned to God's use, for it is humankindnot Satanwho were sent here to succeed and who are protected by God's loving promises and benevolent grace.

Hugh Nibley postulated that ever since then Satan has "had it in for women." Eve thwarted his plan of destruction, and then she recognized him. Brother Nibley further suggested that this grudge, which at times rages as a pitched battle, continues today.12 Sister Patricia Holland said: "If I were Satan and wanted to destroy a society, I think I would stage a full-blown blitz on women."13

Could all this help to explain why through the ages there has been such a need among the unenlightened to subjugate women? Underlying such manifestations in every society is Satan's anger against women. Society often needs little prodding. Dominance and power are heady enticements by themselves.

The prophets have warned that the women of the last dispensation, which is the final dispensation before the return of the Savior, will need to fortify themselves against the onslaught of the adversary (see Revelation 12).14 Individually and collectively, all women and men must learn to respect one another's strengths and watch out for one another's spiritual as well as temporal welfare. We will need to find spiritual sustenance in sure and steady truths garnered from divine and correct sources.

Not only will women need to seek truth for themselves but they will need to speak up courageously and articulately as half-truths or faulty premises are presented to their sisters in the guise of progress and enlightenment. One of Satan's ruses is to mix mostly truth with a little error. Cleverly, this small percentage of error is not introduced until long into the journey. By that time many have emotionally, intellectually, or physically been led onto a path they cannot see is wrong and from which they find it difficult to turn back.

Women, particularly Latter-day Saint women, can and must identify truth. They can and must stand firm in their commitment to that truth, whatever the cost.

Notes
