Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lest Ye Die

Eve's awareness that great and perilous trials awaited humankind must have carried with it an enormous burden. Might there be a symbolic parallel between the two Gardens in which death was the only real choice if souls were to be saved? Eden, where life was inaugurated into mortality; Gethsemene, where the Atonement and the Resurrection made immortality possible.

Eve, with Adam, made a sacrifice that symbolically parallels the sacrifice of the Savior in an important way. By her action, she brought life into the worldnot the life of her children only but life for all mankind. To give life to all, Eve chose to suffer death. Unlike their descendants, Eve and Adam had a choice about whether or not they would eventually die.

In the biblical narrative, Satan boldly seeks to move matters along. Ever lusting for power, he sees Eve as an ally in his unrighteous endeavor to gain sovereignty over the bodies and the souls of mankind. If we follow the story line carefully, we find Eve, upon being addressed by Satan in the Garden, to be very cautious and careful in her language: "And the woman said unto the serpent: we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which thou beholdest in the midst of the garden, God hath saidYe shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die" (Moses 4:8-9). Elder B. H. Roberts suggested that this piece of knowledge was given more as an announcement of the nature of the fruit of the tree and the consequence of eating it than a prohibition against partaking of it.1

Satan pushes his perceived window of opportunity: "Ye shall not surely die; for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil" (Moses 4:9-11). The first part of Satan's statement is a lie, but the remainder of it is true, as affirmed by the Lord in Genesis 3:22-23: "Behold, the man is become as one of us [the Gods], to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken."

Eve does not seem to have been concerned with the issue of physical death, for there is no further reference to it in any of the Creation accounts. Certainly Genesis does not teach that physical death is a punishment for sin or that it is the great challenge of this mortal sphere, for physical death merely offers us the necessary transition from mortality to eternal life. Indeed, the sole purpose of placing "cherubim and a flaming sword" was to "keep the way of the tree of life" (Genesis 3:24), for the time was not yet for Adam and Eve to attain immortality. They had a whole lifetime of purposeful work, struggles, and joys ahead of them, for theirs was a foreordained mission. They needed a space to learn, to make and keep covenants with their Heavenly Father, to bear and nurture children, to celebrate weddings, to revel in their grandchildren, to mourn, to dance, to see a society structured and a nation, a world, shaped.

Adam's mission was to be governor of this entire world and to be the presiding high priest to all future generations. With her beloved companion, Eve was to tie the nations and families of mankind together, to teach, to lead, to love, to extend mercy, and to partner as they set the pattern for all to follow. It was simply not in God's plan that they should at that time know the way to the tree of life.

"Mortal death, the penalty justice imposed upon Adam and his posterity, is in fact a mechanism of rescue," Elder Boyd K. Packer assured us. "It is the process by which we may return to the presence of God. Man must be released from mortality lest he live forever in his sins."2 This awareness of finite time serves as a reminder of the need to progress, to act, to repent. It also allows us a space of time in which to repent.

Julian, who lived and wrote in Rome in the early part of the fifth century after Christ, sought to convince his contemporaries that they were mistaken in believing that physical death is a punishment brought on by Adam's transgression. He reasoned with great fervor that although we are all helpless before physical death, spiritual death is a matter of choice. It is there that we exercise free choice, which God bestowed upon humankind at the time of creation. It is our free will that engages us in the sphere of the voluntary and multiple possibilities available to our individual choice. Julian concluded that although physical death is necessary and universal, each of us has the meansindeed, the responsibilityto choose the response we make to our mortal condition. Each of us holds in our hands our spiritual destiny, which destiny depends upon the choices we make.3 His teaching was rejected.

The plain and simple truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ were being eroded away in that short span of years after His crucifixion. A restoration of those truths was necessary. Elder Boyd K. Packer informed us: "The doctrine of premortal life was known to ancient Christians. For nearly five hundred years the doctrine was taught, but it was then rejected as a heresy by a clergy that had slipped into the Dark Ages of apostasy." He continues: "Once they rejected this doctrine, the doctrine of premortal life, and the doctrine of redemption for the dead, they could never unravel the mystery of life. They became like a man trying to assemble a strand of pearls on a string that was too short. There is no way they can put them all together."4

With the Restoration we now know that which has been lost to so many. We are taught that when we left the presence of the Fatherjust as Adam and Eve were denied the presence of the Father at the time of their departure from Edenwe experienced a spiritual death. The great fear is the possibility of that spiritual death (separation from the Father) becoming permanent, for from that, there is no release. "Therefore God gave unto them commandments, after having made known unto them the plan of redemption, that they should not do evil, the penalty thereof being a second death, which was an everlasting death as to things pertaining unto righteousness; for on such the plan of redemption could have no power, for the works of justice could not be destroyed, according to the supreme goodness of God" (Alma 12:32).

The challenge of mortality is that as we experience this mortal life our senses may be dulled, our sensitivities diminished, and our spirituality blotted out. Removed from the presence of God, we would undergo spiritual diminution that could lead to a spiritual death from which there is no return. That is the terrifying reality. It is also the great and glorifying challenge of mortality.

Adam and Eve could stay in the Garden, live in peace and ease, know neither good nor evilor they could enter the "lone and dreary" world and allow all those spirits who choose to enter that same world to work out their own salvation. That choice, akin to the great choice offered in the councils in heaven, had to be made.

We in mortality cannot begin to imagine the beauty of that world in which Eve dwelt, the serenity Eve felt in her companionship with Adam, or the joy of her association with her God. Hers was a condition that would seem to offer all that one could desire for self. And yet she with Adam held the key to the other door, a door which, upon being opened, would expose a splendid array of all that was good and all that was evil to them, their children, and everyone who would follow after them. Yet, it was a door through which all must pass if Eve were to complete her foreordained mission.

Elder B. H. Roberts wrote of the absolute necessity of passing through this door: "For thereby was brought to pass the broken harmonies of the world out of which would be forged the experiences that would lead to ... high character, human freedom, morality, and loyalty to righteousness; and therefore the 'Fall' is not an incident to be deplored. Again: it was 'the beginning of the rise of man.'" He quoted a prominent Harvard theologian, Dr. John Fiske, regarding life in Eden without the Fall: "What would have been the moral value or significance of a race of human beings ignorant of sin, and doing beneficent acts with no . . . consciousness or volition? ... But for tasting the forbidden fruit, in what respect could man have become a being of higher order . . . ?"5

We must never forget that this courageous woman, Eve, along with her husband, Adam, had agency. She could have said no to the proposition of mortality. Courageously, heroically, and with enormous generosity of spirit Eve claims that most precious aspect of agency, the right to exercise spiritual and personal integrity. The war in heaven was fought for the very purpose that each one of us might have the right to say yes or no to those things which God proposes. In this act in Eden, Eve set the pattern for all her daughters and sons who would follow after her.

Joy in Mortality

After partaking of the fruit, Eve recognized the correctness of her actions and the necessity of them. Some time later she expressed her feelings as a joyous sermon filled with praise and thanksgiving: "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (Moses 5:11). These moving words spoken by the esteemed Mother of All Living brought comfort and assurance to her children, to the hosts of waiting spirits, and to her beloved husband, Adam.

Eve's words are both an endorsement of the wisdom of Heavenly Father's plan and a blessed benediction on the heads of the participants in it. Her words testify that what has been chosen is the better part, the greater law. Hugh Nibley hailed Eve's actions: "It is she who perceives and points out to Adam that they have done the right thing after all."6

In Rabbi Harold S. Kushner wrote: "I don't believe that eating from the Tree of Knowledge was sinful. I believe it was one of the bravest and most liberating events in the history of the human race. Yes, its consequences were painful, in the same way that growing up and leaving your parental home can be painful, in the same way that undertaking the responsibilities of marriage and parenthood can be painful and leave you wondering, 'Why did I ever give up my less-complicated life for these problems?' But for the person who has experienced the complex, hard-earned satisfactions of human existence, there is no doubt that it is worth the pain."

Kushner then advanced the enlightened concept not often found in secular literature: "The woman is not the villain of the story, enslaved by appetite and bringing sin and death into the world. She can be seen as the heroine of the story, leading her husband into the brave new world of moral demands and moral decisions."7

Once again, it is important to realize that Father Adam and Mother Eve were full partners in this event. Neither deceived or coerced the other, nor were they deceived or coerced by God. Elder John A. Widtsoe elaborated: "It is a thrilling thought that Adam and Eve were not coerced to begin God's work on earth. They chose to do so, by the exercise of their free agency. It is the lesson for all their children: Seek the truth, choose wisely, and carry the responsibility for our acts."8

Correctly understood, the entire purpose of the Garden experience was as a school, a place of preparation where further knowledge and wisdom were to be acquired. Once Eve and Adam had gained this necessary knowledge, they were to move on, lest the plan of salvation be thwarted. With the principle of agency as the highest priority, only they could determine that they would act and when that time would be. As Kushner points out, we thus can see their story as a purposeful account of growth and learning, not an account of original sin. We can rejoice in it as a joyful narrative of a paradise that has been outgrown, not a mournful dirge of a paradise that has been lost.

Notes
