Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

God Prepares and Protects

The bodies of Adam and Eve experienced a great change as mortality took the place of immortality. Adam and Eve were aware of that change in their condition: "The eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they had been naked" (Moses 4:13). Naked, symbolic in Eden's realm, may have had added meaning as they entered mortality. Adam and Eve were now totally vulnerable to the vagaries of this sphere. In mortality they were subject to earth's forces and susceptible to temptation. An ancient apocryphal record called the Apocalypse of Moses depicts how Eve might have felt upon finding herself in this condition: "At that very moment my eyes were opened and I knew that I was naked of the righteousness with which I had been clothed. And I wept saying, 'Why have you done this to me, that I have been estranged from my glory with which I was clothed?'"1

A Holy Investiture

With paradisiacal robes and attendant glory gone from Adam and Eve, what would be the Lord's next act? Would He restore their spiritual protection?

One of the most evocative verses in the account after the expulsion from the Garden is Moses 4:27. Just one sentence long, it clearly shows the compassionate nature of God's love for Adam and Eve and for all His children: "Unto Adam, and also unto his wife, did I, the Lord God, make coats of skins, and clothed them." We can expect that this clothing had religious significance because the Lord Himself put his hand to it.

This clothing was for protection and was specific to the earthly sojourn of Adam and Eve. They were robed in this clothing before they were sent forth from the Garden. God gave to Adam and Eve the covenants that are required in this mortal sphere for enlightenment, protection, and exaltation. They agreed to abide by those covenants. Adam and Eve had, in effect, passed the first worthiness interview of mortality, received their endowments, and donned the robes of protection.

It appears that God did not eject them from Eden immediately (Moses 4:15-29). After their bodies became mortal, Adam and Eve received careful and loving instruction attended to personally by Christ and by other beings of light. They were tutored in all eternal gospel truths necessary for an informed, protected, and faith-filled journey in mortality. Joseph Fielding McConkie wrote: "After Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit, but before they were expelled from the garden, the Father taught them the law of sacrifice. Animals were slain that Adam and Eve might be clothed in 'coats of skins' (Moses 4:27) that were to be a protection to them in our fallen world."2

We learn, too, that "Adam and Eve were further instructed by an angel of the Lord that they were to take upon them the name of Christ, that all they did was to be done in his name (Moses 5:8). Thus as God had clothed them in coats or garments of skin as a token of the protection provided them through Christ ... so they were to clothe themselves in his name by faith, and in that name they were to do all that they did that pertained to salvation or the things of the Spirit."3

Scripture restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith tells us: "The Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was. Amen" (Moses 5:58-59). Thus temple covenants and ordinances were made known to Adam and Eve.

The mortal protective coverings given to Adam and Eve in connection with these covenants speak of God's priesthood and powers, give authority to the wearers, reminding them of promises given and covenants made, and, if they wish to claim it, power to overcome the adversary. In preparation for entering mortality, Adam and Eve donned a tangible element like that spoken of by the apostle Paul when he admonished us to "take upon ourselves the whole armour of God" (Ephesians 6:11).

What an event this robing at the hand of God must have been, this grand expression of infinite love. The world pauses to watch the investiture ceremonies of kings and queens, popes, and Supreme Court justices. Yet these worldly ceremonies pale beside the holy and glorious endowment. Do we not suppose that the angels in heaven paused to witness and that heavenly choirs sang? Imagine our interest, the interest of all waiting spirits, in this investiture. We were surely and safely on our way.

Satan Unfettered

The Edenic drama continued as Adam and Eve came face to face with that great hazard of mortalitySatan unfettered. Satan already knew that one way he could succeed in his work was to separate them from each other. Their experiences with Satan brought them a new awareness of person and self.

When God visited the Garden after Adam and Eve had partaken of the fruit, they felt unworthy to be in His presence and hid themselves. When God asked what they had done, Adam told the Lord he was offered the fruit by the woman, whom "thou gavest me and commandest that she should remain with me" (Moses 4:18). According to Aschkenasy, in the original Hebrew, Adam's reply uses a verb from the stem ntn, which implies that an action is quite mechanical, as if to say, "I did what I was supposed to do."

Eve, on the other hand, when asked by the Lord what she had done, used "the unusual, richly connotative verb (beguiled) from the stem ns," says Aschkenasy. Eve's using this verb would have conveyed clearly to the Lord the depth, nature, and meaning of her thought process. Aschkenasy observes that the use of such a verb form indicates a person who has a rich vocabulary and is accustomed to playing a central role.4 Eve's answer was without self-consciousness. Her knowledge of what it was that she and Adam were foreordained to do seems to have sustained her.

The queries posed by God seem to me to be like the questions in a master's exam. Does He not know where they are or what they've done? Of course He does! Joseph Smith, through inspiration, corrected the central question, "Where art thou?" to read, "Where goest thou?" (Moses 4:15). God seems to be probing, wanting to be certain that Adam and Eve know where they are bound. He would not let them go into their strange and daunting new world ignorant of their state or of their destination. President Wilford Woodruff affirmed: "Adam and Eve came to this world to perform exactly the part that they acted in the Garden of Eden; and I will say, they were ordained of God to do what they did, and it was therefore expected that they would eat of the forbidden fruit in order that man might know both good and evil by passing through this school of experience which this life affords us."5

A Powerful and Benevolent Protector

Recognizing the unity inherent in the story of Adam and Eve and yet seeing that each had a separate, uniquely individual role to play in this great drama, we should be better able to pattern our own lives. Heavenly Father addressed Eve directly and with a straightforward question: "What is this thing which thou hast done?" (Moses 4:19).

Eve did not expect Adam to reply for her. She spoke to the point and directly to her Creator. God expected Eve to think and report for herself. He used no intermediary between Himself and her. Similarly, each of us is individually and independently responsible for our own choices. Although a couple has responsibility to each other, commitments to their oneness to be honored, and specific roles and assignments to fulfill, neither can take on the other's sins nor answer before God for the other at a time of accounting.

As the scriptural account continues, we learn not only about Adam and Eve but also about the nature of God. We are shown a kind and loving Father who extends His powerful hand to protect these and all other children who are to be born into mortality. He sets about teaching, reminding, and admonishing with instructions which I suspect are similar to those we received as we left our heavenly home to begin our own sojourn in mortality.

Then God directed His attention to the serpent: "Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life" (Genesis 3:14). This punishment seems to have been for Satan's attempt to usurp the role of Deity, to deceive mankind and thereby interject himself as the one who would control their mortal minds and bodies. As God had foreseen, however, by not knowing God's will, Satan had advanced God's plan, not his own.

God Blesses Eve and Her Posterity

Choice and agency are key to God's plan for mankind's second estate. Unchecked, Satan would thwart this exercise of agency, so God placed a protective armor upon Eve and all her posterity. He declared to Satan directly, "And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed; and he shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel" (Moses 4:21).

Speaking of the unique power to bruise the adversary's head, Elder James E. Talmage declared: "It is significant that this assurance of eventual victory over sin and its inevitable effect, death, both of which were introduced to earth through Satan the arch-enemy of mankind, was to be realized through the offspring of woman; the promise was not made specifically to the man, nor to the pair."6

The larger and more glorious meaning of the power to bruise the serpent's head refers specifically to that "seed" from whom comes protection and through whose name we seek help in our efforts to thwart the effect of Satan's temptings: the Savior, who, though sinless, bore all our sins as He suffered, bled, and died on the cross. Jesus Christ was the "seed" of Mary, a daughter of Eve, but his father was no mortal. Elder Talmage wrote: "In our Lord alone has been fulfilled the word of God spoken in relation to the fall of Adam, that the seed of the woman should have power to overcome Satan by bruising the serpent's head."7

Eve's progeny need not feel weak or powerless. It is not intended that they be passive victims. As their first line of defense, the offspring of Adam and Eve find that their initial, immediate reaction to sin is revulsion and loathing. This intuitive antipathy is given by God as a protection and is part of the makeup of all who come into mortality. We are not sent to earth to sin. We are not expected to sin. Although sin is a reality, we are not intended to succumb to it. Yet we must see the bad to know the good. Evil provides a contrast with good, for if there is no choice, there is no right and wrong, and hence there is no time of testing. With no testing, there can be no true exercise of agency and no eternal development.

What a freeing and ennobling concept! All of us come to this earth life with a built-in abhorrence for all things evil. Satan has control over us only to the degree that we ourselves allow. With our natural abhorrence for embracing evil, agency reigns. It is by our choice, not his, that Satan enters our lives. We are born into mortality, with a mortal body subject to mortal drives, desires, and temptations. But mankind is neither born in sin nor born to love sin. "The sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world" (Moses 6:54). We must never forget that it is by and through the name of Jesus Christ we are able to cast Satan from our midst.

Notes
