Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

God Instructs Adam and Eve

God's son and daughter had done what needed to be done: Adam and Eve had used their agency to enter mortality so that man might be. Together they embarked on an extraordinarily difficult journey, fraught with trials and hazardsa life ruled by the natural laws of the sphere in which they now dwelled and of which they had no practical knowledge. Before they departed from their paradisiacal Eden, these beloved children of our Heavenly Father received counsel and teachings about the challenges and realities that their newly mortal bodies would face in their earthly existence.

The Pattern for Childbirth in Mortality

God spoke to Eve of what she would experience as she embraced her destiny to be "the mother of all living" (Moses 4:26) as she and Adam complied with God's commandment to multiply and replenish the earth. These teachings were surely meant as instruction for Eve's daughters, who would follow after her. They are preserved in scripture.

On the face of it, the Lord's words to Eve might seem harsh: "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception. In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children" (Moses 4:22). Hugh Nibley noted: "The key is the word for sorrow, atsav, meaning to labor, to toil, to sweat, to do something very hard. To multiply does not mean to add or increase but to repeat over and over again; the word in the Septuagint is plethynomai, as in the multiplying of words in the repetitious prayers of the ancients. Both the conception and the labor of Eve will be multiple: she will have many children."1

Thus, in saying He would "multiply thy sorrow and thy conception," God is not meaning that childbirth will be a cause for sadness. Rather, He seems to have been telling Eve that in mortality childbirth will be difficult, that in childbirth she will sweat and toil and experience pain. This instruction lets her know what is to be expected as she gives bodies to waiting spirits.

God is not cursing Eve or causing pain to be inflicted on her. Instead, He is making her aware that her newly mortal body will experience pain in the process of childbirth, a pain that will come and go and be repeated many times. Could He also have been counseling about the necessity of this particular kind of labor as children are born in this sphere?

An article in the Scientific American reported that the "stress-recovery" aspect of labor (birth pains that occur, ease, and occur again multiple times) aid in the emergence of a healthy child. This aspect of the birth process causes the production of unusually elevated levels of adrenaline and noradrenalin, called catecholamines, which enhance the infant's ability to survive outside the womb. Life-enhancing forces are at work through this process. The infant's lungs are cleared, normal breathing is promoted, and fuels are mobilized to nourish cells and to ensure a rich supply of blood for the heart and lungs. The action of stress-recovery affects the heart rate and dilates or constricts blood vessels to divert blood from nonessential organs during stress. Even more, this mobilization assures that blood flows to essential organs and aids respiration while causing fat and sugar to be broken down into readily usable fuels. These and other aspects of the process assist infants to be alert at birth, encouraging the immediate bonding between mother and child.2 Let me hasten to add that medical advances have made it possible for babies born by Caesarean section to have the benefits of the stress-recovery aspects of the birth process.

It is enlightening to understand the purposes of labor pains. In this light, labor (sorrow) in childbirth can be seen as essential to healthy life. So labor thus becomes a blessing.

That view contrasts sharply with our culture's traditional teachings. In the fifth century after Christ, Augustine claimed that Eve had been cursed in bearing children and that a similar curse had fallen upon all women. Julian of Eclanum fairly shouted in response: "This indeed is insane that the pains of parturition [birth] came into being because of sin. Labor pains ... have nothing to do with sin. Innocent animals ... experience similar contractions. If labor pains indicate sin, why do baptized women, released from sin, experience them as other women do?"3 Julian correctly interpreted the passage in Genesis to mean that painful contractions are a natural part of the birth process, information which was eroded and finally lost until the Restoration.

A Covenant and Desired Husband

"Thy desire shall be to thy husband," continues the biblical account (Genesis 3:16). The Lord seems to be saying, "I bless you that you will long for your husband's embrace!" How could such a promise not be heavily weighted in the blessing column? Properly understood, God gave Eveand all her daughtersthe gift of a glorious, passionate love between her husband and herself. Surely this is the same gift righteous parents would wish for their daughter or their son.

This passage of scripture also makes a statement about who women are. It speaks to such qualities as fidelity, loyalty, love, and trust. It holds within it a promise of shared feelings and shared lives. Building relationships and holding families together are God-given traits inherent in a woman's nature.

This blessing is combined with the bearing of children. It would be difficult for a woman to find happiness in a marriage, in her assignment to bear and rear children, if her heart and body were not reaching out in love towards her partner in this assignment. It is important in the risk occupations of wife and motherfor whatever else we may say, they are occupations of risk, requiring support and assistancethat the wife should seek out her husband's blessed support, assistance, and protection. Equally important, the wife's desire reinforces the husband's wish to provide what is needed for her and their family to live.

And so we find that God, in this passage of the scripture, promises his beloved daughter Eve two things: a deep and nonconflicted love and a husband who will care for her, protect her, and be honorable as he presides over the family.

Presiding: Husband, Father, and Priesthood

As part of that same scriptural statement, Eve is told that her husband "shall rule over thee" (Genesis 3:16). Inherent within the Hebrew word translated here as "rule" are the concepts of a provider, a protector, one who will honorably and righteously preside. How sad that down through the centuries this line of scripture has been used to subjugate and subordinate women and to cause unrighteous men to assume they have a right to arbitrary dominion over their wives.

Any sting is taken from these scriptural words by the clarifying words of our beloved prophet Spencer W. Kimball: "I have a question about the word 'rule.' It gives the wrong impression. I would prefer to use the word 'preside' because that's what he does. A righteous husband presides over his wife and family."4 In "The Family: A Proclamation to the World," the First Presidency reaffirmed this idea, reminding us that "by divine design, fathers are to preside over their families in love and righteousness."5

Adam, Work for Thy Sake

The Lord began His counsel to Adam with what also may appear to be a harsh pronouncement: "Cursed shall be the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life" (Moses 4:23).

A careful reading shows us that the earth, not Adam, received the curse and that such a pronouncement relates to God's governance. The earth's natural splendor was now to be injured by the presence of thorns, thistles, and weeds that have the potential for overcoming and destroying flowers, plants, and trees of beauty and usefulness.

The earth was to be governed, as was Satan, so that God's ordinances and commands could be carried out. These are the laws of a mortal sphere as established by a just and loving God, not the vengeful acts of a disappointed Deity. Moreover, the Lord told Adam that this curse is for his own good. How could this be?

The identical word is used for the roles of both the man and the woman. The word in the Septuagint is lype, meaning bodily or mental strain, discomfort, or affliction; the basic root of the word means to work hard at cutting or digging. Both the man and the woman must labor. Although translated into English as "sorrow," the meaning is not to be sorry but to have a hard time.6

Recent scientific findings show that the human body is better able to retain healthy organs and a strong immune system when patterns of stress-recovery are experienced. In other words, toil, labor, and sweatmultiple times overare essential to our physical and mental health. Because hard physical labor is no longer a component of the lives of many of us, medical science recommends that we incorporate into our lives sports or other physical fitness exercises that cause us to labor and sweat, multiple times over, so that our bodies and minds may be strengthened.

Thus Armed, Adam and Eve Begin Their Journey

The Lord had given Adam and Eve loving instruction and outlined for them the challenging and difficult conditions of mortal life. Clothed in the coats of skins He had prepared for them, our beloved first parents were about to leave the paradisiacal Garden of Eden to begin the great and necessary adventure of mortality.

Notes
