Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Sent Forth or Cast Out?

In relating the story of Eden, Alma explained to his son the actions of a caring God: "For behold, after the Lord God sent our first parents forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground, from whence they were takenyea, he drew out the man, and placed at the east end of the garden of Eden, cherubim, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the tree of lifeNow, we see that the man had become as God, knowing good and evil; and lest he should put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat and live forever, the Lord God placed cherubim and the flaming sword, that he should not partake of the fruit" (Alma 42:2-3).

The theme of gentle removal ("drew out the man," man being plural, meaning man and woman) is echoed in Genesis 3:23 and Moses 4:29. Why then do we hold on to the harsher concept of "cast out" as God's punishment for their supposed sin? Adam and Eve were simply excluded from their original nearness to God and transferred to another sphere where they could exist as mortal beings.

Reading the text in this light gives us a clearer understanding of God's actions and intent. God sends them forth to till the ground from which they were taken, which had been prepared for them. That is what the creation of the earth was all about.

Referring to their transgression, President James E. Faust observed: "Adam and Eve, having chosen to leave their state of innocence (2 Nephi 2:23-25), were banished from the presence of God. This is referred to in Christendom as the Fall, or Adam's transgression. It is a spiritual death because Adam and Eve were separated from the presence of God and given agency 'to act for themselves and not to be acted upon' (2 Nephi 2:26)."1 We remember that their transgression related to a law of condition and was not a sin. The Fall refers to both a location and a condition.

Dreary or Glorious?

My heart hurts each time I hear or read of the world as ugly and dark. In my mind's eye, I review the spacious ever-changing skies, the brooding power of a stormy ocean, the divine beauty of templed mountains, the softness of a hill of heather. I revel in the beauty of this earth, in the multicolored foliage of Virginia, the red rock cliffs of the West, the purple dusk of a desert sunset, the peace of the African veldt at twilight, the majesty and force of Victoria Falls, the awe-inspiring stone forests of China, the waving grass of the Argentine Pampas.

How could we call this world dark and dreary? are but a few of the adjectives used to extol it. The Prophet Joseph was told in revelation that "all things which come of the earth ... are ... both to please the eye and to gladden the heart" (D&C 59:18). President Gordon B. Hinckley assured us that "all of beauty in the earth bears the fingerprint of the Master Creator."2 Astronauts have spoken of its magnificence, its order, and its beauty when viewed from outer space.

With this earth as the very place where we can work out our salvation, why do so many of us moan about its harshness and its trials? Perhaps it is because when we dim a light, even in the most beautiful room, we are aware of the lack of that light. God's presence, which brings with it a light more illuminating and more glorious than all others, is missing. To Adam and Eve, accustomed to dwelling in that light, this mortal world must have seemed a frightening, unenlightened place. Even so, they proclaimed their joy at the privilege of being here. Dark though it may have seemed to them, they recognized they were now in a position to fulfill the measure of their creation and to introduce life, not just existence, but life. Their feet were planted in a correct and planned-for place.

Indeed, Eve delivered what must be regarded as one of the most significant single-sentence sermons ever given when she "heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (Moses 5:11). Further, "Adam and Eve blessed the name of God" (Moses 5:12).

God did not set out to diminish them, to punish them, or to curse them. He did not intend themor usto live a mortal existence as though having been blinded and set alone in a hopeless maze. His plan and His love are perfect. He loves his children, and He desires that we share all His gifts. In mortality He gives us a chance to grow in intellect, in spiritual stature, and in agency so that we may someday be worthy to return to live with Him.

Events Thus Far

Adam and Eve agreed to go to the Garden on an assignment that was known to them and to us before the world was created. In the councils in heaven we accepted the plan's design. Challenging though it was, it offered us hope for advancement. Adam and Eve would be our agents in this absolutely vital, frightening, and yet glorious undertaking. None of us could come to earth, gain physical bodies, and thereby work out our salvation through the atoning sacrifice of our Savior, Jesus Christ, if these first parents were not able to find a way to honor their pledge. Their calling was issued and the assignment made and sanctified by the Lord.

When they were created and placed in the Garden of Eden, the spirits of Eve and Adam were clothed in bodies patterned after the exact image of God, made from the dust of a physical earth, but not in a mortal state. Eve's specific assignment was to become the mother of a mortal, physical race. Adam, as a great high priest and the father of the human family, was to preside over the exalted family who will live on this earth when it is celestialized (D&C 107:55).

As God walked and talked with Adam and Eve in the Garden, they learned that to fulfill this assignment they would have to transgress (go across) the boundary of the place known to them as the Garden of Eden into a mortal state. Blood would have to flow in their veins to accomplish this.

In the midst of the Garden, a symbol had been prepared that was evident to them both and which is presented to us symbolically as "the tree of the knowledge of good and evil." Its fruit was forbidden to them only if they wished to stay in the Garden because it contained within it the elements of death. These elements, according to the plan, could be activated only through the use of agency. Satan was allowed to be present in the Gardenas he has been at all the major crossroads pertaining to the planfor there must always be opposition for an informed choice to be made. He is represented as a snake so that we might never forget his designing and dangerous nature.

In the Garden, Adam and Eve walked and talked with God and learned from Him. Undoubtedly they prayed and importuned to know the correct course to take. Satan's presence in the Garden became the catalyst that caused Eve to focus on the necessity to act. By learning the deeper meaning of the word beguiled, we recognize that Eve could see that the earthly sphere she and Adam would enter by partaking of the fruit would provide everything necessary for a rich physical and spiritual life. Stepping out into that other place was not absolutely unknown after all.

Eve partook of the fruit, as she had been foreordained to do, and Adam partook after her, to the hallelujah shouts of the hundreds of generations of spirits she represented. If she had not done so, we would all still be waiting.

God then clothed Adam and Eve in a garment of protection. He advised them of the reality of Satan and of the enmity between Satan and Christ. He taught Eve and all her daughters after her what they should expect in fulfilling their mission as co-creators of mortal bodies. And He taught Adam what he should expect as he became provider and protector and presiding high priest over the family of mankind.

This was the divine, eternal plan. Eve's actions were in response to the word and will of the Lord and thus the law of God.

There was no other way!

Notes
