Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Mortality, a Time for Rejoicing

Lift up your heart, lift up your voice! Rejoice, again I say, rejoice!"1 Much as we sing in the well beloved hymn, Adam's first recorded words of mortality rang forth as trumpets heralding the good news: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God" (Moses 5:10).

The grand plan was unfolding! They had chosen the correct path. They were now in the sphere wherein all could fulfill the measure of their creation.

Mother Eve's clear accounting resounds through the ages as a song of praise and thanksgiving. Her commitment was to partnership. Her knowledge was profound, and her spirituality transcending. She recognized that she and Adam had obeyed the greater law and opened the door not only to mortality but also to eternal life and exaltation for all who keep their first estate. Eve "was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (Moses 5:11).

Modern-day prophets and apostles hailed Eve's declaration. "I don't know any statement in the scriptures with more meat and understanding and wisdom in it than that short paragraph spoken by Mother Eve," said Elder Marion G. Romney.2 Elder Bruce R. McConkie pronounced her statement as "one of the most profound doctrinal declarations ever."3 President Joseph Fielding Smith said, "It is the first discourse ever recordedthat is, that we have."4 That Eve could render such a perfect summary of the plan of salvation confirms that she had been carefully taught. The profound spiritual concepts contained in her summary are worthy of review, lest its brevity cause us to overlook the depth and breadth of her understanding.

Eve's words reflect spiritual clarity and doctrinal understanding, as she declared with intense joy that the action she and Adam had taken had made possible the following:

Seed. The Fall opened the way for those faithful spirits to be born into mortality who had kept their first estate by choosing God's plan and accepting Christ's offer to become the Savior of this world.

Knowledge of good and evil. The knowledge of good and evil is necessary if we are to become like God, and it is required if we are to make the second estate into a trial of faith through our exercise of agency.

The joy of our redemption. Joy would be realized only through the atonement of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The glorious promise of eternal life. Those who choose to embrace and abide by the great plan of happiness would be enabled, through the Atonement, to have eternal life.

Elder John A. Widtsoe advised us to make a close examination of Eve's statement, which gives no sense that she was anything other than a full partner with Adam in all that was done. Adam and Eve were "people who had met and accepted a great challenge, with which, as they imply, God was pleased."5 In good spirits they confronted the unknown and continued their journey through mortality, secure in the knowledge that "all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" (2Nephi 2:24).

It is vital to remember that our first parents recognized the joy of being able to complete their mission in this earthly sphere. But their joy was expressed only after they were assured of a Savior, Jesus Christ, who would come to earth to provide the redemption absolutely essential for themand usto return to the Father.

As we accept the divine nature of our being and come to know the reason for our presence on this planet, we embrace the saving role of the Messiah. Elder Neal A. Maxwell spoke of His nature and role: "Though he was actually the Creator of this world, the earth being his footstool, Jesus' willingness to become from birth a person of 'no reputation' provides one of the great lessons in human history. He, the leader-servant, who remained of 'no reputation' mortally, will one day be he before whom every knee will bow and whose name every tongue will confess."6 Elder Maxwell reminded us: "The only real veneration of Jesus is emulation of Him. Indeed striving to become like Him is a special way of bearing and sharing our testimony of Him."7

Nephi declared of the Savior: "And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam. And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day" (2 Nephi 9:21-22).

Exemplars in the Pattern of Eve

With Eve's sermon we are introduced to the pattern and expectation that her daughters can and will possess that same keen spiritual intellect. The grasp by women of spiritual realities and of spiritual dimensions has been evident throughout the ages.

Elder James E. Faust declared: "Surely the secret citadel of women's inner strength is their spirituality. In this they equal and even surpass men, as they do in faith, morality, and commitment when truly converted to the gospel. They have 'more trust in the Lord [and] more hope in his word' ('More Holiness Give Me,' Hymns, 1985, no. 131). This inner spiritual sense seems to give them a certain resilience to cope with sorrow, trouble, and uncertainty."8

Elder Mark E. Petersen wrote: "I have learned that there is a feminine side to spirituality which we men seldom, if ever, truly appreciate. That feminine type of spirituality is truly divine. It is what makes good mothers great. It is what makes them partners with God in a very real and literal sense. It is what makes them the queens of their homes, the spiritual centers of their families."9

President Brigham Young taught: "The women are a great deal more inclined to believe the truth than the men; they comprehend it more quickly."10

We see this same deep spirituality and strength of commitment in women as the gospel of Jesus Christ is preached around the world. It is often the women who evidence the greatest spiritual hunger, who are willing to listen and to pray to know of its truth. Women seem also to be more willing to endure hardship or ridicule when they embrace the gospel. They seek in tireless and loving ways to bring the truth to their families.

President Spencer W. Kimball prophesied: "Much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days will come because many of the good women of the world (in whom there is often such an inner sense of spirituality) will be drawn to the Church in large numbers." Further, he told us, these "female exemplars will be a significant force in both the numerical and the spiritual growth of the Church in the last days."11

Following the pattern set by Eve, her daughters can and must use their unique spirituality to benefit their own lives and the lives of all for whom they have responsibility. The comprehensive nature of our great Mother Eve's words remind us that women are to search out, learn, and articulate all spiritual truths; that they are to concern themselves with all matters relating to the gospel, and with all matters relating to salvation, to the heavens, and to the earth.

Holy Titles for God's Daughters

God places great significance on naming, as should we, for inherent in names are expectations and promises. The name-title Jesus, the Greek form of the name which the Spirit revealed to Mary as the name by which her Son would be known (Luke 1:31), means "God's help" and "Savior." In Greek, Christ means "Anointed One," as does Messiah in Hebrew.12 With our understanding of His name and titles, we have absolute faith in the ability and willingness of the "Son of the Most High" to pay the price for our sins. As we take His name upon us, we show we believe both in His power to grant us a literal resurrection and in His grace. We claim for ourselves the proffered promises and blessings His name implies.

God and His prophets use titles of strength, power, and beauty to describe His righteous daughters as well. There are royal titles relating to our exaltation, "queens and priestesses."13 There are also the titles God has chosen for use in this world: "mothers," "sisters," "elect ladies," "daughters of the covenant."14 These are not mere words or polite compliments. They are titles by which women who are qualified to receive the fulness of gospel blessings are identified as His heirs and as members of God's own household. President Spencer W. Kimball testified to women: "No greater recognition can come to you in this world than to be known as a woman of God. No greater status can be conferred upon you than being a daughter of God."15 These titles are ours to claim. We must not underestimate their significance or their power.

Notes
