Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Prayer, Our Lifeline to God

As mortality became reality, Eve and Adam learned how to reestablish communication with the heavens through worshipful prayer. They understood that it was their God-given right to have the Lord claim an interest in their lives: "And Adam and Eve, his wife, called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence" (Moses 5:4).

Imagine how bereft Adam and Eve felt at His absence. How lonely and bleak it must have seemed without His physical presence conveying His love and luminous light. How they needed and wanted His continuing counsel, direction, and blessings. Together our first parents waited for further light and knowledge from their Father. So do all who inhabit the earth, whether they know it or not. There was a time when we too walked with Him and heard His voice. Now, we are away from His presence. I think perhaps we do not realize how deeply we miss Him or how much we need Him.

The original intent of language, according to Genesis, was to enable us to seek counsel and comfort from our God and to make and keep covenants with Him, to keep ever available to us a spiritual lifeline. That this promise of a spiritual lifeline continues to the present day was revealed to Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple:

"If thou shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable thingsthat which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal" (D&C 42:61).

That promise is made to all who truly wish to communicate with God. He is there. He has assured us that we should pray with full expectation that He will hear the prayer offered in faith. "Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you" (D&C 88:63).

When do we pray? Always.

What do we take before the Lord? Everything.

Where do we pray? Everywhere.

God placed no limitations on Adam and Eve's communications with Him, nor does He place limitations on ours. We can pray how, when, and where we need to. Prayer may be oral or silent, a song or a silent meditation. We may be alone or with a group, on our knees or sitting or standing, in our cars, our homes, or our offices, or in a forest glade. "Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good" (Alma 37:37).

Our first parents were taught to pray and were advised to teach their children to pray. That same mandate has been extended to every parent throughout all time. Our loving Heavenly Father knows that children who are taught to pray in their homes, who are raised in a house of prayer, are armed and blessed in ways beyond description. With prayer as our lifeline, we need never be alone, never be without hope, never be without protection.

What Is Personal Prayer?

Personal prayer should be just thatpersonal. We do not use set prayers written by others, for God wishes us to convey to Him our own needs and desires. As we communicate what is in our hearts, He will feel the sincerity of our souls. If we do not give our prayers our greatest personal attention, why should we expect the Lord to respond with His great personal attention? We should pray with conviction, fervor, real intent, and all the faith of our very being. We don't need to worry about using elegant words. Rather, we should focus on expressing the innermost desires of our heart, our deepest needs. The Lord has told us He abhors vain repetitions and haughty language. The most profound prayers are often the simplest, for they reflect unvarnished human yearning.

We are promised that every sincere prayer will be answered. The answer may not, however, be the answer we wish for. Prayer is not a detailed list that we turn over to a personal shopper and expect to return a few hours later to find our requests packaged and waiting. Prayer is a real opportunity for meaningful communion with a beloved Heavenly Father who cares for each one of us. It is an opportunity to learn, grow, be directed, and even be chastened when necessary. We should never forget that He has all power to help. Yet, not wishing to deny us lessons we cannot afford to miss, He may give us an answer quite different from that which we are seeking. He may even say no. But He will hear us, and the Spirit will confirm that what follows our petition will be for our greatest good.

We are also taught to recount our many blessings in prayer. Not only do we thus show gratitude, but in the recounting we remember those things most precious to us. Through these recollections we may be led to counsel with the Lord in matters of urgent need as we seek for answers and inspiration.

A prayer for a child's health or well-being often opens avenues of insight into actions we can take or brings to mind people we can call upon who will help. A prayer for an understanding marriage partner may cause us to become sensitive to small changes for the better. A prayer for a world in turmoil may cause us to search for ways to act in kindness. A prayer for the poor and needy may cause us to open our closets, cabinets, and wallets. By attuning ourselves to the Lord's promptings in the everyday acts of life, we become His partner and are ever aware that we are not alone.

In Whose Name Do We Pray?

The Lord prescribed the manner of prayer from the very beginning. He taught Adam and Eve how to pray and to whom they should address their prayers: "Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Lord forevermore" (Moses 5:8).

During His mortal ministry, Christ set the pattern of our prayers. His instructions were clear and unambiguous: "After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name" (Matthew 6:9). We are taught to pray to the Father through His Son Jesus Christ, for He is our mediator with the Father. That is the same pattern of prayer that Adam and Eve were taught and which they were admonished to teach to their children.

Because of the supreme importance of prayer, we should not be confused about the Being to whom we pray. President Gordon B. Hinckley has taught that not only did the Lord set the pattern in the Sermon on the Mount but the resurrected Lord appeared to the Nephites and taught them the manner of prayer. Said President Hinckley: "Search as I have, I find nowhere in the standard works an account where Jesus prayed other than to His Father in Heaven."1

Deviation from this prescribed order, and adopting any other form or manner of prayer, is not the means ordained by the Lord for His faithful sons and daughters. "Logic and reason would certainly suggest that if we have a Father in Heaven, we have a Mother in Heaven. That doctrine rests well with me," President Hinckley declared.2

A longing to know of this eternal mother seems a natural and laudable emotion. Nonetheless, our prophet cautioned, "In light of the instruction we have received from the Lord Himself, I regard it as inappropriate for anyone in the Church to pray to our Mother in Heaven." He pointed out that "the fact that we do not pray to our Mother in Heaven in no way belittles or denigrates her."3

The time will come when we will be blessed with more knowledge of our exalted mother. Until that time, and unless we are otherwise instructed by God through His prophets, our supplications are to be through Jesus Christ, the sure conduit, by the sure power of the Holy Ghost, to God the Father, the sure receiver. "Look unto God with firmness of mind, and pray unto him with exceeding faith, and he will console you in your afflictions, and he will plead your cause, and send down justice upon those who seek your destruction" (Jacob 3:1).

Notes
