Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Parenthood and Progeny

Father Adam and Mother Eve clearly saw God's great pattern for the eternities: Progeny is eternal; things of this earth have no permanence. Our first parents, by their choice, began the cycle that would enable spirits to enter mortality and allow them a time of testing, which would bring them joy and learning. The cycle would culminate in death and through the blessed mercy of our Savior, Jesus Christ, allow us to return again to our Father.

Through this story and by their example, we learn that not only is motherhood a sacred institution but in the eternal scheme of things it is so vital that without it there would be no real advancement beyond the veil. The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles affirmed this "greater law" in their singular document "The Family: A Proclamation to the World": "The first commandment that God gave to Adam and Eve pertained to their potential for parenthood as husband and wife. We declare that God's commandment for His children to multiply and replenish the earth remains in force."1

This profound, prophetic document is like unto the proclamation trumpeted from the tower by King Benjamin when he addressed the great multitudes gathered around the temple. The modern proclamation begins: "We, the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, solemnly proclaim that marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children." Further, "God has commanded that the sacred powers of procreation are to be employed only between man and woman, lawfully wedded as husband and wife."2

Like King Benjamin's address to his people, this modern-day proclamation has been "written and sent forth among those that were not under the sound of his voice, that they might also receive his words" (Mosiah 2:8). Through communications, media channels, and personal presentations, the Proclamation on the Family has reached government and civic leaders and other citizens around the world.

The clear, unambiguous language of this proclamation conveys its clarion message of the centrality of the family to God's plan and His purposes for His children. Embracing these principles will benefit our own lives as well as the lives of all others who will hear and accept them.

So many in the world are bombarded with contradictory and conflicting messages, images, and challenges regarding parenthood and the family. These voices make it seem as though embracing the covenant commandment of creating families, of bearing children, is too difficult in the complex world in which we live. They advance an enormous number of options and alternative actions.

For nearly two decades, agenda-driven voices have dominated the dialogue. Few of them were comfortable in characterizing motherhood as the primary and most honorable role of womanhood, despite the fact that this eternal truth resonates in the hearts of most women. Neither have they felt that intact families were a priority worth fighting for. Their mantra has been, "In the process of doing the important and fulfilling things, become a wife and mother, but don't give up anything for it."

Such messages, overt or subtle, have relegated the roles of mother and homemaker to the secondary position of "also ran" in the subconscious of many. With society giving little validation and less support to the undertaking of motherhood as a primary role, couples have wondered if they should put it off, opt for dual careers, or, alternatively, severely limit the number of children invited into their family. Such dialogue has also changed men's view of women, and they often see the income-producing potential of a woman as desirable or even essential when selecting a wife or continuing a marriage.

The Pendulum Swings Back

Recently the pendulum has begun to swing back to a proper understanding of the importance of the roles of wife and mother. It is interesting to observe the number of women and men outside the ordinary walks of life who, though they had their consciousness raised by the rhetoric of the movements of the 1980s and 90s, are now not only having children of their own but refuse to allow others to tell them that those precious children should become appendages to their life. A poll conducted by a highly respected U.S. research firm found that more than 80 percent of American women and men surveyed said that "having a successful marriage" and "raising a family" were very important to them.3 Since the turn of the twenty-first century, it is almost impossible to tune in to a celebrity talk show without hearing guests talk of the joys and extraordinary rewards of motherhood or parenthood. It is even much in vogue for male celebrities to speak, in uncharacteristically glowing adjectives, of the joy their wife and children bring to them.

Although good and generous women and men have always understood and talked that way, this high-visibility dialogue has given many the focus and courage to assert and act confidently on their own internal priorities. Researchers in 1999 found that young women in their twenties, even before they have families, demanded jobs with a better balance between work life and personal life. Women with children often opted to become stay-at-home moms or work part-time, even if it meant tightening the family's financial belt. This trend is becoming more apparent as society recognizes that a woman's opportunity for conception is limited. Many now realize that they cannot chance long delays in starting a family or adding to the number of children they already have.

Just as women moved into the marketplace during the decade of the eighties and nineties, wise and educated women are now finding ways to take their work back to their home or to stay at home full-time and give up a few of the promises of money. Susan Gibson, a prominent woman who had long espoused feminist views, told of her paradigm shift after the birth of a child: "Feminism did not prepare me for marriage and childbirth. . . .

"After the initial shock, I loved pregnancy. And I loved my baby. Loved is hardly the word for it; for a year or more I was possessed. . . .

"I find myself concerned about a generation of children brought up outside the home, and determined to be home a great deal. I find myself looking at baby boys and baby girls and seeing differences. . . . I have come into a sense that masculinity and femininity are complex and deep-seated, not accidents of the physical surface. I want another child."4

Sara Davidson, a columnist and author, wrote: "The notion that a woman might have it allan absorbing career, a loving marriage, childrencontinues to grip me with an almost mystical power. The woman who can balance family and careerlove and workis the woman most men say they desire and most women say they want to be. Yet I do not know such a woman." She said further: "The only answer I come up with is that you can have it sequentially. At one stage you may emphasize career, and at another, marriage and nurturing young children, and at any point you will be aware of what is missing. If you are lucky, you will be able to fit everything in."5

I can say from my own experience that full-time career and full-time home and family present an almost impossible challenge. Such duality requires one to make choices that are not only difficult but sometimes impossible. I am ever grateful that I found a way to keep my work in my home during my children's early years. Yet, like so many women, I suffer feelings of having failed to do enough at the right times for my children.

Elder James E. Faust, speaking to the young women at Brigham Young University, said: "In the book of Ecclesiastes, it says, 'To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven.' (Eccl. 3:1)." He continued: "It seems that the new roles of women have not decreased their responsibilities because while the new roles are challenging, the old roles of wife and mother are in the soul and cry out to be satisfied. ... Fortunately, women do not have to track a career like a man does. She may fit more than one career into the various seasons of life. She cannot sing all the verses of her song at the same time."6

And there is more to the message of motherhood brought to us through Eve. Sheri Dew, counselor in the general Relief Society presidency, spoke to this point in her October 2001 general Relief Society address. Declaring that prophets have unceasingly taught the doctrine of motherhood, she reminded us that Eve received the title "Mother of All Living" before she ever bore a child: "Like Eve, our motherhood began before we were born. Just as worthy men were foreordained to hold the priesthood in mortality, righteous women were endowed premortally with the privilege of motherhood." Motherhood is more than bearing children, she reminded us, "though it is certainly that." She spoke of this role as "the essence of who we are as women. It defines our very identity, our divine stature and nature, and the unique traits our Father gave us."8

Some women are not able to bear children or may not marry while here on earth. Sister Dew counseled: "For reasons known to the Lord, some women are required to wait to have children. This delay is not easy for any righteous woman. But the Lord's timetable for each of us does not negate our nature. Some of us, then, must simply find other ways to mother. And all around us are those who need to be loved and led. ... As daughters of Eve, we are all mothers and we have always been mothers. And we each have the responsibility to love and help lead the rising generation."9

Such understanding and insight give all of God's daughters on this earth a clearer understanding of their innate nature, glorious role, and divine destiny.

Fatherhood: Paradigms and Priorities

It is not just women who may need to find new approaches to family and career or to reclaim the old ones. Husbands may wish to rethink their priorities as well. Richard Eyre, who with his wife, Linda, has written extensively on family issues, told how such a career change came about for them. A busy and successful graduate of the Harvard School of Business, Richard had found his life filled with meetings, airplanes, and never-abating work. One night, Richard picked up probably the only book by C. S. Lewis he didn't own. It happened to open to a page and the following quotation: "The homemaker has the ultimate career. All other careers ... exist for one purpose onlyand that is to support this ultimate career."10

In his book Don't Just Do Something, Sit There, Brother Eyre wrote: "I began to realize on that night that I was missing out on the most real and most important parts of life. My kids were growing up without me helpingor even noticing. My marriage was too often ignored. At worst I was using something very precious to support something very fleeting and temporary. At best I was working to support something that I wasn't very involved with. ...

"The fact is that career needs are almost always more flexible than family needs. There is only a short 'season' of our lives when we can have children, only a brief season when we are young with them, only a small time before we 'turn around and they're gone.'" He wisely suggested that the maxim "The Home Supports the Career" be reconfigured to read "Careers Exist to Support the Home."11

In that historic Proclamation on the Family, fathers and mothers are clearly directed in their responsibilities: "By divine design, fathers are to preside over their families in love and righteousness and are responsible to provide the necessities of life and protection for their families. Mothers are primarily responsible for the nurture of their children. In these sacred responsibilities, fathers and mothers are obligated to help one another as equal partners."12 Therein we find a key message about God's plan for His childrenand of truths contained in the story of the Garden of Eden. We have the ringing words of prophets throughout the ages assuring us: "From that day, when Eve thus placed first among her blessings the power to bear children, the greatest glory of true womanhood has been motherhood."13

Notes
