Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Priesthood, the Power of Heaven

We have learned that Eve, whose genetic code ties the families of humankind together, was foreordained to be the Mother of All Living. We have also learned that Father Adam was foreordained to be the patriarch of the human race, the governor of this world under Christ's authority.

As we learn of truths restored, it is important to understand that this first high priest in mortality received his assignment, his authority, and the priesthood keys of presidency before the world was. He is that mighty Michael, the archangel who led the heavenly forces who cast Lucifer from heaven. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that he served under the direction of Adam, who in turn served under the Lord Jesus Christ (D&C 78:15-16).

The priesthood given to Adam is the same priesthood that was restored to the earth through Peter, James, and John to Joseph Smith. That priesthood is the very power of heaven. It is the founding power by which this world and all others are built and governed. Only by and through the priesthood can men and women receive the ordinances and all their promised blessings. No review of the lessons of the Garden of Eden would be complete without a discussion of matters relating to that priesthood.

It is vital to understand that the priesthood does not belong to man. Rather, it is power designed from the beginning of time "for the benefit of all members of the Church. Men have no greater claim than women upon the blessings that issue from the Priesthood and accompany its possession," advised Elder John A.Widtsoe.1 And Elder Boyd K. Packer assured us that "a man who holds the priesthood does not have an advantage over a woman in qualifying for exaltation."2

Lest we forget, the awesome power of this grand and glorious priesthood is the power to act in the name of God. It is by this power that mountains move, that rivers are changed from their course, that worlds without end are created. It is by this power that the dead are raised and the blind made to see. It is by this power that God and His ordinances are bound through the ends of time. It is this power that speaks of kingdoms, principalities, thrones, and glories (D&C 132:19). The rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven and operate only through principles of righteousness (D&C 121:36).

Essential to our salvation is a clear picture of how this priesthood relates to ourselves and to others, how it is to be exercised, and how its blessings might be called upon. We all should know how to lay claim to the fruits of that priesthood with its full and empowering blessings. Women, married or single, should know. Just as did Adam and Eve, mothers and fathers should teach their children and others for whom they may have responsibility how to exercise, use, and claim the blessings of the priesthood for themselves.3

Because the blessings of the priesthood come at the hands of righteous men who wear its mantle, it is also necessary to understand how we can support those who bear the priesthood and to be committed to that support in an informed and heartfelt manner. "The possession of the Priesthood does not indicate in any sense that man is superior to woman," declared Elder John A. Widtsoe. He further assured us that "in the Church of Christ, woman is not an adjunct to, but an equal partner with man."4

It is important that we separate our discussion regarding males and females from our support of those empowered to perform priesthood ordinances in our behalf. Only through the priesthood may we claim the saving, indeed, the highest and most essential, promises. When we pledge to support and sustain the priesthood, to hearken to the counsel of the Lord's anointed, to follow the prophets and other leaders, we are recognizing the authority the Lord has constituted and selected Himself.

"It is not given to woman to exercise the authority of the Priesthood independently," counseled Elder James E. Talmage. "In the glorified state of the blessed hereafter, husband and wife will administer in their respective stations, seeing and understanding alike, and co-operating to the full in the government of their family kingdom. ... Then shall woman reign by Divine right, a queen in the resplendent realm of her glorified state."5 As women we need to know where and how we may claim partnership in that great power, not as holders of the priesthood but as those who benefit from its righteous exercise.

To hold and exercise the priesthood carries with it awesome responsibilities, for it is to be exercised only by righteous men who follow after the order of Adam, the Ancient of Days, as restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith under the direction of the Savior, who received the keys from God, the great Elohim. We must pay more heed to those ringing cautions set forth in the Doctrine and Covenants: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood" (D&C 121:41).

The Lord has outlined the attributes by which priesthood power and influence is maintained: "Only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge" (D&C 121:41-43). Not wishing His power to be misused in any way, the Lord warned that should a man attempt to "exercise control or dominion or compulsion ... in any degree of unrighteousness" (D&C 121:37), he violates the oath and covenant that belong to the priesthood. At that point, "the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man" (D&C 121:37). Unless he repents, he will lose his blessings.

Why do men hold the priesthood and not women? I don't know. But I feel confident the genesis of that assignment is eternal. Its roots may be in the equitable division of labor so that the respective missions of men and women may be jointly undertaken and jointly accomplished. Elder Matthew Cowley gave us unusual insight into the magnificence of priesthood and motherhood: "Men have to have something given to them [in mortality] to make them saviors of men, but not mothers, not women. [They] are born with an inherent right, an inherent authority, to be the saviors of human souls.. . and the regenerating force in the lives of God's children."6 (We recall an important aspect of the meaning of the words ezer k'negdo, "one who has a saving power.")

While addressing this issue at a general women's meeting, President Gordon B. Hinckley counseled: "A few Latter-day Saint women are asking why they are not entitled to hold the priesthood. To that I can say that only the Lord, through revelation, could alter that situation. He has not done so, so it is profitless for us to speculate and worry about it."7

To that I say, amen! The whisperings of the Spirit and the wonderful blessing of watching this sacred power exercised in humble righteousness leaves me with an abiding sense of peace. As a daughter of Eve, I bow my head and give thanks for all righteous men who have accepted the mantle and responsibility of the priesthood and who serve us by exercising that selfsame priesthood. Each time I claim its blessings, as is my right under its shared umbrella, I am eternally grateful. How would I live in a world where I could not seek the laying on of hands to heal a loved one or myself? How much easier it is to face an assault from Satan when we can go to a husband, father, or other caring priesthood holder to seek a blessing of sustenance and support. How difficult marriage could be if it were not for the sealing, which binds a husband and wife together for time and all eternity. How different I might be if I had not received my own endowment, made promises, and claimed the blessings of the temple for myself.

How different the world would be if there were not those greatest and most beloved of men, our prophets and apostles, who hold the keys to the priesthood, who labor tirelessly and without ceasing in our behalf. Those glorious holders of the priesthood have put behind themselves all personal agendas, all pride of office, all worldly titles and vestments, and have subjugated themselves totally to the priesthood. They epitomize through their service the Savior's admonition that the greatest shall be servant to the least.

For more than twelve years from the middle 1980s to the late 90s, I was blessed to work under the direction of some of these great Brethren in performing duties aimed at opening doors to countries as the Brethren tirelessly worked to build up the Church in all nations. As director of the International Affairs Office of the Church in Washington, D.C., and New York City, I worked with ambassadors and other leaders in many nations to assure that avenues of access were available as Church leaders needed. Generally, my work was with new or emerging countries in which there had been no Church presence and the problems required a diplomatic or legislative solution.

In that process, I was privileged to observe the unceasing work of the Brethren. I know something of the heavy burdens they carry as they spend their lives working to fulfill the words of the Savior: "And ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth" (Acts 1:8). Their travel is difficult and unending. They cross multiple time zones and go immediately into meetings, conferences, dedicatory, training, or other working sessions and in other ways go about the Lord's work. They often see only airports and the insides of meetinghouses and other buildings, with little time to look beyond to the cities and the countryside.

I have sometimes been surprised, although I should not be, about how little is known generally of the enormous work the Twelve Apostles and the First Presidency carry on their shoulders. Modeling their lives after the Savior's, the Brethren humbly and without fanfare focus full, prayerful attention on building the kingdom of God on earth.

"The duty of the Twelve Apostles of the Church," President Joseph F. Smith told us, "is to preach the gospel to the world, to send it to the inhabitants of the earth and to bear testimony of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as living witnesses of His divine mission."8 That is their special calling, and they work under the direction of the First Presidency. If that presidency is not intact, the entire body of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles constitutes the same authority as the First Presidency. It is important to understand that these Brethren hold all the keys of the kingdom of God on earth. Their priesthood keys encompass the same system of laws by which the gods and the angels are governed.9

President Spencer W. Kimball said: "It seems to me that the Lord chose his words when he said 'every nation,' 'every land,' 'uttermost bounds of the earth,' 'every tongue,' 'every people,' 'every soul,' 'all the world,' 'many lands.'" President Kimball also pointed out that in A.D. 33, when the Savior was on the earth, there were possibly a quarter billion people. "Eighteen hundred years later, when the command came through Joseph Smith to proselyte the world, our experts estimated that there were one billion people."10 Today there are more than five billion people. What an enormous responsibility these Brethren carry!

In addition to testifying of the Savior as they extend the gospel to every people, the apostles, under the direction of the First Presidency, administer the affairs of the Church wherever it is organized. They bear the responsibility for all planning necessary to future growth and expansion, future temples, missions and chapels, and the myriad of other details involved in administering a worldwide Church.

At the beginning of 1985, when I began working with international affairs, the Church was organized in ninety-five sovereign countries and eighteen territories, colonies, or possessions. Some 28,000 full-time missionaries were serving in 180 missions. Church membership stood just over five and a half million. There were 1,507 stakes. Seventeen temples were in operation, and ten more were planned or under construction. All had to be directed, the Saints spiritually fed and loved, the governance of the priesthood quorums overseen, nations visited where members resided, and local leaders identified, called, set apart, and trained for all Church units and auxiliaries.

At the time the Cold War was raging. The hearts of the Brethren were turned to the people of the countries behind the Iron Curtain, and they often traveled in those areas. They frequented the continent of Africa, where the work was relatively new and where local leaders were being carefully nurtured in nations that had granted recognition to the Church. Other nations were being prepared for the gospel. There was burgeoning growth in the Philippines, Brazil, Mexico, and many other nations. People harmed by natural disasters and events had tremendous temporal and spiritual needs. One year alone during that time, with money contributed by special fasts of Church members, nearly twelve million dollars' worth of goods and services went to a variety of organizations dealing with terrible droughts on the African continent. The eyes of the Brethren were on the individual sparrow as well as on the multitude.

At the end of 2001, nearly seventeen years later, the Church was established in 160 nations. About 62,000 full-time missionaries were teaching people in 335 missions and 175 languages. Church membership had reached eleven million. On average, statistics indicated, someone joined the Church every ninety seconds, so membership was growing at the rate of 960 people per day. The equivalent of one stake with thirty-eight hundred members was being added every four and a half days. A new chapel was started somewhere in the world every day. There were 2,604 stakes, with 26,142 wards and branches. One hundred fourteen temples were in operation, with fourteen more being planned or built.

As the message of the Savior's love permeates every kingdom and clime, we have been promised that such exponential growth will continue. It is a joyful but heavy burden for the Brethren. And the work has barely begun.

Imagine any Fortune 500 company that could sustain such growth while at the same time training leaders to hold all major positions. As we see this almost incredible growth, we understand that divine management and leadership principles are at work. Such work could only be done by true apostles of the Lord under the direction of an inspired prophet and president who reports directly to the Creator of this worldthe Savior, Jesus Christ.

Also unheralded are the equally glorious wives of these Brethren, who frequently accompany their husbands in performing whatever work is needed. Often these sisters carry full teaching loads as they work with the wives of local priesthood leaders on these long trips. Multiple times a year, through holidays, birthdays, sickness, and celebrations they leave their homes, families, and personal interests behind them to perform such duties as they are asked. When I see these exceptional women, I marvel at the stature they must have had in the premortal existence.

Revelation and Light

This Church is filled with ongoing light and inspiration. The heavens are open. Revelation about what must be done to meet the needs of the Churchwhether principles or practices or chastisements of the people or their leaderscomes through the living prophet, who is at our head. He is the only earthly man who can speak for the Lord in all matters. This living prophet is entitled to receive revelation on any mattertemporal or spiritual.11

We are counseled that a living prophet is more vital to us than the standard works. "The inspired words of these prophets, when written down, became scripture, and whenever God has his representatives on the earth, there is always new revelation and new scripture," advised Elder Ezra Taft Benson. He also told us that through the ages "always the words of the living prophet took precedence, for it was God's message to the people at that particular time."12

It is because of the richness of this ongoing dialogue between heaven and earth that the gospel has been restored to the earth, that we know of the order of God's governance and priesthood, that we understand His plan for the families of mankind and are assured that truths will continue to be added until the second coming of our Savior. It is because of this priceless gift of continuing revelation that changes will occur within the Church as the Lord deems appropriate and on His timetable. It is an exercise in futility to lobby, push, or cajole to advance some particular agenda. It is natural for our hearts to accept changes for which we have prayed. But they must also be open to the possibility that changes for which we pray may not (and perhaps should not) occur. And we must keep our hearts open to changes that come to which we have given no thought.

We cannot be impatient if our prophets do not speak out as often or as quickly as we would like on a given issue. A prophet, by his very calling, must give himself totally to the work and subordinate himself to God's will and timetable. Silence does not mean insensitivity, inactivity, or lack of prayerful concern. A prophet waits upon the Lord and speaks only in the Lord's time. How richly blessed we are to have a living prophet.

Notes
