Beverly Campbell, Eve and the Choice Made in Eden (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Afterthoughts: The Roles of Mercy and Justice

My odyssey through Eden has reminded me of thoughts that occurred to me some years ago on a trip to Hawaii. On long flights I lean back, wrap myself in the privacy of earphones and the lushness of stereophonic sound, dial the most beautiful symphonic music available and, after a few minutes, begin to think and read and write and ponder "things."

It was at just such a time that I read again an article entitled "Thinking like a Woman."1 My first thought as I reviewed it was, My, how times have changed! Just a few years ago, no self-respecting woman's magazine would have admitted that there was such a thing as thinking like a woman. They would have had us all out educating and reeducating ourselves to think like a man.

How refreshing it was to read that it's not just all right to think like a woman but that there is merit in it, that a woman's thought process is endowed with valuable qualities in which we can take pride!

The article was based on considerable and respected research conducted by Carol Gilligan, who was at that time an associate professor of education in the Graduate School of Education at Harvard University. Her research found that women, by and large, arrive at their moral decisions based on a set of criteria different from that used by men. As a woman sets out to make moral decisions (or most decisions, for that matter), her priorities have to do with how those decisions affect those around her. She is concerned about interrelationships. What will be the greatest good for the greatest number? In terms of values, these criteria would be called "care" and "mercy." For men, the research indicated that the moral thought process was much more direct. It generally boiled down to hard and fast rules of right and wrong, black and white. Professor Gilligan had undertaken this research after finding her women students consistently rated very low on the standard test designed to measure moral development.

This study was of particular interest to me. The research that raised red flags for Professor Gilligan had used data gathered under a Kennedy Foundation grant that I had administered. Great thinkers, Nobel laureates among them, came to sit around the desk of our scientific director to assess this grant study's findings. Researchers had studied societies untouched by civilization to explore how concepts of morality developed. The data from these research efforts had been factored into other long-term studies. But when tests using this material were devised, the measurements and conclusions seemed arbitrary to me. I sensed that some factor must be missing from the equation. Not until much later did I learn that no women had been included in the key studies. Woman's valuable input has been missing from so much of the thinking of recorded history and, therefore, society.

How is that significant? The article observed that when a woman thinks of how something is going to affect all those around her, those effects oftentimes require her to adjust her initial thinking. Making a final decision can sometimes require three or four such adjustments. The article talked about how humbling that can beand how much easier it would be to just say, "Well, it's a matter of principle: right is right and wrong is wrong and hang the consequences."

According to sociologists, the male-oriented "highest stage" (perhaps "first priority" is a better term) of moral development, is the morality of right. That can be quite different from the "morality of responsibility," which is the highest moral order (first priority) for women. The male model concerns itself with separation; the female, with connectedness.

I thought of a friend who was distraught because of a decision she had to make. It wasn't a great moral decision, but it was a decision that affected a goodly number of people she cared about. First, there was her husband, whom she loved and wanted to please. He had been assigned by an organization he represented to take a three-week trip to Asia and had been told he could take his wife along at a considerably reduced cost. They hadn't been away together for a long time, and he decided he would take her and she should be delighted. As it turned out, she was delighted, but she wasn't sure she could go. First, their daughter was returning home from college that week. They hadn't seen her since Christmas. The daughter was starting a new job the day after she arrived, was concerned about it, and would need some support. Next, my friend's mother had been quite ill, and it appeared that a decision about whether to put her in some sort of care facility would have to be made during that period. Additionally, my friend was working as a consultant and had some clients who needed her during that time and it would be not only awkward but inconsiderate to leave them just then. Finally, she did want to share this experience with her husband, and she longed to see the countries of Asia where her husband would be visiting. (Ultimately, she worked all the other problems out and had a wonderful time ... but only after considerable adjustments in thinking.)

Interrelationships. How our decisions will affect those in our caring network. Care and mercy. The ultimate reality for women rests on the truth that our lives are embedded in relationships. Our identities are tied up with other people. The story of Adam and Eve reminds us that knowledge and truth come out of this selfsame process of human interaction. It is through these interconnections and the judgments we make affecting them that we as women keep the family of humankind together. This is the greater law.

Another component that must be factored into an examination of the intellectual differences between men and women is that it is in the nature of woman's thought process to make moral choices based on people as well as on principles. Therefore, for a woman, a choice has a greater complexity and, as a result of that complexity, a greater ambiguity than for a man.2

Woman's ability to tolerate ambiguity, to look at conflicting statements and decide which is paramount, is one of the hallmarks of maturity. Women need to know that it is all rightin fact, that it is an eternal principleto make decisions that consider how they will affect those around her. Far from being a weakness, her thought process is a great strength. That thought process, together with a gentler resulting judgment, will take on greater value as more women are included in the study of human development. Women's way of thinking is a gift. We may recognize that gift as key to Mother Eve's ability to make the correct decision when confronted in the Garden of Eden with apparently conflicting commands. When we have that recognition, we can joyously, proudly, imitate her process in meeting the challenges of daily life.

Not surprisingly, this process seems to be inherent in our nature rather than being a result of nurture. We see it even in young children. Professor Gilligan told of an eleven-year-old girl she interviewed. When asked how she knew she had made the right decision, the girl said that you can never be sure if you've done the right thing because you can't know what would have happened if you'd made the other choice. Such is the nature of three-dimensional thinking. In contrast is the eleven-year-old boy who said that he tries to live up to his standards and judges the rightness of his action by matching his actions to his principles. Those principles were rather straightforward: keep your word, practice what you preach, and try to be fair. The boy said in essence that he didn't need to know what anybody else thought.3

Adam's response after partaking of the fruit appears to be straightforward ("I did what I was supposed to do"). Eve's, on the other hand, was tied to a complex set of inner drivesphysical, intellectual, and spiritualthat took into account the whole range of potential human experience.

This complexity of thought process does not come without a price. Women generally carry a great deal of innate guilt within them because of the nature of this three-dimensional thought process. Numerous studies have shown that in almost every conversation with a group of women who are exploring their feelings, there was guilt. Often women internalize this guilt as meaning that there is something wrong with them. For instance, if a woman is staying at home and caring for her family, she may feel a sense of guilt because she is not contributing more directly to family resources. If a woman is contributing more directly to the resources of the family, she feels guilt for being out of the home. If a woman is on a trip with her husband, she feels guilt for leaving her children. If she chooses to stay home with her children, she feels guilt for not being with her husband. I heard my son say teasingly to his wife, just before their departure on a trip that necessitated leaving their children at home with a sitter, "Are you sure you feel guilty enough? I want you to be happy."

Such feelings should be recognized as a reality of a woman's decision-making process. It is part of who we are. We must not let it become any more than that. When more of us recognize and value this process, we will dispense with such phrases as "frivolous indecision."

Having finished rereading one article, I picked up another I had tucked into my briefcase. This one stated that biomedical researchers have demonstrated that men and women have profoundly different abilities brought about by the different organization of male and female brains. Until that time, researchers had believed this difference was tied to social influences.

It has been well documented that crucial differences in the brain typically result in men preferring to express themselves in actions and women preferring to express themselves in signs and symbols. This difference explains why women are generally better able to read such subtle symbols as facial expression and body language and why men more often speak in concrete absolutes rather than in abstract generalities. These scientifically substantiated differences in the organization of the male brain and female brain affect how we respond to society and how we perceive the world around us.

There really is such a thing as "thinking like a man" and "thinking like a woman," and neither should be negated. Similarly, much has been written about woman's unique intuitive sense. Scientific findings are beginning to demonstrate what women have always knownthey are innately more intuitive, just as was Eve.

I remembered hearing Elder James E. Faust speaking of this intuition: "You will have to answer to your natural womanly instincts which the Prophet Joseph said are according to your natures. You should respond generously to these instincts and promptings to do good. With your very being held still, you should listen to the whisperings of the Holy Spirit. You should follow the noble, intuitive feelings planted deep within your soul by Deity in the previous world. In this way you will be responding to the Holy Spirit of God, and will be sanctified by truth."4

My thoughts were interrupted by our arrival in Honolulu. The next morning found me at an early morning session in the Hawaiian Temple. It was lovely and peaceful and I was filled with that Spirit that can only be felt in the house of the Lord. Still my mind was returning to the two articles, for I was to speak at a women's conference later that day. As the beautiful story of the Creation unfolded, I pondered Adam and Eve in Eden. It seemed to me that theirs was a story of care and concern (mercy) moving in parallel with a story of right and wrong (justice). Could it be that men and women were endowed at the time of creation with two distinct but equally important traits, traits that are both essential and complimentary and are to be used together in wisdom for the greatest good of all mankind? Could it be that this earthly world was meant to be filled not with just one human concept of judgment but twoexisting side by side in harmonyto be used as balance and counterbalance, point and counterpoint? And could it be that when both points of view and both concepts of judgment merge, the very best decisions and conclusions are reached?

As these thoughts stirred my mind, I recalled that oft-quoted scripture, "Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Corinthians 11:11). Even more than the joining of man and woman in marriage, does not this scriptural imperative mean that man is not without the woman, nor woman without the man, in the Lord, in all things? Two voices joined together to bring to the world attitudes and attributes that are uniquely a part of their separate personalities? Singly, important; together, profound.

I turned to Alma 42:24: "For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved" (emphasis added). In Doctrine and Covenants 88:40 we read: "For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own" (emphasis added).

It becomes apparent that both men and women must have more confidence in women's thought processes and in their judgments. Women will wish to speak out clearly in the larger community so that their concerns are not only heard but understood. Due weight will need to be accorded in all matters, but particularly in social, educational, and moral issues that affect the family and society.

In that divine admonition and promise of the Lord, "neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Corinthians 11:11), let us look for the most positive and supportive ways to give validity and power, one to the other. Let us be sensitive to and complimentary of one another's best efforts.

In all cases we must rely on that still, small, spirit of truth, which will confirm that thought processes and conclusions are correct and in accordance with God's will. The way the gift of the Holy Ghost works in our lives is explained by Elder Parley P. Pratt. He taught that the Holy Ghost "quickens all the intellectual faculties. . . . It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness and charity."5

It is only by and through His word that true light and knowledge are revealed, only through His name that our prayers are heard. It is by and through His name and word that we can stand in holy places, that our sick are healed, our families protected, our wounds salved, and our spirits lifted. It is only by becoming like Him that our problems can hope to find solution. It is only through His atonement we are saved. And it is only together as men and women working in true harmony and understanding that we can seek to bring order to chaos, peace to our lives and homes, and ultimately to become saviors one to another.

As daughters of Eve, we as women must make the effort to see that care and mercy are advanced as a worthy adjunct to justice. We must recognize our inherent desire for closeness and attachments, our empathy for others' needs, as strengths, not as weaknesses. We should take pride in our innate process of thinking and develop significant caring networks. We must recognize our role in the Church as positive and significant and, in fact, vital. We must strive to magnify our callings, support our brothers and sisters in righteousness, and remember our prophets' admonition that the work of the Church in these last days will require women's full participation. Those, too, are messages we learn from the example of Mother Eve.

The promise given to each of us and reinforced by the story of the Garden of Eden is that if we will ask and open our ears to hear, God will counsel and bless and see us safely and joyfully through this time of mortality. We must courageously seek truth and act on it, whatever the cost, for that is our foreordained mission.

Notes
