For the information of the members of the Church.

The First Presidency issued the following statistical report concerning the membership of the Church at the end of the year 1972.

Number of Stakes of Zion

Number of Independent Branches in Stakes

Total Wards and Independent Branches in Stakes

Number of Mission Branches

Number of Full-time Missions

Members Holding the Aaronic Priesthood

Total Number Holding Aaronic Priesthood

Members Holding the Melchizedek Priesthood

Total Number Holding Melchizedek Priesthood

Grand Total, Members Holding Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood

An Increase of 30,216 during the year

Children blessed in stakes and missions

Children of record baptized in stakes and missions

Converts baptized in stakes and missions

Aaronic Priesthood MIA—Young Men

Aaronic Priesthood MIA—Young Women

Birth rate per thousand

Number of persons married per thousand

Death rate per thousand

Number of persons assisted

Number placed in remunerative employment

Man-days of work donated to the welfare plan

Unit-days of equipment use donated

Names cleared for proxy temple ordinances (endowments)

Genealogical records microfilmed in 20 countries during the year brought the total to 756,062 one hundred foot rolls of microfilm for use of the Church which are the equivalent of over 3,607,002 printed volumes of 300 pages each.

Number of ordinances performed in the 15 operating temples:

Total Number of ordinances

Total cumulative enrollments in Church schools, including Institutes and Seminaries

President Joseph Fielding Smith, Tenth President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at the age of 95 on July 2, 1972

Lula Maughan Jones Isaacson, widow of the late Elder Thorpe B. Isaacson, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve

Lalene Hendricks Hart, widow of the late Charles H. Hart, member of the First Council of Seventy

June B. Thayn, president of the Chesapeake Stake of Zion

Elmo R. Smith, president of the Oakland-Berkeley Stake of Zion

E. Earl Hawkes, publisher and general manager of the Deseret News

Alfred W. Uhrhan, executive secretary of the General Welfare Committee

Gus P. Backman, prominent Salt Lake community and business leader
