Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Heber C. Kimball ( 1840)

CHAPTER I.

CALLED TO GO UPON A MISSION TO ENGLAND—APPOINTED TO PRESIDE—THE JOURNEY.

THE labors of the Elders of the Church of Latter-day Saints in early days were confined to the United States of America, with the exception of the province of Upper Canada, where a great many persons embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ, and rejoiced in the blessings thereof. The majority of this latter class were originally from Great Britain, and they soon began to manifest a desire that their relatives and friends who were still residing there, might be privileged with hearing the glad tidings of salvation, and be made partakers of those gifts and blessings which are promised in obedience thereto. For the attainment of this object, their prayers were continually ascending to the Lord of sabaoth, that He would prepare the way, and hasten the time when

"The servants of the Lord Soon should take their stand, And spread the glorious light of truth— Throughout their native land."

Notwithstanding this desire, the way was not open for the Elders until the spring of 1837, when the word of the Lord to the Elders of Israel was, that they might go forth to the distant nations of the earth, that the kingdom might roll forth, so that every heart might be penetrated.

Prior to this, my labors had been confined to my own land, in which I had traveled about six thousand miles, preaching the gospel to the best of my ability, and had the pleasure of baptizing several of my countrymen for the remission of sins, and introducing them into the kingdom which the Lord has set up in these last days.

I had frequently felt a desire to visit the shores of Europe, and believed that the time was fast approaching when I should take leave of my own country and lift up my voice to other nations, warning them of the things which were coming on the earth, and making known to them the great things which the Lord had brought to pass. Yet it never occurred to my mind that I should be one of the first commissioned to preach the everlasting gospel on the shores of Europe, and I can assure my friends I was taken by surprise when I was informed by Brother Hyrum Smith, one of the Presidency of the Church, that I had been designed by the Spirit, and, at a conference of the authorities of the Church which had been held, was appointed to take the charge of a mission to the kingdom of Great Britain.

The idea of being appointed to such an important office and mission was almost more than I could bear up under. I felt my weakness and unworthiness, and was nearly ready to sink under the task which devolved upon me, and I could not help exclaiming: "O Lord I am a man of `stammering tongue,' and altogether unfit for such a work. How can I go to preach in that land, which is so famed throughout Christendom for light, knowledge and piety, and as the nursery of religion; and to a people whose intelligence is proverbial?"

Again, the idea of leaving my family for so long a time, which a mission to that country must necessarily require—of being separated from my friends whom I loved, and with whom I had enjoyed many blessings and happy seasons—of leaving my native land to sojourn among strangers in a strange land, was almost overwhelming.

However, all these considerations did not deter me from the path of duty. Neither did I confer with flesh and blood; but the moment I understood the will of my Heavenly Father, I felt a determination to go at all hazards, believing-that He would support me by His almighty power, and endow me with every qualification I needed.

Although my family were dear to me, and I should have to leave them almost destitute, I felt that the cause of truth, the gospel of Christ, outweighed every other consideration; and I felt willing to leave them, believing that their wants would be provided for by that God who taketh care of sparrows and who feedeth the young ravens when they cry.

I was then set apart, along with Elder Hyde, who was likewise appointed to that mission, by the laying on of the hands of the Presidency, who agreed that Elders Goodson, Russell, Richards, Fielding and Snider should accompany us.

After spending a few days in arranging my affairs and settling my business, on the thirteenth day of June, A. D. 1837, I bade adieu to my family and friends, and the town of Kirtland, where the house of the Lord stood, in which I had received my anointing, and had seen such wonderful displays of the power and glory of God. In company with Elder Hyde and the other brethren, I arrived at Fairport, on Lake Erie, that afternoon, a distance of twelve miles; and about an hour after our arrival, took passage in a steam-boat for Buffalo, New York.

We were accompanied by Brother R. B. Thompson and wife, who were on their way to Canada, from Kirtland, where he intended to labor in the ministry.

After a pleasant voyage, we reached Buffalo the next day, at which place we expected to get some funds which were promised us, to assist us on our journey, but we were unfortunately disappointed.

At that time we had but very little means, but still we determined to prosecute our journey, believing that the Lord would open our way.

We accordingly continued our journey, and took our passage in a line boat on the Erie Canal to Utica, a distance of two hundred and fifty miles, and thence to Albany on the railroad.

From this latter place I went with Brother Richards into the country about thirty miles, where we were successful in obtaining some means to enable us to prosecute our journey. We then returned and took passage on a steamboat for New York, at which place we arrived on the 22nd day of June.

On our arrival we met with Brothers Goodson and Snider, according to appointment (they having gone round by the way of Canada), all in good health.

When we arrived at New York we found a vessel ready to sail, but not having sufficient means we were obliged to wait until such time as we could obtain funds to pay our passage and buy provisions for the voyage. We rented a small room in a store house, hoping that some way would be provided for us to go forward and fulfill the mission whereunto we were sent.

We spent considerable time while we were there in praying to our Heavenly Father for His guidance and protection, that He would make our way plain before us, bless us with a prosperous voyage across the billows of the mighty ocean, and make us a blessing to each other and to the captain and crew with whom we should sail.

During our stay in that city, we were subject to many inconveniences. We had to lay upon the floor, and had to buy and cook our own victuals; yet none of these things moved us, neither did we feel discouraged, believing that the Lord would open our way and guide us to our destination.

We conversed with many persons on the subject of the gospel, and distributed a large number of copies of the "Prophetic Warning" among all classes of the community; not forgetting the ministers of religion who abound in that city. We sent a copy to every one whose name we could ascertain through the medium of the post office.

After remaining a few days, we were presented with sixty dollars to assist us. Brother Elijah Fordham made us a present of ten dollars, and concluded to accompany us on our mission, but upon more mature consideration, we thought it was best for him to stop in that place, believing that the Lord had a people in that city, and that a Church would be built up, which was afterwards done by the instrumentality of Elders Parley P. and Orson Pratt.

Having obtained as much money as would pay our passage across the Atlantic, we laid in a stock of provisions, and on the first day of July went on board the ship Garrick, bound for Liverpool, and weighed anchor about ten o'clock, a. m., and about four o'clock, p. m. of the same day, lost sight of my native land. I had feelings which I cannot describe when I could no longer hehold its shores, and when I bade adieu to the land of my birth, which was fast receding, I felt to exclaim:

"Yes, my native land, I love thee: All thy scenes I love them well: Friends, connections, happy country, Can I bid you all farewell? Can I leave you Far in distant lands to dwell?"

However, when I reflected on the causes which had induced me to leave it for a while, and the work which devolved upon me I could likewise say,

"I go, but not to plough the main To ease a restless mind."

No; I hope I was actuated by a different motive than either to please myself or to gain the riches and applause of the world; it was a higher consideration than these that induced me to leave my home. It was because a dispensation of the gospel had been committed to me, and I felt an ardent desire that my fellow-creatures in other lands, as well as those of the land of my birth, might hear the sound of the everlasting gospel, obey its requisitions, rejoice in the fullness and blessings thereof and escape the judgments which were threatened upon the ungodly.

Our passage was very agreeable, and the winds for most part very favorable. On the banks of Newfoundland we saw several whales and many different species of fish.

We were kindly treated while on board, both by the officers and crew, and their conduct was indeed praiseworthy; had we been their own relatives, they could not have behaved more kindly or have treated us better. Thus the Lord answered our prayers in this respect, for which I desire to praise His holy name.

The Lord also gave us favor in the eyes of the passengers, who treated us with the greatest respect. During our voyage a child belonging to one of the passengers was very sick and was given up for dead by the doctor who attended it; consequently, its parents had given up all hopes of its recovery, and expected to have to commit their little one to the ocean. Feeling a great anxiety for the child, I went to its parents and reasoned with, and laid before them the principle of faith, and told them that the Lord was able to restore their child, notwithstanding there was no earthly prospect of its recovery, to which they listened with great interest. Having an opportunity shortly after, secretly to lay hands upon the child, I did so, and in the name of Jesus Christ rebuked the disease which preyed upon its system. The Spirit of the Lord attended the administration, and from that time the child began to recover, and two or three days after it was running about perfectly well. Its parents had to acknowledge that it was healed by the power of the Almighty.

The last Sunday we were on the water I went to the captain and asked the privilege for one of us to preach on board. He very obligingly agreed, and appointed the time when it would be most suitable for himself and the crew to attend, which was at one o'clock p. m. We then appointed Brother Hyde to speak, and notified the crew and passengers of the circumstance.

At the time appointed, there was a congregation of from two to three hundred persons assembled on the deck, who listened with great attention and deep interest to the discourse, which was delivered with great power. I think I never heard Brother Hyde speak with such power and eloquence as that time; he spoke on the subject of the resurrection. The time being limited on account of the duties of the ship's company, his subject was necessarily condensed. The congregation was composed of persons from different nations, and of different faiths, English, Irish, Scotch, Germans, French, etc., both Jews and Christians. A great feeling was produced upon the minds of the assembly, who had never heard the subject treated in like manner before, and from the conversation we afterwards had with several of them, I believe that good was done and many from that time began to search the scriptures for themselves, which are able to make men wise unto salvation.

On the 15th of July we came in sight of land, which caused joy and gratitude to my Heavenly Father to arise in my bosom for the favorable passage we had had so far and the prospect of soon reaching our destination. We then sailed up the Irish channel, having Ireland on our left and Wales on our right. The scenery was very beautiful and imposing.

Three days after first seeing land, being the 18th of July, we arrived in Liverpool, one of the largest ports in Great Britain, being just seventeen days and two hours from our departure from New York. The packet ship South America, which left New York the same time we did, came in a few lengths behind. The sight was very grand to see these two vessels enter port, with every inch of canvass spread. When we first got sight of Liverpool, I went to the side of the vessel and poured out my soul in praise and thanksgiving to God for the prosperous voyage and for all the mercies which He had vouchsafed to me, and while thus engaged, and while contemplating the scenery which then presented itself and the circumstances which had brought me thus far, the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me in a powerful manner; my soul was filled with love and gratitude, and was humbled within me, while I covenanted to dedicate myself to God and to love and serve Him with all my heart.

Immediately after we anchored, a small boat came alongside, and several of the passengers, with Brothers Hyde, Richards, Goodson and myself got in and went on shore. When we were within six or seven feet from the pier, I leaped on shore, and for the first time in my life stood on British ground, among strangers whose manners and customs were different from my own. My feelings at that time were peculiar, particularly when I realized the object, importance and extent of my mission and the work to which I had been appointed and in which I was shortly to be engaged.
