Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Heber C. Kimball ( 1840)

CHAPTER III.

MEETING FOR CONFIRMATION—CONVERT AND BAPTIZE MISS RICHARDS—HER FATHER, A MINISTER, INVITES ME TO PREACH IN HIS CHAPEL—CONGREGATION BELIEVE MY TESTIMONY—MR. RICHARDS FRIGHTENED—CLOSES HIS CHAPEL AGAINST ME—HIS DAUGHTER TROUBLED—I PREDICT THAT HE WILL AGAIN OPEN HIS CHAPEL TO ME—PREDICTION FULFILLED—OTHER ELDERS ENCOURAGED BY THE REV. MR. MATTHEWS, WHO AFTERWARDS REJECTS THEIR TESTIMONY AND COMMENCES PREACHING THEIR DOCTRINES ON HIS OWN ACCOUNT.

HAVING had considerable success the short time we had labored in that place, and having baptized a number we requested them to meet at the house of Sister Dawson for confirmation on the evening of the second Sabbath after our arrival in Preston.

The people having come together, we fully explained to them the nature of that ordinance about to be performed. We then laid our hands upon between forty and fifty for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and cofirmed them members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. While attending to this ordinance the Spirit of the Lord rested down upon us in a powerful manner, which caused us to rejoice exceedingly. Thus the word of the Lord spread and prevailed.

About this time, a young lady, the daughter of a minister of the Presbyterian order, who resided about fifteen miles from Preston, being on a visit to that place, happened to be at the house of a family with whom I was acquainted. Calling in to see them at the time she was there I was introduced to her, and we immediately entered into conversation on the subject of the gospel. I found her a very intelligent person, and she seemed very desirous to hear the things I had to teach and understand the doctrines of the gospel.

I informed her of an appointment I had made to preach that evening, and invited her to attend. She did so, and likewise the evening following; and after attending these two services she was fully convinced of the truth, and the next morning sent for me, desiring to be baptized. I cheerfully complied with her request, and confirmed her at the water side. The following day, she started for home, requesting me to pray for her, and gave us some encouragement to expect that her father would open his chapel for me to preach in.

I hastened to my brethren, told them of the circumstance and the result of my visit with the young lady, and then called upon them to unite in prayer that the Lord would soften the heart of her father, that he might be induced to open his chapel for us to preach in, and that our way might be opened in that place.

The next week I received a letter from her, and one from her father, in which he informed me that I was expected to be at his place the following Saturday, as he had given out an appointment for me to preach in his chapel the next Sunday. The following is a copy of the letter:

"Sir:—You are expected to be here next Saturday. You are given out to preach in the forenoon, afternoon and evening. Although we be strangers to one another, yet I hope we are not strangers to our blessed Redeemer, else I would not have given out for you to preach; our chapel is but little and the congregation but few—yet if one soul be converted, it is of more value than the whole world.

I remain in haste,

JOHN RICHARDS."

Agreeable to the kind invitation, I made preparation to visit that place, and took coach on Saturday afternoon at Preston and arrived at his house a little before dark.

On my entering, he arose and said, "I understand you are the minister lately from America!"

I told him I was, whereupon he bade me welcome to his house, and seemed to rejoice at my arrival.

After receiving refreshment at his hospitable board, we commenced a conversation which lasted till a late hour, which appeared satisfactory to the whole family.

The next morning I accompanied the reverend gentleman to his chapel, and at the hour appointed commenced to preach to a crowded congregation on the principles of salvation. I likewise preached in the afternoon and evening, and my hearers seemed to manifest great interest in the things which I laid before them. Nearly the whole congregation shed tears of joy.

After I had concluded the services of the day, Mr. Richards gave out another appointment for me to preach on Monday evening, which I attended to. I likewise, by request of the congregation, preached on Wednesday evening.

A number now began to believe the doctrines I advanced, and on Thursday, six individuals, all members of Mr. Richards' church, came forward for baptism.

Mr. Richards now, seeing the effect which my preaching produced, and fearing lest he should lose all his members and likewise the salary which was allowed him for preaching, told me that he must close the doors of his chapel against me; but at the same time his behavior was kind, and to his praise be it spoken, treated me with the greatest hospitality.

I then began to preach in private houses, which were opened in that neighborhood, and I ceased not to declare to all who came to hear, both by night and by day, the glorious tidings of salvation, and that God had again restored the ordinances as at the first, and counselors as at the beginning.

Notwithstanding Mr. Richards closed the door of his meeting house against me, he frequently came to hear me preach.

His daughter felt very sorrowful on account of her father not allowing me to preach any more in his place of worship, and wept much; but I told her not to fear, for I believed that God would soften his heart and cause him to open his chapel for me to preach in again.

During this time I was principally entertained at his house. The next Sunday I went along with him to his meeting, feeling a desire to hear him preach. After he had finished his discourse, I was surprised to hear him give out another appointment for me to preach in his chapel. I accordingly preached in the afternoon and in the evening, and the word seemed to be with power and the effect was great upon the people. The next day I baptized two more, both members of Mr. Richards' church.

Mr. Richards had preached in that place upwards of thirty years, and his members, as well as the inhabitants of the place and vicinity, were very much attached to him. Yet, when the fullness of the gospel was preached, although in much weakness, the people, notwithstanding their attachment and regard for their venerable pastor, being convinced of their duty, came forward and followed the footsteps of the Savior by being buried in the likeness of His death.

After laboring for some time in this neighborhood, I was warned by the Spirit to return to Preston, and there found that I was anxiously expected by the brethren. They had received letters from Brothers Richards and Russell, which gave an account of their proceedings since they left Preston. Brother Goodson had also returned from Bedfordshire, where he and Brother Richards had labored, and he gave us a relation of their mission and success. He informed us that a minister by the name of Matthews, brother-in-law to Elder Joseph Fielding, received them very kindly and invited them to preach in his church. The invitation was accepted, and they preached several times. The result was that a number, among whom was Mr. Matthews and his lady, believed their testimony and the things which they proclaimed. Mr. Matthews had likewise borne testimony to his congregation of the truth of these things and that they were the same principles as taught by the apostles in ancient days, and beseeched his church to receive the same. Several of his members went forward and obeyed the gospel, and the time was appointed when he was to be baptized. However, in the interval, something had caused him to stumble, and darkness had pervaded his mind, insomuch so that at the time specified he did not make his appearance, but went to a Baptist minister residing in that place whom he prevailed upon to baptize him. From that time he began to preach baptism for the remission of sins, and no longer walked with the Saints. However, a great part of his members left him and obeyed the truth, and in a letter which he wrote to his brother-in-law, the Rev. James Fielding, he stated that his best members had left him.

It would probably be well to say a few words respecting Mr. Matthews and Mr. Fielding, and their congregations, also their situation prior to the time the gospel saluted their ears.

Mr. Matthews, who was a gentleman of considerable learning and talents, had been a minister in the established church of England. Seeing a great many things in that church contrary to truth and righteousness, and moreover, believing that an overturn was at hand, and that the church was destitute of the gifts of the Spirit, and was not expecting the Savior to come to reign upon the earth, as had been spoken by the prophets, he felt led to withdraw from that body.

He consequently gave up his prospects in that connection, and began to preach the things which he verily believed; and was instrumental in raising up quite a church in that place.

Mr. J. Fielding had been a minister in the Methodist church, but for some of the causes mentioned, had withdrawn from that society, and had collected a considerable church in Preston. Those gentlemen, with their congregations, were, I believe, diligently contending for that faith which was once delivered to the Saints at the time we arrived, but afterwards rejected the truth. Yet, notwithstanding they did not obey the gospel, the greater portion of their members received our testimony, obeyed the ordinances we taught, and are now rejoicing in the blessings of the new and everlasting covenant.
