Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Heber C. Kimball ( 1840)

CHAPTER VI.

IMPRESSED TO VISIT DOWNHAM AND CHATBURN—BAD CHARACTER OF THOSE PLACES—WARNED AGAINST GOING—JOY WITH WHICH THE GOSPEL WAS RECEIVED—THE PEOPLE EAGER TO BE BAPTIZED—LOTH TO PART WITH ME—VAIN OPPOSITION FROM A MINISTER—AFFECTING CONDUCT OF LITTLE CHILDREN.

THERE being something interesting in the establishing of the gospel in Downham and Chatburn, I will relate the circumstances of my visit to those places, and the prospect we had of success prior to our proclaiming the truth to them.

Having been preaching in the neighborhood of these villages, I felt it my duty to pay them a visit and tell them my mission. I mentioned my desires to several of the brethren, but they endeavored to dissuade me from going, informing me that there could be no prospect of success, as several ministers of different denominations had endeavored to raise churches in these places, and had frequently preached to them, but to no effect. They had resisted all the efforts and withstood the attempts of all sects and parties for thirty years, and the preachers had given them up to the hardness of their hearts. I was also informed that they were very wicked places and the inhabitants were hardened against the gospel.

However, this did not discourage me in the least, believing that the gospel of Jesus Christ could reach the heart when the gospels of men were found abortive. I consequently told those who tried to dissuade me from going that these were the places I wanted to go to, and that it was my business "not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

Accordingly I went in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and I soon procured a large barn to preach in, which was crowded to excess. Having taken my stand in the middle of the congregation so that all might be able to hear, I commenced my discourse, spoke with great simplicity on the subject of the gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the conditions of pardon for a fallen world, and the privileges and blessings of all those who embraced the truth. I likewise said a little on the subject of the resurrection.

My remarks were accompanied by the spirit of the Lord and were received with joy, and these people, who were represented as being so hard and obdurate, were melted with tenderness and love, and such a feeling was produced as I never saw before; and the effect seemed to be general.

I then told them that, being a servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, I stood ready at all times to administer the ordinances of the gospel. After I had concluded, I felt some one pulling at my coat. I turned around and asked the person what it was he desired. The answer was "Please, sir, will you baptize me?" "and me!" "and me!" exclaimed more than a dozen voices.

We accordingly went down into the water, and before I left, I baptized twenty-five for the remission of sins—and was thus engaged until four o'clock the next morning.

Another evening the congregation was so numerous that I had to preach in the open air, and took my stand on a stone wall, and afterwards baptized a number.

These towns seemed to be affected from one end to the other; parents called their children together, spoke to them of the subjects upon which I had preached, and warned them against swearing and all other evil practices, and instructed them in their duty, etc. Such a scene I presume was never witnessed in this place before; the hearts of the people appeared to be broken, and the next morning they were all in tears, thinking they should see my face no more. When I left them my feelings were such as I cannot describe. As I walked down the street, followed by numbers, the doors were crowded by the inmates of the houses, waiting to bid us a last farewell, who could only give vent to their grief in sobs and broken accents.

While contemplating this scene we were induced to take off our hats, for we felt as if the place was holy ground. The Spirit of the Lord rested down upon us, and I was constrained to bless that whole region of country.

We were followed a considerable distance from the villages by a great number, who could hardly separate themselves from us. My heart was like unto theirs, and I almost thought my head was a fountain of tears, for I wept for several miles after I bid them adieu.

Some things transpired while I was in England which may be considered of but little importance by the world, but which will no doubt be appreciated by the Saints, who can not only mark the providence of God as displayed in nations and kingdoms, but can observe its workings in private life, and in affairs of but apparent small moment.

Soon after our arrival in England a great many of the "Aikenites" embraced the gospel, which caused considerable ill feeling and opposition among the ministers belonging to that sect.

Having lost quite a number, and seeing that many more were on the eve of being baptized, one of the ministers came to Preston and announced that he was going to put down "Mormonism," expose the doctrines and overthrow the Book of Mormon. He made a very long oration on the subject, and was very vehement in his manner, and pounded the Book of Mormon, which he held in his hand, on the pulpit a great many times. He then exhorted the people to pray that the Lord would drive us from their coasts, and if the Lord would not hear them in that petition, that he would smite the leaders.

The next Sunday Elder Hyde and I, being in Preston, went to our meeting and read the 13th chapter of Corinthians. We strongly urged upon the Saints the grace of charity, which is so highly spoken of in that chapter, and took the liberty of making some remarks on the proceedings of Mr. Aiken, the gentleman who had abused us and the Book of Mormon so very much a few days before. In return for his railing, we exhorted our people to pray that the Lord would soften his heart and open his eyes, that he might see that it was "hard to kick against the pricks"

The discourse had a very good effect, and that week we had the pleasure of baptizing about fifty into the kingdom of Jesus Christ, a large number of whom were members of Mr. Aiken's church.

Thus the Lord blessed us exceedingly, notwithstanding the railing and abuse of the priests, and all things worked together for our good and the advancement of the cause of truth.

I cannot refrain from relating a circumstance which took place, while Brother Fielding and I were passing through the village of Chatburn; having been observed drawing nigh to the town, the news ran from house to house, and immediately on our arrival, the noise of their looms was hushed, the people flocked to the doors to welcome us, and see us pass. The youth of the place ran to meet us, and took hold of our mantles and then of each other's hands. Several, having hold of hands, went before us, singing the songs of Zion, while their parents gazed upon the scene with delight, poured out their blessings upon our heads, and praised the God of heaven for sending us to unfold the principles of truth and the plan of salvation to them.

Such a scene, and such gratitude, I never witnessed before. "Surely," my heart exclaimed, "out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, thou has perfected praise!"

What could have been more pleasing and delightful than such a manifestation of gratitude to Almighty God from those whose hearts were deemed too hard to be penetrated by the gospel, and who had been considered the most wicked and hardened people in that region of country!

In comparison to the joy I then experienced, the grandeur, pomp and glory of the kingdoms of this world shrank into insignificance and appeared as dross, and all the honor of man, aside from the gospel, to be vain.
