Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Heber C. Kimball ( 1840)

CHAPTER VII

VISIT TO THE MOON FAMILY—PREJUDICED AGAINST OUR DOCTRINE—A PROPHECY ABOUT THEM—IMPRESSED TO CALL AT THEIR HOUSE AGAIN—MY PRESENCE HAILED WITH JOY AS AN ANSWER TO PRAYER—THE PROPHECY FULFILLED: THEY JOIN THE CHURCH—A DREAM AND ITS INTERPRETATION.

HAVING an appointment to preach in the village of Wrightington, while on the way I stopped at the house of Brother Amos Fielding. When I arrived he informed me that a certain family by the name of Moon had sent a request by him for me to visit them, that they might have the privilege of conversing with me on the subject of the gospel. Accordingly, Brother Fielding and I paid them a visit that evening.

We were very kindly received by the family, and had considerable conversation on the object of my mission to that country, and the great work of the last days. They listened with attention to my statements, but they appeared to be prejudiced against them rather than otherwise. We remained in conversation until a late hour, and then returned.

On our way home, Brother Fielding observed that he thought our visit had been in vain, as the family seemed to have considerable prejudice. I replied, "Brother Fielding, be not faithless, but believing; we shall yet see great effects from this visit, for I know there are some of the family who have received the testimony and will shortly manifest the same."

At this remark he appeared surprised.

The next morning I continued my journey to Wrightington, and after spending two or three days in that vicinity, preaching the gospel, I returned by the way of Brother Fielding's, with whom I again tarried for the night.

The next morning I commenced my journey, intending to go direct to Preston, but when I got opposite the road leading to Mr. Moon's, I was forcibly impressed by the Spirit of the Lord to call and see them again. I could not resist, and therefore directed my steps to the house, not knowing what it meant.

On my arrival at the house, I knocked at the door, and Mrs. Moon from within exclaimed, "Come in! come in! you are welcome here! I and the lasses (meaning her daughters) have just been calling on the Lord, and praying that He would send you this way."

She then informed me of her state of mind since I was there before, and said she at first rejected my testimony, and endeavored to think lightly of the things I had advanced, but on trying to pray, she said that "the heavens seemed to be like brass over her head, and it was like iron under her feet." She did not know what was the matter, and exclaimed, "Certainly the man has not bewitched me!"

Upon inquiry she found it was the same with the "lasses." They had begun to reflect on the things I had told them, and, thinking it possible that I had told them the truth, they resolved to lay the case before the Lord, and beseech Him to give them a testimony concerning the things I had testified of.

She then observed, that as soon as they did so, light broke in upon their minds, they were convinced that I was a messenger of salvation, and that it was the work of the Lord; and they had resolved to obey the gospel, which they did, for that evening I baptized father and mother and four of their daughters.

Shortly after I visited them again, and baptized the remainder of the family, consisting of thirteen souls, the youngest of whom was over twenty years of age. They received the gospel as little children, and rejoiced exceedingly in its blessings. The sons were very good musicians, and the daughters excellent singers, and when they united their instruments and their voices in the songs of Zion, the effect was truly transporting.

Before I left England, there were about thirty of that family and connections baptized, six of whom were ordained to be fellow-laborers with us in the vineyard, and I left them rejoicing in the truths they had embraced.

One night, while at the village of Rochester, I dreamed that I, in company with another person, was walking out, and saw a very extensive field of wheat, more so than the eye could reach. Such a sight I never before witnessed. The wheat appeared to be perfectly ripe, and ready for harvest. I was very much rejoiced at the glorious sight which presented itself; but judge of my surprise, when, on taking some of the ears and rubbing them in my hands, I found nothing but smut. I marveled exceedingly, and felt very sorrowful, and exclaimed, "What will the people do for grain; here is a great appearance of plenty, but there is no sound wheat!"

While contemplating the subject, I looked in another direction, and saw a small field in the form of the letter L, which had the appearance of something growing in it. I immediately directed my steps to it, and found that it had been sown with wheat, some of which had grown about six inches high, other parts of the field not quite so high, and some had only just sprouted. This gave me great encouragement to expect that at the harvest there would be some good grain. While thus engaged, a large bull, very fierce and angry, leaped over the fence, ran through the field, and stamped down a large quantity of that which had just sprouted, and after doing considerable injury he leaped over the fence and ran away.

I felt very much grieved, that so much wheat should be destroyed, when there was such a prospect of scarcity. When I awoke next morning, the interpretation was given me. The large field with the great appearance of grain, so beautiful to look upon, represented the nation in which I then resided, which had a very pleasing appearance and a great show of religion, and made great pretensions to piety and godliness, but denied the power thereof. It was destitute of the principles of truth, and consequently of the gifts of the spirit.

The small field I saw clearly represented the region of country where I was laboring, and where the word of truth had taken root, and was growing in the hearts of those who had the gospel, some places having grown a little more than others. The village I was in, was that part of the field where the bull did so much injury, for during my short visit there, most of the inhabitants were believing, but as soon as I departed, a clergyman belonging to the church of England, came out and violently attacked the truth, and made considerable noise, crying, "false prophet! delusion!" and after trampling on truth, and doing all the mischief he could, before I returned, he took shelter in his pulpit. However, he did not destroy all the seed, for after my return I was instrumental in building up a church in that place.
