Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Heber C. Kimball ( 1840)

CHAPTER X.

REMOVAL TO MISSOURI—SICKNESS—KINDNESS OF THE SAINTS AT FAR WEST—BUILD A HOUSE, AND THEN HAVE TO ABANDON IT—BATTLE OF CROOKED RIVER—DEATH AND FINAL TESTIMONY OF APOSTLE DAVID W. PATTEN—CORNER STONE OF TEMPLE AT FAR WEST LAID—REMOVAL TO ILLINOIS.

I FOUND my family in good health, and as comfortably situated as I could expect; and our joy was mutual. The Saints in Kirtland also received us with joy and welcomed us home.

But my journey was not yet ended. Soon after my arrival in Kirtland, I had to make preparation to move to the State of Missouri, where the greater part of the Church had already gone. One great cause of their removal to the west, was the persecutions to which they were subject in Kirtland. The brethren who yet resided there, although very kind and affectionate, were weak in the faith in consequence of trials and temptations. This caused us to grieve exceedingly, and we resolved to cheer them up as much as we possibly could.

Being solicited to preach in the house or the Lord, we did so, and after preaching a few times, and recounting our travels and the great success which had attended our labors, and also the marvelous work which the Lord had commenced and was still carrying on in the old country, they began to take courage, their confidence increased, and their faith was strengthened, and they again realized the blessings of Jehovah.

As soon as our circumstances would permit, we commenced our journey to the State of Missouri, by water, a distance of nearly eighteen hundred miles. After enduring considerable fatigue, we arrived safely at Far West, on the 25th of July. We had the pleasure of beholding the faces of numbers of our friends and brethren, some of whom were so glad to see us that tears started in their eyes when we took them by the hand.

There is indeed something peculiarly pleasing to the Saint, who, after a long separation, beholds the friends to whom he is united in bonds the most sacred, and with whom he has probably traveled to preach the gospel, and with them passed through many scenes of sorrow and affliction. At that time every pleasing association is revived, and memory fondly clings to those scenes, the contemplation of which affords pleasure, while every thing of an opposite nature is forgotten and buried in oblivion.

During our journey from Kirtland to Missouri, the weather was remarkably war, in consequence of which I suffered very much, and my body was broken down by sickness, and I continued very feeble for a considerable length of time.

The first Sunday after my arrival at Far West I was called upon to preach to the Saints, which I endeavored to do, although I was scarcely able to stand. I related many things respecting my mission and travels, which were gladly received by the brethren, whose hearts were cheered by the recital, while many of the Elders were stirred up to diligence, and expressed a great desire to accompany us when we should return to England.

Soon after my arrival, I had a lot given me by Bishop Partridge, and also sufficient timber to build me a house. While it was being erected, I lived in a place I built for my cow, about eleven feet square, and in which I could hardly stand upright. The brethren were remarkably kind and contributed to my necessities. One of them by the name of Charles Hubbard, made me a present of forty acres of land, another gave me a cow, etc.

When I had nearly finished my house, and after much labor, I was obliged to abandon it to the mob, who at that time commenced persecuting the Saints, driving off their cattle and destroying their property.

It will not be expected that I should recapitulate the circumstances which then transpired, which were of an extraordinary character, as numbers have written on the subject. Suffice it to say, that the Saints suffered privations, hunger, abuse, cold, famine, and many of them death. Yes, the blood of the Saints has stained the soil of Missouri, for which the King of kings and Lord of hosts will recompense upon her the punishment of her crimes.

From about the 6th of August until the 1st of November it was a continual scene of agitation and alarm, both by night and by day. The enemies of righteousness were determined to overthrow the Saints, and, regardless of all laws (which were trampled upon with impunity), they made every preparation, and used every means in their power to accomplish their unhallowed designs.

The Saints, tenacious of their liberties and sacred rights, resisted these unlawful designs, and with courage worthy of them, they guarded their families and their homes from the aggressions of the mob, but not without the loss of several lives, among whom was my greatly esteemed and much lamented friend. Elder David W. Patten, who fell a sacrifice to the fell spirit of persecution, and a martyr to the cause of truth. The circumstances of his death I will briefly relate:

It being ascertained that a mob had collected on Crooked River, in the County of Caldwell, a company of sixty or seventy persons immediately volunteered from Far West to watch their movements and repel their attacks, and chose Elder Patten for their commander. They commenced their march about midnight and came up to the mob very early next morning, and as soon as the brethren approached near to them, they were fired upon, when Captain Patten received a shot which proved fatal. The mob after firing ran away. Several others of the brethren were wounded at the same time, some of whom afterwards died.

Immediately on receiving the intelligence that Brother Patten was wounded, I hastened to see him. When I arrived he appeared to be in great pain, but still was glad to see me. He was conveyed about four miles to the house of Brother Winchester. During his removal his sufferings were so excruciating, that he frequently desired us to lay him down that he might die. But being desirous to get him out of the reach of the mob and among friends, we prevailed upon him to let us convey him there.

He lived about an hour after his arrival, and was perfectly sensible and collected until he breathed his last. He had medical assistance, yet his wound was such that there was no hope entertained of his recovery. This he was perfectly aware of. In this situation, while the shades of time were lowering and eternity with all its realities was opening to his view, he bore a strong testimony to the truth of the work of the Lord and the religion he had espoused.

The principles of the gospel which were so precious to him before, were honorably maintained in nature's final hour, and afforded him that support and consolation at the time of his departure which deprived death of its sting and its horror.

Speaking of those who had fallen from their steadfastness, he exclaimed, "O that they were in my situation; for I feel that I have kept the faith; I have finished my course; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give to me," etc.

Speaking to his beloved partner, who was present, and who attended him in his dying moments, he said, "Whatever you do else, O, do not deny the faith!" He all the while expressed a great desire to depart. I spoke to him and said, "Brother David, when you get home I want you to remember me." He immediately exclaimed, "I will." At this time his sight was gone.

We felt so very much attached to our beloved brother, that we beseeched the Lord to spare his life and endeavored to exercise faith in the Lord for his recovery. Of this he was perfectly aware, and expressed a wish that we should let him go, as his desire was to be with Christ.

A few minutes before he died he prayed as follows: "Father, I ask thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, that thou wouldst release my spirit and receive it unto Thyself!" and then said to those who surrounded his dying bed, "Brethren, you have held me by your faith, but do give me up, and let me go, I beseech you."

We then committed him to God, and he soon breathed his last, and slept in Jesus without a groan.

This was the end of one who was an honor to the Church and a blessing to the Saints, and whose faith and virtues and diligence in the cause of truth will be long remembered by all who had the pleasure of his acquaintance; and his memory will be had in remembrance by the Church of Christ from generation.

It was indeed a painful circumstance to be deprived of the labors of this worthy servant of Christ, and it east a gloom over the Saints; yet the glorious and sealing testimony which he bore of his acceptance with heaven, and the truth of the gospel, was a matter of joy and satisfaction, not only to his immediate friends, but to the Saints at large.

I remained in the State of Missouri until the 26th of April, A. D. 1839, it being the time appointed by revelation for the Twelve to take their leave of the building spot of the house of the Lord and take their journey across the ocean, and notwithstanding the threats of our enemies that this prophecy should fail, we assembled on the public square, at Far West, assisted Elder Alpheus Cutler to lay the corner foundation stone, sang a hymn and united in prayer to God that He would give us a prosperous mission.

During my stay in Missouri, I frequently went to see the brethren who were confined in prison for the testimony of Jesus and for the word of God. Many times after I had traveled forty or fifty miles to see them, I was denied the privilege by the jailor and the guards.

I was with the brethren in nearly all their movements in the west, and can bear testimony to their faith and virtues, and know they were entirely innocent of the crimes alleged against them, and that their persecutions were brought upon them on account of their attachment to the gospel and to the Saints of the Lord.

Although they were in the Lands of their enemies, who threatened to kill them, I always had the testimony that they would be delivered and come forth victorious.

After the 26th of April, A. D. 1839, I took leave of Far West, and in company with my brethren traveled to Illinois, where my family had removed some time previous, and I had the unspeakable pleasure of seeing my beloved friends, the First Presidency and others who had been delivered out of the hands of their enemies and had arrived safely in Illinois.

Soon after a general conference of the Church was held near Quincy, at which the Saints from all the regions round about assembled. It was a time which will long be remembered by the Saints, it being the first conference held after their expulsion.
