Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Heber C. Kimball ( 1840)

CHAPTER XVI.

FURTHER INCIDENTS OF THE JOURNEY—MONEY INCREASED BY THE POWER OF GOD—ARRIVE AT KIRTLAND AHEAD OF BRETHREN, IN FULFILLMENT OF MY PREDICTION—SERVICES IN THE TEMPLE—VISIT MY OLD HOME AND MY RELATIVES—KIND TREATMENT—ARRIVE IN NEW YORK—JOYFUL MEETING WITH BRETHREN.

ON the 22nd of October, Elder Almon W. Babbitt and Dr. Knight, an eminent physician, came from Pleasant Garden to see me, and the next day Brother James Modisett took us in his father's carriage twenty miles, to the house of Brother Addison Pratt. From there we were conveyed by Dr. Knight to Pleasant Garden, and put up with Brother Jonathan Crosby. We found a few brethren there, who were well and in good spirits. We remained three days, preaching to the few brethren and those who wished to hear. * * *

Before leaving, Dr. Knight and some others gave us some money to assist us on our mission. While there I also received a letter from my wife, giving an account of her sickness since I left, also that of our children, William and Helen. I wrote her a comforting letter in reply, praying the Lord to bless her and the little ones.

On the 26th, Brother Babbitt took us in his buggy twelve miles, to the house of Brother Scott, whose family was very glad to see us, and we tarried with them through the night, after which Brother Scott sent his little son, John, to convey us to Bellville, fifteen miles, several miles of the journey in a rain storm, which obliged us to put up at an inn for the remainder of the day and night. Brother Brigham was very sick, and had to go to bed. I sat up to wait upon him, and spent the evening with the landlord and his lady, preaching to them. They received our testimony, and were very kind to us.

The following morning the landlord arose very early, and talked to the citizens about the travelers who had stayed with him the night previous, and what he had heard us say concerning the gospel. The neighbors flocked in; made many enquiries and were very anxious that we should tarry and preach in the place.

Our host said several times he hoped the stage would not come, that we might stay and preach, as the people were very much excited on account of a great discussion which had recently occurred between two popular preachers.

The stage, however, came along about ten o'clock, and we started on our way towards Kirtland, leaving the landlord in tears.

The money given to us in Pleasant Garden added to the five dollars we had left when the brethren parted from us on the 18th, amounted to thirteen dollars and fifty cents. When we got into the stage we did not expect to ride many miles. We rode, however, as far as Indianapolis, paid our passage, and found we had sufficient means to carry us to Richmond, Indiana. When we arrived in Richmond, we found we had means to take us to Dayton, to which place we proceeded and tarried over night, waiting for another line of stages. We expected to stop here and preach until we got means to pursue our journey. Brother Brigham, however, went to his trunk to get money to pay the bill and found we had sufficient to pay our passage to Columbus, to which place we took passage in the stage and tarried over night. When he paid the next bill, he found he had sufficient means to pay our passage to Worcester, and accordingly we took passage for that place. When we arrived there, Brother Brigham went to his trunk again to get money to pay, and found sufficient to pay our passage to Cleveland.

While on our way to Cleveland, and within about twenty miles of that place we passed a little town called Strongsville. Brother Brigham had a strong impression to stop at a tavern when we first came into that town; but as the stage did not stop there we went on.

We arrived at Cleveland about eleven o'clock at night, took lodgings and remained till next morning.

On the morning of November 3rd, it being Sunday, we went to the Episcopalian church, and while returning to the hotel, we met my father-in-law, and learned that Elders Smith, Turley and Hedlock had just arrived in Cleveland. Father Murray was as much astonished to see me alive as though he had seen one risen from the dead. I don't think I ever saw a man feel better than he did when I met him in the street.

We walked with him a short distance and met the brethren, whose health was good compared with what it had been, and who were in fine spirits. We learned that they had stayed over night at the tavern in Strongsville, where Brother Brigham had such a strong impression to stop the night previous. They had picked up Elder John Taylor at Dayton, where he was left at a tavern very sick with the ague a few days before, by Father Coltrin, who proceeded to Kirtland.

Brothers Taylor and Hedlock got into the stage with us, which left early in the afternoon, and rode as far as Willoughby. We proceeded to Kirtland and arrived the same evening, where we found a good many brethren and friends, who were glad to see us. Thus was the prediction fulfilled which I made on my sick bed, in regard to reaching Kirtland before my brethren.

Brother Brigham had one York shilling left, and on looking over our expenses, we found we had paid out over eighty-seven dollars out of the thirteen dollars and fifty cents we had at Pleasant Garden, which was all the money we had to pay our passage with. We had traveled over four hundred miles by stage, for which we paid from eight to ten cents a mile, and had taken three meals a day, for each of which we were charged fifty cents, also fifty cents for our lodgings. Brother Brigham often suspected that I put the money in his trunk or clothes, thinking that I had a purse of money which I had not acquainted him with; but this was not so; the money could only have been put in his trunk by some heavenly messenger, who thus administered to our necessities daily as he knew we needed.

There was a division of sentiment among the brethren in Kirtland, many of whom lacked the energy to move to Missouri, and some lacked the disposition.

On Sunday, the 10th of November, Elder John Taylor preached in the temple in the forenoon, and I preached in the afternoon. I had great freedom in speaking, and compared my hearers to a parcel of old earthen pots that were cracked in burning, for they were mostly apostates who were living there.

Immediately after I returned to the house of Ira Bond, Martin Harris, Cyrus Smalling and others came in and attacked me on what I had been saying, asking me who I referred to in my comparisons. I answered, "To no one in particular, but to anyone that the coat fits." I was so sick that I referred them to Brother Hedlock, who came in at that moment, to talk with, as I was lying on a bed, having a chill, and not able to talk. John Moreton and others declared I should never preach in the house again. Some of the people tried to make me angry, so as to quarrel with me, but they failed.

I made my home at Dean Gould's, in the house of Ira Bond. They were all very kind to me. I staid with them most of the time I was in Kirtland, during which the weather was very stormy.

I was thankful to get rid of the chills that time without the aid of medicine, but I continued afflicted with a cough which I caught by riding in the stage at night.

On Sunday, the 17th, Brother Brigham preached in the forenoon, and Brother John Taylor in the afternoon. In the evening Brother Brigham anointed Brother John Taylor in the house of the Lord, he having previously washed himself in pure water; then we all went to the temple. I was called upon and opened the meeting by prayer, when Brigham anointed him with pure sweet oil and pronounced such blessings upon him as the Spirit gave utterance to, and Brother Taylor then arose and prayed.

Brother Theodore Turley, one of the Seventies, was then anointed by Daniel S. Miles one of the presidents of the Seventies; both of which anointings were sealed by loud shouts of hosannah. Then their feet were washed and the meeting closed.

A council was held with Brothers Kellog, Moreton and others, who took the lead in Kirtland. We proposed that some of the Elders should remain there and preach for a few weeks, but John Moreton replied that they had had many talented preachers, and he considered that men of such ordinary ability as the missionaries of our party possessed could do no good in Kirtland; he thought possibly that Brother John Taylor might do, but he was not sure.

Kirtland at that time was a desolate looking place, about one-half of the houses being empty and going to ruin.

We had but little means to prosecute our journey, but, God being our helper, we felt to press our way onward.

I left there with my brethren on the 22nd of November, and went to Fairport. There we were detained till the 26th on account of a tremendous snow storm. Our board cost us fifteen dollars while there. We boarded a boat and landed at Buffalo on the 27th, in the morning, and proceeded by stage to Batavia, where we arrived in the evening. The next afternoon, we took the cars for Rochester.

When we got to Byron, I got out and left the brethren, supposing Harvy Hall, my brother-in-law, was living there. I had scarcely left the cars when I was informed that he had gone to Rochester. I think I never felt worse in my life, my anticipations were so great to see him, and I could not get away till the next night. Just at evening, I got aboard the cars and arrived at Hall's at eight the next evening, where I was joyfully received. I staid there one week, and was confined to my bed some of the time. I had to take deck passage on the steamboat for the want of means, and took cold and it settled in my righ side. I was so bad that I could hardly draw my breath.

A letter from my wife reached Mendon, my old home about three weeks before I did. Sister Hall was at my brother Solomon's, and advised him to take it out. He did so, and opened it, but could not tell where I was. Supposing that I was dead, my relatives were feeling very badly when I arrived there. I was taken to my brother Solomon's, and he and his family were all rejoiced to see me once more in the land of the living.

Nathaniel Campbell, my wife's brother-in-law, came and took me home with him to Victor. I received great kindness from them and from all my old friends. Several of the neighbors came in while I was there, and my wife's sister introduced me as her "Mormon" brother. They seemed to take a great interest in our sufferings, and this seemed to be the feeling of all candid people.

I was urged by my friends to return and bring my family, and remain with them, or at least to stop there till warm weather, on account of my poor health, as a little fatigue would bring me down again. However, I knew it would not do, as "no man, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God."

I preached in Mendon school house Sunday, December 21st, at one o'clock. The house was full. Then in the evening again there was an appointment for their Methodist preacher, but as he did not come, nothing would do but I must preach. I also preached at Miller's Corner. There seemed to be a great desire to hear, but my health would not permit me to speak much.

On the 29th, Brother William E. Murray came through the snow up to his horses' sides, determined to have me go home with him. It was as much as we could do to get to his house. It was a pleasure to me to see them. William said to me, "When you want to pray, Heber, use your liberty." He and his family seemed to take much pleasure in the things of God; and on the first day of the year 1840, I went into the water and baptized him and his wife. He gave me a little money, a pair of pantaloons and a pair of drawers, and would have given me fifty dollars if he had had it. My sister, Mrs. Wheeler, gave me another pair of drawers and two fine shirts, and a shawl to wear around my neck. An old friend, John E. Tomlinson, gave me a dollar and said if I would come again he'd give me more. These, with Brother Wheeler, were the only ones who would help me upon my mission. Others were willing to assist me if I would only forsake my "Mormonism" and come back and live with them; but I felt that I would rather live in a cave, or be driven with the Saints every other year while I lived, and be one with them, than to apostatize and have all the good things of the earth, for I would feel myself disgraced in the sight of God and man.

On the 6th of January, I preached in Mendon for the fourth time. I also had calls to preach in other parts of the town, as well as other towns in that region. The Baptist church that I had formerly been a member of, had about died out.

While in Victor, I had several calls to go to Pike. After being much wrought upon, I consented to go. William Murray and wife accompanied me. We got to the house of my old friend, Adolphus Huit, the first day of February. I never saw a person more pleased than his wife was to see me; she said that she had been calling on the Lord that He would send me there.

On Sunday morning we went to the Christian chapel. After the meeting was through, an appointment was given out for me to preach on Monday evening. The church leaders said they were willing that I should preach, because the people were in such a cold state that I could not have any effect upon them.

When the time came, I went and found the house crowded. My text was from the 2nd Epistle of John, 9th, 10th and 11th verses. When I was almost through, two of the ministers came into the pulpit. I gave them permission to speak, when one Baptist arose and found fault with me because I had preached from the Bible.

When he had sat down, I answered him, and then three others followed his example, and I answered each in turn. They were confounded, and the discussion tended to open the eyes of the people.

I afterwards baptized Mrs. Huit, and many others believed. I only preached once and then returned to Victor.

On the 10th, I started for New York, and reached Albany on the 12th. Mr. Wheeler, my brother-in-law, stayed with me all night at the hotel and paid my bill. He thought me unwise to go any farther, but the next day I took coach for New York.

I went up on the east side of the river, crossed the Catskill Mountains, and took three days to get to Jersey City, traveling part of the way by sleigh. When I arrived at Jersey City, I had not one penny left, and could not cross the river without paying twenty-five cents. I informed the person in charge of the boat that I was out of money, and a gentleman who overheard me gave me twenty-five cents. I crossed the river into New York at nine o'clock at night, went to the Western Hotel and pawned my trunk to pay for lodging. I had only eaten one meal a day while traveling to New York, for want of money to buy more, but I did not suffer from hunger.

The next morning, I went in search of some of the Saints, and soon found Brothers Parley P. and Orson Pratt and Brigham Young, who were glad to see me. I went to meeting with them and found one hundred and fifty Saints assembled. It was a great pleasure to meet with them. They were very kind to me, and soon provided me with money to redeem my trunk.

I found a letter in New York from my wife, which had lain in the office for a long time, and I was thankful to hear that she and our children were better.

Soon after I arrived in New York, Orson Pratt and I were called upon to visit a sick woman, who was unable to turn herself in bed without assistance. We anointed her with oil in the name of the Lord, and she was made whole. She did not belong to the Church, nor did her husband, but in two days afterwards she and her husband were baptized, and fourteen others.

I was detained in New York about four weeks, being unable to obtain passage on a packet ship, as the owners of vessels found it more profitable to carry freight than passengers. Brothers Woodruff, Taylor, Clark, Mulliner, White and Turley had already gone to England, and Brother George A. Smith, on account of sickness, had gone to Philadelphia.

We were not idle, however, while we remained. We had calls to preach on every hand. I attended a meeting almost every night and was generally kept up talking till midnight or past.

As a result of our labors, many new members were added to the Church and fresh zeal was infused into the old ones The Saints were very kind to us, and provided liberally for our wants, and when we were ready to sail they supplied us with money to pay our passage, and many tempting delicacies as well as more substantial food to serve us on the voyage, besides clothing and bedding.

In company with Elders Brigham Young, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, Parley P. Pratt and R. Hedlock, I took passage for England on the ship Patrick Henry, on the 7th of March, 1840. A large number of the Saints came down to the wharf to bid us farewell. When we got into the small boat to go to the ship the Saints on shore sang "The Gallant Ship is Under Way," in which song we joined until the sound of our voices was lost in the distance. I may also add that previous to starting we held a conference with the Saints in New York, at which, by unanimous vote of those present, a "letter of recommendation" was given me, signed, in behalf of the Saints, by the presiding Elder of the Branch and clerk of the conference, testifying of my "wisdom, understanding, meekness and humility," and recommending me "as an upright, honest, candid man, and a faithful minister of the gospel."
