Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Studying the Scriptures

Chapter 1

Suggestions on Studying the Scriptures

In the April 1976 general conference, President Spencer W. Kimball said, "No father, no son, no mother, no daughter should get so busy that he or she does not have time to study the scriptures." [^1]

I do not recall a time in Church history when so much emphasis has been placed by the leaders of the Church on studying the scriptures. President Kimball, who emphasized so much that we should not only lengthen our stride but that we should also quicken our pace, indicated that we should also do this where scripture study is concerned. I think President Kimball was concerned that we do not have a single complete scripture in the Church—not a single one.

None of our scriptures is complete, and there are many scriptures that we do not even have. I think our Heavenly Father would like to give us these scriptures if we would live up to what we already have. But because our Heavenly Father is a loving, kind, merciful Father who is concerned with our welfare and our good, He is not going to give us more scriptures than we are willing to live and to keep—because where much is given, much is expected. If he gives us additional scriptures and we do not read those scriptures or live their teachings, then he brings us under greater condemnation. In 2 Nephi, chapter 28, the Lord has indicated exactly how he works with his children so far as the giving of scriptures is concerned:

"Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough!

"For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (vv. 29-30).

Students of Judaism and Christianity know how literally that prophecy and that statement can be fulfilled. For hundreds of years the Jewish people had their scriptures, the Torah, and they believed in those scriptures and taught them. Then our Heavenly Father decided to give them additional scriptures—the New Testament. Some of those people accepted the New Testament. In fact, nearly all of the early converts to Christianity came out of Judaism, but as a body and as a nation, the Jewish people did not accept the New Testament. The results of that rejection can be seen today. Now, not only do they not have the New Testament, but in essence they do not have the Old Testament either. Once you reject additional words from God, in effect you reject what he has already given. Whereas 2,000 years ago the Jewish people held up a standard—their Old Testament, their Torah—to the world, today those who live in Israel or have visited Israel can verify that the average Israeli is not a religious person so far as the study of the scriptures is concerned. In fact, in Israel the Bible is primarily considered to be a history book and not a book directly from God.

The Christians, of course, did quite well with the New Testament, until our Heavenly Father decided that he would give them additional scriptures. If you read the accounts and writings of Christian ministers in America 140 years ago, you will learn that they were pleading with people to study the scriptures because the scriptures contained the word of God. Two such ministers finally motivated the Prophet Joseph Smith to read the New Testament, which set his soul on fire by these words: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him" (James 1:5). Those words led to the great inauguration of the dispensation of the fulness of times, but it was primarily a Reverend Green, with his teaching that the New Testament is the word of God, who motivated the Prophet Joseph Smith to seek the help that led to the First Vision.

When our Heavenly Father decided to give the Christian world additional scripture, he brought forth the Book of Mormon. Many in Christianity accepted this book—nearly all of the early converts to Mormonism came out of Christianity. But again, as a body, the Christians did not accept this new scripture, and now their New Testament has been taken away from them. A poll conducted by Dr. George M. Gallup, director of the American Institute of Public Opinion, shows how literally the New Testament has been taken from them. The poll found that the average American over twenty years of age could not name even one of the four Gospels—53 percent could not name one of the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John. That is how literally the New Testament has been taken away from the Christian world.

Therefore, our living prophets and their associates have encouraged the membership of the Church to study the scriptures in hopes that we can prove worthy to receive additional scriptures. You see, our Heavenly Father is not going to give us more scriptures if we do not keep and treasure the scriptures we already have. If he did so, he would bring us under condemnation since we are responsible for all that he has given us that we do not keep.

"For behold, thus saith the Lord God; I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:30).

When we respond to our Heavenly Father, he gives us more. At any one time, we are responsible for all we have, including that which we do not keep. But any time he gives us more and we do not respond, then he does not give us any more, lest he bring us under greater condemnation by so doing. I think it is significant that in 1977, for the first time this century, additional scriptures were added to the scriptural canon of the Church.

In 1976, President Kimball made a special plea to the membership of the Church to read the scriptures:

"For many years the General Authorities have urged us all with increasing frequency and in a spirit of love to adopt a program of daily gospel study in our homes, both as individuals and as families. . . .

"Nevertheless, we are saddened to learn, as we travel about the stakes and missions of the Church, that there are still many of the Saints who are not reading and pondering the scriptures regularly. . . .

" . . . The prophets of old seem to cry out to us in almost every page of the scriptures, urging us to study the word of the Lord, . . . But we do not always hear, and we might well ask ourselves why. . . .

"Lest the foregoing be lightly passed over, let me pause here to point out a common error in the mind of man—that is, the tendency, when someone speaks of faithfulness or success in one thing or another, to think 'me,' and when someone mentions failure or neglect, to think 'them.' But I ask us all to honestly evaluate our performance in scripture study." [^2]

We all have good intentions. I am sure there is not a person in the Church who does not believe we ought to read the scriptures, but we make excuses. Some of us might say, "Well, we have too many scriptures. You know, it would be better if we were Protestant or Catholic because then we would only have two books to read. But as Latter-day Saints we also have the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. We have too many scriptures." Maybe we have convinced the Lord that we have too many scriptures; otherwise, he would give us more. In our hearts, of course, we know that is not true. But in our actions, we prove it is true. We have too many scriptures.

Before President Joseph Fielding Smith became president of the Church, there is a report that he spoke of the importance of the scriptures at a stake conference he attended. During his talk, he asked the membership at that conference, "If the Brethren should publish the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon, how many of you would read the sealed portion?" And virtually every hand went up. Then President Smith asked, "May I see by a show of hands how many of you have read our present Book of Mormon." Very few hands went up. Isn't that interesting? We would all read the sealed portion if it were given to us, but we don't read the scriptures we already have.

Some people say, "Well, it's not a question of having too many scriptures, it's a question of having too little time. There are so many other things to do." And I guess one answer to that could be, "Well, how many fewer hours do you have each day than anyone else? Do you really have fewer than twenty-four hours?" Is it more a matter of priority, maybe, than time? And doesn't our Heavenly Father know how much time we have—not just in each day but in each life? He will judge as to whether we have enough time. I don't think we will determine that. I am sure our Heavenly Father would not be impressed with the excuse that we don't have enough time.

Perhaps we think other things are more important. Again, it's a matter of priority. Certainly other things are more important in certain situations. If you're in a dining room and someone begins choking on some meat, I don't think that is a good time to start reading the scriptures.

Unfortunately, most of us think the best time to read scriptures is some time other than the present. When we are young and busily making friends and associations in school, we don't have time to read the scriptures. We have too many other things to do and to learn. Best wait until we are married and have plenty of free time. But then the children come along, and we think we are even busier than before. Certainly the Lord doesn't expect us to read the scriptures when we're up half the night with the baby. We decide to wait until the children get older—until they no longer wear diapers and can take care of themselves. We'll read the scriptures then.

But the youngsters turn into teenagers and start dating, and again we're up half the night—waiting and worrying. Then, we think we'll have ample time to read and study the scriptures once they leave home. By that time, of course, most of us have difficulty reading and some of us have difficulty concentrating. So we put off reading just a little longer—first for a week, then for a month, then for a year, and finally for a lifetime—all because we do not make scripture reading a priority.

Some people say, "Well, the scriptures were written a long time ago. The Book of Mormon was started 2,600 years ago. Surely there is nothing in the Book of Mormon that can help us today. When I read about those wars and that they used swords and so on when they fought, and today we have atomic bombs and airplanes and so on, I realize there is really nothing I can learn from the Book of Mormon. The scriptures are not relevant today." One way or another, the adversary convinces us that we should not read the scriptures, or he convinces us that we should procrastinate the reading of the scriptures.

We should read them for several reasons. First of all, the Lord himself has commanded us to read the scriptures. "Search the scriptures," the Lord said, "for . . . they are they which testify of me" (John 5:39). Church leaders also encourage us to read the scriptures. Those who have read the scriptures know that they help us solve problems and gain an understanding of the gospel. By reading the scriptures, we learn to appreciate and understand other people. We also gain a testimony and understanding of our Heavenly Father and his divine Son: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent" (John 17:3). How do we know God and about God except in the scriptures? If we don't read the scriptures, how can we possibly obtain a testimony? Just as there are many excuses for not reading the scriptures, so also are there all kinds of reasons we should be reading the scriptures.

Even if we read the scriptures, we may not spend enough meaningful time reading them properly. That is, we tend to read the scriptures as we read a novel—we can pick it up and put it down in a spare moment. It is amazing how often the scriptures and the living prophets exhort us to read and ponder the scriptures regularly. Scripture study is a little different from other types of study. We need to apply our faith, experience, and understanding each time we open the scriptures. We must do this day after day, week after week, year after year. It makes no difference how many times we have read the scriptures. When we reread them, we often see something in them we did not notice before. One reason we may not have noticed certain scriptural teachings in the past is that we may not have faced the problems we face today.

Leaders of the Church have told us why our Heavenly Father does not give us more scripture. President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

"The Lord is withholding from us a great many truths that he would gladly reveal if we were ready to receive them. . . . Until we are prepared to receive the things already given, I fear the Lord will hold from us those other things which one time will be revealed. . . . When we, the members of the Church, reach the point that we are willing to live by all that the Lord has revealed, he will give us more.. . . The Lord is withholding from us great and mighty truths because of the hardness of our hearts. Why should we clamor for more when we will not abide in what we already have?" [^3]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "When we as a people believe and conform to all of the truths we have received, we shall receive more of the mind and will and voice of the Lord. What we receive and when it comes are in large measure up to us." [^4]

As indicated earlier, we do not have a single complete scripture. Certainly the Old Testament is not complete. At least seventeen books referred to in the Old Testament do not appear in that scripture. The New Testament is not a complete book either. Paul refers to other letters that are not found in the New Testament.

We as Latter-day Saints refer to the Book of Mormon as "the stick of Joseph," but at best the Book of Mormon is an abridgment of the book of Joseph. The book of Joseph would be primarily the brass plates of Laban and the large plates of Nephi. Mormon testified on at least two occasions in the Book of Mormon that he did not write one-hundredth part in his record those things that were written on the large plates of Nephi. Even then, approximately two-thirds of the plates—at least according to Orson Pratt—were sealed. The Prophet Joseph Smith did not translate a single word from those portions, so certainly the Book of Mormon is not a complete book.

The Doctrine and Covenants is not a complete book either. Joseph Fielding Smith and others have indicated that there are still many revelations to be included in the Doctrine and Covenants. President Smith said, "Not all of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith are in the Doctrine and Covenants. . . . The Church has had many other revelations, but we have in the Doctrine and Covenants revelations sufficient to bring to pass our exaltation if we will but heed them. When we, the members of the Church, reach the point that we are willing to live by all that the Lord has revealed, he will give us more that can be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants." [^5]

And of course, the Pearl of Great Price is not a complete book. The Brethren have added to the Pearl of Great Price in recent years, but where is the great book of Joseph that rightfully belongs in the Pearl of Great Price? The Prophet Joseph Smith received and translated that book, but it is not published in our present Pearl of Great Price. Students of Church history and readers of the History of the Church will recall that in his diary, the Prophet Joseph Smith made several entries concerning his translation of the book of Joseph.

But, to date, the Church has not published the book of Joseph. This is the same Joseph who was sold into Egypt. Joseph prophesied "concerning all his seed," and of Joseph's prophecies, Nephi stated that "there are not many greater" (2 Nephi 4:2). I wonder in what ways we have failed to read and live the scriptures so that the Lord has withheld from us the great prophecies of our great-great-great forefather Joseph.

We do not have a single complete scripture in the Church, and there are many scriptures of which we don't even have a verse. Yet if we were living according to the commandments of our Heavenly Father, we would have these additional scriptures.

So how do we get off dead center so far as scripture study is concerned? We can do several things. First of all, we have to decide that we really are going to improve our scripture study. To increase our likelihood of success, we must involve others in our decision—a spouse or other family member, a roommate, a friend or acquaintance, or several people. If we let others know what our goal is, they can ask us, "How are you coming along?"

Let's assume for a moment that you commit yourself to a minimum daily reading goal of five pages per day. After you make that commitment, you ought to announce it to all your Relief Society sisters or priesthood quorum members. Suggest to these brothers or sisters that when they see you from then on, you want them to ask you, "How are you coming with your reading of five pages of scripture a day?" If you will do that one simple thing, you will start reading the scriptures because it is much easier to read five pages a day than to explain to all your sisters or brothers why you aren't doing it!

Make your reading goal realistic—something you can meet. Don't say, "Well, I am going to read 100 pages a day." Chances are, you are not going to read that much, and after a couple of failures you are going to give up. Your goal doesn't have to be too great to accomplish wonders. Five pages a day, for example, doesn't sound like much. And I doubt that there are very many Latter-day Saints who could not read five pages of scripture a day. But by reading five pages a day, you could read all 531 pages of the Book of Mormon in 107 days—less than four months. At five pages a day, you could read the Doctrine and Covenants (294 pages) in fifty-nine days—less than two months. Nevertheless, most members of the Church have never read the Doctrine and Covenants. You could read the sixty-one pages in the Pearl of Great Price in thirteen days—less than two weeks. Most members haven't read the Pearl of Great Price either. The New Testament published by the Church is 403 pages long. You could read it in eighty-one days if you read five pages a day.

If you add up the 107 days for the Book of Mormon, 59 days for the Doctrine and Covenants, 13 days for the Pearl of Great Price, and 81 days for the New Testament, you have 260 days. In less than nine months, you could read all of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and New Testament. The Old Testament would take you a bit longer because of its size. But I don't believe we have too many scriptures or too little time. Such excuses do not justify our not reading the scriptures.

Sometimes emergencies do come up, and on those days you may be absolutely unable to read the scriptures. If you fall behind, simply use Sunday to catch up. Force yourself to keep your minimum commitment. Daily scripture reading is not a great burden, though in your mind it may seem so. What you have got to do is make it a pleasant task—make the scriptures come alive.

Psychologists tell us that we tend to remember about 10 percent of what we read, about 30 percent of what we see, and about 70 percent of what we do. If you want to increase your effectiveness in reading the scriptures from 10 percent to 70 percent, all you have to do is start living the scriptures. Liken the scriptures unto yourself. Place yourself in the position of the original author. Get involved in the story. Moroni saw a vision of all of us, and he says, "Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing" (Mormon 8:35). When you read the writings of Moroni, ask yourself this question: "What did Moroni see that would cause him to put this into the scriptures?" Moroni and other Book of Mormon prophets, including Mormon, Nephi, and Jacob, said that the Lord commanded them what to put in the scriptures. So when you read a page in the Book of Mormon, ask yourself this question: "Why did the Lord command his prophet to put this particular writing in the scriptures?" All of a sudden the scriptures will come alive for you. If you want to go one step further, put yourself in the place of one of the characters. The whole book is transformed when you become involved in it. You see things you are reading from an entirely different perspective once you become involved because you are a participant in this great experience.

As a young boy, I remember President Heber J. Grant talking about putting himself in the place of Nephi and living Nephi's experiences in the Book of Mormon's introductory chapters. I tried that, and it didn't work very well. Nephi was too good a person for me. He was so faithful and thorough in everything he did that he was simply too good for me to relate to. So I decided to relate to Laman. And thankfully, that didn't work out very well either. Finally, I found somebody in the Book of Mormon to whom I could relate in the book's early chapters—Sam. And so I became Sam when I read the Book of Mormon.

I had heard dozens of lectures and sermons on the great example of the faith of Nephi. The scripture that speakers invariably quoted was, "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7). This is a great statement of faith, and it was a thrill to go with my brother Nephi back to the city of Jerusalem to see how the Lord fulfilled his promise in delivering the plates of Laban into our hands and to see our safe return to our father. But Nephi's example of faith that I remember most occurred after we had spent eight years in the wilderness and finally came to the shore of a great sea—Irreantum. It was so great that you couldn't even see to the other side. Our brother Nephi came to us and said that the Lord had commanded him to build a ship so that we could cross that great sea. I guarantee you that I didn't want to get on any ship that Nephi built to cross that great sea. I joined with my brethren in saying, "Our brother is a fool, for he thinketh that he can build a ship" (1 Nephi 17:17).

But then I remember how Nephi likened the scriptures unto us, asking us whether we remembered having read about Moses. He recounted for us the great episodes in the life of Moses written in our scriptures, the brass plates of Laban.

"Now ye know that the children of Israel were in bondage; and . . . ye know that it must needs be a good thing for them, that they should be brought out of bondage. Now ye know that Moses was commanded of the Lord to do that great work; and ye know that by his word the waters of the Red Sea were divided hither and thither, and they passed through on dry ground. But ye know that the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, who were the armies of Pharaoh. And ye also know that they were fed with manna in the wilderness. Yea, and ye also know that Moses, by his word according to the power of God which was in him, smote the rock, and there came forth water, that the children of Israel might quench their thirst" (1 Nephi 17:25-29).

Nephi recounted the miracles of the exodus and likened them to our situation. Then, looking at that great expanse of water, he showed the example of faith I remember most: "If God had commanded me to do all things I could do them. If he should command me that I should say unto this water, be thou earth, it should be earth; and if I should say it, it would be done. And now, if the Lord has such great power, and has wrought so many miracles among the children of men, how is it that he cannot instruct me, that I should build a ship?" (1 Nephi 17:51).

And I thought, "Well, of course, if we really believe that God created the heavens and the earth and all things which in them are, and if God could command the sea to part so the children of Israel could walk across on dry land, and if he could feed people for forty years with manna in the wilderness, why can't he tell my brother Nephi how to build a ship?" All of a sudden I wanted to help him build that ship.

When you live an experience, you seldom forget it. I think this is the lesson Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone was trying to teach the priesthood of the Church during a general conference talk delivered while he was serving as a counselor in the Presiding Bishopric.

"I believe that the scriptures have every dimension of life that we can cleave unto and find a pattern for living, if we will just go back to the scriptures and study them and learn of them," he said. "Let me tell you the greatest experience I believe I have had in all my readings of the scriptures."

Then Elder Featherstone began recounting 3 Nephi 17, in which the resurrected Jesus Christ prayed for the people using language that "cannot be written" (v. 15) and blessed their little children, who were then ministered to by angels.

"'And the multitude did see and hear and bear record . . . and they were in number about two thousand and five hundred [and ONE] souls' who were in that beautiful experience with the Savior," Elder Featherstone said. The record tells us there were 2,500 people present on that occasion, but when Elder Featherstone reads that account there were 2,501 people because he was there also.

"I want you to know I was there. . . . And I promise you that vicariously every single [person] in the Church can read the scriptures and have that same experience with all of the prophets. . . . I so testify and admonish you to read the scriptures, to go back to the sure word of God."6

If you want to make the scriptures come alive, all you have to do is liken them unto yourself, place yourself in them, and live them, and you will increase your effectiveness in remembering them from 10 percent to 70 percent.

Next, ponder the scriptures, relate them to everything, and live their principles. I went to the dictionary to see what the word "ponder" means because it is used so many times in the scriptures regarding the reading of the scriptures. Ponder means to meditate on, to think through, to wonder about. Let me give you a few references in the scriptures where the word "ponder" is found.

When the angel appeared to Mary to tell her that she was to be the mother of Christ, Luke 2:19 says, "Mary kept these things, and pondered them in her heart." Nephi, in discussing his writings, says, "I write the things of my soul, . . . For my soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them . . . and my heart pondereth continually upon the things which I have seen and heard" (1 Nephi 4:15-16). On another occasion, he says, "Behold, my beloved brethren, I suppose that ye ponder somewhat in your hearts concerning that which ye should do after ye have entered in by the way" (2 Nephi 32:1). In the book of Helaman we read, "And it came to pass that Nephi went his way towards his own house, pondering upon the things which the Lord had shown unto him. And it came to pass as he was thus pondering—being much cast down because of the wickedness of the people of the Nephites . . . —and it came to pass as he was thus pondering in his heart, behold, a voice came unto him saying: Blessed art thou, Nephi" (Helaman 10:2-4). During the resurrected Lord's visit to the Nephites, he taught the people for a full day, then made this remarkable and significant statement, "Go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow, and I come unto you again" (3 Nephi 17:3).

Ponder the scriptures. Learn to understand them. Prepare your minds for other things. If you do, the scriptures will come alive for you.

A system of marking the scriptures will also help you with your studies. Marking helps you correlate scriptures and learn gospel principles. I use different colors to help me. For example, I usually use a blue pencil for anything that has to do with the house of Israel because the colors on the flag of modern Israel are blue and white. I use green, representing the newness of life, for anything that has to do with the atonement of Jesus Christ. For anything else dealing with Christ, I use yellow, representing the light of the world. If a scripture discusses the priesthood, I use purple. Purple is a kingly color, and it reminds me of a royal priesthood. I use black where the scriptures talk about the devil.

My system may not work for you. The best marking system for you is one that works for you. Some of us mark up our scriptures when we are on missions or during some other early period of our lives, and then we never change them. Perhaps we ought to develop and use a good, meaningful marking system for about five years, then review it to see how it might be improved. Once we have marked our scriptures, we tend to read only the markings rather than everything else. Maybe there is something we ought to learn that we did not see and did not mark the first time through.

I think one of the most significant publishing enterprises of the Church this century is the new Topical Guide appearing after the New Testament in the Church's edition of the Holy Bible. The 598-page Topical Guide features cross-referencing not only to books in the Old Testament and New Testament but to the Church's other scriptures—the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. Correlating scriptures is not quite as difficult as it once was because the Church has done this for us.

If you want to get the most out of your scripture study, reread the scriptures and study them systematically. Reapply scriptural principles in your life. You are not the same person today you were last year or even last week. Just because you have read the scriptures once does not mean you don't need to go back to them again and again.

Finally, I suggest that you teach the scriptures to others. An excellent way to learn something is to teach it. I can't think of a more enriching assignment in the Church than to be a gospel doctrine teacher. If we as Latter-day Saints really believed that it is important to read and understand the scriptures, every bishop in this Church would have a long list of people who have applied to be the gospel doctrine teacher. If you really want to learn the scriptures, then teach them.

I don't believe that we will ever again have any other manual in the adult curriculum of the Church except the scriptures of the Church. We may see some teacher supplements, study guides, or similar helps, but I believe the manuals of the Church from now on in the adult curriculum are going to be based on the scriptures of the Church. The Brethren are committed to the fact that they want the Latter-day Saints to become acquainted with the scriptures because they realize there is power in living the principles of the scriptures.

I honestly believe that at our final judgment we are going to be held responsible for what we do with the scriptures while we are here on the earth. The scriptures have cost some of the best blood that has ever been on this earth, including "the best blood of the nineteenth century" (D&C 135:6), even that of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I don't think we are going to get by lightly in regards to the scriptures.

I think we might well be asked a series of questions at the final judgment. The person asking the questions might first of all ask, "Did you have opportunities to read the Book of Mormon while you were on the earth?" If we can honestly answer no, there will be no further questions and no judgment concerning that matter. If we answer yes, however, other questions might follow. As soon as we next answer no, our point of judgment will have arrived.

"Yes, you had opportunities to read the Book of Mormon. Did you read it then? Did you learn the teaching principles contained therein? Did you liken the principles unto yourself? Did you apply these principles in your life? Did you teach these principles to others, including your family?"

If we can honestly answer all these questions yes, then perhaps we will hear the joyful words, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant . . . enter thou into the joy of thy Lord" (Matthew 25:21).

In the talk cited at the outset of this chapter, President Kimball said, "I ask all to begin now to study the scriptures in earnest. . . . And perhaps the easiest and most effective way to do this is to participate in the study program of the Church. . . . It is hoped that all will support this program of scripture study—to give it great emphasis, to see that this well-correlated program of the Church is not diminished by conflicting reading or study assignments. Each of the standard works should be studied intensely in the year it is scheduled for study.

"This month we begin study in the Book of Mormon. . . . We invite you to join in this excellent opportunity, for as the Prophet Joseph Smith said, 'The Book of Mormon [is] the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man [can] get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts than by any other book.' (History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 4:461.) You will be blessed and enriched by its contents, for it was written for our day and time—'to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile' (title page)—a fact that is emphasized time and again by its principal authors: Nephi, Mormon, and Moroni. And although we can profit from it in many ways, perhaps learning from it something of history and of war and of peace—still its principal message is the most valuable we can ever receive: that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of the world.

"May we all read the Book of Mormon prayerfully, study it carefully, and receive a testimony of its divinity. For the Savior himself said of it: 'As your Lord and your God liveth it is true.' (D&C 17:6)." [^6]

That is my testimony as well. The prophets have admonished us to read not only the Book of Mormon but all the scriptures. May we read them prayerfully, study them carefully, and apply their principles diligently. And by so doing, may we receive a testimony of their divinity.

Notes

From an address delivered during a Brigham Young University Travel Studies Book of Mormon Panama cruise, January 1978.

---
Notas:
[^1] Howard W. Hunter, "Reading the Scriptures," Ensign, November 1979, 64.
[^2] Harold B. Lee, regional representatives seminar, 12 December 1970, 10.
[^3] Gordon B. Hinckley, "'An Angel from on High, the Long, Long Silence Broke,'" Ensign, November 1979, 9.
[^4] Henry B. Eyring, "Feed My Lambs," Ensign, November 1997, 83.
[^5] Ibid., 83-84.
[^6] Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), 75.
