Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 2

The Scriptures

We will be held accountable at the final judgment for what we do with the scriptures in this life. This is part of our gospel teaching. Statements from latter-day prophets, including Presidents Gordon B. Hinckley, Howard W. Hunter, Ezra Taft Benson, Spencer W. Kimball, Joseph Fielding Smith, and other leaders make this amply clear.

The scriptures have been given to us as a guide, a blueprint of life. We must accept and live according to their teachings if we want promised blessings, or we can reject them and suffer promised consequences.

I thrill to the words of Nephi as he tells us good-bye. Many of us read his words of farewell and get a feeling for what he is saying, but we do not analyze his words. Therefore, we do not really catch their full significance.

"And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ . . .

"And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things . . .

"And you that will not partake of the goodness of God, and respect the words of the Jews, and also my words, and the words which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the Lamb of God, behold, I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these words shall condemn you at the last day" (2 Nephi 33:10-11, 14; emphasis added).

For Nephi, writing 600 years before Christ, the phrase "words of the Jews" refers, of course, to portions of the Old Testament found in the plates of Laban. "These words" could also refer to sections of the Old Testament, particularly Isaiah, included in Nephi's two books. "My words" are Nephi's writings in the Book of Mormon. "The words which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the Lamb of God" surely include the Savior's words in 3 Nephi and in the New Testament, but I also believe they could include the major revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants.

"Behold, I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these words [in the Book of Mormon, the Old Testament, the New Testament, and the Doctrine and Covenants] shall condemn you at the last day. For what I seal on earth, shall be brought against you at the judgment bar; for thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must obey" (2 Nephi 33:14-15).

These are rather sobering words. We would be wise to read and reread Nephi's farewell. His words serve as a valuable reminder that disrespecting the scriptures leads to condemnation.

I do not know a single place in the scriptures where we are exhorted to read only. Rather, we are told to "search [the scriptures] diligently" (Mosiah 1:7) and to "ponder [them] in [our] hearts" (Moroni 10:3). And in our day, the prophets have added the word "daily."

For example, President Hunter has said, "Not only should we study each day, but there should be a regular time set aside when we can concentrate without interference." [^1]

President Harold B. Lee said, "Are you continually increasing your testimony by diligent study of the scriptures? Do you have a daily habit of reading the scriptures? If we are not reading the scriptures daily, our testimonies are growing thinner; our spirituality isn't increasing in depth. We . . . must be studying the scriptures and have a daily habit." [^2]

And President Hinckley added, "I should like to make a request and offer a challenge to members of the Church throughout the world and to our friends everywhere to read the Book of Mormon. . . . Read as little as one chapter a day each weekday and three chapters each Sunday." [^3]

We are dual in nature. We have a physical body that we can all see, but within that physical body is a spirit that gives life to the physical body. When the spirit is not there, the body is not alive. At the time of temporal or physical death, the spirit leaves the physical body. We refer to that as a separation of body and spirit. We understand quite a bit about the physical body. We know we ought to eat certain types of food and that we should eat at regular times.

However, occasions arise when, because of an emergency or something else, we may not get three meals a day, or even one meal a day in certain circumstances. But we understand that if we go for an extended period of time without physical food, the physical body will lose its strength. In fact, if we go too long without food or water, our physical body will die.

What makes us think that our spirit body is less in need of food than our physical body? Our spirit body requires spiritual food in somewhat the same way that our physical body requires physical food. If our spirit body does not receive spiritual food on a regular basis, it becomes weaker and weaker.

We have all had experiences with family members, loved ones, or associates who were once strong in the gospel but who became somewhat indifferent, even going into inactivity or leaving the Church altogether. If you ask them whether they read the scriptures daily, almost without exception they will answer no.

"Well, no, not daily. After I got back from my mission and went back to school and had to find time to study, I sort of got out of the habit. No, I guess I do not read the scriptures every day."

Ask them if they've read them this week.

"Well, no. I really haven't read them this week."

Nor have they read them this month. In all likelihood, they haven't even read them once this year. No wonder they've drifted from the Church.

Our spirits need daily reading and pondering of the scriptures, without exception. And if we make an exception, it ought to be only a one-day exception—just as physical food every day without exception is the ideal. If an emergency arises or if it's fast Sunday, you can survive as long as you have been eating right. Likewise, you can survive a day without spiritual food as long as you've been giving your spirit the right kind of food—the food found in the scriptures.

Elder Henry B. Eyring said, "There are two great keys to inviting the Spirit to guide what words we speak as we feed others. They are the daily study of the scriptures and the power and prayer of faith." [^4] That's it. Those are the only two he felt it necessary to list. The Holy Ghost will guide what we say if we study and ponder the scriptures every day.

The words of the scriptures invite the Holy Spirit. The Lord said it this way: "Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men" (D&C 11:21).

I think that applies to more than just missionaries and others trying to lead people into the Church. It also applies to those who are counseling others who are not members of the Church and who are not interested in becoming members of the Church but who have serious personal problems. In those circumstances, as we appeal to God for the right words, he will tell us what to say if we have learned what we should say before the situation arises.

Elder Eyring continues: "With daily study of the scriptures, we can count on this blessing even in casual conversations or in a class when we may be asked by a teacher to respond to a question. We will experience the power the Lord promised: 'Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man' (D&C 84:85).

"We treasure the word of God not only by reading the words of the scriptures but by studying them. We may be nourished more by pondering a few words, allowing the Holy Ghost to make them treasures to us, than to pass quickly and superficially over whole chapters of scripture." [^5]

Before the 1970s, we had new manuals nearly every year for the adult curriculum of the Church. In fact, we had new manuals every year for nearly all the major classes in the Church. We had a new manual for the deacons, a new manual for the teachers, and a new manual for the priests. We also had new manuals every year in the gospel doctrine classes and in the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums.

It was not until the early 1970s that Church leaders decided the Latter-day Saints should study the scriptures on a systematic basis. As a result, the Church set up an eight-year study cycle. The first year we studied the book of Genesis and the Pearl of Great Price. The second year we were to study the rest of the Old Testament. The third year was the four gospels; the fourth year the rest of the New Testament. The fifth year was the Book of Mormon through Alma 29; the sixth year the rest of the Book of Mormon. The seventh and eighth years were the Doctrine and Covenants and Church history.

We learned quite a bit from that first cycle, so the second time around we expanded the first year to include the other four books of Moses with Genesis and the Pearl of Great Price. But we never did complete that cycle because in the meantime our missionary work was bringing in approximately 300,000 converts a year. At that rate, we had 1 million new members every three years, or 2 million every six years. Therefore, every seven years we'd have approximately 2.5 million new members who had never studied the Pearl of Great Price and the first part of the Old Testament in a Church class. So the Brethren changed to the four-year cycle we have now—Old Testament, New Testament, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price.

The Lord tells us why it is important to study the scriptures, over and over again: "Behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth, I will give more." Then comes a sobering thought, "From them that shall say, we have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:30).

The Jewish people had their Torah, and they held it up to the world, and they believed in it and diligently patterned their lives after it. Then the New Testament came along. In effect, the people said, "We do not need the New Testament. We have the Old Testament." And today it is difficult to find many Jewish people who really believe the Bible to be the word of God. And after hundreds of years the Book of Mormon came forth and they said, "Another Bible? We do not need another Bible. We already have a Bible." Today we're hard-pressed to find many believing Christians who accept the scriptures as the word of God. "From them that shall say, we have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have." It may not be literally taken away, but their testimonies of it, their belief in it, will be taken away.

At any one time, we are only held responsible for that part of the scriptures we have but do not keep. Nevertheless, we are denying ourselves of the blessings we could have if we had the portions we do not have.

Therefore, the fact that our scriptures have not been added to in recent years is prima facie evidence that we as a Church are not doing what we should be doing with our scriptures. No wonder President Ezra Taft Benson said, "The whole Church is under condemnation." [^6] The Lord, through President Benson, is actually the one who said these words. In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said the whole Church was under condemnation in regard to how they were treating the Book of Mormon (see D&C 84:57). President Benson merely reiterated that statement and reminded us that we remain under condemnation.

The scriptures may be likened to a great treasure house with thousands of rooms. Church members should not think that all they have to do is walk through the hallways of the house in order to glean its treasures. That was one of the reasons behind the eight-year cycle—to give members enough time to really read, study, ponder, and diligently search the scriptures. Too many of us spend too little time in the treasure house. We enter in the front door, run through the hallways, exit the backdoor, and then say, "The prophet said to read it. I've read it." No, I do not think we will find one prophet who says that all we have to do is read.

There's a treasure in every room of the treasure house, but all the doors are locked. We need the keys of experience, understanding, faith, and diligence in order to unlock the doors. Only with the right keys can we enter each room, find its treasures, and take them home to bless ourselves and our families.

After we finish, we start over again. And as we return to the first room, we miraculously see treasure we hadn't seen before. Why? Because we have different keys of experience and understanding, faith and diligence. Therefore, we ought to study the scriptures regularly.

Do not say, "I've read it once; I do not need to read it again." You will be proven wrong. I can promise you that if you search the scriptures again, regardless of the book or the number of times you've read it, you will see something in that scripture you did not see before. And what you see this time is something that will help you solve a problem that you are now facing.

I hope there is no teacher in the Church, no LDS chaplain, no one representing the Church who is using any other scriptures than the LDS editions of the scriptures. How unfortunate it would be if we were using the Bible that we used in the Church thirty or forty years ago. The older versions contain virtually no chapter headings. Footnotes were located in the center of the page. There was no Topical Guide. There was no Bible Dictionary. There were few maps.

For awhile, we had all kinds of Bibles in the Church. The Primary had one Bible for the children. The seminary and institutes had one Bible used only in seminaries and institutes. The missionaries had one Bible with missionary references written on it. Then the Brethren decided to come out with the magnificent, absolutely tremendous LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible. The strength of the King James Version is, in fact, that it is the King James Version—word for word, comma for comma, without a single change. In addition, it contains several excellent helps all the way through, including a tremendous Topical Guide. It contains 3,400 scriptural references under hundreds of major topics associated with the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Most of us have heard of the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon, but have we heard of the sealed portion of the Bible? I could put it more bluntly. Have we read the Bible Dictionary? We all need to take the time to read it; until we do, it will remain unavailable—or sealed—to us.

Decide now to read and study the scriptures. Set aside time every day. Each week read the assigned scriptures in accordance with the Church program of study. Read and study materials pertaining to the scriptures found in Church publications such as the Church magazines.

Over the years, the Ensign magazine has published many articles on the scriptures. Yet when I ask Church members, "Do you remember this?" They say, "No, I didn't know it existed." In October 1979, for example, the Ensign ran a major article, "The Church Publishes First LDS Edition of the Bible," emphasizing that doctrinal scholarship is the mission of the new King James Version. Two years later, in October 1981, the Ensign ran an article titled "The Church Publishes a New Triple Combination." The article detailed changes and additions to the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

I believe the Brethren were very disappointed in how Church members were using the new scriptures. When the Brethren visited the stakes, they often noticed that stake presidents, high councilors, and bishops had the old editions. Why? Because they had their old books trained! They felt they didn't need a Topical Guide. They had used their old scriptures so much that if they wanted something on the resurrection they could turn right to it. Why use the new scriptures? The answer, of course, is that the Church published the new scriptures for all members, and the Brethren expected priesthood leaders to set an example.

Therefore, in October 1982 another major article appeared in the Ensign on "Using the New LDS Editions of Scripture." In essence, the Brethren said, "We published them and told you about them; now let's use them."

That article was followed by another major article in August 1983: "The Coming Forth of the LDS Editions of Scripture." Church members were told of the many miracles associated with the publication of the new editions of the scriptures.

In October 1983, four years after the Bible was published and two years after the triple combination appeared, the Ensign ran another new article: "Discovering the LDS Editions of Scripture." We were still talking about "discovering" the new editions because many members still did not know they existed.

Finally, the First Presidency and Church publications committee put out a video on reading the scriptures. Excerpts from a transcript of this video appeared in the Ensign in December 1985. This issue also featured "Feasting Upon the Scriptures," by President Hinckley; "Come, Learn of Me," by Elder Thomas S. Monson, then chairman of the Church publications committee; "Using the New Scriptures," by Elder Boyd K. Packer; and "Come: Hear the Voice of the Lord," by Elder Bruce R. McConkie.

At a general authority training meeting on October 2, 1981, members of the Quorum of the Twelve who formed the publications committee told the leadership of the Church—the First Presidency, the Twelve, the Quorum of the Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric, and so on—that they had to set the example in using the new LDS editions. Elder McConkie told a thrilling story about special scriptures that he had. One scriptural book belonged to President Joseph F. Smith, the sixth prophet. Another had been given to Elder McConkie by his wife-to-be before he set out on his first mission. He mentioned how many thousands of miles it had traveled and how many countries it had visited. Then he said, "These are sacred volumes, and as far as I am concerned there are not any volumes that can compare to them. But they have to go into retirement. They have to go on the shelf. They have to be put in a glass case. My children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren can come and look at them. But as far as studying the gospel and reading the scriptures, I am going to use the new scriptures." And, he said, "If this applies to me, I think it applies to us."

We should be using the new editions of the scriptures ourselves, marking them up, quoting from them, using the teaching aids they contain, and saying to Church members in the stakes and in the military, "Go, and do thou likewise."

That is why I think it is a serious omission if any of us are using editions of the Bible other than the new LDS edition. This is the edition our young men get when they go in the military, and this is the one we can use with non-LDS Christians. They want the King James Version. This is their Bible. We will use their Bible, but we will use the LDS edition's magnificent helps as well.

Notes

Excerpts from a talk given to the LDS Chaplains on 6 October 1997, in their session held in conjunction with the October conference of the Church.

---
Notas:
[^1] It is a commandment of God. The Lord and his prophets have instructed us to read, study, and ponder all of the scriptures available to us. That should be sufficient reason for us to read the Old Testament. When Adam was questioned about why he did a particular thing, he replied simply, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me" (Moses 5:6). Do resolve that you are going to read the entire Old Testament, book by book, chapter by chapter, verse by verse. Decide the schedule and pace that is best for you. Some have found it helps to set apart a definite time period each day for studying the scriptures. Don't be too concerned about the pronunciation of names in the Old Testament. These vary from language to language, and even from group to group within a language. Those who speak the "King's English," for example, might not pronounce some of the names the same as those who use "American English," and probably neither group will use the original pronunciation. Isaac does not sound too much like Yitshak, nor would many people recognize Shlomo as Solomon. Perhaps you have already noted that the LDS Edition of the Bible does not include a pronunciation guide. This should indicate to us that the Brethren might not be too concerned about the pronunciation of biblical names. No flesh was to be eaten from animals unless the animal had a cloven foot and chewed its cud (hence, no pork). The Sabbath was to be from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday. The wearing of phylacteries by the men on the forehead and left arm. The authorized King James text has been the basic, standard text for most of the Protestant world since it was first published in the early 1600s. Thus, among other things, when our missionaries quote from this text it is more apt to be recognized and readily accepted by investigators, many of whom come from backgrounds in Protestant churches. Obviously, in the eyes of the investigators it is more effective for the missionary to quote and teach from the investigators' Bible than from a Bible used exclusively by the missionary's Church. Spencer W. Kimball, President Kimball Speaks Out (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), 96.
[^2] The Old Testament contains many principles of salvation and provides many examples of righteousness. Stories of faith, devotion, diligence, perseverance, and bravery are in the Old Testament. These, in turn, have inspired and illuminated much of the best literature in the world. The heroic attributes and characteristics of many of these role models—Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Elijah, Job, and Daniel, to name a few—are sorely needed in today's world. President Spencer W. Kimball stated: "To know the patriarchs and prophets of the ages past and their faithfulness under stress and temptation and persecution strengthens [us and our] resolves." [^1] Do determine that your major purpose in studying the Old Testament is to learn the teachings and doctrines that relate (1) to the life, mission, and atonement of Jesus Christ, and (2) to the gospel of Jesus Christ. Don't be too concerned about the exact routes of travel of the people in the Bible, nor about their exact places of residence. Having a sense of geography is useful, and it can help in an understanding of the peoples being discussed, but geography usually is not absolutely essential to a correct understanding of the principle or doctrine being discussed. No flesh taken from the sea was to be eaten unless it had scales. No work was to be performed on the Sabbath, including no harvesting of food. The use of small containers (called mezzuzahs) on the right side of gate posts, doorways, and so forth. These contain the words of selected scriptures. The King James text was prepared during an important period of the development of the English language (the Victorian period of literature) when major works in English were being sought and referenced by scholars in the other major languages of the world. This concept is discussed at length in chapter 12, "The Old Testament, a Witness for Jesus Christ."
[^3] Learning and living the principles of righteousness contained in the Old Testament can help us solve many of the problems we face today. In the scriptures the Lord teaches us correct principles, and then he expects us to use our free agency in living according to these principles so we can receive the blessings associated with such obedience. In the Old Testament, the Lord promised his covenant people that if they lived the principles of righteousness contained in the scriptures, he would (1) bless them with "the rain of your land in his due season," (2) "send grass in the fields for thy cattle," and (3) "prolong your days in the land" (Deuteronomy 11:9, 14-15). Similar blessings await us today. Do use the LDS Edition of the King James Version of the Bible. Don't restrict your reading of the Old Testament to the time periods you may have set aside each day. Get involved with the teachings of the book so much that you won't want to put it down. No blood or blood products were to be eaten. Thus no meat was to be consumed unless the animal or fowl had been killed in a certain way, with the blood properly drained. No fire was to be lit on the Sabbath. The use of the menorah (seven-stemmed candelabrum) and Sabbath candles. The King James text, having been published in 1611, had by the 1970s been translated into hundreds of different languages, with tens of millions of copies available, and with wide acceptance throughout the world. Abraham Lincoln, quoted in "President proclaims 1983 Year of Bible," Church News, 20 March 1983, 3.
[^4] The Old Testament is a strong witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Indeed, the Old Testament was essentially the only scripture that was available to the Jewish people at the time Jesus Christ was upon the earth and admonished them to "search the scriptures . . . they are they which testify of me" (John 5:39). [^2] No dairy products and meat products were to be eaten at the same time. Actually this is more a tradition than a religious requirement; it has resulted from an interpretation of the command in Exodus 23:19: "Thou shalt not seethe a kid [baby goat] in its mother's milk." Only a certain distance was to be walked on the Sabbath (hence, "a Sabbath day's journey"). Key commentaries, reference books, and concordances based on the King James text, which could assist LDS readers in their study of the Bible, are widely available. As an example, the title page of The Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible by James Strong indicates that it shows "every word of the text of the common English version of the canonical books, and every occurrence of each word in regular order; . . . also brief dictionaries of the Hebrew and Greek words of the original, with references to the English words." In the "General Preface" of this concordance, the publisher acknowledges that it has used "the text of the English Bible ordinarily in use . . . [as] it is intended to be a permanent standard for purposes of reference."14 Ronald Reagan, quoted in "President proclaims 1983 Year of Bible,"Church News, 20 March 1983, 3.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, Marion G. Romney, and Gordon B. Hinckley, quoted in"President proclaims 1983 Year of Bible," Church News, 20 March 1983, 3; emphasis added.
[^6] Discourses of Brigham Young, 125.
