Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 3

How to Get the Most from Your Study of the Old Testament

I am firmly convinced the Old Testament is one of the greatest books on the face of the earth today. It is indeed the "Book of Books." The Old Testament is the basic scripture for the Jewish people, and—together with the New Testament—is the basic scripture for all Christians. So far as Latter-day Saints are concerned, the Old Testament ranks with the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price as an important scripture our Heavenly Father has given for our blessing—and for which we each will be held accountable at our day of judgment.

Many readers already know that the essential meaning of the word Bible is Books, and as part of the Bible the Old Testament is really made up of a series of books. Some of these books are not closely related to the books that either precede them or follow them. Thus the Old Testament does not always have the consistent flow of story or chronology that might be found in some of the other scriptures.

Also, one of the major purposes of the Old Testament is to lead people to Jesus Christ and to the gospel of Jesus Christ. But the prophecies about Christ and the doctrines of his gospel are so frequently intertwined with the history and daily affairs of the people that the reader might easily become too involved with the history and miss the truly essential teachings. We must take care that that does not happen.

Reasons to Read the Old Testament

We should read the Old Testament consistently and thoroughly for many reasons, including the following:

Statements of Leaders

Several leaders of the United States have spoken of the worth of the Bible, of which the Old Testament is a vital part. For instance, Abraham Lincoln said, "All the good the Savior gave to the world was communicated through this book. . . . All things most desirable for man's welfare here and hereafter are to be found portrayed in it." [^3]

When President Ronald Reagan proclaimed 1983 to be the Year of the Bible, he encouraged "all citizens, each in his or her own way, to re-examine and rediscover its priceless and timeless message." [^4]

Of course, leaders of the Church have also spoken of the Bible's importance. The First Presidency of the Church said: "We commend to all people everywhere the daily reading, pondering and heeding of the divine truths of the Holy Bible. . . . When it is read reverently and prayerfully, the Holy Bible becomes a priceless volume, converting the soul to righteousness. . . . As we read the scriptures, we avail ourselves of the better part of the world's literature." [^5]

Brigham Young taught: "The doctrines contained in the Bible will lift to a superior condition all who observe them; they will impart to them knowledge, wisdom, charity, fill them with compassion and cause them to feel after the wants of those who are in distress, or in painful or degraded circumstances. They who observe the precepts contained in the Scriptures will be just and true and virtuous and peaceable at home and abroad. Follow out the doctrines of the Bible, and men will make splendid husbands, women excellent wives, and children will be obedient; they will make families happy and the nations wealthy and happy and lifted up above the things of this life." [^6]

Wilford Woodruff identified the Bible as "the record of the Jews, given by the inspiration of the Lord through Moses and the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets. . . . It is not in the power of any man . . . to make such a book without the inspiration of the Almighty." [^7]

As Latter-day Saints, we are all well acquainted with the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith that helps explain the statement in the Articles of Faith that "we believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly" (Articles of Faith 1:8). Joseph Smith said, "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^8] This qualifying statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith should not be interpreted to mean that we do not accept the Bible as inspired scripture from the Lord. Brigham Young explained:

"The Bible is true. It may not all have been translated aright, and many precious things may have been rejected in the compilation and translation of the Bible; but we understand . . . that if all the sayings and doings of the Savior had been written, the world could not contain them. I will say that the world could not understand them. . . . The Bible, when it is understood, is one of the simplest books in the world, for, as far as it is translated correctly, it is nothing but truth, and in truth there is no mystery save to the ignorant. The revelations of the Lord to his creatures are adapted to the lowest capacity, and they bring life and salvation to all who are willing to receive them." [^9]

The Old Testament Is Not Read

Despite these and other, similar statements on the importance of the Bible, it has been referred to as the "great unread book." A popular book about the Bible written by Bruce Barton was given the apt title The Book Nobody Knows.

Certainly the Old Testament is not given much attention among Christian churches today, with but few exceptions. Many of the Jewish people have also deserted the Old Testament, either through neglect or by a preference for other books containing their oral or written traditions. Even among Latter-day Saints, the Old Testament is perhaps the least read and least understood and appreciated of all our standard works.

Reasons for Not Reading the Old Testament

Why is it that many, if not most, of us have never bothered to read the Old Testament completely through?

One excuse I have heard is that the Old Testament is "simply or primarily a history book about a people who lived a long time ago, with strange customs, in a land that is far away." It is true the Old Testament contains history; but it is not simply or primarily a history book. It is much, much more than that.

Another excuse is that it is "too hard to understand." When questioned further, the person might make such observations as "It is too long," or "The language is too difficult," or "It doesn't seem very relevant today." Although the first two of these excuses might be based on some facts, they are still excuses, and we should recognize them as such. The last excuse isn't at all true if you concentrate on the basic doctrines and gospel teachings in the book. There is such a thing as basic, fundamental truth, and truth is eternal. Thus, the truths contained in the Old Testament apply just as much today as they did when they were given thousands of years ago.

How to Understand the Old Testament

Actually, the Old Testament is not an extremely difficult book to understand. It is a relatively simple book if you understand how and why the book is put together the way it is. Remember the words of Brigham Young: "The Bible, when it is understood, is one of the simplest books in the world, for, as far as it is translated correctly, it is nothing but truth, and in truth there is no mystery save to the ignorant." [^10] This statement gives us a clue to understanding the Old Testament: We must read it in the light of the truth the Lord has revealed in the latter days. In doing so, we must study and ponder the book, become acquainted with its makeup and format, and learn its doctrines and teachings.

A statement in the Book of Mormon also gives us a hint as to how we should study the scriptures. In Alma 17:2 we read that the sons of Mosiah "had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God" (Alma 17:2; emphasis added).

Note again the principle: The scriptures must be searched diligently.

Do's and Don'ts

As you approach a study of the Old Testament, I would recommend three do's and three don'ts:

Now let's look at three don'ts:

Background to the Old Testament

Religious History of Families

I find it helpful to remember that the Old Testament is essentially a brief review or synopsis of the religious history of a series of families. In order to understand this history, you need to know something about the background of the practices, traditions, beliefs, and customs of that particular family. Also, you need to realize that the people are in a relative state of apostasy during most of the history recorded in this scripture.

The Old Testament begins with the story of the family of Adam; but by the fifth chapter of Genesis—the first book of the Old Testament—we are already reading about the family of Noah, a descendant of Adam; and then we are introduced to the family name-title of Shem, one of the sons of Noah: Semites.

By the eleventh chapter of Genesis we are introduced to Abraham—a descendant of Shem who was thus known as a Semite—and soon become acquainted with the name-title of Abraham's family: Hebrews.

In chapter 25 of Genesis we read of the birth of Jacob, a grandson of Abraham, and thus a Hebrew. Jacob's name is subsequently changed to Israel, and we note the name-title of his family: Israelites.

In chapter 29 of Genesis we read of the birth of Judah, the fourth son of Jacob and thus an Israelite. Subsequently we learn the name-title of Judah's family: Jews.

Thus by the time we get through with the very first book in the Old Testament, we have already read of the major early families on the earth, ending with the family of Jacob (Israelites) and the family of Judah (Jews). The remaining thirty-eight books in the Old Testament are primarily concerned with the religious history of these families. And remember, during the time period covered by most of those thirty-eight books, the people are declining into a state of apostasy.

If you understand the relationship between the various families we have mentioned, you understand more than most of the readers of the Old Testament. Many people do not realize that such terms as Semites, Hebrews, Israelites, and Jews are essentially family names. Even fewer people understand the relationship of these families.

A few general statements will help us to see the relationship of these families:

"All Hebrews are Semites, but not all Semites are Hebrews."

"All Israelites are Hebrews, but not all Hebrews are Israelites."

"All Jews are Israelites, but not all Israelites are Jews."

If these terms give you difficulty, let's substitute the first name of the ancient patriarch for the name-title of his particular family: "All descendants of Abraham are also descendants of Shem." The truthfulness of this statement is obvious, for Abraham is a descendant of Shem; thus all of Abraham's descendants would also be descendants of Shem. Now, substituting the important name-titles for the names of the patriarchs, what we have really said is "All Hebrews are Semites."

Shem, of course, had many other family lines in addition to the family line of Abraham. Thus, not all descendants of Shem are descendants of Abraham, or, in other words, "Not all Semites are Hebrews."

We can use the same technique to explain the relationship between the family of Abraham and the family of Jacob:

"All descendants of Jacob are also descendants of Abraham." Again, when you remember that Jacob is Abraham's grandson, it is obvious that the descendants of Jacob would also be descendants of Abraham. Using family name-titles, what we have really said is "All Israelites are Hebrews."

But Abraham had many other grandsons in addition to Jacob; thus not all descendants of Abraham are descendants of Jacob. Or, in other words, "Not all Hebrews are Israelites."

Unfortunately most readers of the Old Testament have not studied this book diligently enough to learn the distinctions between these family names. Yet an understanding of these family relationships is imperative to a correct understanding of the Old Testament and, incidentally, to an understanding of some of the difficult problems in the world today. Perhaps if the people of the world understood these relationships, we could have greater peace in Israel. For example, God promised certain lands in the Near and Middle East to the descendants of Abraham—that is, to the Hebrews, a term that applies to all the descendants of Abraham, which in modern terminology would include both the Arabs and the Jews. However, many Jewish people apply a modern definition of the term Hebrews; they apply it only to themselves as Jews rather than to all the peoples to whom the term applied in the Old Testament. Thus, many Jewish people today feel these lands have been promised exclusively to them.

Customs and Practices of the Hebrews

As we study the Old Testament, it is important that we learn and understand the major practices, beliefs, and traditions of these families; such background will give us a greater understanding of many of the stories in the Old Testament. We certainly cannot list all of these customs here, but perhaps we should mention some of the most important ones that were in place by the time of Abraham and thus might be referred to as "manners and customs of the Hebrews."

Patriarchal order. This term indicates that the right to rule or preside over the family belonged to the father and went from father to son.

Law of primogeniture. This custom determined which son should succeed the father as the presiding head of the family. The word prime has to do with first and the construction geniture has to do with birth. Thus, everything else being equal, the firstborn son would usually succeed the father as the head of the family.

Law of the birthright or of inheritance. By "right" of his "birth" as a son, the son who succeeded his father as the head of the family was entitled to a double portion of his father's inheritance. Thus, for example, if a father had four sons, upon the death of the father the inheritance would be divided into five portions. Each of the sons—including the birthright son—would receive one of the portions. The birthright son would then receive a second portion to meet such needs as the care of the mother, the care of any unmarried sisters, and so on. The firstborn son had the first right to the birthright blessing, but if he proved to be unworthy, or even less worthy, the birthright could be given to another son. As you may recall, this was the case for several consecutive generations in the Old Testament, beginning with Isaac.

Polygamy. Abraham and some of the other ancient patriarchs practiced polygamy, where they could have more than one wife at the same time. Inasmuch as each of these wives might have her own "firstborn son," the practice was generally followed that the firstborn son of the firstwife would succeed his father, provided that this son was worthy and qualified.

The wife is included in the family of her husband. When a woman married, she was considered to belong to her husband's family rather than to her father's family. Thus, it was customary for the prospective bridegroom to bring a dowry to the wedding, or, in effect, to reimburse the father for the loss of a daughter at the time of her marriage. This custom of the daughter being associated with the family of her husband after marriage may help explain why the names of daughters are frequently not included in the histories of Hebrew families.

Although we have been able to list only a few of the customs of the Hebrews here, you should already see the importance of learning and understanding these practices so you can more fully understand and appreciate (1) why Abraham, Jacob, and others had more than one wife at the same time; (2) why Isaac, the son of Sarah, became the new head of the family upon the death of Abraham even though Ishmael—Abraham's son through Hagar—was several years older; (3) why Joseph, the eleventh-born son of Jacob but the firstborn of Jacob's second wife, Rachel, became the birthright son when Reuben, the firstborn son of the first wife, Leah, proved to be unworthy.

An understanding of these customs helps you to visualize these people as real people, with real challenges. In other words, an understanding of these customs helps the Old Testament to come alive for you.

Customs and Practices of the Israelites

Now let's look at some other types of practices and customs that largely were developed during the family periods of the Israelites and the Jews.

Dietary restrictions. Many people are surprised to find that the Old Testament contains instructions on the following customs, some of which are still practiced by orthodox Jews today:

To obtain further information on these practices, review such Topical Guide entries as the "Law of Moses," "Blood, Eating of," and "Fish." In the Bible Dictionary, read such items as "Clean and Unclean" and the brief article entitled "Kosher."

Dress and grooming standards. Have you ever wondered where the orthodox Jewish people of today got the idea that men are not to be close shaven on their faces, are not to cut the hair at the corners of the head, and are to wear fringes on their garments? Or why the heads of married women should be shaved, or why women are not to wear things pertaining to a man and vice versa? All of these customs have their roots in the Old Testament, and you can learn more about them by reading the appropriate scriptures listed under such general headings in the Topical Guide as "Israel, Judah, People of" or under such specific headings as "Hair," "Head," "Garment," "Fringe," or "Shave."

Purification procedures. Several chapters in the Old Testament are devoted to special purification rites for women after menstrual periods or giving birth, and for all persons who might have touched a diseased individual or a dead body. For precise information on these procedures, see the article on "Purification" in the Bible Dictionary, and read the appropriate scriptures under the same heading in the Topical Guide.

Sabbath regulations. Laws and regulations concerning the Sabbath day are legion in the Old Testament, and the observance of these laws helped to distinguish the covenant people in the Old Testament from all their neighbors. Note some of their beliefs and teachings concerning the Sabbath:

Where can you learn the details about these Sabbath regulations? Again, you read the appropriate articles in the Bible Dictionary, such as "Sabbath" and "Sabbath Day's Journey." Also, review the appropriate scriptures under such Topical Guide entries as "Israel, Judah, People of" and "Sabbath."

Religious symbols. Several religious symbols were used by the descendants of Judah in Old Testament times, and some of them are still used by orthodox Jews today. These include the following:

Again, to obtain additional information on these customs, read the appropriate entries under such headings as "Phylactery" and "Candlestick" in both the Topical Guide and the Bible Dictionary. Although the word mezzuzah does not appear in the English editions of the King James Bible, the practice of placing short scriptural quotations in certain places is indicated in Deuteronomy 6:9 and 11:20.

Feasts and festivals. Many chapters in the Old Testament are devoted to the institution and observance of feasts and festivals, including the following: Passover; Yom Kippur (or "Day of Atonement"); Feast of Pentecost (Shavuot), also called Feast of Weeks; Feast of the Tabernacles (Sukkot); Purim (Lots); and Feast of Dedication (Hanukkah). Pertinent information on each of these feasts and festivals may be obtained in the excellent Bible Dictionary article entitled "Feasts." Also, appropriate scriptures are listed under the topic "Feast" in the Topical Guide.

Summary of the Background to the Old Testament

This listing of Old Testament practices, customs, beliefs, and traditions could go on much longer. But perhaps I have listed enough of them here to emphasize again why it is necessary to study diligently the Old Testament. In some ways it might be considered a difficult book, but if you understand the major family groups in the scripture, and their customs, beliefs, and festivals, you will have come a long way toward a true understanding of the meaning and significance of this holy record. In somewhat the same way, a person studying The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would understand the total picture better if he knew about the exodus from Nauvoo, the trek across the plains, and such doctrines and customs as marriage for time and eternity, the Word of Wisdom, fast Sundays, and the celebration of the 24th of July.

Why We Use the LDS Edition of the King James Version of the Bible

Why is it so important to use the King James Version of the Bible in our study of the Old Testament? The quick and easy answer is that it is the text used in the latest edition of the Bible published by the Church. But that simply begs another question: Why did the LDS Church in the 1970s elect to use the text of the authorized King James Version in its edition of the Bible, rather than a more recent translation?

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has testified concerning the value of the King James text: "As far as the Bibles of the world are concerned, the King James version is so far ahead of all others that there is little comparison. . . . It is the Bible that came into being to prepare the way for the translation of the Book of Mormon and to set a literary pattern and standard for the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. It is the official Bible of the Church." [^11]

On another occasion, Elder McConkie wrote: "For nearly four hundred years the King James Version of the Bible has been one of the most stabilizing forces in all Christendom. It has been one of the chief means of preserving the English language as such; but more than this, it has kept right principles before millions of people who have been and are without personal contact with the prophets and witnesses who teach personally the Lord's message of salvation to his earthly children."12

While accepting the statements of the Brethren on the value of the King James Version, some members of the Church may still wonder why the text of the Joseph Smith Translation was not used as the basic text for the special LDS edition of the Bible. You may have noted, for example, that in his explanation as to why he selected the King James Version over all the other editions of the Bible published by the world, President Clark indicated he had received his greatest help from what he called the "Inspired Version of Joseph Smith." [^12]

So far as I know, Church leaders have never officially explained why they decided to use the King James text in the LDS edition of the Bible. However, it is obvious the following factors were considered in the decision:

The Prophet Joseph Smith used the King James text in preparing his "Inspired Version," which was intended to help clarify passages that were awkwardly composed or doctrinally difficult. That the General Authorities had faith and confidence in this Joseph Smith Translation was evidenced when they authorized use of the JST in footnotes in the LDS edition. They also authorized inclusion of a special section entitled "Joseph Smith Translation Excerpts Too Lengthy for Inclusion in Footnotes," which occupies pages 795 through 813 of the appendix of the LDS edition of the Bible. This important instructional aid will be discussed later.

Not only should we use the King James Version of the Bible, but we would do well to use that version as found in the LDS edition of the Bible. I am convinced that the LDS edition of the Bible is the best edition published in modern times. Let's examine the unique elements of this edition, which I believe will make its value apparent.

Title Page

You will note from the title page and the two pages of explanatory introduction that the text of this edition of the Bible is the Authorized King James Version, word for word and comma for comma. This LDS edition was first printed in 1979, and any printing since then should be acceptable.

Contents Page

The page listing the contents provides a list of the thirty-nine books of the Old Testament and the twenty-seven books of the New Testament, in the order in which these books appear in the scriptures. Also, note that the appendix includes the sections headed Topical Guide, Bible Dictionary, Joseph Smith Translation, Gazetteer, and Maps. Each of these sections will be discussed in detail later.

Explanation Concerning Abbreviations

The next page is titled "Explanation Concerning Abbreviations." These abbreviations are "found in footnotes and other study aids" in the LDS edition of the Bible. The abbreviations used in the footnotes include:

GR: An alternate translation from the Greek.

HEB: An alternate translation from the Hebrew.

IE: An explanation of idioms and difficult constructions.

JST: Joseph Smith Translation.

TG: Topical Guide.

OR: Signifies that alternate words follow to clarify the meaning of archaic expressions.

The footnotes identified by these abbreviations are extremely important to a more complete understanding of the Old Testament. In fact, these footnotes are so important that I believe each of them should be marked with a distinctive color, marking both the superscript letter in the text and the abbreviation in the footnote itself. The only exception to this marking might be the TG (or Topical Guide) footnotes, because they are so numerous.

Let me explain this marking system further. You will see that in Genesis chapter one, verse one, the word created is preceded by the small superscript letter c. You will then note in the footnotes on this page that in chapter one, verse one, the small letter c is followed by the abbreviation HEB, with the explanation that in this instance the word created could also have been translated as "shaped" or "fashioned." The content of this footnote is so important to an understanding of the first verse of Genesis 1 that I would mark in color both the superscript letter c in the text and the abbreviation HEB in the footnote. Then, when I subsequently read the text, the marking on the superscript letter automatically leads me to the appropriate footnote.

Again, I believe all of the footnotes headed by the abbreviations GR, HEB, IE, JST, and OR are so important that each of them should be individually marked with a separate, distinctive color.

As examples, in my copy of the Bible I have marked all of the GR footnotes in green, all of the HEB footnotes in blue, the IE footnotes in yellow, the JST footnotes in red, and the OR footnotes in orange. My selection of these particular colors was entirely personal, and they may not be the best colors for you. I selected the color green for the GR (Greek) footnotes because they both begin with the letters "GR." I used the same principle in selecting orange for the OR footnotes. My reasons for using blue, yellow, and red colors are not quite so obvious. I selected blue for the HEB footnotes because of the blue colors on the modern flag of Israel. I selected yellow for the IE footnotes since these footnotes clarify idioms and difficult constructions, and yellow seemed to me to signify a new idea. I selected red for the JST footnotes because they are so important, and the color red reminds me to stop and ponder.

Again, select your own colors for your own purposes, but I would strongly urge you to color-mark all these important and significant footnotes. [^13]

Cross-References in the Footnotes

As you turn the pages of the Bible, you will see the voluminous cross-references that appear in the footnotes. These cross-references will lead you to appropriate scriptures in all the standard works of the Church, not only to other references in the Old Testament and the New Testament. If you will consistently use these cross-references, you will soon gain an increased appreciation and understanding of the great gospel plan of salvation and exaltation, and of the life, mission, and atonement of Jesus Christ, because these are the common messages of all the standard works.

Understanding and using the cross-references, as well as the other footnotes, are at the very heart and core of anyone's diligent study of the Old Testament.

Chapter Headings

All of the chapter headings in the LDS edition of the Bible were prepared initially by a prophet, seer, and revelator serving as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Each heading was then reviewed by three members of the Quorum of the Twelve serving on the scriptures publications committee, and any questions were taken to the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve for a final resolution. This suggests that the chapter and section headings in the LDS editions of the scriptures are the nearest thing to canonized scripture we have in the Church, outside the actual text of the scriptures themselves. I recommend you develop the habit of reading and pondering the chapter headings before you read the text of that particular chapter. In fact, I highly recommend that at least once in your life you go through each of the books of scripture, chapter by chapter, reading only the chapter headings. This activity will help you develop a feel for the sweep and the grandeur of the scriptures you might not obtain any other way.

In preparation for this discussion, I decided to read all of the chapter headings in the Old Testament without reading the text of each chapter. In one hour and fifteen minutes I had read and marked all of the chapter headings from Genesis through Esther. Then later, in less than one hour, I completed reading the chapter headings of the books Job through Malachi. It was a very worthwhile and enlightening experience. I highly recommend that you do the same.

Just to give you an idea of the importance and significance of the chapter headings, here are the headings for the first three chapters of Genesis:

"Chapter 1—God creates this earth and its heaven and all forms of life in six days—Creative acts of each day set forth—God creates man, both male and female, in his own image—Man given dominion over all things, and commanded to multiply and fill the earth.

"Chapter 2—Creation completed—God rests on the seventh day—Prior spirit creation explained—Adam and Eve placed in Garden of Eden—They are forbidden to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil—Adam names every living creature—Adam and Eve are married by the Lord.

"Chapter 3—The Serpent (Lucifer) deceives Eve—She and then Adam partake of the forbidden fruit—Her Seed (Christ) shall bruise the Serpent's head—Role of woman, and of man—Adam and Eve cast out of the Garden of Eden—Adam presides—Eve becomes the mother of all living."

I hope these samples whet your appetite to want to read all the chapter headings. These headings can play an important role in your diligent study of the Old Testament.

Appendix

Now let's look together at the major sections in the appendix of the LDS edition of the Bible.

Topical Guide

The official name of the first section of the appendix is "Topical Guide with Selected Concordance and Index." The contents of this section are explained as follows: "This Topical Guide, with selected concordance and index entries, is intended to help the reader find scriptures most often used in gospel classes and study. Because of space limitations, the guide is not intended to be comprehensive. It is also recommended that the reader look up each scripture and examine it in its context, in order to gain a better understanding of it." [^14]

Tens of thousands of individual references are listed under the numerous topic headings. Without question, the Topical Guide is the most helpful reference system pertaining to all of the standard works yet published. This system provides us with a highly effective "chain link" referencing system on all the major principles, doctrines, and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ and our Heavenly Father's plan of progression and eternal life.

As you study and use the individual references listed under the various topics, remember to "look up each scripture and examine it in its context, in order to gain a better understanding of it."

As you can imagine, hundreds of people contributed tens of thousands of hours, with the aid of computers, to help prepare the Topical Guide. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie expressed it, "Without the help of the computer, the Topical Guide in the LDS edition of the scriptures could not have been prepared in its thoroughness and accuracy in this century." [^15] And all this is now available to us to help us in our diligent study of the scriptures.

How can the Topical Guide best serve us in our study? Let me make a couple of suggestions.

Let's assume you want to learn what has been written in the scriptures about the sacrament. You will note that this topic is listed on pages 441-42 of the Topical Guide, with appropriate scriptural references. It would not take too long to read all of these scriptural references. Then you might place yourself in the frame of mind of a Gospel Doctrine teacher or a person preparing a talk for sacrament meeting on this subject. Thus, you will want to decide which of these scriptures would be the best one to introduce the subject of "The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper." Let's assume you select Matthew 26:26. You might then write and encircle the number 1 near the reference to Matthew 26:26 in the Topical Guide. If you decide the next important reference you want to quote and discuss on this topic is 3 Nephi 18:7, write and encircle the number 2 next to the reference of 3 Nephi 18:7, and so forth. Thus, in a relatively short time you can develop a priority list of "chain references" on the important ordinance of the sacrament that will be of help to you throughout the remainder of your life.

In time you can develop similar chain reference systems for all the important principles and ordinances of the gospel. Remember, the most difficult task has already been done for you—the identification and listing of all the pertinent scriptures pertaining to particular topics. All you need to do is to read and study the references, select those that are most helpful to you in understanding the topic, and then mark them.

Bible Dictionary

The next major section of the appendix is the Bible Dictionary, consisting of 195 pages of vital information. I believe that the Bible Dictionary in the LDS edition of the Bible is the best Bible dictionary that has ever been published. When a number of scriptural scholars in the Church were assigned to create this dictionary, they first received permission to use the best of what had been printed in other Bible dictionaries; then they improved on these materials through their understanding of the modern scriptures and their acquaintance with the teachings of the prophets of this dispensation. Unfortunately many members of the Church have not learned how to use this magnificent instructional aid. It is the sealed portion of the Bible!

Perhaps sharing a portion of the preface to the Bible Dictionary might inspire some of us to do more with this important section of the scriptures:

"This dictionary has been designed to provide teachers and students with a concise collection of definitions and explanations of items that are mentioned in or are otherwise associated with the Bible. . . . It is not intended as an official or revealed endorsement by the Church of the doctrinal, historical, cultural, and other matters set forth. Many of the items have been drawn from the best available scholarship of the world and are subject to reevaluation based on new research and discoveries or on new revelation. The topics have been carefully selected and are treated briefly. . . .

"In addition to names of persons and places mentioned in the Bible, there are articles that may be regarded as introductory to the study of scripture, such as Bible, canon, revelation, and certain cultural items. A short account is given of each of the books of the Bible. An attempt has been made to deal with a few doctrinal subjects, such as atonement, baptism, Holy Spirit, priesthood, restoration, and resurrection." [^16]

As indicated in this preface, scores of entries in the Bible Dictionary should be of great interest to students of the Old Testament, including the "short account" given of each of the books and the identification of the names of many persons and places mentioned in this sacred scripture.

The best, and perhaps the only, way to become acquainted with the contents of the Bible Dictionary is to read all the entries in the dictionary, item-by-item and word-for-word, from "Aaron" through "Zipporah." I'm afraid too many of us wait to use the Bible Dictionary until we feel a definite need for its use, and then we commonly look up only a single topic. Of course, it is better to use the dictionary in this fashion than not to use it at all. But how much better it would be if we would first acquaint ourselves with what is in the dictionary.

For example, I suppose many Gospel Doctrine teachers in the Church have never bothered to read the entry under the "Fall of Adam" heading because they think they already know all they need to know about the fall of Adam. However, I am confident that virtually every member of the Church would have his or her understanding of the Fall expanded by reading what has been provided under that topic. I invite you—indeed, challenge you—to read all the entries in the Bible Dictionary. They will greatly enhance your understanding of the Bible and of the gospel in general.

Let me share with you a few specific items in the dictionary that will prove of great value and assistance to you.

On pages 622 to 625 of the appendix you will find a series of articles written on the subject of the Bible under such subtitles as "Structure of the Bible," "Preservation of the Text of the Old Testament," "Preservation of the Text of the New Testament," and "Bible, English." This information should prove invaluable to you as you diligently study the Old Testament. Additional information on this same general subject is found under the entry "Canon" on pages 630-31.

The Chronological Tables on pages 635 through 645 should also prove indispensable to you. You will find a wealth of information in these tables, including a listing of basic dates and a listing of the kings and prophets of both the kingdom of Judah and the kingdom of Israel. You will also find a great deal of information in these charts under such headings as "Internal History," "External History," "Synchronisms," "Jewish History," "Profane History," "Egypt," "Syria," and "Contemporary Events." Again, these charts have required the combined efforts of many students and scholars of the scriptures, requiring thousands of hours, distilling knowledge that is made available to us in a format that can be easily understood and utilized. You might want to specially mark or tag these tables, as well as the tremendous Harmony of the Gospels charts on pages 684 through 696.

On pages 756 to 759 of the appendix is an extremely interesting entry under the heading "Quotations from the Old Testament found in the New Testament." This worthwhile article is one of the many that might never be discovered even by the serious student of the Bible—unless he or she reads the Bible Dictionary from beginning to end. This valuable list provides us with a listing of all the Old Testament passages that have clearly influenced New Testament writers. These references are all presented in the order of the books of the Old Testament. Thus, you can readily determine that this list includes sixty-four references from Psalms, fifty-five from Isaiah, twenty-six from both Deuteronomy and Exodus, and eighteen from Genesis. If you want to spend some extremely interesting and informative gospel study time, read the passages listed from the Old Testament and then read the corresponding passages from the New Testament.

Joseph Smith Translation

The next major section of the appendix is headed by the descriptive title "Joseph Smith Translation, Excerpts Too Lengthy for Inclusion in Footnotes," found on pages 795 to 813.

Many excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation are included as footnotes on the pages providing the text of the Bible. However, it was decided that if the footnote from the Joseph Smith Translation would take over nine lines on those pages, it should appear in this special section.

The first reference in this section is Genesis 9:4-6. This does not mean that the Joseph Smith Translation does not make many significant contributions to a correct understanding of the first eight chapters of Genesis. However, if you carefully review those early chapters of Genesis, you will note the numerous cross-references to the books of Moses and Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price. These modern scripture references will provide the student of the Old Testament with invaluable insights into the early chapters of Genesis.

Even then, note the many lengthy contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation in such chapters as Genesis 9, 14, 15, 17, 19, 21, 48, and 50.

Gazetteer

The Gazetteer of the LDS edition of the Bible appears on pages 814 through 827 of the appendix. This list includes the name of every major place or site mentioned in the Bible, with an introductory statement as to how these places can be quickly located in the twenty-two maps that follow.

To help familiarize yourself with the places that pertain primarily to the Old Testament period, you might want to circle those place names in the Gazetteer in one color (perhaps blue). Then you might use another color (perhaps green) for those places primarily associated with the New Testament. The important thing is to use the Gazetteer properly so you can quickly find the location of any places mentioned.

Maps

The twenty-two maps available in the LDS edition of the Bible are among the best biblical maps available. Map number 1 (the physical map of Palestine) can be used to find both Old Testament and New Testament locations. However, maps 2 through 12 are primarily concerned with Old Testament locations, while maps 13 through 22 pertain primarily to the New Testament. As you study the Old Testament, you will want to examine carefully all of the maps of the time period that is most appropriate for each area.

Books of the Old Testament

Let us now go through each of the books of the Old Testament, one by one, noting particular items pertaining to selected chapters.

The First Book of Moses, Called Genesis

Interestingly enough, I suspect that most people—including Latter-day Saints, other Christians, and Jews—do not know the full correct name of the first book of the Bible. I think if most people were asked to give the full name of the first book of the Bible, they would simply answer "Genesis," or perhaps "The Book of Genesis." The basic meaning of the word Genesis, of course, is "beginning."

However, we see on page 1 of the Bible, the complete name of the first book is The First Book of Moses, Called Genesis. That should pique our interest enough that we might check the exact titles of some of the other early books in the Bible. You will note that the next four books are called, respectively, The Second Book of Moses, Called Exodus; The Third Book of Moses, Called Leviticus; The Fourth Book of Moses, Called Numbers; and The Fifth Book of Moses, Called Deuteronomy. In many languages, these books are simply listed as "The First Book of Moses," "The Second Book of Moses," etc.; the titles of "Genesis," "Exodus," "Leviticus," "Numbers," and "Deuteronomy" are not even listed as part of the titles in those languages.

Because Moses is the author of the first five books in the Bible, these books are often collectively called the pentateuch, a Greek word meaning "five books." The Jewish people refer to these five books as the Torah, from a Hebrew word meaning "to cast" or to put forth instruction and God's law.

The chronological chart in the Bible Dictionary indicates that Moses was not born on the earth until approximately 1571 b.c. (Before Christ). However, the same chart indicates the "Fall of Adam" occurred approximately 4,000 years before the birth of Christ. Thus, in order for Moses to provide us with a rather detailed account of the creation in chapter 1 of Genesis, he must either have had written records and oral traditions to draw on, or he must have received the information in revelation from the Lord—or both. Latter-day Saints know one possible source for the information provided by Moses. The first verse from the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price [^17] indicates that the first part of this record contained "The words of God, which he spake unto Moses at a time when Moses was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain." The information provided in the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price largely corresponds to the information in Genesis 1:1 through Genesis 6:13. However, as is readily evident, the account in the book of Moses is much more detailed and explicit than the account in Genesis. Thus, a study of the first six chapters of Genesis should be supplemented by a study of the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price.

Also, the cross-reference footnotes in the early chapters of Genesis indicate that chapters 4 and 5 of the book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price are concerned with the creation account. These chapters from Abraham thus should be reviewed in conjunction with a study of Genesis chapters 1 and 2.

In reading Genesis, pay special attention to the HEB footnotes, which provide "an alternate translation from the Hebrew." For example, it is of great help to know not only that the word "created" in the first verse of the Bible could also have been translated "shaped" or "fashioned," but that divine activity was always involved. Also, note the possible shade of difference in meaning if the Hebrew word translated "replenish" in Genesis 1:28 had been translated "fill" as it was in verse 22.

Out of the scores of verses I might have selected from Genesis, I have chosen the first part of Genesis 18:14: "Is anything too hard for the Lord?" The answer, of course, is No—and that knowledge should give comfort to all of us throughout our lives as we realize that with God's help we can accomplish all our righteous desires.

I urge you to pay special attention to the excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation that pertain to the book of Genesis, not only those included as footnotes on the pages, but also those included in the section of the appendix titled "Joseph Smith Translation, Excerpts Too Lengthy for Inclusion in Footnotes." The Joseph Smith Translation provides additional vital information on Melchizedek in Genesis chapter 14, on Abraham in chapter 17, and on Joseph in chapters 48 and 50.

The Second Book of Moses, Called Exodus

The word Exodus has the same basic meaning as departure. This book is so named, of course, because it details the departure of the Israelites from their bondage in Egypt. This book also shows the beginning of the development of the Israelites as an independent and separate nation or people. The institution of new feasts and festivals, and the building of the tabernacle, all tended to unify and give character to the new nation.

Note the several contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation to this book, particularly the very significant contribution to Exodus 34:1-2.

The verse I have chosen to highlight is Exodus 6:3, which contains the words of God to Moses: "And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them" (emphasis added). Although this verse is subject to at least two major interpretations, many biblical scholars have chosen to believe that the God of the Old Testament was the God we know by the name-title of Elohim, and that God was not known to his people by the name Jehovah. However, we as Latter-day Saints know from other scriptures that the God of the Old Testament is Jesus Christ and that he was known unto his people in the Old Testament by the name Jehovah. Notice the contribution of the Joseph Smith Translation to this matter: "And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob. I am the Lord God Almighty; the Lord Jehovah. And was not my name known unto them?" (emphasis added).

Joseph Fielding Smith has written: "All revelation since the fall has come through Jesus Christ, who is the Jehovah of the Old Testament." [^18] It is evident that Jehovah is an important name-title for the God of the Old Testament.

The Third Book of Moses, Called Leviticus

Many readers of the Bible consider this book to be one of the most difficult to understand in the entire Old Testament. A very helpful outline and description of this book is contained on page 724 of the Bible Dictionary under the title "Leviticus." A careful study of this outline would be profitable. Also, be sure to take advantage of the extremely helpful footnotes in this chapter, including the 100 HEB footnotes of "alternate translations from the Hebrew," the 21 OR footnotes providing clarifications of archaic English expressions, and the 20 IE footnotes that provide explanations "of idioms and difficult constructions."

The verse I would like to highlight is Leviticus 19:2, which contains the words of the Lord to Moses: "Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be holy: for I the Lord your God am holy." The terms "I am the Lord" or "I am the Lord your God" appear at least sixteen times in this chapter. These terms not only indicate that the teachings come directly from God, but they also place a "seal of approval" on these admonitions.

The Fourth Book of Moses, Called Numbers

An outline of the major sections of this book is provided in the article titled "Numbers" in the Bible Dictionary. Several key scriptures are interspersed throughout this book. Numbers 21:9 is especially significant when related to 1 Nephi 17:41, Alma 33:18-22, and John 3:14-17. Also, note the Messianic prophecy in Numbers 24:17.

The thought to highlight from the book of Numbers comes from the opening words of Numbers 27:22: "And Moses did as the Lord commanded him." Throughout his life, the great prophet and lawgiver, Moses, demonstrated the importance of obedience; only obedience brings forth the blessings of heaven.

The Fifth Book of Moses, Called Deuteronomy

As we mentioned earlier, the book of Deuteronomy is quoted frequently by the writers of the New Testament. It might also be noted that later writers in the Old Testament also quoted Deuteronomy, as did Jesus Christ when he answered difficult questions asked by the scribes and the Pharisees.

Particular attention should be given to (1) chapters 4 through 11, which contain some of the great exhortations of Moses to his people, and (2) chapters 29 through 34, which include some of Moses' farewell advice, given shortly before he was taken from the presence of his people. These form the capstone of Moses' prophetic ministry.

I would like to highlight Deuteronomy 10:12: "And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul." This important verse takes on additional significance when you remember that the Hebrew word translated as fear has the basic meaning of reverence or awesome respect.

The Book of Joshua

The last sentence in the Bible Dictionary entry on the book of Joshua reads: "The book was regarded by the Jews as the first of the 'former prophets,' but it is more properly a continuation of the first Five Books."

The book of Joshua is primarily an account of the conquest of the land of Canaan by the Israelites under Joshua. It is important to note in the very first chapter that the Lord is speaking to and working through Joshua, and in the last chapter of the book, Joshua acknowledges that the Lord was responsible for all the victories of the Israelites. In the last chapter we read these stirring words from Joshua:

"Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (Joshua 24:14-15).

Joshua's stirring invitation is as pertinent today as it was at the time it was first given.

The Book of Judges

Moses was known as the Prophet among the ancient Israelites; even though some of his successors might also have been prophets, they were known collectively as the judges. The "Book of Judges," together with the small book of Ruth, "contain all the Jewish history that has been preserved to us" in the scriptures "of the times between the death of Joshua and the birth of Samuel." [^19] Some of the words in the heading of chapter two set the tone of the entire book: "An angel rebukes Israel for not serving the Lord—A pattern of future events: A new generation arises that forsakes the Lord . . .—The Lord is angry with Israel and ceases to preserve them—He raises up judges to guide and lead them—Canaanites left in land to prove Israel" (that is, to test them).

Interesting persons discussed in the book of Judges include Barak, Deborah, Gideon, Jael, Jephthah, and Samson. Each of these is discussed in brief entries under the titles of their names in the Bible Dictionary.

A verse I would like to highlight (Judges 6:13) has special meaning only if I note some of the capitalization: "And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why then is all this befallen us?" The word Lord (with only the first letter capitalized) refers to a messenger and is translated from the Hebrew word adoni. The word LORD (with all letters capitalized) refers to Jehovah. Such usage is consistent throughout the Old Testament.

The Book of Ruth

This brief book of four chapters is remembered primarily by many (1) because of Ruth's statement of devotion to her mother-in-law, Naomi, and (2) because the book provides critical links in the genealogy of David and thus of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, who was partially a descendant of David.

Surely you remember these words from the book of Ruth: "Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God" (Ruth 1:16).

Such devotion is admirable in any age of the world.

First and Second Samuel

The formal titles of the two books of Samuel are very long: The First Book of Samuel, Otherwise Called the First Book of the Kings, and The Second Book of Samuel, Otherwise Called the Second Book of the Kings. In the Hebrew Bible, these two books are combined into one. These are the first of four consecutive books in the Old Testament dealing with the end of the rule of the judges and the beginning of the reign of the kings over the Israelites. As the titles of the books indicate, the early leading personality during this period of history is Samuel, whose birth, calling as a prophet, and appointment as a judge are reviewed in the first seven chapters of the first book. The heading of chapter eight includes the words: "The Lord consents to give them a king." In a sense, this marks the beginning of the period of the kings among ancient Israel, and Saul, the first king, is mentioned first in chapter 9. Other major personalities introduced in the First Book of Samuel include Jonathan, David, and Goliath.

In 1 Samuel 8:7 we read: "And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me." When the people reject the prophet of the Lord, they reject the Lord himself.

The Second Book of Samuel begins just after the death of Saul and follows David through the major part of his kingship. It includes the story of Uzzah being smitten for steadying the ark, the dishonorable and sinful acts of David in connection with Bath-sheba and Uriah, and the revolt of David's son Absalom. Nathan is one of the chief prophets of the period. The Messianic statements and prophecies concerning the coming of Christ and David's psalm of praise in chapter 22 comprise some of the spiritual high points of the book. In verse 2 of that chapter we read: "The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer" (2 Samuel 22:2).

Together, these two books cover a period of about 130 years, beginning with the birth of Samuel and ending just before the death of David.

First and Second Kings

Again, the Jews regard our books of First Kings and Second Kings as one book. One Jewish tradition maintains these books were edited by the prophets. The formal titles of these books are The First Book of the Kings, Commonly Called the Third Book of the Kings, and The Second Book of the Kings, Commonly Called the Fourth Book of the Kings.

The entry in the Bible Dictionary states concerning these books: "The books of Kings narrate the history from the rebellion of Adonijah to the final captivity of Judah, including the whole history of the northern kingdom from the separation till its disappearance in 721 b.c. The books were compiled by some unknown writer from a variety of written documents, including the state chronicles."

The First Book of Kings includes an account of the reign of Solomon, including his building and dedicating the temple. Elijah is the major prophet during the latter part of this book, and several of his miraculous accomplishments are listed in chapters 17, 18, and 19.

Do you remember these challenging words from Elijah in 1 Kings 18:21: "And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him."

The Second Book of Kings begins with the ministry and teachings of Elijah and Elisha. Chapters 1 through 7, and chapter 13:13-21, which tells of the death of Elisha, should be read with great care and much pondering. Chapter 17 tells of the scattering of the ten tribes, and chapters 24 and 25 recount the Babylonian captivity of the kingdom of Judah during the days of King Zedekiah. These chapters should be of particular interest to Latter-day Saints. In 1 Nephi 1:4, we learn that Lehi and his family left Jerusalem "in the commencement of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah."

The words to be highlighted from this book are the words of Elisha to his fearful servant as recorded in 2 Kings 6:16: "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them." Truly, one man and God make a majority.

First and Second Chronicles

Formally, these books are called The First Book of the Chronicles and The Second Book of the Chronicles. As you may have already surmised, the two books of Chronicles count as one in the Hebrew canon. Concerning these two books, the Bible Dictionary entry indicates they "give a short history of events from the Creation down to the proclamation of Cyrus allowing the Jews to return to Palestine. . . . The date of composition [of these books] cannot be fixed with certainty."

Actually, the only information in these two books relating to the period of the Creation is a listing of genealogies and family ties from Adam down to the time period being discussed. Most of the events detailed in these books have already been mentioned in First and Second Samuel and First and Second Kings. Verses that might be given special attention in First Chronicles include (1) 1 Chronicles 5:1-2, where additional insight is provided on why Joseph succeeded Reuben as the birthright son of Israel; (2) 1 Chronicles 17:1-15, where dialogue between David and Nathan is provided; and (3) 1 Chronicles 29:29, where the books of "Nathan the prophet" and "Gad the seer" are mentioned. The books of Nathan and Gad are only two of several books that were apparently part of the canonized scriptures at one time, but which do not appear in our present Old Testament. If you are interested in the subject of lost scriptures and in the listing of the books lost from the Bible, read the entry under the title "Lost Books" on pages 725-26 of the Bible Dictionary.

A reference in Second Chronicles that might be pondered is chapter 15, verses 9 and 10. These verses might help explain why the progenitors of Lehi—who was of the blood tribe of Manasseh—left the land of their inheritance and migrated to Jerusalem. Lehi was a descendant of Manasseh, as stated in Alma 10:3; yet Nephi recorded in 1 Nephi 1:4 that his father had dwelt "at Jerusalem in all his days."

Note the exact words of 2 Chronicles 15:9-10: "And he [the Lord] gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the Lord his God was with him. So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem."

The Lord truly knows the end from the beginning.

Ezra

This section of the Old Testament is known by the designation Ezra—not Book of Ezra, but simply Ezra. It is also worthy of note that the first three verses of Ezra are virtually word-for-word the same as the last two verses of Second Chronicles. Thus, this section or book was clearly intended to be a sequel to First and Second Chronicles.

Although this book is named in honor of the famous priest and scribe called Ezra, the first six chapters of the book describe events that happened sixty to eighty years before Ezra arrived in Jerusalem. These events include King Cyrus of Persia allowing the Jews to go back to Jerusalem to build the temple. The remaining four chapters pertain to the lifetime of Ezra and record his powerful intercessory prayer in behalf of his people, including these words from Ezra 9:9: "We were bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us."

The Book of Nehemiah

This book is clearly a continuation of Ezra, the two being regarded by the Jews as one book. Little is known about the man Nehemiah except that he was a Jew who held the important position of "cupbearer" to the king of Persia and who received from the king a royal commission authorizing him to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. The religious position of Nehemiah is not clear; he may have been a Levite or of the tribe of Judah.

Chapter 8 of Nehemiah contains the interesting experience of Ezra "the priest the scribe" (8:9) reading "the law of God distinctly" (8:8) and giving the sense or meaning, while the people stood up in their places.

Nehemiah 9:6 reads: "Thou, even thou, art Lord alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are therein, . . . and thou preservest them all."

The Book of Esther

The book of Esther is the second book in the Old Testament bearing the name of a woman, the first being the book of Ruth. The book stands by itself and is not directly connected to any other book in the Bible. Although the existence of God seems to be taken for granted throughout the book, the word or name of God does not appear anywhere in the book. This may help to explain why no fragment of the book of Esther has been found among the Dead Sea Scrolls. As indicated in the Manual of Discipline among the Dead Sea Scrolls, the people of the Qumran community where the scrolls were discovered were under command to preserve any writing with the name of God written thereon. Fragments of all the books of the Old Testament, except Esther, have been found among the scrolls.

The book of Esther provides the background for the institution of the feast of Purim or "the lots." The article under the title "Feasts" in the Bible Dictionary helps us gain an understanding of Purim and of the book of Esther.

An interesting verse in Esther 2:7 provides another name for Esther—Hadassah—which has become the name of the largest women's organization in Judaism today.

The Book of Job

The book of Job is another book that seems to stand by itself in the Old Testament. It contains some of the greatest poetry in the Bible, and its contents have been read, discussed, and pondered by great philosophers throughout the centuries.

Though some sectarian students of the Bible have questioned whether Job actually existed as a separate individual, he is mentioned by name in Ezekiel 14:14, James 5:11, and in Doctrine and Covenants 121:10. Perhaps the most famous single statement by Job is his stirring testimony of the resurrection in Job 19:25-27:

"For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold."

This statement of the resurrection is one of the strongest in the entire Old Testament.

The Book of Psalms

In the Hebrew canon, the Psalms collectively are referred to by a word which best translates as praises, and the titles of some of these praises include another Hebrew word which denotes a composition set to music.

No attempt will be made here to even begin to describe the majesty of some of the profound statements in this book of scripture and in the book of Proverbs that follows it. Suffice it to say that the writers of the New Testament books quote more verses from the book of Psalms than from any other book of the Old Testament. Indeed, out of a total of 283 direct citations from the Old Testament in the New Testament, 116 have been counted from this one book, many of them referring directly to Jesus Christ.

Notice—and then read and ponder—the Psalms which are headed "A Messianic Psalm" or "Speaking Messianically": 2, 8, 9, 16, 21, 22, 31, 34, 40, 45, 67, 68, 69, 89, 91, 110, 118, and 132. An additional thirty Psalms are also quoted by New Testament writers: 4, 5, 6, 10, 14, 18, 19, 24, 32, 35, 36, 37, 41, 44, 51, 55, 78, 82, 94, 95, 97, 102, 104, 109, 112, 116, 117, 135, 140, and 143.

The Bible Dictionary entry concerning this book includes the following: "No book of the Old Testament is more Christian in its inner sense or more fully attested as such by the use made of it than the Psalms."

Of the scores of verses from the book of Psalms that could have been highlighted, I have selected Psalm 19:1: "The heavens declare the glory of god; and the firmament sheweth his handywork." My commentary on that scripture would be another quotation, from Psalm 14:1: "The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God."

The Proverbs

The Hebrew word which the King James translators translated as proverb has variously been rendered as similitude or parable. However, many of the sayings in this book do not fit neatly under either of these designations.

The various chapters in this book stand by themselves. Indeed, the various proverbs within any single chapter often have little relationship to each other. Special attention might be given to the proverbs in chapter 3, as three of them—from verse 3, verses 11-12, and verse 34—are quoted by New Testament writers.

Although scores of verses could have been highlighted, the thought in Proverbs 3:5 has special meaning for me: "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding."

This is good advice for all of us, regardless of our station or position in life.

Ecclesiastes or, the Preacher

The Hebrew word that is translated preacher in this title essentially means "one who convenes an assembly."

The Bible Dictionary entry on this book should assist you greatly in understanding the flavor of the book. Although many readers of the book consider its message too pessimistic, remember the author is writing from the point of view of the world, where without the truths of the gospel everything is indeed "vain," "empty," and "transitory." Chapters 11 and 12 contain the most spiritual message in the book, including the idea that the only activity of lasting and permanent value comes from obedience to God's commandments. Note particularly the statement in Ecclesiastes 12:7 that at the time of death "the spirit shall return unto God who gave it."

The Song of Solomon

This brief book of eight chapters contains virtually nothing that is edifying so far as the gospel of Jesus Christ is concerned. Perhaps it is sufficient to mention that the book entitled "The Song of Solomon" does not appear in the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, and the Prophet Joseph Smith reportedly said: "The Song of Solomon is not inspired writing." [^20]

The Book of the Prophet Isaiah

It might be unwise to select any one book of the Old Testament and declare it the most important of them all. However, I must admit that if I were forced to select the Old Testament book I consider to be the most important for the world today, at this time in my life I confess that choice would have to be The Book of the Prophet Isaiah.

Although the Savior was not asked by the Nephites to identify the most important book of their scriptures, it is of interest to note that after the resurrected Jesus Christ quoted Isaiah 54 to the Nephites, he offered the following counsel: "And now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah.

"For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles. And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake" (3 Nephi 23:1-3).

My mind cannot conceive of a greater recommendation for reading, studying, and pondering the writings of Isaiah than these words by the resurrected Christ.

As you study Isaiah, pay special attention to those chapters where the chapter headings indicate that the chapter (1) emphasizes the life, mission, and atonement of Jesus Christ, (2) mentions major events that are to precede the second coming of Jesus Christ in the last days, (3) is quoted in the Book of Mormon or in other scriptures, or (4) pertains to the Millennium. After re-reading Isaiah to determine which chapters should be included in which category, I realized that virtually every chapter appeared under one of those headings or another, and several of the chapters were listed under two or more headings.

I am thrilled as I ponder the import of these words of Isaiah: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace" (Isaiah 9:6).

These are only a few of the many titles Isaiah used for his Savior and God. The Lord's admonition remains: "Search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah" (3 Nephi 23:1).

The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah

The writings and prophecies of Jeremiah should be of particular interest to Latter-day Saints, as Jeremiah was a contemporary of the prophet Lehi, and some of the writings of Jeremiah are contained on the brass plates of Laban.

Jeremiah lived at a critical time in the history of the kingdom of Judah. He first prophesied of the impending Babylonian captivity and then was an eyewitness of many of the major events associated with it.

Jeremiah's call came directly from the Lord, and Jeremiah 1:4-5 indicates that the call initially came in the pre-earthly existence. Note these words: "Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations."

Note also the frequency with which Jeremiah used either the expression "The Lord said unto me" or "The word of the Lord came unto me saying." One or the other of these expressions is found in half of the verses of the first chapter of Jeremiah. Thus, when we quote this prophet, instead of saying, "According to the prophet Jeremiah," perhaps it would be more correct to say, "According to the Lord as revealed through his prophet Jeremiah."

The entire book of Jeremiah makes for interesting and rather easy reading, but perhaps special attention should be given to those chapters where Jeremiah prophesies concerning the gathering and restoration of Israel in the latter days. These would include chapters 16, 23-25, 30-33, and 50. The miracles associated with this latter-day gathering will be so great that the Lord revealed through his prophet Jeremiah:

"Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers.

"Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks" (Jeremiah 16:14-16).

Concerning the book of Jeremiah, we might well say, "Great are the words of the Lord which he spake through his prophet Jeremiah."

The Lamentations of Jeremiah

The Bible Dictionary entry concerning this brief book gives us insight into the organizational pattern of the book, as well as much of the import of its message. Unfortunately, much of the beauty of these poems is lost in the translation, as is true with most or all poetic literature.

The Bible Dictionary entry reads in part: "Lamentations, Book of. Or, Dirges over the fall of Jerusalem and the nation. Written by Jeremiah. The poems are acrostic, chs. 1, 2, 4 having each 22 verses beginning with the successive letters of the alphabet; ch. 3 has 66 verses, every three beginning each with one letter; ch. 5 is not alphabetical. This beautiful little book is very instructive, e.g., in regard to the scenes in the city, and the feelings of the people, ch. 4; the deep impression made by the destruction of the holy city and temple by Jehovah's own hand (1:21; 2:1-11; 3:42-44); the feeling of sin awakened by it and the deep sense of national humiliation."

Note the yearning of Jeremiah as expressed in the next to last verse of his lamentations: "Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old" (Lamentations 5:21).

The old days really are better when they were days of righteousness and we are in days of sin.

The Book of the Prophet Ezekiel

The meaning of the name Ezekiel is "God will strengthen." (The El portion of a Hebrew name means the word God.) It is an appropriate name for this priest of the family of Zadok who was carried captive into Babylon in the days of Nebuchadnezzar and there prophesied for some twenty-two years concerning the future of Israel, both in the immediate future and also in the latter days.

Inasmuch as Ezekiel's prophecies are concerned with two different gatherings (both in the future, from his perspective), care must be taken to determine which of these prophecies are primarily concerned with the latter days. The chapter headings will help somewhat in this determination; you will want to give special attention and consideration to chapters 11, 20, 34-39, and 47-48.

Latter-day Saints will recognize the references to the Bible and the Book of Mormon in this prophecy of Ezekiel:

"The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions: And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

"And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these? Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand" (Ezekiel 37:15-19).

I ended this quotation with verse 19, but the remainder of this chapter and the chapters that follow provide vital and interesting information pertaining to the times in which we live. They also provide information that will help us prepare for the second coming of Christ.

The Book of Daniel

Daniel is another prophet whose name ends with the letters El, standing for the word God. The full name of DANIEL means "A judge (is) God."

The book of Daniel was written during the period of the exile, as was the book of Ezekiel. Little is known of the hero of the book whose name was Daniel. Nothing at all is known of his parentage, but Daniel 1:3 introduces the possibility that he was of "the king's seed." Daniel is frequently spoken of in modern times as having been a prophet, but the word prophet is not used in connection with Daniel in his book. In fact, the only time the word prophet appears in the book of Daniel is in Daniel 9:2, and there it refers to Jeremiah.

There is no question, however, as to whether or not Daniel had the spirit of prophecy. His interpretation of dreams and of the writing on the wall of the king's palace—and his visions of the latter days, including the stone cut out of the mountain "without hands" (Daniel 2:34) and the visit of the Son of Man (Christ) with the ancient of days (Adam)—all testify of his spiritual and prophetic powers. Evidently Daniel is one of the relatively few people who have been privileged to see in vision the major events on the earth that will immediately precede the second coming of Jesus Christ.

Fortunately, once you start reading and pondering the book of Daniel it will be hard to put it down. Few books of scripture maintain as high a level of drama and excitement—chapter after chapter after chapter—as the writings of this Hebrew exile. And who can ever forget the thrilling and exciting stories of the fiery furnace and the den of lions?

One insightful quotation from Daniel: "Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand" (Daniel 12:10).

Brigham Young used similar words in relation to a study of the Bible: "The world could not understand them [the writings of the Bible] . . . and yet it is one of the simplest books in the world." [^21]

Hosea

Again we have an example where the name of the book consists only of the name of the major writer: Hosea. You will remember this was also the case with Ezra, and it will be the pattern for all the remaining books of the Old Testament: Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.

The Hebrew Old Testament combines all twelve of these books into one, titled "Scroll of the Twelve." The prophets themselves are referred to as the "minor prophets" because of the briefness of their writings.

As indicated in the Bible Dictionary entry on the prophet Hosea, he is "the only prophet of the northern kingdom [kingdom of Israel] who has left written prophecies." However, "the profound thought and pathos of this prophet of the north deeply influenced succeeding writers." Except for Hosea, all the other prophets whose names are listed as titles of books in the Old Testament were sent by the Lord to the citizens of the kingdom of Judah.

New Testament writers were also influenced by Hosea; six quotations from Hosea are included in New Testament books (Hosea 1:10; 2:23; 6:6; 10:8; 11:1; and 13:14)—more than were included from the writings of Joel, Amos, Jonah, and Micah combined.

Perhaps the two best-known statements from Hosea are:

"When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt" (Hosea 11:1, also quoted in Matthew 2:15), and "I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction" (Hosea 13:14).

Joel

Although brief in length—only three chapters running a total of 4 1/2 pages—the book of Joel contains significant passages pertaining to the last days. For Latter-day Saints, Joel has the distinction of having been quoted by the Angel Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Concerning the messages delivered by Moroni on September 21 and 22, 1823, Joseph Smith recorded:

"He . . . quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in" (Joseph Smith—History 1:41).

The verses from Joel quoted by the Angel Moroni, which he said were soon to be fulfilled, are as follows:

"And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.

"And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call" (Joel 2:28-32).

The prophecies in the final chapter of Joel—chapter 3—take us right down to the beginning of the Millennium when the Lord shall dwell in Zion.

Amos

Latter-day Saints quote the words of Amos 3:7 almost as frequently as they quote any other single scripture: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7).

Another statement by Amos used widely by missionaries in the Church is found in Amos 8:11: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord" (Amos 8:11).

The heading of the last chapter of Amos—chapter nine—indicates that "in the last days [Israel] will be gathered again into their own land, and it shall become productive." Thousands of Latter-day Saint visitors to the modern country of Israel in the past few years can attest to at least a partial fulfillment of this prophecy by Amos.

Obadiah

This is the shortest book in the Old Testament, only one chapter of slightly more than one page. The last verse prophesies of the time when "saviours shall come up on mount Zion."

Jonah

The story of Jonah is one of the best known in the entire Old Testament. Virtually every student of the Bible remembers the account of Jonah being swallowed by a "great fish," in the belly of which he spent three days and three nights. Although some liberal interpreters of the Bible have questioned the authenticity of this story, it is evident that the Savior was aware of the incident, as indicated in his words recorded in Matthew 12:39-40: "An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth" (Matthew 12:39-40).

Micah

Every one of the seven chapters of Micah contains a pertinent message for the people on the earth today. His statement on true religion has been quoted by Jewish and Christian preachers throughout the world: "What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:8).

Christians might remember best his prophecy of the birthplace of the Messiah: "But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting" (Micah 5:2).

Nahum

Only three chapters and less than three pages long, Nahum predicts the great destructions that will occur in the latter days, including the burning of the earth at the Second Coming. The thought at the beginning of Nahum 1:3 is revealing: "The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power."

Habakkuk

This brief book of three chapters reminds us that the just shall live by faith and that patience is necessary to realize the promises of the Lord. Note the message in Habakkuk 2:20: "But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him."

Zephaniah

The word of the Lord through Zephaniah reminds us in three brief chapters that the destruction of the kingdom of Judah anciently was a type and a shadow of the destructions that will occur before the Second Coming. All nations shall assemble to battle, and it will be a day of wrath and of trouble.

A condition to be hoped for is mentioned in Zephaniah 3:9: "For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent."

Haggai

In the second shortest book of the Old Testament, Haggai speaks of the coming of the Messiah and refers to him as "the desire of all nations" (Haggai 2:7). Then Haggai quotes the words of the Lord concerning the temple: "The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace" (Haggai 2:9).

Zechariah

The meaning of the name Zechariah is "Jehovah remembers." What an appropriate name for the prophet who has so much to say concerning both the first and the second comings of the Messiah. The book of Zechariah includes more Messianic prophecies per chapter and verse than any other Old Testament book.

The headings of three of the chapters of Zechariah—3, 9, and 11—begin with the words "Zechariah speaks Messianically." Of course, each of these chapters should be read and pondered carefully.

Zechariah 9:9 was quoted by Matthew in the New Testament: "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass" (Zechariah 9:9).

Special attention should also be given to chapters 2, 8, 10, and 12-14, which speak of the gathering of Israel in the last days and of the major events that will occur before the second coming of Christ.

It would be profitable for us to read carefully all the chapters of Zechariah. Jehovah wants us to remember that he remembers.

Malachi

This last book of the Old Testament has been quoted about as widely as any scripture ever recorded. Latter-day Saints pay special attention both to chapter 3, which contains the famous statement on tithing, and chapter 4, which prophesies of the return of Elijah before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. The Savior quoted these same two chapters to the Nephites in 3 Nephi 24-25, and Moroni quoted and paraphrased portions of both chapters 3 and 4 to the Prophet Joseph Smith on September 21 and 22, 1823.

Then, on April 3, 1836, Elijah appeared in the Kirtland Temple and announced he had returned in fulfillment of the prophecy of Malachi, "To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse" (Doctrine and Covenants 110:15; compare Malachi 4:6).

Thus, major portions of the writings of Malachi appear in the Bible, in the Book of Mormon, in the Doctrine and Covenants, and in the Pearl of Great Price. Few writers of the Old Testament can claim that distinction.

Testimonies Pertaining to the Old Testament

Near the beginning of this discussion we included testimonies on the value of the Old Testament; as the final area of emphasis in our discussion it seems fitting that we should include two additional prophetic testimonies.

Elder George Q. Cannon has written concerning the Bible: "This book [the Bible] is of priceless worth; its value cannot be estimated by anything that is known among men upon which value is fixed. . . . To the Latter-day Saints it should always be a precious treasure. Beyond any people now upon the face of the earth, they should value it, for the reason that from its pages, from the doctrines set forth by its writers, the epitome of the plan of salvation which is there given unto us, we derive the highest consolation, we obtain the greatest strength. It is, as it were, a constant fountain sending forth streams of living life to satisfy the souls of all who peruse its pages." [^22]

This statement by Brother Cannon should answer the charges of those who claim the teachings of the Old Testament are not relevant in today's society. As Latter-day Saints, indeed, as thinking human beings, we should know that human interests, desires, and needs—and the principles that relate to them—have remained relatively constant throughout the centuries. And, unfortunately, the vices, temptations, and evils of the past remain with us today, and we must be warned of them by the voice of the Lord through his ancient prophets as well as through his living prophets, seers, and revelators.

Also, much of the Old Testament was revealed by the Lord to his prophets anciently to provide hope for those then living and to provide instruction and direction for those who would live in the dispensation of the fulness of times with the responsibility to help prepare the world for the second coming of the Messiah. Such writings have great relevance and significance today.

Let me conclude by recalling for you the experience of President Spencer W. Kimball concerning his first reading of the Bible. He wrote: "Let me tell you of one of the goals that I made when I was still but a lad. When I heard a Church leader from Salt Lake City tell us at conference that we should read the scriptures, and I recognized that I had never read the Bible, that very night at the conclusion of that very sermon I walked to my home a block away and climbed up in my little attic room in the top of the house and lighted a little coal-oil lamp that was on the little table, and I read the first chapters of Genesis. A year later I closed the Bible, having read every chapter in that big and glorious book.

"I found that this Bible that I was reading had in it 66 books, and then I was nearly dissuaded when I found that it had in it 1,189 chapters, and then I also found that it had 1,519 pages. It was formidable, but I knew if others did it that I could do it.

"I found that there were certain parts that were hard for a 14-year-old boy to understand. There were some pages that were not especially interesting to me, but when I had read the 66 books and 1,189 chapters and 1,519 pages, I had a glowing satisfaction that I had made a goal and that I had achieved it.

"Now I am not telling you this story to boast; I am merely using this as an example to say that if I could do it by coal-oil light, you can do it by electric light. I have always been glad I read the Bible from cover to cover." [^23]

There's a challenge from the Lord through a prophet who has testified during the lifetime of most of us. Will we accept the challenge? Will we study diligently the books of the Old Testament? If we do, then I can promise you that we individually can paraphrase the words of President Kimball and say sincerely: "I have always been glad I read the Old Testament from cover to cover."

That is my own testimony; I am grateful we have the Old Testament to read from cover to cover.

My prayer is that we may read it, ponder it, and study it diligently, that we may come to a greater understanding and appreciation of our Savior and Redeemer.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper, but much of the material was included in the audiotape How to Get the Most from the Old Testament (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), and in a talk presented at the CES Symposium on the Old Testament, Brigham Young University, August 1991.

---
Notas:
[^3] Philippians, Colossians, Ephesians, Philemon, and Hebrews—a.d. 60, 62. 3. For a more complete discussion on the instructional aids found in the LDS edition of the Bible, including a treatment on the Topical Guide, see chapter 3, "How to Get the Most from Your Study of the Old Testament."
[^4] Titus, and First and Second Timothy—a.d. 64, 65 4. Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 10th ed. (Springfield, Mass.: Merriam-Webster, Inc., 1993), "idiom."
[^5] 5. See the interesting and helpful discussion in the Bible Dictionary, "Joseph Smith Translation," 717.
[^6] 6. Bruce R. McConkie, The Bible, a Sealed Book, transcript, (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, c. 1984), 5.
[^7] 7. Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 336.
[^8] 8. For additional information on Matthew, see Bible Dictionary, "Matthew," 729 (for Matthew as a person); "Gospels," 682-83 (which includes the Gospel of Matthew).
[^9] 9. For additional information on Mark, see Bible Dictionary, "Mark," 728 (for Mark as a person); "Gospels," 682-83 (which includes the Gospel of Mark).
[^10] 10. For additional information on Luke, see Bible Dictionary, "Luke," 726 (for Luke as a person); "Gospels," 682-83 (which includes the Gospel of Luke).
[^11] 11. For additional information on John, see Bible Dictionary, "John," 715 (for John as a person); "John, Gospel of," 725-26; "Gospels," 682-83 (which includes the Gospel of John).
[^12] 12. For additional information on Acts, see Bible Dictionary, "Acts of the Apostles," 603-4; "Apostle," 612.
[^13] 13. For additional information on Paul and his epistle to the Romans, see Bible Dictionary, "Paul," 742-43; "Pauline Epistles," 745; "Roman Empire," 763-64; "Rome," 764.
[^14] 14. For additional information on Paul's epistles to the Corinthians, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 743-44; "Corinth," 650.
[^15] 15. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 200.
[^16] 16. John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1975), 166.
[^17] 17. For additional information on Paul's epistle to the Galatians, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 744-45; "Galatia," 767-77.
[^18] 18. For additional information on Paul's epistle to the Ephesians, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 746; "Ephesus," 665-66.
[^19] 19. For additional information on Paul's epistle to the Philippians, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 745-46; "Philippi," 750.
[^20] 20. For additional information on Paul's epistle to the Colossians, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 746; "Colosse," 648.
[^21] 21. For additional information on Paul's epistles to the Thessalonians, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 743; "Thessalonica," 785.
[^22] 22. For additional information on Paul's epistles to Timothy, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 747; "Timothy," 785.
[^23] 23. For additional information on Paul's epistle to Titus, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 747; "Titus," 785-86.
