Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 4

How to Get the Most from Your Study of the New Testament

I consider the New Testament to be one of the greatest of all the scriptures. It is the "Book of Books" so far as an account of the birth, ministry, teachings, atonement, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ are concerned. And I hasten to add my belief that a knowledge of the atonement of Jesus Christ—and all that the atonement entails—constitutes the most important understanding any person can acquire on this earth. I think it would be fair to state that more people have been led to at least a basic knowledge and testimony of Jesus Christ through the New Testament during the past two millennia than through any other single book. Thus a study of this book deserves our time and best attention.

Why Use the Authorized King James Version?

As we begin, let's consider the question as to why we should use the text of the authorized King James Version of the Bible. [^1] The basic reasons why at least one General Authority favored the use of the King James Version are outlined in a 475-page book, Why the King James Version?, published in 1956 and written by President J. Reuben Clark Jr., who was then serving as a counselor in the First Presidency. In his book President Clark reviews the origin and the basic contents of many of the major editions of the Bible in existence at that time. In the preface to his book, President Clark writes:

"It should be clearly in mind that only the New Testament is considered herein, save for a short discussion of the origin of writing and of modern criticism of the Old Testament. . . .

". . . The author has, in his later years, done some reading in an effort to satisfy himself as to which of the generally used English translations of the New Testament, he might more fully rely upon (judged by his reading) as most accurately recording the words and an account of the works of our Lord and Master, barring the Inspired Version of Joseph Smith. . . . [The] preparation [of the book on the King James Version] has been of greatest value to [the author] personally in helping to confirm and solidify his spiritual instincts regarding the New Testament record and message." [^2]

As a result of his extensive research and comprehensive comparison with other editions of the Bible, President Clark became convinced that the King James text was superior to all other English Bibles, and thus used it as the basic New Testament text in his monumental book Our Lord of the Gospels.

Instructional Aids in the LDS Edition of the Bible

Not only should we use the King James Version of the Bible, but I believe we should use that version as found in the LDS edition of the Bible. I am convinced that the instructional aids in the LDS edition make it the most important and valuable edition ever published on the earth. I am convinced further that any person who is fully acquainted with the contents of these instructional aids, and who knows how to use them effectively, will understand more about the teachings of the Bible than most so-called scholars who have earned theological degrees in biblical studies but who have not had the benefit of these aids.

Let's consider some of these instructional aids individually, in the order in which they are introduced in the Bible. [^3]

"GR" Footnotes

The footnotes labeled "GR" give an alternate translation from the Greek. You know, of course, that we do not have available any of the original books of the Bible—not a single one! All we have are copies of earlier copies of earlier copies—and very few of these "earlier copies" date before about a.d. 900. However, the earliest copies of the New Testament available to us are in the Greek language; thus, we would surely get our "longitude and latitude" better in the New Testament if we could read Greek. Unfortunately most of us do not read Greek, nor do we have the earliest Greek copies readily available to us. But scholars in the Church who are well versed in the Greek language have reviewed these early manuscripts—and the editions based on them—and have provided in the footnotes of the LDS edition some alternate translations that may be more accurate. Thus, in effect, we have in the LDS edition the best of both the Greek and the English New Testaments.

Literally hundreds of contributions from the Greek texts and translations are included as footnotes in the books of the New Testament. If you want to have a thrilling and educational experience, identify and mark each of the hundreds of "GR" footnotes in your New Testament. I promise you that through this single activity your understanding and appreciation of the New Testament will increase greatly. I would suggest you mark them with a colored pencil (perhaps with a green pencil for the "GR" [Greek] footnotes, inasmuch as they both begin with the letters "GR"). In order to identify properly each of these "GR" footnotes, you should mark both the "GR" entry in the footnote and the corresponding superscript letter in the text.

As an example, the first "GR" footnote reference in the New Testament is found in Matthew 2:4. You will note that the superscript letter a before the word demanded in this verse leads us to a "GR" footnote entry, suggesting the alternate wording "inquired." I would suggest you prominently mark both the superscript letter and the footnote reference in green; thus one of these sources will quickly lead you to the other.

Another example on this same page is found in Matthew 2:6, where the superscript letter d preceding the word rule leads us to a footnote entry for that verse, suggesting the following alternate readings from the Greek: "tend, protect, nurture."

"HEB" Footnotes

The footnotes labeled "HEB" give an alternate translation from the Hebrew. These "HEB" footnotes, of course, are found most frequently in the Old Testament, inasmuch as most of the earliest copies of Old Testament books were written in the Hebrew language. Thus, sometime you might want to mark all the "HEB" footnotes listed in the Old Testament, with their corresponding superscript letters. (Be sure to choose a color different from that you use with the "GR" footnotes.) So far as I have been able to determine, only two "HEB" footnotes appear in the New Testament (Romans 9:29 and Hebrews 2:7), and both of them pertain to verses being quoted from the Old Testament.

"IE" Footnotes

The footnotes labeled "IE" give an explanation of idioms and difficult constructions. The dictionary defines an idiom several ways, including "an expression in the usage of a language that is peculiar to itself either grammatically or in having a meaning that cannot be derived from the conjoined meaning of its elements." [^4] That involved definition correctly suggests that an "idiom" is particularly tricky; at first glance it may appear to mean one thing when in actuality it means another.

A good example of an idiom is found in Matthew 22:16, where the King James text reads "neither carest thou for any man." This could more correctly have been translated "you court no man's favor." Another example of an idiom is in Luke 22:66, where the expression "the elders of the people" has reference to "the Sanhedrin." Again, you might want to identify all the "IE" footnotes, together with the superscript letters leading to them, by marking them with a distinctive color.

"JST" Footnotes

The footnotes labeled "JST" give a more correct reading from the Joseph Smith Translation. As we read on the page facing page 1 in the Bible, "Short excerpts are provided in the footnotes; longer excerpts are provided in the Appendix. Italic type in these JST excerpts is used for words not found in the King James Version." [^5]

Those who are students of the Book of Mormon will remember that an "angel of the Lord" told the prophet Nephi, nearly six hundred years before the time of Christ, that when the early equivalent of what we call the Bible would come into the control of a particular church, many plain and precious truths would be deleted or changed. The exact words of the angel are recorded as follows:

"Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God. And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the formation of that great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away. And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men. Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God. And . . . because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book . . . an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (1 Nephi 13:25-29).

A careful reading of 1 Nephi clearly indicates that many "plain and precious" truths of the gospel of the Lamb (Jesus Christ) would be taken from "the book of the Lamb of God" (which would include the New Testament). The excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible which are included in this LDS edition of the scriptures help to restore many of these "plain and precious" truths! Now do you see why the JST footnotes are so valuable? Again, I highly recommend that you distinctly mark every one of them, without exception, perhaps in a bright color such as red; then study and ponder the changes suggested by the JST excerpts until you understand them. If you do this one thing, you will understand more about the New Testament than the biblical scholars who do not have the advantage of these footnotes.

Let's look now at two brief examples of the contribution of the JST footnotes; other examples will be given later when we identify specific scriptures to ponder in the individual books of the New Testament.

The Joseph Smith Translation text of these two verses reads: "Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be with God. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, and had communed with God, he was afterwards an hungered, and was left to be tempted of the devil."

What an important and significant difference!

The corresponding verse in the JST is: "For he that receiveth, to him shall be given; but he that continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken even that which he hath."

Again, what an important change!

Elder Bruce R. McConkie said concerning the value of the Joseph Smith Translation: "The Joseph Smith Translation, or Inspired Version, is a thousand times over the best Bible now existing on earth. It contains all that the King James Version does, plus pages of additions and corrections and an occasional deletion. It was made by the spirit of revelation, and the changes and additions are the equivalent of the revealed word in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. For historical and other reasons there have been, among some members of the Church in times past, some prejudice and misunderstanding of the place of the Joseph Smith Translation. I hope this has now all vanished away. The Latter-day Saint edition of the Bible footnotes many of the major changes made in the Inspired Version and has a seventeen-page section that sets forth excerpts that are too lengthy for inclusion in the footnotes. Reference to this section and to the footnotes themselves will give anyone who has spiritual insight a deep appreciation of the revelatory work of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is one of the great evidences of his prophetic call." [^6]

"OR" Footnotes

The footnotes labeled "OR," which stands for the word or, give us alternate words to clarify the meaning of English expressions that have become archaic.

As you are well aware, the meanings of words frequently change. Many of us have witnessed such changes in meanings of words even during our lifetimes. Obviously, many words used by the translators of the King James text in 1611 have changed meanings in the nearly four hundred years that have followed. The "OR" footnotes help us to be aware of these changes.

Again, only two examples from the New Testament:

If you decide to color mark the "OR" entries, you might want to consider the color orange, which begins with the same letters, "OR."

Scriptural Cross-References

The LDS edition of the Bible provides thousands of cross-references to other scriptures. A glance at the footnotes on almost any page of the Bible will tell us that these scriptural cross references include references to all the standard works: the Old Testament, New Testament, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. The Church has never before published such an extensive cross-referencing system in any edition of the scriptures.

Bible Dictionary

A few of the many individual entries in the Bible Dictionary that should be of great interest to students of the New Testament are: Angels; Anointed One; Atonement; Baptism; Beatitudes; Bishop; Church; Communion; Confirmation; Degrees of Glory; Disciple; Dispensations; Faith; Gentile; Grecians; Holy Ghost; Laying on of hands; Lord's Day; Miracles; Parables; Paradise; Pharisees; Prayer; Repentance; Resurrection; Sadducees; Samaritans; Sanhedrin; Scribe; Son of God; Son of Man; Temple; Temple of Herod; Tetrarch; Transfiguration, Mount of; Wise Men of the East; and Zealots.

Two other major sections of the Bible Dictionary that we should use frequently and repeatedly as we read the New Testament are:

As you can imagine, the development of these charts required hundreds of hours of dedicated effort.

In summary, if you want to earn the equivalent of a doctor's degree in biblical studies, just read and ponder and meditate—until you understand—each of the entries of the Bible Dictionary, beginning with the first entry of Aaron (who was a brother of Moses) and continuing through the last entry of Zipporah (who, by the way, was a wife of Moses).

Maps

The appendix concludes with twenty-two maps spread over twenty-four pages. About half of these maps pertain particularly to New Testament times, specifically maps 13 through 22. Maps 14 through 17 are particularly helpful in enabling a person to "follow in the footsteps of Jesus." Map 1 provides the details of the physical area of Palestine.

The Books and the Major Groupings of the Books of the New Testament

The sequence of the books of the New Testament has varied somewhat over the centuries, but the listing in the authorized King James Version provides for four natural groupings. These groupings are: (1) the first five books, comprising the four Gospels and the book of Acts, all of these being somewhat historical, with the four so-called Gospels emphasizing in particular the birth, life, teachings, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, including his ministry and atonement; (2) the fourteen epistles of Paul, arranged in the New Testament essentially according to their length, except for the book of Hebrews, which is placed at the end of his epistles; (3) the seven general epistles, comprising some of the writings of James, Peter, John, and Jude; and (4) the single book of "The Revelation of St. John the Divine."

As you glance through these books, you will note that some of them occupy only about a page or less (such as Philemon, 2 and 3 John, and Jude), while others average over 50 pages (including Matthew, Luke, and Acts). All in all, the 27 books of the New Testament occupy 403 pages in the LDS edition of the Bible, as compared with the 1184 pages that make up the 39 books of the Old Testament.

Let us briefly review each of these major groupings of books in the New Testament.

The Four Gospels and the Book of Acts

The first four books of the New Testament all begin with the words "The Gospel According to," followed respectively by the words "St. Matthew," "St. Mark," "St. Luke," and "St. John." Of course, there is only one gospel, and that gospel is rightfully called the "gospel of Jesus Christ." (The word gospel means "good news.") Thus, more accurate, but longer, titles for these books might be "The Gospel of Jesus Christ According to Matthew," and so forth. However, as we study these books carefully we will note that none of the books really attempts to present the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ in a systematic manner. Rather, these books consist primarily of the testimonies of the individual authors concerning the good news of the life, ministry, and atonement of Jesus Christ. It is of great interest to me to note that Joseph Smith in the Joseph Smith Translation changed these titles to "The Testimony of St. Matthew," "The Testimony of St. Mark," "The Testimony of St. Luke," and "The Testimony of St. John." These titles in the Joseph Smith Translation reflect more precisely what the books really are: they contain the testimonies of these individual brethren of the early church.

It is also interesting to note that the Joseph Smith Translation retains the word Saint before the individual names of the authors of these four books. This custom, I suppose, results from the use of this term in the many editions of the New Testament published by the Catholic Church prior to the publication of either the King James or the JST editions. As you know, the Catholic Church has officially elevated some very righteous persons to the status of "sainthood," and all four of these writers have been so named. Of course, we also know that in New Testament times the followers of Jesus Christ were called "Saints," and Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were all believers in Jesus Christ and were members of his church.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written concerning the differences and similarities of the first four books of the New Testament: "The four New Testament gospels . . . present different aspects of our Lord's personality and teachings. It appears that Matthew was directing his gospel to the Jews. He presents Christ as the promised Messiah and Christianity as the fulfilment of Judaism. Mark apparently wrote with the aim of appealing to the Roman or Gentile mind. Luke's gospel presents the Master to the Greeks, to those of culture and refinement. And the gospel of John is the account for the saints; it is pre-eminently the gospel for the Church, for those who understand the scriptures and their symbolisms and who are concerned with spiritual and eternal things. Obviously such varying approaches have the great advantage of presenting the truths of salvation to people of different cultures, backgrounds, and experiences. But the simple fact is that all of the gospel authors wrote by inspiration, and all had the same purposes: 1. To testify of the divine Sonship of our Lord; and 2. To teach the truths of the plan of salvation." [^7]

All of the first four books of the New Testament are discussed together on pages 682-83 of the Bible Dictionary under the title "Gospels"; the book by John also has a separate entry on page 715 under the title "John, Gospel of."

The fifth book of the New Testament is named "The Acts of the Apostles," which briefly and aptly describes the essential contents of the book. Perhaps because this book also contains the forty-day ministry of Jesus Christ after his resurrection, together with historical events associated with some of the early leaders of the Church established by Christ, the book of Acts is frequently grouped with the four so-called Gospels.

The Pauline Epistles

As we review the titles of the next fourteen books of the New Testament, you will note that all of them include the name Paul, and most of them begin with the words "The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the . . ." followed by the name of a group or individual. The first of these books is entitled "The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans"; followed by "The First . . ." and "The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians"; "The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Galatians"; then to the "Ephesians"; to the "Philippians"; to the "Colossians"; and "The First . . ." and "The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians"; then "The First . . ." and "The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy." The titles of the next two books do not contain the words "the Apostle," but are simply designated as "The Epistle of Paul to Titus" and "The Epistle of Paul to Philemon"; I have never found a satisfactory explanation as to why the words "the Apostle" are not included in these two titles. The title of the final Pauline epistle, however, includes these two words again: "The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews."

As we discuss each of these books later, we might have time to identify the groups or individuals to whom these epistles were addressed. For now, however, it might be sufficient to indicate that these epistles are all discussed in detail on pages 743-48 of the Bible Dictionary, under the title "Pauline Epistles." You will find in that article that Paul's epistles are frequently divided into four chronological groups, based on the dates when they were written:

On occasion, you may want to read Paul's epistles in the chronological order in which he wrote them, rather than in the order in which they appear in the New Testament, which is essentially according to their length. Reading the epistles chronologically may help you understand Paul better and may also help you to see why he said what he did when he said it.

The General Epistles

The titles of the next seven books all contain the word "Epistle," and in five of those titles the word "General" also is included. Thus, as a grouping, these books are known as the "General Epistles"; they are discussed in a very brief article under this title on page 678 of the Bible Dictionary as follows: "They are so named because they are not directed to any one person or specific branch of the Church. The designation is not entirely accurate for 2 and 3 John."

Individually, the "General Epistles" are designated as: "The General Epistle of James," "The First Epistle General of Peter," "The Second Epistle General of Peter," "The First Epistle General of John," "The Second Epistle of John," "The Third Epistle of John," and "The General Epistle of Jude." These books are discussed under their individual titles in the Bible Dictionary.

The Book of Revelation

The last and concluding book of the New Testament is "The Revelation of St. John the Divine." The author of this book is also known by the designations of "John the Beloved," "John the Beloved Disciple" or "John the Apostle." The book is also known as the Apocalypse, from a Greek word meaning revealed or uncovered. In the Bible Dictionary, on pages 762-63, this book is discussed rather extensively under the title "Revelation of John."

Selected Scriptures to Ponder from Each of the Books of the New Testament

To help us have a better feel for the flavor and content of the New Testament, I have selected examples of "Scriptures to Ponder" from each of the twenty-seven books of the New Testament. Obviously, we can look at only a very limited number of references. However, because each book contains scriptures worthy of careful reading and pondering, at least one example will be discussed from every book, with additional examples from the longer and more critical books.

The Gospel According to St. Matthew [^8]

Matthew 5:1-6

"And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him: And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled."

This is the beginning of the beatitudes in the Sermon on the Mount.

The Joseph Smith Translation makes a valuable contribution to our understanding of this passage:

"And Jesus, seeing the multitudes, went up into a mountain; and when he was set down, his disciples came unto him; and he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed are they who shall believe on me; and again, more blessed are they who shall believe on your words, when ye shall testify that ye have seen me and that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe on your words, and come down into the depth of humility, and be baptized in my name; for they shall be visited with fire and the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins. Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit, who come unto me; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And again, blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted. And blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. And blessed are all they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (JST, Matthew 5:1-8; see also 3 Nephi 12:1-6).

A careful reading of the beatitudes in the Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that all of the listed blessings are predicated upon the person's being baptized and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost. Also, at the beginning of Matthew 6 the Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that the Savior, at least in this part of the sermon, is speaking only to his disciples, not to the multitude: "And it came to pass that, as Jesus taught his disciples, he said unto them . . . "

Thus it is clear that the following instructions were intended only for the apostles: "Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?" (Matthew 6:25).

Matthew 5:31-32

"It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement: But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery."

At first glance, this scripture seems to say that anyone who is divorced and then remarries commits adultery, and this is the interpretation placed on it by the Roman Catholic Church. Hundreds of millions of Catholics are guided by this interpretation, and the laws of many countries where Catholics are in the majority have enacted laws forbidding marriage for a divorced person. Catholics recognize the concept of "separate room and board"—wherein a married couple can live apart from each other—but they do not recognize the marriage of divorced people. Thus, many hundreds of thousands of Catholic men and women are living in a "common law" relationship, without benefit of legal marriage. The Savior has suggested that we should "ponder" the scriptures and "search them" diligently. Let's do this by referring to other scriptures with similar wording.

Matthew 19:3-9: "The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away? He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso married her which is put away doth commit adultery."

Mark 10:2-12 records the same incident in essentially the same words. Note the exact wording of the two key verses at the end, Mark 10:11-12: "And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her. And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery."

Luke 16:18: "Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery."

Remember the suggestion that all the scriptures pertaining to a topic should be considered before a final interpretation. Remember also that at least two of the scriptures mentioned that this law was given to them by Moses. Now let's go back to the writings of Moses and read the exact words of the law.

Deuteronomy 24:1-2: "When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house. And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man's wife."

This law, given through Moses, makes it absolutely clear that remarriage is possible after a legal, written bill of divorcement has been placed in her hands. However, if a husband simply puts his wife away or divorces himself (separates himself) from her without giving the written bill of divorcement, and if she then remarries and has sexual relations with her new partner, of course both of them commit adultery.

In summary, the word divorce, standing by itself in the New Testament, is not the legal term; the legal term is a written bill of divorcement.

The lives of millions would be blessed if these scriptures were understood correctly. We can see from this example why it is important to read and ponder all of the scriptures pertaining to a particular subject. No wonder the commandment is to ponder the scriptures, not merely to read them.

Matthew 7:23

"And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity."

JST: "And then will I say, Ye never knew me; depart from me ye that work iniquity" (JST, Matthew 7:33).

Matthew 13:3-6

"And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow; And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up: Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth: And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away."

As worded in the King James text, the placement of the clause "because they had no deepness of earth" next to "forthwith they sprung up" would seem to suggest that the investigators readily accepted the gospel because they evidently did not have a good understanding of the scriptures, which of course makes little or no sense. However, the Joseph Smith Translation places this key clause after the word "scorched," so that the total idea is expressed as follows: "Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth; and forthwith they sprung up; and when the sun was up, they were scorched, because they had no deepness of earth; and because they had no root, they withered away" (JST, Matthew 13:5).

Matthew 16:28

"Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom."

Some of the listeners of Jesus misinterpreted this statement, thinking that if some standing there would not taste of death until the second coming of Christ, then the second coming must be during that very generation. Latter-day Saints, however, recognize that this statement pertained to John the Revelator, as is made clear in John 21:20-24, 3 Nephi 28:6-8, and Doctrine and Covenants 7. (See TG, "Translated Beings.")

Matthew 24:1

"And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple."

JST: "And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple; and his disciples came to him for to hear him, saying, Master, show us concerning the buildings of the temple. . . ."

Matthew 24:28

JST: "And now I show unto you a parable. Behold, wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together; so likewise shall mine elect be gathered from the four quarters of the earth."

This clarification is also included in the section called "Joseph Smith—Matthew" in the Pearl of Great Price, which is essentially the same as Matthew 24 in the Joseph Smith Translation.

Matthew 24:34

"Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled."

In context, it is clear that the "generation" mentioned here is the generation in which the preceding signs would be fulfilled, not the generation of those then listening to Jesus.

Matthew 27:50

"Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost."

JST: "Jesus when he had cried again with a loud voice, saying, Father, it is finished, thy will is done, yielded up the ghost" (JST, Matthew 27:54).

The Gospel According to St. Mark [^9]

Mark 9:43-44

"And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched."

See the Joseph Smith Translation of Mark 9:43-48: "It is better for thee, to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell; into the fire that never shall be quenched. Therefore, let every man stand or fall, by himself, and not for another; or not trusting another.

"Seek unto my Father, and it shall be done in that very moment what ye shall ask, if ye ask in faith, believing that ye shall receive. And if thine eye which seeth for thee, him that is appointed to watch over thee to show thee light, become a transgressor and offend thee, pluck him out. It is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God, with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire. For it is better that thyself should be saved, than to be cast into hell with thy brother, where their worm dieth not, and where the fire is not quenched."

Mark 14:22-24

"And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them: and they all drank of it. And he said unto them, this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many."

JST: "And as they did eat, Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them, and said, Take it, and eat. Behold, this is for you to do in remembrance of my body; for as oft as ye do this ye will remember this hour that I was with you. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them; and they all drank of it. And he said unto them, this is in remembrance of my blood which is shed for many, and the new testament which I give unto you; for of me ye shall bear record unto all the world. And as oft as ye do this ordinance, ye will remember me in this hour that I was with you and drank with you of this cup, even the last time in my ministry" (JST, Mark 13:20-24).

What a profound difference the Joseph Smith Translation makes. Contrary to what is taught by a major Christian church, we are not partaking of the actual flesh and blood of Jesus Christ when we partake of the emblems of the sacrament, but we partake of these emblems in remembrance of his flesh and blood! (See BD, "Communion.")

The Gospel According to St. Luke [^10]

Luke 1:41

"And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost."

Note that the spirit of John the Baptist was evidently in his body in Elizabeth's womb at this time and understood the significance of Mary's announcement.

Luke 2:21-23

"And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb. And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord; (As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord . . . )." (See BD, "Circumcision"; and TG, "Circumcision" and "Purification.")

Luke 2:52

"And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man."

This brief verse of only fourteen words covers eighteen years of the most important life that has ever been lived on this earth—yet it includes the major elements of a person's development: mental, physical, religious, and social.

Luke 6:27-28

"But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you, Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you."

This verse may describe what Jesus was doing—or thinking—at the time of his trial and scourging.

Luke 10:31-33

"And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him." (See BD, "Priests," "Levi," "Samaritans.")

Luke 11:52

"Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered."

JST: "Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge, the fulness of the scriptures; ye enter not in yourselves into the kingdom; and those who were entering in, ye hindered."

Luke 17:21

"Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you."

JST: " . . . For, behold, the kingdom of God has already come unto you."

Luke 22:32

"But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." (See TG, "Conversion.")

Earlier references indicated that Peter already had a strong testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ (see Matthew 16:16), but at this period of his life Peter had not been fully converted, that is, his actions were not 100 percent consistent with his knowledge.

Luke 22:44

"And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground."

D&C 19:16, 18: "For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent . . . Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit."

Luke 24:39

"Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (See BD, "Spirit"; and TG, "Spirit" and "Spirits, Disembodied.")

This statement clearly indicates that Jesus believed in spirits and that he understood a basic difference between spirit beings and physical beings.

The Gospel According to St. John [^11]

John 1:1

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God."

JST: "In the beginning was the gospel preached through the Son. And the gospel was the word, and the word was with the Son, and the Son was with God, and the Son was of God."

John 5:25, 28

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. . . . Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice."

The "Vision of the Redemption of the Dead," by Joseph F. Smith, in Doctrine and Covenants 138, provides insightful information on the meaning of this verse.

John 5:31

"If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true."

JST: "Therefore if I bear witness of myself, yet my witness is true" (JST, John 5:32).

John 8:56

"Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad."

Abraham knew of the gospel of Jesus Christ!

John 10:16

"And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd."

In 3 Nephi 15:13-24 and 3 Nephi 16:1-3, the resurrected Jesus Christ indicates he is going to show himself unto the lost tribes of Israel. The resurrection of Jesus Christ is the proof of his divinity!

John 14:26

"But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you."

This shows how Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John might have written their accounts many years later and still have written the same thing as one another.

John 19:30-31

"When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost. The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away."

The LDS edition of the Bible includes the following footnote to verse 31: "Jesus arose on the first day of the week. The previous day was the weekly Sabbath. The day before the Sabbath, being also the day after the Passover meal, could be the 'high' day."

John 20:17

"Jesus saith unto her [Mary Magdalene], Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.

JST: "Hold me not" (which could also mean "hold back" or "detain me not").

The Acts of the Apostles [^12]

Acts 3:20-21

"And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (See BD, "Restitution; Restoration"; and TG, "Jesus Christ, Second Coming," and "Restoration of the Gospel.")

The word restitution could also have been translated as restoration.

Acts 13:48

"And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed."

JST: "And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord; and as many as believed were ordained unto eternal life."

Acts 20:35

"I have shewed you all things, how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive."

It is interesting to note that this famous statement is found in the book of Acts, not in one of the Gospels.

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans [^13]

Romans 5:11

" . . . we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement."

The GR footnote indicates that atonement means "reconciliation" or "restoration to favor." This is the only time the word atonement appears in the New Testament. (See BD, "Atonement"; and TG, "Jesus Christ, Atonement Through," and "Redemption.")

Romans 7:15-19

"For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good."

JST: "For that which I am commanded to do, I do; and that which I am commanded not to allow, I allow not. For what I know is not right, I would not do; for that which is sin, I hate. If then I do not that which I would not allow, I consent unto the law, that it is good; and I am not condemned" (JST, Romans 7:15-17).

What a tremendous contribution the Joseph Smith Translation makes to a correct understanding of this verse!

Romans 8:16

"The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God."

Note that there is a capital "S" in the first "Spirit," referring to the Holy Ghost, and a lowercase "s" in the second "spirit." Each of us has a spirit; it is the life-giving force of our existence. (See TG, "Man, a Spirit Child of Heavenly Father.")

Romans 8:29-30

"For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified."

These two verses contain the only two times the word predestinate is used in all the Bible—although the word predestinated is also used twice, in Ephesians 1:5, 11. In all these cases, the Greek word translated predestinate, as indicated in the GR footnotes, also has the meaning of "appointed beforehand," or "foreordained." (See TG, "God, Foreknowledge of.")

Romans 11:21, 24

"For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. . . . For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and wert grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree: how much more shall these, which be the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree?"

(Note: The symbolism of the "natural" and "wild" branches of the olive tree is also included in the allegory of Zenos as recorded in Jacob 5 in the Book of Mormon.)

The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians [^14]

1 Corinthians 2:11

"For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God."

JST: " . . . even so the things of God knoweth no man, except he has the Spirit of God."

1 Corinthians 10:23-24

"All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. Let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth."

JST: "All things are not lawful for me, for all things are not expedient; all things are not lawful, for all things edify not. Let not man seek therefore his own, but every man another's good."

1 Corinthians 14:34-35

"Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church."

The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "speak" with "rule." (See TG, "Woman.")

1 Corinthians 15:29

"Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (See BD, "Baptism"; and TG, "Salvation, for the Dead.")

This statement clearly indicates that Paul and the early Christians had an understanding of the ordinance of baptism for the dead.

1 Corinthians 15:40-42

"There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption." (See also D&C 76; 88:22-32; BD, "Degrees of Glory"; and TG, "Celestial Glory," "Terrestrial Glory," "Telestial Glory.")

1 Corinthians 15:50

"Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption."

The resurrected Jesus Christ said, "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have" (Luke 24:39; see also BD, "Blood" and "Flesh"; and TG, "Flesh and Blood").

Although a resurrected body has "flesh and bones," it does not have "blood." Joseph Smith taught that resurrected beings have "spirit in their bodies, and not blood." [^15] President John Taylor also taught this principle: "When the resurrection . . . of man shall be consummated, . . . he [will] still be in the same image, . . . without variation or change in any of his parts or faculties, except the substitution of spirit for blood." [^16]

The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians

2 Corinthians 11:14

"And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light."

Doctrine and Covenants 128:20 also tells of an incident where the devil appeared as an angel of light. (See BD, "Devil.")

2 Corinthians 12:2

"I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven."

The GR footnote to this verse reads: "I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago." (See BD, "Degrees of Glory"; and TG, "Celestial Glory" and "Heaven.")

2 Corinthians 13:1

"This is the third time I am coming to you. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established."

The principle of two or three witnesses so that the truth might be established is also mentioned in Deuteronomy 19:15. (See TG, "Witnesses.")

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Galatians [^17]

Galatians 1:17-18

"Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days."

Galatians 3:6-8

"Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed."

The gospel was preached to Abraham, and there is only one gospel: the gospel of Jesus Christ. No wonder some of the Dead Sea Scrolls contained some of the essential teachings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ! (See BD, "Dead Sea Scrolls.")

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians [^18]

Ephesians 1:4-5

"According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will."

These verses clearly teach of a pre-earthly existence! Also, this is one of only four instances where the word predestinate or predestinated appears in the Bible.

Ephesians 1:10

"That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him."

(See BD, "Dispensation"; and TG, "Dispensations," "Israel, Gathering of," "Jesus Christ, Power of," "Last Days," "Restoration of the Gospel.")

Ephesians 2:19-21

"Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord."

This passage indicates the true Church will have "apostles and prophets," with Jesus Christ as the "cornerstone." (See BD, "Church"; and TG, "Cornerstone," "Gentiles," "Strangers.")

Ephesians 4:11-13

"And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ."

These verses indicate some of the purposes of a church organization, as well as some of the offices in the true Church. (See BD, "Church," and "Evangelist"; see also TG, "Apostles," "Church Organization," "Edification," "God, Perfection of," "Man, Potential to Become Like Heavenly Father," "Patriarchs," "Priesthood, History of," "Prophets, Mission of.")

Ephesians 4:26

"Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath."

JST: "Can ye be angry, and not sin? . . . "

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Philippians [^19]

Philippians 3:11

"If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead."

JST: "If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the just."

Everyone attains to the resurrection of the dead.

Philippians 4:8

"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things."

This verse is the basis for the wording of Article of Faith 13, "Indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul. . . ."

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Colossians [^20]

Colossians 1:14-16

"In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins: Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him."

The Joseph Smith Translation version makes no changes in this verse. Of course, God is not literally invisible, but he is "invisible" to sinful man. Also, all things were created by Jesus Christ, the "Firstborn" of every creature. (See BD, "Firstborn"; TG, "Creation," "Firstborn," "God, Body of (Corporeal Nature)," "Jesus Christ, Atonement through," "Jesus Christ, Firstborn," "Redemption," "Remission of Sins.")

The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians [^21]

1 Thessalonians 4:13-18

"But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words."

JST: "But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that they who are alive at the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them who remain unto the coming of the Lord, who are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then they who are alive, shall be caught up together into the clouds with them who remain, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we be ever with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words."

1 Thessalonians 5:1-6

"But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you. For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober."

If Paul were here now, I believe he would give us the same counsel and admonition.

The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians

2 Thessalonians 2:7-9

"For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders."

JST: "For the mystery of iniquity doth already work, and he it is who now worketh, and Christ suffereth him to work, until the time is fulfilled that he shall be taken out of the way. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. Yea, the Lord, even Jesus, whose coming is not until after there cometh a falling away, by the working of Satan with all power, and signs and lying wonders." (See TG, "Conspiracy," "False Priesthoods," "Jesus Christ, Second Coming," "Secret Combinations.")

The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy [^22]

1 Timothy 2:13-14

"For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression."

It is significant that the word transgression, rather than sin, is used in describing the Fall. Note also that Adam was not deceived. (See BD, "Fall of Adam"; TG, "Fall of Man," "Man, Physical Creation of," "Transgression.")

1 Timothy 3:2, 12

"A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach; . . . Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well."

This scripture gives some of the qualifications of a bishop. Also, in the early days of the Church in this dispensation, deacons were primarily mature men. (See BD, "Bishop"; TG, "Bishop," "Deacon," "Priesthood, Qualifying for.")

The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy

2 Timothy 2:8

"Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel."

Of course, it is not "Paul's" gospel. Thus, the Joseph Smith Translation changes the verse from "my gospel" to "the gospel."

2 Timothy 3:16

"All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness."

JST: "And all Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness."

The Epistle of Paul to Titus [^23]

Titus 1:15

"Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled."

JST: "Unto the pure, let all things be pure. . . . "

Titus 2:14

"Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works."

Peculiar means "different" or "treasured." (See TG, "Jesus Christ, Atonement through," "Jesus Christ, Redeemer," "Peculiar People," "Redemption," "Zeal.")

The Epistle of Paul to Philemon [^24]

Philemon 1:6

"That the communication [GR: participation, fellowship] of thy faith may become effectual [GR: active] by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus."

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews [^25]

Hebrews 1 (heading)

"The Son is in the express image of the person of the Father—Christ is the Only Begotten Son and thus above the angels."

Hebrews 1:6-7

"And again, when he bringeth in the first begotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him. And of the angels he saith, Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire."

JST: "And again, when he bringeth in the first-begotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him, who maketh his ministers as a flame of fire. And of the angels he saith, Angels are ministering spirits."

The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies: Angels may already be spirits; Christ does not "make" them spirits. (See BD, "Firstborn"; TG, "Jesus Christ, Firstborn.")

Hebrews 2:6-7

"But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; [HEB: "gods"] thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and didst set him over the works of thy hands."

This is a quotation from Psalm 8:5.

Hebrews 5:4

"And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron."

As we see from this verse, man cannot assume priesthood power, nor does he obtain it through graduation from a divinity school. (See TG, "Priesthood, Authority" and "Priesthood, Qualifying for.")

Hebrews 5:8-10

"Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec."

Christ is also the "Great High Priest"; the office of high priest is an office in the Melchizedek Priesthood. (See BD, "High Priest" and "Melchizedek Priesthood"; TG, "God, Perfection of," "High Priests," "Jesus Christ, Exemplar," "Jesus Christ, Mission of," "Jesus Christ, Temptation of," "Jesus Christ, Types, in Anticipation," "Salvation," "Salvation, Plan of.")

Hebrews 6:1

"Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection. . . ."

JST: "Therefore not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ . . . "

Hebrews 7:1-3

"For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him; to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace; without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually."

JST: "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually" (JST, Hebrews 7:3).

Hebrews 8:12

"For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more."

God can remember, but he will not remember. Therefore, the sins we commit, repent of, and have been forgiven of will not be remembered by God at the day of our judgment.

Hebrews 11:5

"By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God."

Enoch and his city were translated, as were Elijah, Moses, John the Beloved, and the three Nephite disciples. (See BD, "Zion"; TG, "Testimony," "Translated Beings," "Zion.")

Hebrews 11:24-26

"By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward."

Note that Moses knew of the gospel of Jesus Christ!

Hebrews 12:9

"Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?"

God the Father is the Father of our spirits. (A few of the TG entries for this verse are "Father," "God," "Heavenly Father," "Man, Antemortal Existence of," "Man, a Spirit Child of Heavenly Father," "Man, Potential to Become Like Heavenly Father," "Reverence," "Spirit Body," "Spirit Creation.")

The General Epistle of James [^26]

James 1:5-6

"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed."

James 2:14, 17, 20, 24, 26

"What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? . . . Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. . . . But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? . . . Ye see then how that, by works a man is justified, and not by faith only. . . . For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also." (See JST, James 2:14-21; see also BD, "Faith"; TG, "Faith," "Good Works," "Justification," "Perfection," "Righteousness.")

James 2:19

"Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble."

James 5:14-15

"Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him."

Healing is one of the gifts of the Spirit. (See D&C 42:44; 66:9; see also BD, "Elders"; TG, "Administrations to the Sick," "Anointing," "Elders," "Healing," "Prayer," "Sickness.")

The First Epistle General of Peter [^27]

1 Peter 2:9

"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light."

1 Peter 3:18-20

"For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water."

This also quoted verbatim in Doctrine and Covenants 138:7-9.

1 Peter 4:6

"For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit."

This verse is quoted verbatim in Doctrine and Covenants 138:10, part of Joseph F. Smith's "Vision of the Redemption of the Dead."

The Second Epistle General of Peter

2 Peter 1:16-19

"For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount. We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts."

This "testimony" of Peter's is similar to the "testimonies" of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

2 Peter 1:20-21

"Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (See TG, "Prophecy," "Scriptures, Study.")

2 Peter 3:3-4

"Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation" (see also JST, 2 Peter 3:3-13).

2 Peter 3:8

"But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day."

The wording of Abraham 3:4 is "A day unto the Lord . . . being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest."

The First Epistle General of John [^28]

1 John 2:1-2

"My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin [JST: "and repent"], we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world."

This is only one of the three times in all the Bible that the word propitiation is used; the other instances are found in Romans 3:25 and 1 John 4:10.

1 John 4:12

"No man hath seen God at any time."

JST: "No man hath seen God at any time, except them who believe."

1 John 5:18

"We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not."

JST: "We know that whosoever is born of God continueth not in sin."

The Second Epistle of John

2 John 1:9

"Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son."

Note the wording of 3 Nephi 11:32: "And this is my doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the Father hath given unto me."

The Third Epistle of John

3 John 1:4

"I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth."

The General Epistle of Jude [^29]

Jude 1:6

"And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day."

Compare this scripture with Abraham 3:26: "And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (See TG, "Angels," "Death, Spiritual, First," "Devil," "Judgment, the Last," "Man, Antemortal Existence of," "Sons of Perdition," "Spirits, Evil, Unclean.")

Jude 1:9

"Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee." (See BD, "Adam," "Michael"; to identify Adam as Michael, see D&C 27:1; 107:54; 128:21.)

The Revelation of St. John the Divine [^30]

Revelation 1:7

"Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him."

This scripture is about the second coming of Christ. Compare this verse to Zechariah 12:10, which reads, "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced." Compare also the statement of Jesus Christ in Doctrine and Covenants 45:51-53, concerning his appearance on the Mount of Olives as a resurrected being: "And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king."

Revelation 1:10

"I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet."

Note that Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were also "in the spirit" when Doctrine and Covenants 76 was received.

The "Lord's day" is Sunday. (See BD, "Lord's Day," "Spirit.")

Revelation 1:18

"I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death."

The resurrection of Jesus Christ is the proof of his divinity. (See BD, "Resurrection.")

Revelation 3:12

"Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name."

Article of Faith 10 gives further insight into this passage: "We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion (the New Jerusalem) will be built upon the American continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory."

Revelation 4:6

"And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind."

Joseph Smith was very interested in the book of Revelation and asked the Lord about those verses and symbols in which he was most interested. Explanations about some of those verses and symbols are found in Doctrine and Covenants 77 (see D&C 77:1-4).

Revelation 4:10

"The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne . . . " (see D&C 77:5).

Revelation 5:1

"And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals" (see D&C 77:6-7).

Revelation 7:1

"And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree" (see D&C 77:8).

Revelation 7:2

"And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea" (see D&C 77:9-10).

Revelation 7:4

"And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel."

Note that the "seven seals" refers to "seven thousand years" (see D&C 77:11).

Revelation 8:6

"And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound" (see D&C 77:12).

Revelation 9:1

"And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit" (see D&C 77:13).

Revelation 10:2, 8-11

"And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth. . . . And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth. And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey. And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings" (see D&C 77:14).

Revelation 11:3, 6, 8-12

"And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. . . . These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. . . . And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth. And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them" (see D&C 77:15).

Revelation 12 (heading)

"John sees the imminent apostasy of the Church—He also sees the war in heaven in the beginning when Satan was cast out—He sees the continuation of that war on earth."

Revelation 12:7-9

"And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." (See BD, "Heaven," "War in Heaven"; TG, "Adam," "Angels," "Council in Heaven," "Death, Spiritual, First," "Devil," "Man, Antemortal Existence of," "Rebellion," "War.")

Revelation 14:6-7

"And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters."

Revelation 19:10

"And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy."

Revelation 20:5-6

"But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years." (See BD, "Resurrection," "Spirit"; TG, "Resurrection," "Spirits, Disembodied.")

Revelation 20:7

"And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison." (See BD, "Devil.")

Revelation 22:7

"Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book."

Revelation 22:8-9, 13

"And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which shewed me these things. Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship God. . . . I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last."

Revelation 22:18-19

"For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book."

"This book" does not refer to the Bible; it does not even refer to the New Testament; it refers only to this book of Revelation.

Revelation 22:20

"He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus."

It is entirely fitting that the last words in the New Testament are directed toward the second coming of the Savior—the greatest event which is yet to occur in the history of this earth. One of the major purposes of the restoration of the gospel and of the Church is to help prepare a people to be worthy to live with Jesus Christ when he comes. Therefore, if we are living as we should, we could also echo the words of John: "Even so, come, Lord Jesus."

Testimonies of Church Leaders and Others on the Value of the New Testament

The fifth and final section of this presentation will include statements from Church and other leaders pertaining to the value and importance of the New Testament. 2 Corinthians 13:1 reads: "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." Similar wording in the Old Testament is in Deuteronomy 19:15. In keeping with this principle of multiple witnesses, I will include testimonies of others.

George Q. Cannon

Speaking of the Bible, including the New Testament: "This book is of priceless worth; its value cannot be estimated by anything that is known among men upon which value is fixed. . . . To the Latter-day Saints it should always be a precious treasure. . . . It is, as it were, a constant fountain sending forth streams of living life to satisfy the souls of all who peruse its pages." [^31]

Ezra Taft Benson

"I love the Bible, both the Old and New Testaments. It is a source of great truth. It teaches us about the life and ministry of the Master." [^32]

Joseph Smith

"We were now individually members of, and acknowledged of God, 'The Church of Jesus Christ,' organized in accordance with commandments and revelations given by Him to ourselves in these last days, as well as according to the order of the Church as recorded in the New Testament." [^33]

Brigham Young

"We believe the New Testament. . . . We give great credit to the Apostles, translators, and the fathers that have preserved and handed down the Bible to us. . . . In this they have certainly bequeathed a great blessing to the world." [^34]

"The Bible, when it is understood, is one of the simplest books in the world, for, as far as it is translated correctly, it is nothing but truth, and in truth there is no mystery save to the ignorant. The revelations of the Lord to his creatures are adapted to the lowest capacity, and they bring life and salvation to all who are willing to receive them." [^35]

"In all my teachings, I have taught the Gospel from the Old and New Testaments. I found therein every doctrine, and the proof of every doctrine, the Latter-day Saints believe in, as far as I know. . . . There may be some doctrines about which little is said in the Bible, but they are all couched therein, and I believe the doctrines because they are true, and I have taught them because they are calculated to save the children of men." [^36]

"The doctrines contained in the Bible will lift to a superior condition all who observe them." [^37]

First Presidency: Spencer W. Kimball, Marion G. Romney, and Gordon B. Hinckley

"We commend to all people everywhere the daily reading, pondering and heeding of the divine truths of the Holy Bible. . . . When it is read reverently and prayerfully, the Holy Bible becomes a priceless volume, converting the soul to righteousness. . . . As we read the scriptures, we avail ourselves of the better part of the world's literature." [^38]

Joseph F. Smith

"I do not believe that any upright, honest man or woman, possessing common intelligence, can read the Gospels of the New Testament and the testimonies therein given of the Savior, without intuitively feeling that he was what he professed to be. . . . The Spirit of the Lord bears witness in unmistakable language that burns with conviction." [^39]

Bruce R. McConkie

"Now, let us speak particularly of these wondrous books that we call the four gospels. They contain hidden and unknown treasures. We haven't caught the vision and come to realize what we can get out of the gospels. Would it surprise you if I suggested that there is more knowledge in the four gospels, more revealed truth relative to the nature and kind of being that God our Father is, than in all the rest of holy writ combined? All we need to do is learn how to get that knowledge out. We need guidance. We need the Spirit of the Lord to direct us as we study." [^40]

Near the beginning of this presentation, I made two statements I repeat here for emphasis and by way of conclusion:

My prayer is that each one of us might follow the admonition of Elder McConkie to seek the Spirit of the Lord to direct us as we study the New Testament. That we might read it, ponder it, understand and love it, and learn to live its teachings is the prayer I ask for all of us.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] What the Book of Mormon is and is not. Nephi, who provides the information in 1 Nephi and 2 Nephi. Mormon engraved the information contained in the following sections of the Book of Mormon: Words of Mormon (pages 143-45), Book of Mosiah (pages 145-207), Book of Alma (pages 207-368), Book of Helaman (pages 368-406), 3 Nephi (pages 406-64), 4 Nephi (pages 465-68), and the first seven chapters of the "smaller" Book of Mormon within the Book of Mormon (pages 469-81). The four engravers were all personal witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ during the time they lived in mortality on the earth. Nephi and his brother Jacob, who lived approximately 500 to 600 years before Christ, were personal witnesses of Jesus Christ before his earthly birth. He visited and talked with them (2 Nephi 11:3). Mormon and Moroni, who lived from approximately 310 to 421 after the birth of Christ, were personal witnesses of the resurrected Jesus Christ. The Savior visited and spoke with them (Mormon 1:15; Ether 12:22-23, 38-39). To be a witness or testament of the divinity of Jesus Christ, and to bring to the Jews the testimony of the Nephites that Jesus is the Christ. The principle of moral agency. This is critical to our political, economic, and social life. See 2 Nephi 2:11, 15-16, 26-27; 10:23; 26:27; Mosiah 2:33; 5:8; 18:28; 23:13; Alma 3:26-27; 12:31; 13:3; 29:4-5; 41:3-7; 58:40-41; 61:9, 21; Helaman 14:30-31. Use the 1981 edition or a later edition. Develop a desire to read the scriptures. Gordon B. Hinckley, in "One Chapter a Day," Church News, 10 April 1983, 24.
[^2] The author of the Book of Mormon. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, who provides the information in the seven chapters of the book that bears his name. Moroni was the second engraver on the plates of Mormon. As mentioned earlier, Moroni wrote Mormon 8-9, abridged the Book of Ether, and produced the Book of Moroni. The four engravers were visited and tutored by angels or translated beings. Nephi and Jacob were both tutored by angels sent directly from the presence of the Lord as recorded in 1 Nephi 11 and 2 Nephi 10. Mormon and Moroni were tutored by translated beings who had been caught up to heaven in the presence of the Lord, including the three Nephite disciples, as indicated in 3 Nephi 28:26 and Mormon 8:11. To fulfill biblical prophecy and to be a witness or another testament of the Bible. Dealing with unbelievers within the Church. The story of Korihor in Alma 30:37-53 is a good example. See also Alma 1:1-25; 2; 11:21-46; 12:1-9; 14:26-29; 15:1-12; 31-35. Read the chapter headings. Hope that the scriptures are true, that they are the word of the Lord (see Hebrews 11:1; Alma 32:21). Ezra Taft Benson, in Conference Report, April 1986, 4-5.
[^3] The plates of the Book of Mormon. Enos, who engraved the book that bears his name. The four engravers all had visions of us—or our times and our challenges—and they wrote especially for us to help us solve our problems (see 2 Nephi 6, 25, 26; Jacob 4; Mormon 8, 9; Moroni 1). These engravers did not write for their contemporaries; they wrote for us. There is not even a hint that any of these writers received as much as one senine in royalty payments for the publication of their records. Indeed, their records were not even published during their lifetimes. To convince the Lamanites that they are of the house of Israel. The preparation of a people for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ and the millennial reign. The seven pages of the Book of Omni (361 b.c. to 130 b.c.) and the four pages of 4 Nephi (36 a.d. to 321 a.d.) cover 516 years—half the time period of the Lehite record. But the 261 pages of Mosiah, Alma, and Helaman cover only 130 years (130 b.c. to 1 b.c.). Why? See also Helaman 14-16 and 3 Nephi 1-11. Use the footnotes and the cross references, and use the helps in the Bible, including the Topical Guide and the Bible Dictionary. Decide to read the scriptures. Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, ed. Parley P. Pratt [Jr.] (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 20, 22.
[^4] The engravers of the plates from which our present Book of Mormon was translated. Jarom, who engraved the two-page record that bears his name. The four engravers were faithful in being guided by the Lord as to what they should write; they wrote only those things commanded by him. On several occasions they indicated, in essence, that they "intended to have written more," or were about to write on a particular subject but stopped because "the Lord forbade." Notice, for example, the words of Mormon of such an experience: "And now there cannot be written in this book even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people; But behold the plates of Nephi do contain the more part of the things which he taught the people. And these things have I written, which are a lesser part of the things which he taught the people; and I have written them to the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken. To restore to the knowledge of mankind many plain and precious truths concerning the gospel of Jesus Christ. The nature and purpose of translated beings. The experience of the three Nephite disciples helps us understand Elijah, Moses, and John the Revelator. The Book of Mormon indeed offers "inspired commentary" on the Bible. See Alma 45:18-19; 3 Nephi 28:1-12; 36-40; Ether 15:34. Become acquainted with the Index. Commit to a definite minimum schedule—daily, weekly, and monthly. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 1:38.
[^5] The prophets of the Book of Mormon. Omni, who is responsible for the first three verses of the book that bears his name. The four engravers all bore strong testimonies of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Their testimonies appear on almost every page of their writings. Refer, for example, to the hundreds of scriptures listed on pages 175-85 in the index of the Book of Mormon under the numerous titles headed by the words "Jesus Christ." When all of their testimonies are combined, it is evident that we have an almost irrefutable testimony that Jesus Christ is indeed the divine Son of God, the Savior and Redeemer of the world. No wonder one of the major purposes of the Book of Mormon as listed on the title page is to convince "the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." To convince mankind that every person must be judged of his works; to test the faith of this generation; to help the faithful. The proper uses of wealth. See 2 Nephi 26:30; Jacob 2:12-14; 17-19; Mosiah 4:16, 26. Pay special attention to sections that begin or end with the following expressions: Read a little from the scriptures each day. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 194.
[^6] The peoples of the Book of Mormon. Amaron, who engraved verses 4-8 of the book of Omni. The four engravers all warned us that we will be held accountable for what we do with what they have written. Nephi cautions us in the last chapter engraved by him: "And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good. And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness. To help the people of this generation solve their problems; to provide mankind with secrets of national survival; to prepare the faithful for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ and the millennial reign. America is a choice land to the righteous. See 1 Nephi 2:19-20; 13:30; 2 Nephi 1:1-12, 20; 10:19; Alma 36:30; 37:13; Ether 1:38-43; 2:7-12, 15; 9:20; 10:28; 13:2. Involve others in your decision. Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants," Ensign, May 1987, 83-84.
[^7] The purposes of the Book of Mormon. Chemish, who has the distinction of engraving only one verse in the Book of Mormon, Omni 1:9. The principles of national survival, including the importance of the spirit of discernment. See Alma 43:23-24; Mosiah 10:10-11; Alma 2:30-38; 37:13; 56:46-56; 3 Nephi 4:8-15; Mormon 2:14-15; 3:2, 7-8; Ether 2:7-12; 9:20; Moroni 9:20. Liken the scriptures unto yourself (see 1 Nephi 19:22-23). Remember Nephi's words: "And it came to pass that I, Nephi, said unto my father: I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7). Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert and The World of the Jaredites (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and FARMS, 1988), 121-22.
[^8] General do's and don'ts in studying the Book of Mormon. Abinadom, the son of Chemish, who engraved twice as much as his father, the two verses comprising Omni 1:10-11. Advice and principles concerning different types of government. For examples on monarchy, the reign of judges, and other government types, see Mosiah 2:9-19; 11:1-15; 23:7-8; 29:1-44; Helaman 5:1-2; 3 Nephi 7:1-3; Ether 6:22-30. Place yourself in the position of the original author (see Mormon 8:34-35). Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:333.
[^9] Hints and helps in reading the Book of Mormon. Amaleki, the son of Abinadom, who engraved verses 12-30 of the book of Omni. What causes war? The Book of Mormon examines cycles of righteousness, blessings, prosperity, pride, selfishness (class distinction, persecution, hatred), war, punishment, humility, and repentance. See 1 Nephi 14:15-17; 22:13-14, 17; Alma 16:9-10; 50:21; Mormon 4:11-12; Ether 13-15. Ask yourself why the Lord had his prophets include specific teachings found in the Book of Mormon (see 3 Nephi 16:6-12).
[^10] My testimony of the Book of Mormon. Is war justified? See1 Nephi 14:15-17; 22:13-14; Alma 16:9-10; 43:46-47; 48:14; 50:21; 3 Nephi 3:20-21; Mormon 4:11-12; Ether 13-15). Ponder the scriptures (see 2 Nephi 4:15-16; 3 Nephi 17:3; Moroni 10:3-5).
[^11] Does God always protect the righteous in time of war or threatened destruction? Learn the principles and their relationships to each other.
[^12] The reality of the devil and some of the methods he uses. Relate the principles in the scriptures to everything else, including the teachings of the living prophets (see 2 Nephi 11:8).
[^13] The importance of keeping a sacred oath or of keeping one's word. Live the principles of the scriptures. Reading without living is like a glass eye—all for show and nothing for use.
[^14] Why we should be humble without being compelled to be humble. See Alma 31 for Alma's experience with the Zoramites. Study systematically and correlate with other scriptures.
[^15] Warnings against indifference and procrastination. Develop a meaningful marking system.
[^16] Warnings against pride. Teach the scriptures to others, including your family.
[^17] Warnings against the dangers of following false traditions. Reread the scriptures.
[^18] Warnings against the teachings of agnostics, atheists, and unbelievers. See the stories of Korihor (Alma 30), Nehor (Alma 1-2), and Sherem (Jacob 7). Reapply the principles in your life—you are a different person from when you last read the scriptures.
[^19] Warnings against hypocrisy and idols. Prepare to meet the Savior.
[^20] Warnings against unchastity.
[^21] Warnings against priestcraft. " He commandeth that there shall be no priestcrafts; for, behold, priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion" (2 Nephi 26:29).
[^22] Warnings against the evils and dangers of secret combinations.Such warnings can be found in several books: 2 Nephi 9:9; 26:22; Alma; Helaman; 3 Nephi; 4 Nephi; Mormon; Ether 8-9, 11, 13, 14. The warnings found in the Book of Ether may be why Moroni included this book.
[^23] Warnings against the corrupting powers of heavy taxation. See the example of wicked king Noah in Mosiah 11.
[^24] The importance of serving our fellowmen.
[^25] 25. For additional information on Paul's epistle to the Hebrews, see Bible Dictionary, "Pauline Epistles," 746-47.
[^26] 26. For additional information on James and his epistle, see Bible Dictionary, "James," 709 (for James as a person); "James, Epistle of," 709-10.
[^27] 27. For additional information on Peter and his epistles, see Bible Dictionary, "Peter," 749 (for Peter as a person); "Peter, Epistles of," 749-50.
[^28] 28. For additional information on John and his epistles, see Bible Dictionary, "John," 715 (for John as a person); "John, Epistles of," 715.
[^29] 29. For additional information on Jude and his epistle, see Bible Dictionary, "Jude," 719 (for Jude as a person); "Jude, Epistle of," 719.
[^30] 30. For additional information on John and his revelation, see Bible Dictionary, "John," 715 (for John as a person); "Revelation of John," 762-63.
[^31] 31. Gospel Truth, 2:248.
[^32] 32. Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), 23.
[^33] 33. History of the Church, 1:79. This statement was made on the occasion of the organization of the Church on 6 April 1830.
[^34] 34. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 1:242.
[^35] 35. Discourses of Brigham Young, 124; emphasis added.
[^36] 36. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 16:73-74.
[^37] 37. Discourses of Brigham Young, 125.
[^38] 38. Spencer W. Kimball, Marion G. Romney, and Gordon B. Hinckley, quoted in "President proclaims 1983 Year of Bible," Church News, 20 March 1983, 3.
[^39] 39. Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 19:261.
[^40] 40. Bruce R. McConkie, "Drink from the Fountain," Ensign, April 1975, 70.
