Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 5

How to Get the Most from Your Study of the Book of Mormon

I believe that every person in the Church who can learn to read should do so. And I believe that every person who can read, should read the Book of Mormon and the other scriptures of the Church. And they should read them again and again.

The scriptures are the "will . . . mind . . . word . . . [and] voice of the Lord" (D&C 68:4) to all of the people who live on the earth.

Unfortunately, an overwhelming majority of people on earth have not read any book of scripture completely, and I'm afraid that is also true of most Latter-day Saints regarding the Book of Mormon and the other scriptures.

Perhaps one reason some members have not read the Bible is that they may feel it was written by peoples who lived thousands of years ago in areas thousands of miles away, and that its messages pertain only to the peoples of those times. These members do not realize that the truths and principles of the scriptures are eternal. They apply to all peoples of all times in all places, including each of us, here and now. In fact, the Book of Mormon was written explicitly for our time, for us.

Perhaps another reason many people have not read the scriptures is because they think the scriptures are "too difficult" to read. True, the Bible has been translated from earlier languages and is written in the vocabulary and idioms of the English language of over 300 years ago. However, this is not true of the Book of Mormon. Also, recent editions of the scriptures provide numerous footnotes, cross references, explanatory notes, alternate readings, guides, and dictionary entries to help us understand the scriptures more fully.

We should not read the Book of Mormon or any other scriptures casually as we might read a newspaper, a popular magazine, or a novel. We are counseled to search the scriptures diligently (see Alma 17:2), to ponder them in our hearts (see Moroni 10:3), and to liken them unto ourselves (see 1 Nephi 19:23-24).

The time, effort, thought, and meditation required of this type of reading are well worth it because an understanding and application of the scriptures will help us become better and happier persons. Personal improvement and happiness are two of the many promises given to those who read, hear, study, and live the word of God. The scriptures are indeed "the power of God unto salvation" as declared by the Lord himself (D&C 68:4).

During my more than six decades on the earth, I have read many of the "best sellers" and significant books written by the scholars of the world. I can say in all honesty and sincerity that if I had to choose between having either the scriptures of the Church or having all the other books ever published on this earth, there is absolutely no question as to which I would choose. I would select the scriptures.

The Lord has emphasized from the beginning the importance of reading the scriptures. Our latter-day prophets have reiterated this plea. In the April 1983 general conference, President Gordon B. Hinckley mentioned the request of the Brethren "that all Saints everywhere begin a daily reading of those scriptures that provide the account of the life of Christ." He said the presiding officers of the Church hoped that "each family [would] read [each day] from the four Gospels and Third Nephi, the actual scriptures and teachings of the Savior." [^1]

President Ezra Taft Benson emphasized that our daily scripture study should include the Book of Mormon: "Unless we read the Book of Mormon and give heed to its teachings, the Lord has stated in section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants that the whole Church is under condemnation: 'And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all' (D&C 84:56). . . . Now we not only need to say more about the Book of Mormon, but we need to do more with it. . . . The Book of Mormon has not been, nor is it yet, the center of our personal study, family teaching, preaching, and missionary work. Of this we must repent. . . . As President Marion G. Romney [said,] 'I counsel you, my beloved brothers and sisters and friends everywhere, to make reading in the Book of Mormon a few minutes each day a lifelong practice." [^2]

In keeping with these admonitions, I share a few ideas as to how we all might get the most out of our study of the Book of Mormon. Many of these suggestions would apply to reading the other scriptures as well, but for this discussion I will relate them only to the Book of Mormon. I will discuss these ideas under several major headings:

Note that I used the term "our present Book of Mormon." I am convinced that some day we will have available to us a much larger and more extensive record of the ancient inhabitants of the land we now call the Americas. It may not even be called the Book of Mormon; rather, it may simply be known as the "Record of the Nephites" or some similar title.

I am equally convinced, however, that this expanded record will not be made available to us until we have read our present Book of Mormon again and again, and have learned to apply its principles in our lives. As our prophets have frequently reminded us, the Book of Mormon is not on trial, but we are on trial as to what we do with this sacred volume of scripture.

What the Book of Mormon Is and Is Not

The Book of Mormon is largely a condensed religious record of three major groups of people who lived in the lands we now call the Americas beginning over 2,000 years before the birth of Jesus Christ and continuing until about 421 a.d. A major portion of the book is concerned with the religious record of the descendants of a colony of people who left Jerusalem about 600 b.c. under the leadership of a prophet named Lehi. It contains many of their religious beliefs, principles, and practices. It records the exact words of many of their prophets. It tells of the appearance and teachings of the resurrected Jesus Christ to them shortly after his ascension into heaven (see 3 Nephi 10:18).

The Book of Mormon is not a geography book of ancient America, nor is it a secular history of the peoples who lived in the Americas in ancient times, although it does provide limited information on their types of government, modes of transportation, and agricultural practices. Some of their wars are described in detail, perhaps partially because one of the major engravers of the record was a great military leader himself, in addition to being a religious leader and historian.

Also, the Book of Mormon does not purport to tell all the story of all the peoples who lived in all these lands during all this time period. It clearly contains only a severely abridged account of a minority group during part of their history in perhaps a relatively small geographical area. We should remember that the last date in the Book of Mormon is over 1,000 years before the coming of Columbus to the Americas. Therefore, the Book of Mormon does NOT tell us what happened during that 1,000 years, nor does it tell us of any additional peoples who may have been discovered during that time or who may have come from foreign lands to the Americas.

The Author of the Book of Mormon

Usually when a book is printed, the name of the author is listed prominently on its cover. This, however, was not the case when the Book of Mormon was first published. As a result, many people not acquainted with the book have unfortunately assumed that Mormon is its author. Although Mormon did write and abridge much of what is in our present Book of Mormon, he is not its author. Nor is Joseph Smith its author, although the term "author and proprietor" was listed by his name in the first edition of 1830 in order to comply with the copyright laws of New York. In subsequent editions, Joseph Smith is rightfully identified as the translator.

As we will see later, many persons engraved and wrote on the plates from which we get the Book of Mormon, and many prophets and others are quoted extensively. But if any one person qualifies to be referred to as the "author" of the Book of Mormon, that person is Jesus Christ. The subtitle of the Book of Mormon, "Another Testament of Jesus Christ," is entirely fitting. As we will also see later, virtually all of those who wrote the accounts comprising our present Book of Mormon were specifically directed in their efforts by Jesus Christ himself. Also, the major message of the book centers on Christ. As Nephi, the first major writer in our present Book of Mormon, has declared:

"Behold I say unto you, that as these things are true, and as the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved. Wherefore, for this cause hath the Lord God promised unto me that these things which I write shall be kept and preserved, and handed down . . . from generation to generation as long as the earth shall stand; and they shall go according to the will and pleasure of God; and the nations who shall possess them shall be judged of them according to the words which are written.

"For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. . . . we believe in Christ . . . we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know of what source they may look for a remission of their sins" (2 Nephi 25:20-26).

"And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good. And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness" (2 Nephi 33:10-11).

The other major writers of the Book of Mormon also testify that they wrote only those things they were commanded to write by Christ. Thus, Jesus Christ might correctly be identified as the author of this book. In modern times the resurrected Jesus Christ has testified concerning his acceptance of the Book of Mormon: "As your Lord and your God liveth it is true" (D&C 17:6).

The Plates of the Book of Mormon

Although the various peoples of the Book of Mormon kept many different types of records, we need to understand the origin and history of only five major sets of plates associated either directly or indirectly with our present Book of Mormon in order to understand the essential makeup of the book. Only two of these sets of plates—the small plates of Nephi and the plates of Mormon—were given to the Prophet Joseph Smith and translated by him. The five major sets of plates, in chronological sequence, are: the plates of Ether, the brass plates of Laban, the large plates of Nephi, the small plates of Nephi, and the plates of Mormon.

The Plates of Ether

Our present Book of Mormon refers to the "twenty and four plates . . . which is called the Book of Ether" (Ether 1:2). These plates cover more than 2,000 years of history of a numerous people. All that we have of these plates in our present Book of Mormon is the relatively brief abridgment and summary in the Book of Ether of the people we refer to as Jaredites—thirty-one pages in our current edition. So far as we know, Joseph Smith never had the plates of Ether in his possession.

The Brass Plates of Laban

In referring to these plates as "the brass plates of Laban," I realize I am using a modern term that is frequently used by members of the Church. However, the present Book of Mormon does not refer to these plates a single time in precisely this same word order; rather, these plates are referred to as "the plates of brass" (1 Nephi 3:12, 24; 4:16, 24, 38; 5:10, 14; 2 Nephi 5:12). This word order might be awkward for us in modern English, but it would be 100 percent consistent with both ancient and modern Hebrew usage. Such usage in the translation by Joseph Smith is one of thousands of indications that the Book of Mormon is precisely what it claims to be: a translation from an ancient text prepared in the Hebrew pattern of thought.

The plates of brass were written in Egyptian as indicated in Mosiah 1:4, which mentions that Lehi could read the engravings on these plates because he had "been taught in the language of the Egyptians." These plates are primarily concerned with the descendants of Joseph, who was sold into Egypt. Therefore, in a sense the plates of brass might be considered as part of the "stick of Joseph" or the "stick of Ephraim" mentioned in the Old Testament and in other scriptures (see Ezekiel 37:16-19).

Lehi's sons obtained the plates of brass when they left Jerusalem approximately 600 years before the time of Christ. The plates of brass contained "the five books of Moses" (1 Nephi 5:11) and many other books found in our present Old Testament, including the book of Isaiah. However, the plates of brass were more complete and more comprehensive than our Old Testament. Nephi, who was personally acquainted with the contents of the brass plates and who saw our present Old Testament in vision, said that "many plain and precious things" (1 Nephi 13:20) had been taken from the earlier records before they appeared in our present Bible. The teachings of many additional prophets were also found on the brass plates, including the words of Ezias, Neum, Zenos, and Zenock.

Joseph Smith did not translate directly from the plates of brass, and we have no evidence that he ever had them in his possession. We have in our present Book of Mormon only those portions of the brass plates that were quoted by the engravers of the two sets of plates given to Joseph Smith: the small plates of Nephi and the plates of Mormon.

The Large Plates of Nephi

These plates, started shortly after Lehi left Jerusalem, contained both a religious and a secular history of the members of the Lehite colony and of their descendants. These plates contained a series of books that were named after the authors who wrote on the plates. Evidently, Lehi was the earliest writer on these plates, although the engraver of the record might have been Nephi, who then named the book in honor of his father. The large plates of Nephi essentially covered the history of the Lehite people—more commonly know as the Nephites—from approximately 600 years before Christ to approximately 400 years after Christ. Mormon abridged these plates in the fourth century a.d. We have parts of Mormon's abridgment in our present Book of Mormon. However, the unabridged large plates of Nephi contain many items not found in our present Book of Mormon, including "a full account of the history of [Nephi's] people" (1 Nephi 9:2; see also 2 Nephi 4:14; Jacob 1:2-3), the genealogy of Lehi (1 Nephi 19:2), and the "more part" of the teachings of the resurrected Jesus Christ to the Nephite nation (3 Nephi 26:7). Again, we have no indication that Joseph Smith ever had the large plates of Nephi in his possession, or that he ever translated directly from them.

The Small Plates of Nephi

These plates were started approximately 570 b.c. and contain primarily a religious history of the Lehite colony for the first 470 years of its existence (1 Nephi 6:3, 5; 9:4; 19:2-6; 2 Nephi 5:29-32; Jacob 1:4). Some of the religious teachings of the plates of brass were copied onto these plates (2 Nephi 4:15). A translation of these plates comprises the first 143 pages of the present edition of the Book of Mormon, including the books of 1 Nephi (pages 1-53), 2 Nephi (pages 53-117), Jacob (pages 117-35), Enos (pages 136-38), Jarom (pages 138-40), and Omni (pages 140-43). The small plates of Nephi contain the "first person" account of the various writers on these plates. In other words, these plates have not been abridged. The Prophet Joseph Smith was given the small plates of Nephi. He had them in his possession; he translated directly from them.

The Plates of Mormon

The Plates of Mormon were the plates delivered to the Prophet Joseph Smith by Moroni on September 22, 1827. Essentially these plates contain (1) an abridgment by Mormon of the books on the large plates of Nephi, (2) first-person accounts by Mormon, including the section titled "The Words of Mormon," (3) personal accounts of Moroni, and (4) Moroni's abridgment of the plates of Ether. A portion of the plates of Mormon were sealed and have not yet been translated. We are not certain of the exact contents of this sealed portion. However, Moroni evidently was the major writer of the sealed portion (see Ether 4:5).

The following books in our present Book of Mormon come from the plates of Mormon, which are largely an abridgment of the large plates of Nephi (pages 145-468): Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, 3 Nephi, and 4 Nephi. Mormon wrote Mormon 1-7 (Moroni wrote Mormon 8-9). The plates of Mormon also contain Moroni's abridgement of the plates of Ether and Moroni's own writings in the book of Moroni, which include one discourse and two letters by Mormon (Moroni 7-9).

The Engravers of the Plates

These plates contain the words of many different persons. However, when we remember that our present Book of Mormon consists only of (1) the small plates of Nephi and (2) portions of the plates of Mormon that contain the abridgments and writings of Mormon and Moroni, then we can immediately see that there were relatively few engravers on the plates received by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Indeed, these engravers number only eleven.

Nine engravers contributed to the small plates of Nephi:

The two engravers of the plates of Mormon—the other set of plates received by the Prophet Joseph Smith—are the father and son combination of Mormon and Moroni.

The smaller Book of Mormon is primarily an abridgment by Mormon on his own plates of Mormon of a much longer record he had earlier written on the large plates of Nephi. In other words, Mormon was one of the original writers on the large plates of Nephi—together with Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, and others. After Mormon had written his extensive record on the large plates of Nephi, he was commanded by the Lord to prepare the plates of Mormon and to include on them an abridgment of all the books on the large plates of Nephi. Mormon also abridged his own record, which constitutes the "smaller" Book of Mormon on pages 468-81 of the 1981 edition.

Except for the relatively brief contributions of Enos, Jarom, Omni, Amaron, Chemish, Abinadom, and Amaleki, which comprise less than eight pages of our present text, all of the records included in our present Book of Mormon were engraved by four persons: Nephi, Jacob, Mormon, and Moroni. To understand and appreciate the Book of Mormon, we should know something about these four major engravers. They had several significant and remarkable characteristics and experiences in common:

These four engravers or writers or editors or compilers were tutored by the Savior as to what they should write. They were strong witnesses of his divinity. Is it any wonder that their writings are identified as "Another Testament of Jesus Christ"?

Think of the possible implications of this truth—both as to what was included in the Book of Mormon and as to how we should read the Book of Mormon. Note, for example, the words of Moroni as he first started his engravings on the plates of Mormon: "Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you. Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing" (Mormon 8:34-35).

Moroni is directly responsible for the materials on pages 481-531 of our present Book of Mormon. If you want a thrill and a meaningful insight into the Book of Mormon, just read or reread any one of those fifty pages. Then close the book, close your eyes, and ask yourself these questions: "What did the great prophet Moroni see in his vision of us and of our day that would prompt him to write this particular incident from the many teachings that were available to him in the voluminous records he had at his disposal?" "What principle or truth is Moroni trying to teach me and my generation that will help us to solve our problems?"

If you will do this as you read the Book of Mormon, the book will come alive for you to such an extent that you will have difficulty putting it down. Do you remember the testimony of Parley P. Pratt as he read the Book of Mormon in this manner? He wrote:

"I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep. As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly and manifestly as a man comprehends and knows that he exists. . . . I esteemed the Book, or the information contained in it, more than all the riches of the world." [^3]

Apply the same principle as you read the pages engraved by Mormon, Nephi, or Jacob. When you read a page or a chapter from the engravings of Mormon, close the book, close your eyes, and then ask yourself: "What is there of such importance in this story that the prophet Mormon—who had a vision of me and my day, and who had such voluminous records at his disposal that he couldn't even record 'a hundredth part' of the total—would decide to include it in his abridged engravings?"

The Book of Mormon was written for us by prophets who had had visions of our day. In many ways, it is the most modern and timely of all our scriptures.

"And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them. And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation. Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people.

"Therefore I, Mormon, do write the things which have been commanded me of the Lord. And now I, Mormon, make an end of my sayings, and proceed to write the things which have been commanded me" (3 Nephi 26:6-12).

On other occasions the engravers indicated that they wrote on a particular subject, or related a particular incident, because the Lord had commanded them to do so (see 3 Nephi 23:7-14).

"And I pray the Father in the name of Christ that many of us, if not all, may be saved in his kingdom at that great and last day.

"And now, my beloved brethren, all those who are of the house of Israel, and all ye ends of the earth, I speak unto you as the voice of one crying from the dust: Farewell until that great day shall come.

"And you that will not partake of the goodness of God, and respect the words of the Jews [the Old Testament], and also my words [the Book of Mormon], and the words which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the Lamb of God [the New Testament], behold, I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these words shall condemn you at the last day. For what I seal on earth, shall be brought against you at the judgment bar; for thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must obey. Amen" (2 Nephi 33:10-15).

Jacob informs us that we will also meet him at the judgment seat of God. Note these words of caution: "O then, my beloved brethren, repent ye, and enter in at the strait gate, and continue in the way which is narrow, until ye shall obtain eternal life. O be wise; what can I say more? Finally, I bid you farewell, until I shall meet you before the pleasing bar of God, which bar striketh the wicked with awful dread and fear. Amen" (Jacob 6:11-13).

Mormon provided the following caution: "And these things doth the Spirit manifest unto me; therefore I write unto you all. And for this cause I write unto you, that ye may know that ye must all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, yea, every soul who belongs to the whole human family of Adam; and ye must stand to be judged of your works, whether they be good or evil; . . . and I would that I could persuade all ye ends of the earth to repent and prepare to stand before the judgment-seat of Christ" (Mormon 3:20, 21-22).

And finally Moroni adds his solemn warning: "And now I speak unto all the ends of the earth. . . . I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust? . . . And God shall show unto you, that that which I have written is true" (Moroni 10:24, 27, 29).

The Prophets of the Book of Mormon

In addition to the four engravers, many additional persons mentioned in the Book of Mormon might qualify for the title of "prophet." Just the Lehite portion of the record might well include the following persons, listed alphabetically:

Abinadi; Alma the elder; Alma the younger; Benjamin; Enos; Gidgiddoni; Helaman, the son of Alma; Helaman, the son of Helaman; Lehi, the father of Nephi; Lehi, the son of Helaman; Nephi, the son of Lehi; Nephi, the son of Helaman; Nephi, the son of Nephi, who was the son of Helaman; Nephi, after whom 4 Nephi is named; and Samuel the Lamanite.

Other great religious leaders and teachers of righteousness might also be included, such as Aaron; Ammon; Amulek; Himni; Jarom; Joseph, the son of Lehi; Lachoneus; Moroni, the righteous Nephite military commander; Mosiah; Omner; and Shiblon.

Even with this partial list, we should be aware that the number of prophets among the Lehite people in the lands of the Americas seem to exceed the number of prophets among the Kingdom of Judah during the same period of time. In making such a comparison, however, we should remember two salient facts: (1) our present Old Testament is incomplete, and many "plain and precious truths," including the words of many prophets, have been deleted; (2) our present Book of Mormon contains only a partial account of what was originally written of these prophets; the "sealed portion" of the plates of Mormon may include the names and teachings of many additional prophets.

Other prophets could be mentioned from the Jaredite account, including the brother of Jared. Still other prophets are quoted who belong to the period covered by the plates of brass, such as the prophets Ezias, Neum, Zenos, and Zenock.

The words of all of these prophets were engraved on the plates for us by engravers who were themselves prophets. Thus, for example, when the prophet Mormon quotes from the prophet Abinadi, whose writings are included in the records of the prophet Alma, we in a sense have a second or even third witness of these testimonies when they are included in this sacred scripture.

The Peoples of the Book of Mormon

Although many different peoples are identified in the Book of Mormon, I mention only a few of the major groups. The words Lamanite and Lamanites are used more frequently than any other name designating a particular people, appearing over 700 times in our present Book of Mormon. During the first 600 years or so of the history of the descendants of Lehi and his colony, the term Lamanite is used to refer to a descendant of Laman or, in a more general sense, as a descendant of those who remained with Laman during the great division of about 570 b.c. This usage continued to the time of Christ.

Then, for approximately 200 years (from about 34 a.d. to 231 a.d.), there were no "manner of -ites" among the people (4 Nephi 1:17). Finally, as the record indicates, "in the two hundred and thirty and first year, there was a great division among the people . . . and . . . they who rejected the gospel were called Lamanites. . . . And they were taught to hate the children of God, even as the Lamanites were taught to hate the children of Nephi from the beginning" (4 Nephi 1:35, 38-39).

The term Lamanite had a different meaning at the close of the Book of Mormon than it had near the beginning. We should keep this distinction in mind when we use the term Lamanite in our day to refer to the descendants of those mentioned at the close of the Book of Mormon.

The words Nephite and Nephites are the second most frequently used terms to designate a family group, appearing nearly 400 times in our present Book of Mormon. These terms refer to the descendants of Nephi and to the descendants of those who joined with Nephi in approximately 570 b.c. or who believed in the basic teachings of Nephi. Following the great division in 231 a.d., "there arose a people who were called the Nephites, and they were true believers in Christ" (4 Nephi 1:36).

The other family names coming from the original family of Lehi are the terms Lemuelites (found five times), Jacobites (listed four times), and Josephites (also listed four times). The word Samite does not appear a single time, nor is the term "the people of Sam" ever used. Perhaps the reason is provided in 2 Nephi 4:11:

"And after [Lehi] had made an end of speaking unto them, he spake unto Sam, saying: Blessed art thou, and thy seed; for thou shalt inherit the land like unto thy brother Nephi. And thy seed shall be numbered with his seed; and thou shalt be even like unto thy brother, and thy seed like unto his seed; and thou shalt be blessed in all thy days" (2 Nephi 4:11).

Two other terms are used quite extensively by members of the Church to refer to other major groupings of the Book of Mormon, but interestingly enough these terms are not used extensively within the Book of Mormon. For example, the word Jaredite appears only twice in the Book of Mormon (in Moroni 9:23 and in the introductory statement of the Book of Ether), and the term "people of Jared" is used only twice (in Moroni 1:1 and on the Book of Mormon title page). Perhaps it would be more accurate and consistent to use the term "people of Jared" as Moroni does in the title page of the Book of Mormon.

Some Book of Mormon readers might be surprised to learn that the words Mulekite and Mulekites do not appear a single time in the Book of Mormon. Indeed, the word Mulek appears only seventeen times: thirteen times to refer to a city, one time to refer to the land northward, and only three times to refer to a specific person (see Mosiah 25:2; Helaman 6:10; and Helaman 8:21).

However, the term "people of Zarahemla" is used fourteen times to refer to the people we often call Mulekites. Perhaps we should start using the term "people of Zarahemla" instead of the word "Mulekites" in referring to those people who left Jerusalem just a few years after the people of Lehi had departed from that city.

Such usage might keep us from saying that Mulek, the son of Zedekiah, was the leader of the colony at the time it left Jerusalem. Such a claim is not made within the Book of Mormon, and it is very unlikely that Mulek was the leader. Mulek is not mentioned in the Bible. However, we know from the Bible that Zedekiah, the vassal king of Judah and the father of Mulek, was only thirty-two years old when he was taken captive by the Babylonians at the time the city of Jerusalem was destroyed. Although Zedekiah's son Mulek was not taken captive to Babylon, he obviously was very young and probably was not the leader of the small colony of people that fled from Jerusalem to escape the Babylonians. Later, they were led by the Lord to the lands we now know of as the Americas. More than likely the young boy Mulek was taken by the colony to preserve his life and also to preserve the seed of Zedekiah.

The Book of Mormon also includes other names of peoples ending in the suffix "ite"; these designate groups were named after a particular powerful leader or after a noted progenitor. The names of the groups beginning with the letter A include Amalekites (eighteen times), Amalickiahites (four times), Amlicites (twenty-seven times), Ammonihahites (one time), Ammonites (two times), and Amulonites (seven times). Also, the term "Anti-Nephi-Lehies" is briefly used to describe the "people of Ammon."

Also, some groups were identified by particular characteristics, such as the "Gadianton robbers."

However, the major groups of people to keep in mind as you read the record are (1) the Lamanites, (2) the Nephites, (3) the people of Zarahemla (sometimes erroneously called the Mulekites), and (4) the people of Jared, sometimes called Jaredites.

The Purposes of the Book of Mormon

What is the purpose of the Book of Mormon? When asked that question, many Latter-day Saints respond by quoting from the title page of the Book of Mormon: "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ." This is just one of the major purposes of the Book of Mormon; there are several other very important purposes:

We often use the word "witness" to identify this purpose of the Book of Mormon, but I am convinced that the word "testament" is a stronger and more comprehensive word. I was living in Australia several years ago when the Brethren decided on the subtitle for the Book of Mormon, "Another Testament of Jesus Christ." I immediately went to the National Library in Perth, Australia, obtained the largest dictionary I could find, and traced the etymology of the word testament. I found that the current word came from middle English, which, in turn, came from late Latin, and then from an earlier Latin word that essentially means covenant. The Latin word is testari, which means "to be a witness." Then I found this intriguing explanation:

"TESTAMENT (Middle English from Late Latin from Latin)

"LL (Late Latin) testamentum—COVENANT. Translation of Greek diatheke, or covenant.

"L (Latin) last will from testari, to be a witness, make, a will . . . both from a prehistoric Italic compound, whose first and second constituents respectively are akin to L (Latin) tres three and L (Latin) stare to stand: from the witness standing by as a third party in a litigation—more at THREE, STAND."

All of us are acquainted with the principle taught by our Heavenly Father that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every truth will be established (see Deuteronomy 17:6, 2 Corinthians 13:1). I am convinced that the wording "Another Testament" was divinely inspired. In the roots of the word testament, we have the concepts of three, witness, testimony, and covenant.

Several biblical prophecies and statements—from both the Old Testament and New Testament—that pertain directly to the Book of Mormon or to the peoples of the Book of Mormon are listed in the Topical Guide under the heading "Book of Mormon" and in the Bible Dictionary under "Ephraim, Stick of" in the LDS edition of the Holy Bible.

Concerning the purpose of the Book of Mormon as another testament of the Bible, note these explanatory words of Mormon as to one of the reasons he prepared and wrote on the plates of Mormon:

"Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come from the Gentiles unto you. For behold, this is written for the intent that ye may believe that; and if ye believe that ye will believe this also" (Mormon 7:8-9).

Note again the emphasis by Mormon: "This [the Book of Mormon] is written for the intent that ye may believe that [the Bible]; and if ye believe that [the Bible] ye will believe this [the Book of Mormon] also."

These statements indicate that the Book of Mormon is indeed a witness for the Bible, and that the Bible is also a witness for the Book of Mormon.

Moroni, the last engraver on the plates of Mormon, also indicated the prophesied connection between these two volumes of scripture. I suspect Moroni 10:4 is the most frequently quoted single verse in the entire Book of Mormon. I am also convinced that it cannot be fully understood out of the context of the verse that precedes it and the verse that follows it. Note carefully the words of all three of these verses:

"Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

"And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:3-5).

Although "Bible" and "Book of Mormon" do not appear in these words by Moroni—these titles were not in use in the days of Moroni—a careful reading indicates that Moroni is saying in essence that you must accept the truthfulness of both these books if you study and ponder them in sincerity and truth. You cannot accept the truthfulness of one without accepting the other.

Notice the exhortation in verse 3 that after you read "these things" (the records of the Book of Mormon), you should remember "how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam . . . and ponder it [the way God has dealt with the children of men] in your hearts." In which of these two scriptures—the Bible or the Book of Mormon—do we read of the "creation of Adam"? The answer, of course, is the Bible. This information is not in the Book of Mormon. Indeed, this same Moroni, when he started his abridgment of the record of Ether, stated: "And as I suppose that the first part of this record, which speaks concerning the creation of the world, and also of Adam . . . is had among the Jews—Therefore I do not write those things which transpired from the days of Adam" (Ether 1:3-4).

Therefore in verse 3, Moroni is telling us we must read the Bible and ponder it in our hearts. Then, in verse 4, Moroni says that when we are ready to receive "these things"—including both the Bible and the Book of Mormon—we should "ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things [the Bible and the Book of Mormon] are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it [the Book of Mormon] unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost."

And then the clinching statement: "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things."

These testimonies are similar to the one given by President Brigham Young concerning this topic: "No man can say that this book (laying his hand on the Bible) is true . . . and at the same time say, that the Book of Mormon is untrue. . . . There is not that person on the face of the earth who has had the privilege of learning the Gospel of Jesus Christ from these two books, that can say that one is true, and the other is false. No Latter-day Saint, no man or woman, can say the Book of Mormon is true, and at the same time say that the Bible is untrue. If one be true, both are." [^4]

As the Book of Mormon title page states: "To show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever."

The Book of Mormon offers a knowledge of the Savior unto the remnants of the House of Israel through the testimony of the Nephites. This purpose of the Book of Mormon is concerned with the workings of the Lord with various groups within the House of Israel. Note the numerous references listed under the following topics in the Book of Mormon index: "Israel"; "Israel, Gathering Of"; "Israel, Scattering Of"; and "Israel, Ten Lost Tribes Of."

You might want to review the index and prepare a list of all the headings pertaining to the basic principles, doctrines, and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Then note the numerous references from the Book of Mormon pertaining to these topics. The Book of Mormon has made many contributions on such vital subjects as the atonement of Jesus Christ, baptism, becoming sons and daughters of Christ, being born again, the birth of Jesus, the devil, faith, the fall of Adam, final judgment, freedom, God, Israel, the Holy Ghost and Holy Spirit, and hope.

In addition, the Book of Mormon has contributed to our knowledge and understanding of Jesus Christ (as Jehovah, Messiah, Savior, Redeemer), joy and happiness, laws of mercy and justice, life after death, ministering of angels, miracles, priestcraft, prophets, redemption, resurrection, sanctification, scriptures, secret combinations, seers, service to fellowmen, status of little children who die without baptism, traditions, translated beings, and the tree of life.

The twenty related headings listed under "Judgment" in the index should indicate something about the importance of the Book of Mormon on these subjects.

The Book of Mormon offers many major messages for our time. Following is only a partial list of those messages that seem to have a modern application. In other words, the Book of Mormon provides information on these subjects that should help us solve serious problems and challenges we now face. Some of these pertain primarily to members of the Church, but most of them pertain to all mankind.

General Do's And Don'ts

Although the Book of Mormon was written by writers who lived hundreds of years ago, in many ways it is as timely as today's newspapers and magazines. One reason the Book of Mormon is so timely is that it was written by men who saw in vision the conditions of our day; therefore, they were able to write about today's problems even though they lived centuries ago. The following scriptures from the Book of Mormon clearly indicate that the four major writers of the sacred Nephite scripture knew a great deal about us and the problems of our time:

Nephi: 1 Nephi 9:1-6; 10-16 (especially 13:30-42 and 14:1-30); 2 Nephi 26:16-33; 27-33).

Jacob: 2 Nephi 6:8-15.

Mormon: Words of Mormon 1:1-9; Mormon 5:8-24; 7:1-10.

Moroni: Mormon 8:12-41; 9:1-37; Ether 4:1, 6; 12:38-39.

Here are some do's and don'ts that may help you in your serious study of the Book of Mormon:

Do's

Do become so well acquainted with the four major engravers and the two sets of plates translated by Joseph Smith that you can identify with the writers and their plates. You will then more easily and effectively "liken the scriptures" unto yourself.

Do learn all the names of the books of the Book of Mormon in the order in which they appear so you can easily locate the books and find references in them. The Book of Mormon contains only fifteen books (as compared with sixty-six books in the Bible—thirty-nine in the Old Testament and twenty-seven in the New Testament): 1 Nephi, 2 Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, Omni, Words of Mormon, Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, 3 Nephi, 4 Nephi, Mormon, Ether, and Moroni.

Do develop a personal, meaningful, workable, marking system. Use different colored pencils. You remember about 70 percent of what you do but only about 10 percent of what you read.

Do remember that this book is essentially a record of a group of Israelites; thus, relate what you know concerning the history, manner, customs, traditions, and language of the Israelites to the story of the descendants of Lehi and his colony.

One idea concerning the "language of the Israelites"—Hebrew—will help you understand many otherwise difficult grammatical constructions in the Book of Mormon. In Hebrew, the noun usually precedes any adjective or descriptive word pertaining to it. The Israelite says "morning good" rather than "good morning." Now note these examples taken only from the opening chapters of 1 Nephi: "altar of stones" (1 Nephi 2:5), "river of water" (1 Nephi 2:6), "waters of the river" (1 Nephi 2:9), "valley of Lemuel" (1 Nephi 2:14), "plates of brass" (1 Nephi 3:12).

Another interesting custom of the Israelites is that once a woman is married, she is considered to be part of her husband's family. She is usually not mentioned in her father's record. In the family record of Lehi, covering nearly 1,000 years and 500 pages, only three women belonging to these peoples are mentioned by name: Sariah, Abish, and Isabel (contrast with Joseph Smith-History 1:4).

Do become acquainted with the doctrinal teachings of the Book of Mormon. It contains the "fulness of the gospel" of salvation. In other words, it contains instructions on everything you need to know and do in order to return to the presence of God. As Joseph Smith said, "A man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." [^5]

Do pray about what you have read.

Do bear your testimony concerning its truthfulness.

Don'ts

Don't claim that the Book of Mormon is primarily a history book, or a book on archaeology or geography, or a book that tells everything about all the peoples who lived in all the lands of the Americas before the coming of Columbus. Limit your claims and purposes of the book to those of the original writers and engravers.

Don't become too concerned about the exact location of the various cities and lands mentioned in the Book of Mormon. You might want to become oriented to the general location of three or four of the major lands as described in the book—such as the lands of Nephi, Zarahemla, and Bountiful—but do not become so preoccupied with their exact location in relationship to current lands and cities that it diverts your attention from the major religious messages of the Book of Mormon.

Don't worry about trying to "prove" the Book of Mormon to others. The Book of Mormon contains its own proofs, which prove (1) the truthfulness of its teachings concerning the divinity of Jesus Christ and (2) the principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. As President Benson mentioned during the 1987 April general conference:

"We are not required to prove that the Book of Mormon is true or is an authentic record through external evidences—though there are many. It never has been the case, nor is it so now, that the studies of the learned will prove the Book of Mormon true or false. The origin, preparation, translation, and verification of the truth of the Book of Mormon have all been retained in the hands of the Lord, and the Lord makes no mistakes. You can be assured of that.

"God has built in His own proof system of the Book of Mormon as found in Moroni, chapter 10, and in the testimonies of the Three and the Eight Witnesses and in various sections of the Doctrine and Covenants.

"We each need to get our own testimony of the Book of Mormon through the Holy Ghost. Then our testimony, coupled with the Book of Mormon, should be shared with others so that they, too, can know through the Holy Ghost of its truthfulness." [^6]

Don't let critics or opponents of the Book of Mormon bother you with their challenges to "prove" the authenticity of the book. Remember the story of Korihor in Alma 30. The burden of proof is upon the critics, and they simply cannot prove the Book of Mormon is not true just as Korihor could not prove that God does not exist. "Ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6).

Don't let differences in the pronunciation of the names in the Book of Mormon by different people bother you. Many of these names are of Hebrew origin, and others, such as most of the names in the Book of Ether, come from an even earlier culture. Undoubtedly, at best, we are not pronouncing these names correctly according to their original pronunciation.

Don't become unduly concerned about the changes that have been made in the various editions and printings of the Book of Mormon. The 1981 edition is the most accurate of all, and is faithful to the printer's manuscript and to what we have of the dictated (or original) manuscript. No major doctrinal errors or changes have been made in any of the editions.

Don't let criticisms of the Book of Mormon by anti-LDS critics bother you even for one second, whether such criticisms are concerned with the critics' interpretation of the doctrines of the book or with any lack of so-called "archaeological evidences" that they may think they perceive. Invariably, their criticisms are without substance; they are a smoke screen to serve as a weak excuse and defense for their not having paid the price of reading the Book of Mormon and praying about its truthfulness.

To quote a parable by Hugh Nibley on Book of Mormon criticism may be helpful:

"A young man once long ago claimed he had found a large diamond in his field as he was ploughing. He put the stone on display to the public free of charge, and everyone took sides. A psychologist showed, by citing some famous case studies, that the young man was suffering from a well-known form of delusion. An historian showed that other men have also claimed to have found diamonds in fields and been deceived. A geologist proved that there were no diamonds in the area but only quartz: the young man had been fooled by a quartz. When asked to inspect the stone itself, the geologist declined with a weary, tolerant smile and a kindly shake of the head. An English professor showed that the young man in describing his stone used the very same language that others had used in describing uncut diamonds: he was, therefore, simply speaking the common language of his time. A sociologist showed that only three out of 177 florists' assistants in four major cities believed the stone was genuine. A clergyman wrote a book to show that it was not the young man but someone else who had found the stone.

"Finally an indigent jeweler named Snite pointed out that since the stone was still available for examination the answer to the question of whether it was a diamond or not had absolutely nothing to do with who found it, or whether the finder was honest or sane, or who believed him, or whether he would know a diamond from a brick, or whether diamonds had ever been found in fields, or whether people had ever been fooled by quartz or glass, but was to be answered simply and solely by putting the stone to certain well-known tests for diamonds. Experts on diamonds were called in. Some of them declared it genuine. The others made nervous jokes about it and declared that they could not very well jeopardize their dignity and reputations by appearing to take the thing too seriously. To hide the bad impression thus made, someone came out with the theory that the stone was really a synthetic diamond, very skillfully made, but a fake just the same. The objection to this is that the production of a good synthetic diamond [157] years ago would have been an even more remarkable feat than the finding of a real one." [^7]

This story has many morals. The Book of Mormon is a spiritual diamond. Our challenge to the critics should be to apply the spiritual tests to see whether it is a real genuine diamond; in other words, the critics should read it, compare its teachings with those of the Bible, and pray about it.

Specific Hints and Helps

Now for some specific hints and helps as you read and ponder the Book of Mormon:

"And thus it is. Amen" (1 Nephi 14:30) and "And thus we see" (1 Nephi 16:29; 17:3). Nephi, Jacob, Mormon, and Moroni use these expressions to reinforce a major point they have just made.

Of course, these suggestions are useless unless we read and reread the Book of Mormon. Here are a few ideas that might help you in your resolve to make study of the Book of Mormon a lifetime pursuit and to make this study more effective. Just start where you are.

"And I said unto them: If God had commanded me to do all things I could do them. If he should command me that I should say unto this water, be thou earth, it should be earth; and if I should say it, it would be done. And now, if the Lord has such great power, and has wrought so many miracles among the children of men, how is it that he cannot instruct me, that I should build a ship?" (1 Nephi 17:50-51).

President Brigham Young asked, "Do you read the Scriptures, my brethren and sisters, as though you were writing them a thousand, two thousand, or five thousand years ago? Do you read them as though you stood in the place of the men who wrote them? If you do not, . . . it is your privilege to do so." [^8]

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1833 edition—published under the title A Book of Commandments; consisted of sixty-five chapters. They were personal witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ during the time they lived upon the earth. Use the latest edition—one published at least since 1981—and become acquainted with its many learning, teaching, and studying aids. The literal fatherhood of God (and thus the brotherhood and sisterhood of us all). Nature of God. Nature of God and the Godhead. Doctrines of Salvation, 3:198.
[^2] 1835 edition—consisted of 102 sections and seven Lectures on Faith. The sections of the current edition that were published in the 1835 edition include sections 1, 3-12, 14-76, 78-84, 86, 88-102, 104, 106-107, 133-134. They were visited and tutored by angels or translated beings. Develop a meaningful marking and cross-referencing system for the Doctrine and Covenants. The plan of eternal progression and eventual godhood. Mission and atonement of Jesus Christ. Relationship of Jesus Christ to God the Father. Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 22:146.
[^3] 1844 edition—consisted of 111 sections and the Lectures on Faith. They were directed by Jesus Christ as to what they should put in their records. Relate the things you learn in the Doctrine and Covenants to similar teachings in the other scriptures. The reality of pre-earthly and postmortal existence. Concept of "eternity to eternity." Nature of man (purpose of existence). History of the Church, 1:222.
[^4] 1876 edition—consisted of 136 sections and the Lectures on Faith. This edition included this statement: "First issued, as divided into chapters and verses, by Orson Pratt." Concerning the revelations in this edition, Elder Joseph F. Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve proposed the following at the October 1880 general conference: "I move that we receive and accept the revelations contained in these books, as revelations from God to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Saints, and to all the world." [^6] The motion was accepted unanimously. They had visions of our day, and they provided material especially for us. Liken the scriptures unto yourself. Relationship of laws and blessings (and punishments). Purposes of a mortal existence. Baptism by water (authority, method, necessity, words of baptismal prayer). Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), 59, 4.
[^5] 1879 edition—consisted of 136 sections and the Lectures on Faith. This was the first edition "issued with footnotes." Ask for assistance from the Holy Ghost in understanding these revelations and principles. The nature of an "opposition in all things." Principles and ordinances of the gospel leading to the celestial kingdom. Baptism of Holy Ghost (confirmation). Institute Self-Instruction Course (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints), 51.
[^6] 1921 edition—consisted of 136 sections and the first Official Declaration but did not include the Lectures on Faith. "First published in double-column pages, with new section headings, revised footnote references, and index." Learn the principles of life contained in this book of scripture and live them. Vital necessity of agency. Principles and ordinances of the gospel leading to eternal life in the presence of God. Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (purpose of emblems). Joseph F. Smith, "Fiftieth Semi-annual Conference," Millennial Star, 42 (15 November 1880): 724.
[^7] 1981 edition—This is the latest edition, although some printings have been published since 1981. This edition is noted for its revised and expanded section headings, a great increase in the number of footnote references, a greatly expanded and enlarged index, and the addition of two new sections (137 and 138) and Official Declaration—2. Love. Extent and nature of Christ's atonement. Ezra Taft Benson, "The Gift of Modern Revelation," Ensign, November 1986, 79-80.
[^8] Scriptures (place or purpose, extent, literalness, and interpretation of). Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants," Ensign, May 1987, 83, 85.
