Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 6

How to Get the Most from Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants

The Doctrine and Covenants is one of the most important books on earth. Of this book, President Joseph Fielding Smith said, "In my judgment there is no book on earth yet come to man as important as the book known as the Doctrine and Covenants." [^1]

This agrees with the appraisal of President Wilford Woodruff, who said, "I consider that the Doctrine and Covenants, our Testament, contains a code of the most solemn, the most Godlike proclamations ever made to the human family." [^2]

I add my testimony of the value of the Doctrine and Covenants to those of the Brethren. I know it is one of the five most important books on earth—joined by the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price.

What Is the Doctrine and Covenants?

Primarily, the Doctrine and Covenants is a book of revelations. Most of the sections contain direct revelations from God to his prophets (primarily Joseph Smith), but other sections contain information derived from revelations, such as answers to scriptural questions (sections 77 and 113), items of instruction (sections 130 and 131), letters (sections 127 and 128), inspired translation of earlier scripture (section 7), and prayers, including the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple (sections 13, 65, and 109).

Both the preface (section 1) and the appendix (section 133) were received by revelation, although they were given for a specific purpose. Other sections are almost pure prophecy (sections 87 and 121), while others include the minutes of a high council meeting (section 102), a declaration of belief concerning government (section 134), historical information on the martyrdom of Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum (section 135), and instructions concerning the organization of the Saints for migration to the West (section 136). The Doctrine and Covenants also contains two official declarations. "Official Declaration—1" (the Manifesto) concerns the cessation of polygamy, and "Official Declaration—2" discusses the priesthood being given to all worthy male members. Both declarations were also received by revelation given to the prophet at that time and then individually approved by the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and later by the membership of the Church.

Have any sections been added to the Doctrine and Covenants since the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith except for sections 135, 136, 137, and 138, and the first and second Official Declarations? Yes. Sections 2, 13, 77, 85, 87, 103, 105, and 108 through 132 were not published in the 1835 edition (some of them had not even been received by that time) but were published in later editions after being accepted by the Church as canonized scripture.

What Is the Relationship of Our Present Doctrine and Covenants to the Publication Called A Book of Commandments?

A brief history of A Book of Commandments is necessary to answer this question. Soon after Joseph Smith received some of the early revelations, members of the Church or other inquiring individuals were naturally interested in knowing exactly what the revelations said. Often the revelations were written down and circulated, even if they were given primarily for the benefit of a particular person or group of people. The revelations were treated much the same way as patriarchal blessings might be recorded and distributed today, even though they are for the personal benefit and instruction of the person receiving the blessing.

In time, copies of several of the revelations were in circulation, and, as would be normal, some persons started to make a collection of these revelations. Missionaries traveling away from the headquarters of the Church particularly were interested in having complete and correct copies of these revelations, particularly if the revelations could assist them in their missionary efforts.

Because of a growing interest in and demand for the revelations, the matter of their possible publication received special attention at a conference of the Church held during November 1831. A specific request was made of the Lord, and sections 1 and 133 were received during the conference as a result. After a vote by the members at the conference, the Church proceeded with the publication of sixty-five of the revelations in a book to be titled A Book of Commandments.

At this special conference at Hiram, Ohio, on November 1, 1831, just nineteen months after the organization of the Church, the Lord gave a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith that the Lord said was to serve as "my preface unto the book of my commandments" (D&C 1:6). The History of the Church contains the following account from the Far West Record:

During the afternoon of November 1, "Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., said that inasmuch as the Lord has bestowed a great blessing upon us in giving commandments and revelations, he asked the conference what testimony they were willing to attach to these commandments which would shortly be sent to the world. A number of the brethren arose and said that they were willing to testify to the world that they knew that they were of the Lord."

During the second day's proceedings, "The revelation of last evening read by the moderator [this was Oliver Cowdery]. The brethren then arose in turn and bore witness to the truth of the Book of Commandments; after which Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., arose and expressed his feelings and gratitude concerning the commandments and preface received yesterday." [^3]

Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were given the responsibility of taking the selected sixty-five revelations to Jackson County, Missouri, where they were to be printed by the W. W. Phelps and Company printing press. Initially ten thousand copies were to be printed; this was later changed to three thousand copies.

A number of copies of all sixty-five chapters had been printed—but none bound into books—when, on July 20, 1833, a mob destroyed the press and most of the printed chapters. The book, however, was subsequently published but was never made widely available. The title page stated: "A Book of Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ, organized According to Law, on the 6th of April, 1830. Published by W. W. Phelps & Co., 1833."

This was the forerunner of the book now known as the Doctrine and Covenants.

What Is the Significance of the Words Doctrine and Covenants?

Smith and Sjodahl briefly explained the meaning of these words in their Doctrine andCovenants Commentary:

"The doctrine of the Lord is that, 'Whosoever repenteth and cometh unto me, the same is [of] my church.'" The term covenant, meanwhile, "signifies the settled arrangement between God and man, whereby the eternal Father undertakes to save His children. This arrangement is also called His 'oath,' His 'counsel,' and His 'promise' (Psalm 89:3, 4; Hebrews 6:13-20)." [^4]

The Institute Self-Instruction Course on the Doctrine and Covenants adds:

"DOCTRINE: Gospel teachings or positions which have such general acceptance as to be considered settled and therefore authoritative; statements of the fundamental revealed message of salvation through Jesus Christ; gospel truths; the system of principles, rules, and laws under which the Church operates.

"The instructional aspect of the gospel through which one may come to know God and eternal truths respecting the purpose of life and the means of salvation.

"COVENANTS: The revealed terms and conditions upon which a person may qualify himself to receive promised blessings from God through entering into agreements to be obedient; a binding contract or mutual promise between God and man; the revealed conditional promises of the Lord.

"The operational or practical side of living the gospel by those who have faith in God's promises and are willing to agree to live his way in order to achieve the promised blessings." [^5]

What Is the Relationship of the Present Edition of the Doctrine and Covenants to All the Earlier Major English Editions?

Usually only six major editions are listed in English: 1833, 1835, 1844, 1876, 1921, and 1981, but sometimes the 1879 edition is also listed because that edition used footnotes for the first time. Here is a rundown on the various English-language editions:

What Is the Relationship of the Doctrine and Covenants to the Other Canonized Scriptures of the Church?

In answering this question, we might also provide answers to such questions as "Who is the author of the Doctrine and Covenants" and "Why is a study of the Doctrine and Covenants so important today?"

The Doctrine and Covenants is unique among the standard works of the Church. It was revealed in this dispensation and is intended almost entirely for people who will live on the earth during this dispensation.

The Old Testament was revealed to prophets in ancient times primarily to prepare the people of those days for the first coming of the Savior. Gospel principles in the Old Testament, of course, are beneficial and instructive for all people of all ages.

The New Testament was written as a witness and testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ, and as such it is important for all people of all times. The latter part of the New Testament, however, consists of letters and other instructions concerned primarily with the branches and members of the Church in the meridian of time.

The Book of Mormon was written and compiled by prophets in ancient times but is primarily intended for people of this dispensation as an additional witness of the Bible and of the divinity of Jesus Christ.

The Pearl of Great Price contains writings and teachings of ancient prophets as well as the history and testimony of Joseph Smith and doctrinal instructions by other prophets of this dispensation.

More than any other canonized scriptures, the Doctrine and Covenants has largely been revealed to and written by the prophets of this dispensation for the instruction and edification of the people of this time.

The Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon

Many of us are aware of the emphasis placed by President Ezra Taft Benson on reading the Book of Mormon. Fewer of us, however, are aware of the strong emphasis he has placed on reading, pondering, and living the teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants. For example, President Benson made the following statements concerning the Doctrine and Covenants in the 1986 October general conference of the Church:

"I would like to speak particularly about the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. . . .

"Each of these two books of modern scripture contains a powerful proclamation to the world. The Book of Mormon title page declares its purpose is threefold: to show what great things the Lord has done, to teach of the covenants of the Lord, and to convince both Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ.

"Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants is the Lord's preface to the book. The Doctrine and Covenants is the only book in the world that has a preface written by the Lord himself. In that preface He declares to the world that His voice is unto all men (see v. 2), that the coming of the Lord is nigh (see v. 12), and that the truths found in the Doctrine and Covenants will all be fulfilled (see vs. 37-38).

"Each of these two great latter-day scriptures bears powerful and eloquent witness of the Lord Jesus Christ. Virtually every page of both the Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon teaches about the Master—His great love for His children and His atoning sacrifice—and teaches us how to live so that we can return to Him and our Heavenly Father.

"Each of these two great latter-day books of scripture contains the knowledge and the power to help us live better lives in a time of great wickedness and evil. Those who carefully and prayerfully search the pages of these books will find comfort, counsel, guidance, and the quiet power to improve their lives."

President Benson then quoted President Joseph Fielding Smith concerning the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants: "'If we will put them into practice, if we will keep the commandments of the Lord, we will know the truth and there shall be no weapon formed against us that shall prosper. There shall be no false doctrines, no teaching of men that will deceive us. . . . If we will search these revelations then we will be fortified against errors and we will be made strong' (in Conference Report, Oct. 1931, p. 17)."

Then President Benson provides us with an inspired interpretation of Moses 7:61: "Many years before the coming of the Savior to this earth, the prophet Enoch saw the latter days. He observed the great wickedness that would prevail on the earth at this time and foretold the 'great tribulations' that would result from such wickedness; but in the midst of what was otherwise a very gloomy prophecy, the Lord promised, 'But my people will I preserve' (Moses 7:61). How would He do so? Note what the Lord Himself promised He would do to preserve His people. He said:

"'And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; . . . and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare' (Moses 7:62; italics added)."

President Benson continues: "The Lord promised, therefore, that righteousness would come from heaven and truth out of the earth. We have seen the marvelous fulfillment of that prophecy in our generation. The Book of Mormon has come forth out of the earth, filled with truth, serving as the very 'keystone of our religion.' . . . God has also sent down righteousness from heaven. The Father Himself appeared with His Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The angel Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James, and numerous other angels were directed by heaven to restore the necessary powers to the kingdom. Further, the Prophet Joseph Smith received revelation after revelation from the heavens during those first critical years of the Church's growth. These revelations have been preserved for us in the Doctrine and Covenants.

"These two great works of scripture, then, become a major tool in the Lord's hand for preserving His people in the latter days. . . . The Doctrine and Covenants is a glorious book of scripture given directly to our generation. It contains the will of the Lord for us in these last days that precede the second coming of Christ. It contains many truths and doctrines not fully revealed in other scripture. Like the Book of Mormon, it will strengthen those who carefully and prayerfully study from its pages." [^7]

The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants were again on the mind of President Benson during the April 1987 general conference of the Church: "The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants testify of each other. You cannot believe one and not the other. . . . The Doctrine and Covenants is the binding link between the Book of Mormon and the continuing work of the Restoration through the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors.

"In the Doctrine and Covenants we learn of temple work, eternal families, the degrees of glory, Church organization, and many other great truths of the Restoration. . . . The Book of Mormon brings men to Christ. The Doctrine and Covenants brings men to Christ's kingdom, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 'the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth' (v. 30). I know that.

"The Book of Mormon is the 'keystone' of our religion, and the Doctrine and Covenants is the capstone, with continuing latter-day revelation. The Lord has placed His stamp of approval on both the keystone and the capstone. . . .

"God bless us all to use all the scriptures, but in particular the instrument He designed to bring us to Christ—the Book of Mormon, the keystone of our religion—along with its companion volume, the capstone, the Doctrine and Covenants, the instrument to bring us to Christ's kingdom, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . .

"I promise you that as you more diligently study modern revelation on gospel subjects, your power to teach and preach will be magnified." [^8]

Reasons for Reading the Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon

One reason we should read the Book of Mormon is that Jesus Christ is its author. The word author means "to bring about" or "to be responsible for." Sometimes Joseph Smith is thought of as the author of the Book of Mormon, and he was even listed in the first edition of the Book of Mormon as the author and proprietor. However, this wording was simply to meet the requirement of the copyright law in effect at that time. Joseph Smith's contribution to the Book of Mormon was tremendous, but he was its translator, not its author.

Nor was Mormon its author, although he provided us with 338 pages of the present 531 pages in the Book of Mormon. However, he mentioned that most of his writings were really abridgements or condensations of much more voluminous records. Also, Mormon did not write a single word in the books of 1 Nephi, 2 Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, and Omni. Nor did he write the last 50 pages in our present Book of Mormon; these are primarily the words of Moroni, although he did include a few items written by his father. Mormon, therefore, could not be listed as the author of the entire book. Nor could Nephi, who engraved the first 117 pages; nor could Jacob, who engraved the next 19 pages; nor could Moroni, who provided us with the last 50 pages. If only one person could be listed as the author of the Book of Mormon, that person would need to be Jesus Christ.

The same thing is also true concerning the Doctrine and Covenants. In fact, even a much higher percentage of the Doctrine and Covenants came directly from the Lord himself.

All revelations come from the Lord. The apostle Peter said that prophecy "came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Peter 1:21). The same might also be said of revelation. When a person reads the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants, he is literally reading the mind and will of the Lord as given through his prophets.

Concerning this principle, Elder John A. Widtsoe has written: "The Giver of all the revelations is Jesus Christ. The God spoken of in the Doctrine and Covenants is Jesus of Nazareth. Apparently the Father does not speak in them. He speaks through his Son. It is a fundamental doctrine of Mormonism that God the Father has commissioned his Son Jesus Christ to do certain work. He is the one that looks after the affairs of this earth, and all things pertaining to the Church are done by him. God the Father has appeared very few times upon the earth, at the beginning of the dispensations. He appeared in the Garden of Eden. He spoke out of heaven at the time of the Savior's baptism. He appeared in the grove to the Prophet Joseph Smith." [^9]

Do we really believe this truth, that Jesus Christ is the actual author of the Doctrine and Covenants? If so, we will not have any difficulty reading and pondering this sacred scripture.

As mentioned in chapter 5, except for the 71/2 pages comprising the small books of Enos, Jarom, and Omni, the remainder of the Book of Mormon was written or engraved by Nephi (117 pages), Jacob (19 pages), Mormon (338 pages), or Moroni (50 pages). Chapter 5 also outlined some of the major characteristics of these persons. As you review these major characteristics, attributes, and experiences, reflect on how many of these also apply to Joseph Smith and therefore also have application to the Doctrine and Covenants:

All of these reasons for reading the Book of Mormon also apply to reading the Doctrine and Covenants. Joseph Smith was a personal witness of Jesus Christ. He was tutored by angels. He was directed by Jesus Christ as to what he should include in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Obviously the Doctrine and Covenants was written for us in our day. Indeed, it was revealed in our day; for English-speaking members of the Church, it was revealed in their native tongue. The Doctrine and Covenants is not translated so far as English is concerned.

How to Get the Most from Our Study of the Doctrine and Covenants

The following suggestions will help us get the most out of our study of the Doctrine and Covenants:

The latest edition includes new and enlarged section headings, more voluminous footnotes and cross-references, and an extensive index that provides a list of the major scriptures for hundreds of gospel topics.

Editions of the Doctrine and Covenants published since 1981 feature:

a. Title page. Note the statement, "With some additions by his successors in the presidency of the Church."

b. "Explanatory Introduction" (three pages), including the "Testimony of the Twelve Apostles to the Truth of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants."

At a general assembly held in Kirtland, Ohio, in August 1835, further consideration was given to the publication of some of the revelations received by Joseph Smith. Many persons bore individual testimonies that they knew the revelations were true and represented the mind and will of the Lord. W. W. Phelps then read a written testimony of the Twelve, which follows:

"The Testimony of the Witnesses to the Book of the Lord's Commandments, which commandments He gave to His Church through Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose:

"We, therefore, feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of the earth, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men and are verily true.

"We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, in the which we rejoice exceedingly, praying the Lord always that the children of men may be profited thereby."

"The names of the Twelve were:

Thomas B. Marsh Orson Hyde William Smith

David W. Patten Wm. E. McLellin Orson Pratt

Brigham Young Parley P. Pratt John F. Boynton

Heber C. Kimball Luke S. Johnson Lyman E. Johnson"

This testimony has been included in every copy of the Doctrine and Covenants ever published. In the 1835 edition, the testimony was published on page 256 as part of the minutes of the general assembly of August 17, 1835, without the printed names of the individual members of the Quorum of the Twelve.

Subsequently, it was decided to publish the testimony on a separate page near the front of the volume, and to add the names of the Twelve "in the order in which they stood in the quorum." [^10]

c. "Chronological Order of Contents" (two pages). Note the location of the section entries and the date of the revelation or event.

d. Section headings or headnotes. Headings have been greatly enlarged and are more complete. For example, the heading to section 78 explains that this section no longer contains the "code names" originally used to protect the identity of individuals named in this revelation.

e. Section summaries or subheadings. These additions are very helpful, especially on longer sections.

f. Footnotes and cross-references. The footnotes have been greatly increased and offer thorough cross-referencing to the other standard works.

g. Sections 137 and 138. These sections were officially added to the Doctrine and Covenants after first appearing as supplements to the Pearl of Great Price.

h. Official Declaration—1. This declaration contains excerpts from three addresses by President Wilford Woodruff.

i. Official Declaration—2. This declaration appeared for the first time in the 1981 edition and includes a letter signed by the First Presidency and read in general conference by President N. Eldon Tanner.

j. Four new maps. These maps are of the New England area, New York-Ohio area, Missouri-Illinois area, and the United States in 1847.

k. Index to the triple combination. The index was expanded to 416 pages.

An effective marking and cross-referencing system will help you become more involved with the scriptures. Make certain any marking system you develop is relevant and has meaning for you.

Another valuable contribution of the Doctrine and Covenants is that it serves as an inspired commentary on some of the other scriptures. Note, for example, how much more we know about the following topics because of the contributions of the Doctrine and Covenants:

a. Isaiah—section 113.

b. Malachi and Elijah—sections 2 and 110:13-16.

c. John, the beloved disciple (John 21)—section 7.

d. Preaching the gospel to the dead (1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6)—section 138.

e. Book of Revelation—section 77.

f. The Apocrypha—section 91.

g. The parable of the wheat and tares (Matthew 13:24-30)—sections 86:1-11 and 101:65-67.

h. The parable of the ten virgins (Matthew 25:1-13)—sections 45:56-59 and 63:54.

i. Husbands, wives, little children ("as an explanation of 1 Corinthians 7:14")—section 74.

j. Degrees of glory (John 5:29)—section 76.

One of the most valuable suggestions I could give concerning your study of the Doctrine and Covenants is that you liken each of the pertinent revelations to yourself.

Let me share with you a suggestion I received from Elder Rex D. Pinegar concerning this principle while I was serving as a mission president in Australia. Elder Pinegar suggested that whenever you found a scripture containing a great truth directed to an individual you cross out the name of the individual and write in your own name. As an example, in Doctrine and Covenants 8:1, cross out the name "Oliver Cowdery"; then write in your own name and reread verses 1-5, applying the principles that pertain to your own salvation.

Let's review a few other sections to see how this principle might work:

Section:

3, especially verses 9-10 (write in your name for "Joseph").

8, especially verses 1-3.

23, especially verses 1 and 6 (write in your name for "Oliver" in verse 1 and for "Joseph Knight" in verse 6).

30, especially verses 1-2 (write in your name for "David").

39, especially verses 7-8 (write in your name for "James").

50, especially verses 13-14, 17 (write in your name at the beginning of verse 13).

64, especially verses 8-10, 32-33 (write in your name at the beginning of verse 8).

Things of the Spirit are known only by the power of the Spirit. Many spiritual truths in the Doctrine and Covenants can only be fully understood and appreciated through the promptings and guidance of the Holy Spirit. Of course, the guiding influence of the Spirit should be earnestly sought whenever we read any of the scriptures or study any of the principles or ordinances of the gospel.

This is perhaps the most important suggestion of all—and perhaps the most difficult to apply. The Doctrine and Covenants is similar to the other scriptures in that it is like a great treasure house with many rooms. Each room contains a precious treasure that can help you in your personal life. However, all of the rooms are locked, and you can unlock them only with the keys of experience and understanding. You should not read the Doctrine and Covenants the way you read novels, magazines, or newspapers; rather, you should ponder and meditate upon each section and, in some instances, on almost each verse.

The Teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants

One essential key to use in our study is to become well acquainted with some of the major teachings in the Doctrine and Covenants, especially with verses that make a primary contribution to our understanding of particular principles, ordinances, policies, or practices.

The "Grandest" Principle of the Gospel

While doing research on a different topic, I discovered a very interesting article that appeared in an old Contributor magazine in August 1895. A letter addressed to readers indicated that "the Young Men's and Young Ladies' M.I.A. of the Twentieth Ward" had invited people to respond to the following question: "What, in your opinion, constitutes the grandest principle, or the most attractive feature of the Gospel?"

The issue published several answers. For example, Brother Henry W. Naisbitt wrote: "I respectfully submit that the grandest principle revealed in this dispensation was that of the personality of Deity, in connection with the old yet ever essential Fatherhood of God."

Brother George Reynolds then indicated: "What feature of the Gospel is most attractive to us individually depends largely on our own peculiar mental makeup. We view things from our particular standpoint, and from that standpoint judge them. To me there is no principle of the Gospel more attractive than that which assures me, I am a son of God literally and truly, with all the possibilities within my reach of becoming like my great Father; and that all mankind are like me, His children, his sons and daughters."

Brother T. B. Lewis suggested: "I consider marriage for time and eternity the grandest principle, or the most attractive feature of the Gospel."

Brother David McKenzie provided another answer: "The principle of Love stands pre-eminent. . . . Surely love must be the 'most attractive feature,' although it may not technically be called a 'principle of the Gospel.'"

George G. Bywater included several of these ideas in his answer: "In accordance with this postulate, the grandest principle or the most attractive feature of the Gospel must be sought for in man as the crowning work of the Creator. Love is the crowning attribute of God and man."

Brother Thomas Hull made similar expressions: "As I reflect upon the many grand principles thereof, there opens up before my vision, the glorious prospect of man's destiny, his likeness of God, eternal progression, endless lives, and there whispers to my soul, in tones of softest, sweetest melody, the voice of God, in constant and immediate revelation, guiding ever in the way of life. The principle of eternal covenants rises before me, binding us to eternity." [^11]

Interestingly enough, if we analyze these "grandest" principles of the gospel, we will note that in each instance the Doctrine and Covenants contributes more to our understanding concerning these principles than any of the other scriptures. In most instances the Doctrine and Covenants contributes more than all of the other scriptures combined.

Let's review again the "grandest" principles listed by the respondents:

These grand principles are essentially the same truths we need to know and implement in our lives in order to achieve eternal life—the greatest gift of God to man. Before we can fully understand or appreciate the blessings of eternal life, we must understand these truths:

Doctrinal Differences between Christian Groups

Another technique I use to determine the value of the teachings in the Doctrine and Covenants is to consider the important areas of doctrinal differences between and among the various Christian groups. Reflect in your mind on the contributions of the Doctrine and Covenants to the varied Christian beliefs related to each of these areas:

List of Important Items from the Topical Guide

In reviewing all 3,495 items in the Topical Guide of the LDS edition of the Bible, I made an alphabetical list of those topics on which the Doctrine and Covenants makes a significant contribution—usually a contribution that equals the contribution of all the other scriptures. Then I prepared a similar alphabetical list from the Index in the triple combination through the letter "c" to illustrate the tremendous contribution of the Doctrine and Covenants. I include here only a few selected topics from both of the extensive lists I generated. Again, reflect upon some of the great contributions the Doctrine and Covenants makes in these areas. Also, you might want to complete on your own "Items from the Index" list from "D" through "Z" in order to develop your own appreciation of the contribution of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Items Pertaining to the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the Kingdom of God on Earth and in Heaven that Are Emphasized in the Doctrine and CovenantsSignificant Topics—and Related Sections in the Doctrine and Covenants

Following are possible topics and verses from the Doctrine and Covenants to emphasize and enlarge upon. I provide here only a few examples, encouraging you to prepare a similar, more detailed list of your own.

A

Aaronic Priesthood: 13

B

Baptism: 20:37; 71-74; 33:11-12

Baptism for the Dead: 127; 128; 137; 138:33; 1 Corinthians 15:29

C

Called, Chosen: 121:34-40

Church, one True: 1:30

D

Death: 42:45-47

Degrees of Glory: 76In the Resurrection: 88:15-32 (especially 25-28)

E

Eternal (and Endless) Punishment: 19:6-12

G

Gethsemane Experience: 19:16-18

God Seen Only by those Who Have Been Quickened: 67:11-13

God's Voice or Servants' Voice—the same: 1:38; 18:33-36; 68:4 (will, mind, word, voice, power)

H

Holy Ghost (Godhead): 130:22

I

Instruction Items: 129; 130; 131; 137 (One-Verse Sermons: 6:7; 11:21)

K

Kingdom of God and Heaven: 65:6

L

Last Days: 45, 133

Law: 88:34-38

M

Marriage: 49:15-17

Millennium: 29:7-11

N

New Jerusalem: 84:1-4

O

Official Declarations 1 and 2 (Principle of Continuous Revelation)

P

Parables—Explanation of Earlier: 101

Postmortal Spirit World: 138

Prayer "that is expedient for you": 88:64

Pre-earthly Existence: 93:29-38

Priesthood: 107

Duties of: 20:38

History of: 84:6

Principles of Life: 88:117-126

Prophets: 117:4, 6

R

Repentance and Forgiveness: 58:42-43

Reproving: 121:41-43

S

Sacrament—of the Lord's Supper: 20:75-79; 27:1-2

Sons of Perdition: 76:31-47

Soul of Man—Worth of: 88:15-16

Spirit World: 138

T

Testimony of Jesus Christ: 76:22-24

Thoughts: 6:16 (33:1); 9:9; 33:1; 88:109

V

Voice of God: 18:33-36

W

War in Heaven: 29:36

Word of Wisdom: 89

Worth of Souls: 18:15-16

Z

Zion: 105:5-6

Importance of All the Scriptures

Scripture might be defined as the will, mind, word, or voice of God revealed to man (see D&C 68:4). In this sense, scripture could be spoken or written. However, some scripture has been written down and accepted as official canon by members of the Church. As such, it is part of the scriptures or standard works of the Church.

Several latter-day prophets, seers, and revelators have testified of the importance of the scriptures:

Elder Boyd K. Packer said: "If [you] are acquainted with the revelations, there is no question—personal or social or political or occupational—that need go unanswered. Therein is contained the fulness of the everlasting gospel. Therein we find principles of truth that will resolve every confusion and every problem and every dilemma that will face the human family or any individual in it." [^12]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: "I think that people who study the scriptures get a dimension to their life that nobody else gets and that can't be gained in any way except by studying the scriptures. There's an increase in faith and a desire to do what's right and a feeling of inspiration and understanding that comes to people who study the gospel—meaning particularly the standard works—and who ponder the principles, that can't come in any other way." [^13]

President Harold B. Lee said: "I say that we need to teach our people to find their answers in the scriptures. If only each of us would be wise enough to say that we aren't able to answer any question unless we can find a doctrinal answer in the scriptures! And if we hear someone teaching something that is contrary to what is in the scriptures, each of us may know whether the things spoken are false—it is as simple as that. But the unfortunate thing is that so many of us are not reading the scriptures. We do not know what is in them, and therefore we speculate about the things that we ought to have found in the scriptures themselves. I think that therein is one of our biggest dangers of today." [^14]

President Lee also said: "Are you . . . continually increasing your testimony by diligent study of the scriptures? Do you have a daily habit of reading the scriptures? If we're not reading the scriptures daily, our testimonies are growing thinner, our spirituality isn't increasing in depth. We, ourselves, must be studying the scriptures and have a daily habit." [^15]

President Spencer W. Kimball said: "I find that when I get casual in my relationships with divinity and when it seems that no divine ear is listening and no divine voice is speaking, that I am far, far away. If I immerse myself in the scriptures the distance narrows and the spirituality returns." [^16]

A study of the scriptures will help us feel closer to God. An understanding of the scriptures will bring additional power and blessings into our lives.

Why Is the Principle of Continuous Revelation So Basic to All the Teachings and Claims of the Church?

The principle of continuous revelation is basic not only to the Doctrine and Covenants but also to the very existence of the Church. We proclaim to the world in the ninth Article of Faith:

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." In ancient times, the Lord said through his prophet Amos, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7). And in the New Testament we read that Jesus Christ is "the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever" (Hebrews 13:8).

Inspired prophets of this dispensation have indicated that the "rock" upon which the Church at the time of Christ was built was really "the rock of revelation" (as described in Matthew 16:18). As stated again and again, revelation is the lifeblood of the Church.

In his inspiring talk in the April 1977 general conference titled "Revelation: The Word of the Lord to His Prophets," President Spencer W. Kimball made the following essential points:

"Of all things, that for which we should be most grateful today is that the heavens are indeed open and that the restored church of Jesus Christ is founded upon the rock of revelation. Continuous revelation is indeed the very lifeblood of the gospel of the living Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. . . .

"The foreverness of this kingdom and the revelations which it brought into existence are absolute realities. Never again will the sun [of revelation] go down; never again will all men prove totally unworthy of communication with their Maker. Never again will God be hidden from his children on the earth. Revelation is here to remain. . . .

" . . . Again we testify to the world that revelation continues and that the vaults and files of the Church contain these revelations which come month to month and day to day. We testify also that there is, since 1830 when The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, and will continue to be, so long as time shall last, a prophet, recognized of God and his people, who will continue to interpret the mind and will of the Lord. . . .

" . . . I say, in the deepest of humility, but also by the power and force of a burning testimony in my soul, that from the prophet of the Restoration to the prophet of our own year, the communication line is unbroken, the authority is continuous, and light, brilliant and penetrating, continues to shine. The sound of the voice of the Lord is a continuous melody and a thunderous appeal. For nearly a century and a half there has been no interruption.

"Man never needs to stand alone. Every faithful person may have the inspiration for his own limited kingdom. But the Lord definitely calls prophets today and reveals his secrets unto them as he did yesterday, he does today, and will do tomorrow: that is the way it is." [^17]

Additional statements on the need for continuous revelation have been given by prophets, seers, and revelators of this dispensation. The need for ongoing revelation may appear to be at variance with an emphasis on reading the scriptures, but it is not.

Wilford Woodruff: "I will refer to a certain meeting I attended in the town of Kirtland in my early days. . . . Some remarks were made . . . with regard to the living oracles and with regard to the written word of God. . . . A leading man in the church . . . talked upon the subject, and said: 'You have got the word of God before you here in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants; you have the written word of God, and you who give revelations should give revelations according to those books, as what is written in those books is the word of God. We should confine ourselves to them.'

"When he concluded, Brother Joseph turned to Brother Brigham Young and said, 'Brother Brigham, I want you to take the stand and tell us your views with regard to the written oracles and the written word of God.' Brother Brigham took the stand, and he took the Bible, and laid it down; he took the Book of Mormon, and laid it down; and he took the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and laid it down before him, and he said: 'There is the written word of God to us, concerning the work of God from the beginning of the world, almost, to our day. And now,' said he, 'when compared with the living oracles those books are nothing to me; those books do not convey the word of God direct to us now, as do the words of a Prophet or a man bearing the Holy Priesthood in our day and generation. I would rather have the living oracles than all the writing in the books.' That was the course he pursued. When he was through, Brother Joseph said to the congregation, 'Brother Brigham has told you the word of the Lord, and he has told you the truth.'

" . . . The Bible is all right, the Book of Mormon is all right, the Doctrine and Covenants is all right, and they proclaim the work of God and the word of God in the earth in this day and generation until the coming of the Son of Man; but the Holy Priesthood is not confined particularly to those books, that is, it did not cease when those books were made." [^18]

John Taylor: "Those books [the scriptures] are good for example, precedent, and investigation, and for developing certain laws and principles; but they do not, they cannot touch every case required to be adjudicated and set in order; we require a living tree—a living fountain—living intelligence, proceeding from the living priesthood in heaven, through the living priesthood on earth." [^19]

George Q. Cannon: "As Latter-day Saints, we need constantly the guidance of Jehovah. We have the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants; but all these books, without the living oracles and a constant stream of revelation from the Lord, would not lead any people into the Celestial Kingdom of God."20

More Revelations in the Future

Not a single one of our present scriptures is complete, including our present Doctrine and Covenants. It is my firm belief that if we as Latter-day Saints learn the principles and doctrines of the Doctrine and Covenants and live them in our lives, the Lord will instruct his prophets to include more of his revelations in this sacred scripture.

Concerning this principle, President Joseph Fielding Smith has stated: "Not all of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith are in the Doctrine and Covenants. He made a selection for this book by revelation. The Church has had many other revelations, but we have in the Doctrine and Covenants revelations sufficient to bring to pass our exaltation if we will but heed them. When we, the members of the Church, reach the point that we are willing to live by all that the Lord has revealed, he will give us more that can be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord is withholding from us great and mighty truths because of the hardness of our hearts. Why should we clamor for more when we will not abide in what we already have? We are led by revelation today just as much as they were anciently." [^20]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has also written concerning this principle:

"The last word has not been spoken on any subject. Streams of living water shall yet flow from the Eternal Spring who is the source of all truth. There are more things we do not know about the doctrines of salvation than there are things we do know.

"When we as a people believe and conform to all of the truths we have received, we shall receive more of the mind and will and voice of the Lord. What we receive and when it comes are in large measure up to us. The Lord has many things he wants to tell us, but so far we have not attained that unity and spiritual stature which will enable us to pull down knowledge from heaven upon us.

"We praise God because he has seen fit to give to us what we have received, including these two revelations on salvation for the dead [sections 137 and 138], and pray that we may believe and obey with that faith and devotion which will cause the Lord to give us more of his eternal word. The more we know, the more scripture we receive, the more we have in our standard works, the greater is our chance of gaining eternal life in our Father's kingdom. We can never live a law until it is revealed to us. Can any of us know too much? Can we receive too much revelation? Can we add too much to our holy writ?

"What a wondrous thing it is to worship a God who still speaks, whose voice is still heard, whose words are without end!" [^21]

In a later talk to regional representatives, Elder McConkie suggested seven steps to follow if we expect to receive further canonized scriptures from the Lord:

"May I suggest for you and your families and all those with whom you labor in the kingdom, the following:

"1. Study the scriptures daily. Drink directly from Holy Writ. Learn the word as it is found in the scriptures.

"2. Mark a new set of the Standard Works. Learn to use the footnotes and teaching aids in our new editions of the scriptures. Pay particular attention to the inspired changes made by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Bible. Be sure any quotations you make include the new textual corrections.

"3. Apply what you learn to your life and to your administrative assignments in the Church. Act and live as the scriptures decree.

"4. Use the scriptures in all your sermons and teaching. Rely upon the scriptures. Quote the scriptures. Believe the scriptures. Choose your illustrations from them.

"5. Ponder the revealed word in your hearts. Pray about its deep and hidden meanings. Let the things of eternity be your constant meditation.

"6. Expound the scriptures. Explain their meanings. Let others know what you know. Raise your voice in testimony.

"7. Get others to go and do likewise with reference to all these things." [^22]

Summary

Wouldn't it be wonderful if we were a generation that would truly "receive" and live our present scriptures so that we could receive even more of the word of God? All of our blessings are predicated upon obedience to laws, and the gospel laws are found in the scriptures.

If we had in the scriptures the "greater" truths and laws that are currently being withheld from us—and if we could then live these greater truths—we could receive even greater blessings from our Heavenly Father.

Notes

From a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1833 edition—published under the title A Book of Commandments; consisted of sixty-five chapters. They were personal witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ during the time they lived upon the earth. Use the latest edition—one published at least since 1981—and become acquainted with its many learning, teaching, and studying aids. The literal fatherhood of God (and thus the brotherhood and sisterhood of us all). Nature of God. Nature of God and the Godhead. Doctrines of Salvation, 3:198.
[^2] 1835 edition—consisted of 102 sections and seven Lectures on Faith. The sections of the current edition that were published in the 1835 edition include sections 1, 3-12, 14-76, 78-84, 86, 88-102, 104, 106-107, 133-134. They were visited and tutored by angels or translated beings. Develop a meaningful marking and cross-referencing system for the Doctrine and Covenants. The plan of eternal progression and eventual godhood. Mission and atonement of Jesus Christ. Relationship of Jesus Christ to God the Father. Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 22:146.
[^3] 1844 edition—consisted of 111 sections and the Lectures on Faith. They were directed by Jesus Christ as to what they should put in their records. Relate the things you learn in the Doctrine and Covenants to similar teachings in the other scriptures. The reality of pre-earthly and postmortal existence. Concept of "eternity to eternity." Nature of man (purpose of existence). History of the Church, 1:222.
[^4] 1876 edition—consisted of 136 sections and the Lectures on Faith. This edition included this statement: "First issued, as divided into chapters and verses, by Orson Pratt." Concerning the revelations in this edition, Elder Joseph F. Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve proposed the following at the October 1880 general conference: "I move that we receive and accept the revelations contained in these books, as revelations from God to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Saints, and to all the world." [^6] The motion was accepted unanimously. They had visions of our day, and they provided material especially for us. Liken the scriptures unto yourself. Relationship of laws and blessings (and punishments). Purposes of a mortal existence. Baptism by water (authority, method, necessity, words of baptismal prayer). Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), 59, 4.
[^5] 1879 edition—consisted of 136 sections and the Lectures on Faith. This was the first edition "issued with footnotes." Ask for assistance from the Holy Ghost in understanding these revelations and principles. The nature of an "opposition in all things." Principles and ordinances of the gospel leading to the celestial kingdom. Baptism of Holy Ghost (confirmation). Institute Self-Instruction Course (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints), 51.
[^7] 1981 edition—This is the latest edition, although some printings have been published since 1981. This edition is noted for its revised and expanded section headings, a great increase in the number of footnote references, a greatly expanded and enlarged index, and the addition of two new sections (137 and 138) and Official Declaration—2. Love. Extent and nature of Christ's atonement. Ezra Taft Benson, "The Gift of Modern Revelation," Ensign, November 1986, 79-80.
[^8] Scriptures (place or purpose, extent, literalness, and interpretation of). Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants," Ensign, May 1987, 83, 85.
[^9] Priesthood authority. John A. Widtsoe, The Message of the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), 8-9.
[^10] Organization and government of the Church. History of the Church, 2:245.
[^11] Revelation and prophecy (nature and purpose of). "The Grandest Principle of the Gospel," in The Contributor, 16 August 1895, 610-14.
[^12] Boyd K. Packer, "Teach the Scriptures," address to religious educators of the Church Educational System, 14 October 1977, 5.
[^13] Bruce R. McConkie, "Spare time's rare to Apostle," Church News, 24 January 1976, 4.
[^14] Harold B. Lee, "Find the Answers in the Scriptures," Ensign, December 1972, 3.
[^15] Harold B. Lee, regional representatives seminar, 12 December 1970, 10.
[^16] Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 135.
[^17] Spencer W. Kimball, "Revelation: The Word of the Lord to His Prophets," Ensign, May 1977, 76-78.
[^18] Wilford Woodruff, in Conference Report, October 1897, 22-23; emphasis added.
[^19] John Taylor, "On Priesthood," Millennial Star, 9 (1 November 1847): 323.
[^20] Gospel Truth, 1:323.
[^21] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:202.
[^22] Bruce R. McConkie, "A New Commandment: Save Thyself and Thy Kindred!" Ensign, August 1976, 11.
