Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 8

The Book of Mormon as a Part of God's System of Witnesses

One of the major purposes of our existence upon this earth is to learn to walk by faith. To help us realize this purpose, the Lord removed our memory of the premortal existence, allowing us to truly learn to develop our powers of faith in him here in this life. God does not let our faith go unanswered, however. He has promised that certain evidences or witnesses will "follow them that believe" (Mark 16:17-18). Therefore, we can know our faith in him is not in vain, and thus we can be encouraged to further develop our faith.

The Book of Mormon plays a unique role in God's system of witnesses because it testifies to man of the actuality of God and also of the truthfulness of his work upon the earth. However, the Book of Mormon is not the only witness provided by God. One of the prophets has stated, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Corinthians 13:1; emphasis added).

Members of the Godhead Testify of Each Other

The three members of the Godhead apparently follow this same law of witnessing or testifying of each other. In fact, in the New Testament the Savior testifies of the Father and his work so frequently, and indicates so often that he and the Father are one, that traditional Christianity has come to believe that God the Father and Jesus Christ the Son are one in substance as well as in other areas. That such is not the case was made absolutely clear by the first vision of Joseph Smith.

The members of the Godhead are, however, one in many respects (goals, purposes, ideals), and they are also one in testimony. Note the significance of the following statement of the resurrected Jesus Christ concerning this matter:

"I say unto you, that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one; and I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one . . . and I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me . . . and whoso believeth in me believeth in the Father also; and unto him will the Father bear record of me, for he will visit him with fire and with the Holy Ghost. And thus will the Father bear record of me, and the Holy Ghost will bear record unto him of the Father and me; for the Father, and I, and the Holy Ghost are one" (3 Nephi 11:27, 32, 35-36; emphasis added).

Here the Savior makes two very important points: (1) the three members of the Godhead are one in the sense that they testify or witness of each other, and (2) if we accept or believe in any one of the members of the Godhead, we must accept or believe in the others, for they all testify of each other.

The three members of the Godhead testify and witness of each other: "I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me . . . and whoso believeth in me believeth in the Father also" (3 Nephi 11:32, 35).

The Scriptures Testify of Each Other and of the Members of the Godhead

The same divine law of witnesses applies also to the holy scriptures. The Holy Bible is one witness to the divinity of Jesus Christ, but where are the second and third witnesses? We Latter-day Saints believe the Book of Mormon to be a second witness (the "American" witness) to the divine mission of the Savior, and we believe the third great witness is yet to come forth. The Lord taught of the existence of three scriptural witnesses in these words:

"For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; . . . And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews . . . and my word . . . shall be gathered in one" (2 Nephi 29:12-14).

We will have three great scriptural witnesses brought forth by the Lord. The relationship of these records to each other is also made clear in the Book of Mormon. In his farewell address, Mormon made the following statement to the Lamanites of this dispensation: "Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record [the Book of Mormon] but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record [the Bible] shall come from the Gentiles unto you. For behold, this [the Book of Mormon] is written for the intent that ye may believe that [the Bible]; and if ye believe that [the Bible] ye will believe this [the Book of Mormon] also" (Mormon 7:8-9; emphasis added).

Here Mormon says that one of the major purposes of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is to testify of the Bible, and he also states that if we honestly accept one of these scriptures, we will accept the other, for the two scriptures testify of each other. This is also the testimony of President Brigham Young:

"No man can say that this book (laying his hand on the Bible) is true . . . and at the same time say, that the Book of Mormon is untrue. . . . There is not that person on the face of the earth who has had the privilege of learning the Gospel of Jesus Christ from these two books, that can say that one is true, and the other is false. No Latter-day Saint, no man or woman, can say the Book of Mormon is true, and at the same time say that the Bible is untrue. If one be true, both are."1

In addition to testifying of other scriptures, the Book of Mormon also testifies of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Nephi, the first major historian in the Book of Mormon, made this comment concerning the relationship between the teachings of Christ and the Book of Mormon: "And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words [the Book of Mormon] and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words [the Book of Mormon], for they are the words of Christ" (2 Nephi 33:10).

According to the testimonies of the great Book of Mormon prophets Mormon and Nephi, if we accept the Book of Mormon, we must also accept both the Bible and the divinity of the Savior, for the Book of Mormon testifies of these things. In like manner, if we accept either the Bible or the divinity of the Savior, we will also accept the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon is written for the intent that we may believe the Bible; if we believe the Bible, we will also believe the Book of Mormon (Mormon 7:9). If we hearken unto the words of the Book of Mormon, we will believe in Christ; if we believe in Christ, we will also believe in the Book of Mormon (2 Nephi 33:10).

Special Witnesses to the Book of Mormon

The Lord has even provided us with a series of witnesses to the scriptures themselves. In relationship to the Book of Mormon, at least three groups of human witnesses were promised by the Lord and have been provided (2 Nephi 11:3; 2 Nephi 27:12-14; Ether 5:2-4; and D&C 5:11-15). First of all, we have the life and testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith as a witness that the Book of Mormon is true. The Prophet declared that the record was given to him by an angel sent from God and that he translated the record by the gift and power of God (see JS—H 1:30-54, 59, 67). Joseph Smith sealed this testimony with his life.

Second, we have the testimonies of the three special witnesses—Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. These men testified that the Book of Mormon had "been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true." They also claimed they had "seen the engravings . . . upon the plates . . . they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man. . . . And we declare that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon" ("The Testimony of Three Witnesses" in the front of the Book of Mormon). None of these three special witnesses ever denied his testimony of the things he had both seen and heard.

Then we have the testimonies of the eight special witnesses. They said Joseph Smith showed them the plates and that they handled them with their own hands and saw the engravings thereon: "And this we bear record with words of soberness . . . that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken" ("The Testimony of Eight Witnesses" in the front of the Book of Mormon). Again, none of these men ever denied his testimony.

These groups of special witnesses not only testify of each other, but they also serve as witnesses to the claims of Joseph Smith regarding the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. If we accept the testimony of any of these groups of human witnesses, we must accept the Book of Mormon and the Bible and also the divinity of Jesus Christ. (See figure on the following page.)

If we accept the testimony of any of the human witnesses, we must also accept the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, the Bible, and the divinity of Jesus Christ.

The Holy Ghost Testifies of the Truth of these Things

In addition to the testimony of other people and of the scriptures, however, the Lord has promised us a "more sure witness" of the truth of these things. This more sure witness is the Holy Ghost. Paul tells us that no man knoweth of the things of God except by the Spirit of God (1 Corinthians 2:11), and in 1 John 5:6 we read: "It is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth."

The best and most effective way to discover truth in the spiritual and religious realm is to ask God. As the Savior said, "Ask, and it shall be given you" (Matthew 7:7), and as James added, "let him ask in faith, nothing wavering" (James 1:6).

The last writer in the Book of Mormon gives us a specific formula by which we can arrive at a knowledge of the truth of spiritual things, including the knowledge of whether the Book of Mormon is true:

"Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

"And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:3-5; emphasis added).

Surely God the Father has provided us with ample witnesses in our day that the work of this dispensation is true. He has borne his testimony to us through his prophets and his divine Son. He has sent angels again to the earth with the glad tidings of the gospel. He has provided scriptural and human witnesses to his great work. He has promised us the witness of his emissary, the Holy Ghost, if we are sincere and faithful. As the prophet Moroni stated: "All this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day" (Ether 5:4).

It now behooves us to examine honestly and sincerely these witnesses and their testimonies. If we do, the Lord has promised us we will not find them wanting.

Notes

This material was initially published as Appendix A in A Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 342-48.
