Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 10

The Book of Mormon, a Modern Scripture

Some people are surprised when they discover there are other scriptures in addition to the Bible. In fact, when the Book of Mormon was translated by Joseph Smith and was first published in 1830, many people said, in essence, "A new Bible? We have a Bible, and there cannot be another Bible."

Fortunately, during the past 130 years there has been a change in this thinking. Many reputable Bible scholars now readily admit that the Bible is not a closed book; indeed, there are at least sixteen books mentioned in the Bible that do not even appear in our present versions. Thus we know that the Bible in and of itself is not complete. Also, a little serious thinking should help us realize there might well be other scriptures in addition to the Bible. Why should God speak only to one nation? He himself has said that he is not a respecter of persons and is unchangeable—the same yesterday, today, and tomorrow. Surely, then, if he spoke to one nation in former times and taught them his gospel, he has done the same thing for other nations and can and will do the same thing for us if we are worthy.

Isaiah stated that the Lord teaches his people "line upon line and precept upon precept" (Isaiah 28:10). His statement indicates that revelation never ceases and the scriptures are never closed so long as the people are righteous and keep God's commandments which have been revealed to them. Paul also indicates there could be more than one scripture. In his second letter to the Corinthians, he states, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Corinthians 13:1). The Bible is one witness to the divinity of Christ, but where are the additional witnesses?

I believe the Old Testament prophet Ezekiel knew of one of these additional witnesses. In chapter 37 of his book, he states, "The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions: and join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand. And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these? Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand" (Ezekiel 37:15-19).

When we recall that in ancient times it was the custom to write on parchment and roll it on a stick, it becomes very evident that the Lord is talking here of two separate records. One of these records is to be of Judah and those of the house of Israel who are connected with him; this, of course, is the Bible. The other record is to be of Joseph and those of the house of Israel who are with him. But where is there any record of the descendants of Joseph? Certainly that record is not the Bible, for the Bible does not tell the story of the descendants of Joseph. Also, Ezekiel distinctly states that the records of Judah and Joseph are to be separate from each other; otherwise how could they be put together and become one in the hand of the Lord?

The Book of Mormon fulfills all the requirements for this additional scripture. In the first place, it reveals the gospel "line upon line, precept upon precept" and thus helps establish the previous word of the Lord. One of its major purposes is to serve as another witness to the divinity of Christ. Also, the Book of Mormon is primarily a record of the descendants of Joseph.

Although it is not possible to consider in detail the multitudinous claims and teachings of the Book of Mormon, let us look briefly at some of its major teachings. The Book of Mormon might be called the "American Scripture," for it tells of three major groups of people who came to the continent of North and South America before the time of Christ.

The first of these groups came here during the worldwide dispersion of the people at the time of the tower of Babel. Concerning this dispersion, we read in the book of Genesis, "So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth" (Genesis 11:8).

The people who came to this continent at that time were led by a man called Jared; thus, they are called Jaredites in the Book of Mormon. The Jaredites lived here for about two thousand years and built one of the great civilizations of all time, but this great nation was virtually destroyed in a great civil war sometime between 600 b.c. and 200 b.c. The records of the Jaredites were preserved, however, and later came into the possession of the second group of people who came to this continent.

That second group came from Jerusalem about 600 b.c. during the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah. The great prophet of that day was Jeremiah, but the Bible states there were also other prophets at that time. One of those prophets was named Lehi, and the Book of Mormon tells how Lehi was warned by the Lord to flee out of Jerusalem because of the impending destruction of that city by Babylonia. Lehi gathered together his family and the family of a man called Ishmael, and they traveled for eight years in a south-southeast direction, until they finally arrived at the shores of a great sea, evidently the Sea of Arabia. There they built a ship, and after traveling for eight years, they were finally led by the Lord to the shores of this continent, which was their promised land. Soon after their arrival here, the group divided into two factions: the more righteous group was led by Nephi, the son of Lehi, and they became the white-skinned Nephites of the Book of Mormon; the more wicked group followed after Laman, another of the sons of Lehi, and in time the Lamanites became a dark and a loathsome people because they disobeyed the commandments of God.

After nearly one thousand years these two factions met in a great war, and the Nephite nation was virtually destroyed. The Lamanites survived the war but broke up into small tribes later; they were discovered in this condition by Columbus and were given the name of "Indians." Thus the Book of Mormon teaches that the American Indians are largely of the house of Israel.

The third group of people mentioned in the Book of Mormon arrived here shortly before 580 b.c. and also came from Jerusalem. One of the infant sons of King Zedekiah, called Mulek, was with this group, and so they were called the Mulekites. Sometime after arriving in the promised land, the Mulekites joined with the Nephites; these two groups then intermarried and became one.

About a.d. 34—which was nearly 350 years before the combined Mulekite-Nephite nation was destroyed—an event of tremendous importance happened. The resurrected Christ appeared to that people and taught them his gospel. The Savior had previously prophesied of that visit while he lived in mortality on the eastern continent. Perhaps you recall the statement of Christ in the book of John when He said, "And other sheep I have which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd" (John 10:16).

Who were these additional people to be visited by the Savior? Some have said that they were the Gentiles around Palestine; however, there is no record whatsoever that the Savior ever preached to the Gentiles while he lived upon the earth. In fact, in Matthew 15:24, he very clearly stated, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel."

The Savior fulfilled his promise of visiting his other sheep when he appeared as a resurrected being to the righteous people on this continent. His gospel teachings in the Book of Mormon are both clear and comprehensive, and because they have come to us through only one translation, they are very easy to understand.

Someone has said that if a person should discover a manuscript containing fifty words of Jesus Christ in addition to those in the New Testament, such a discovery would be the most important find of the past nineteen hundred years. In the Book of Mormon we find not only fifty additional words of Christ but fifty times fifty—and many more. No wonder this book is held in such high esteem by those who have read it that it has now been published in most of the major languages of the world and continues to sell at the rate of tens of thousands of copies per year. The Book of Mormon restores many of the plain and precious truths of the gospel of Christ, which had been partially lost through the many translations of the Bible.

You might be interested in the testimony of a Christian minister on this point. He writes: "I have been a minister . . . for 37 years. I have built up a library of the greatest books in the world, costing me more than $12,000. But I have found here in the Book of Mormon a library more valuable than all the collections of books in the world because it is the word of God." [^1]

But, you might ask, how can one be certain the Book of Mormon is truly the word of God? In the book of John, the Savior said: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:16-17). Thus, if we want to know whether the gospel is true, we should live the gospel and then Christ will manifest the truth of it unto us. He has given us a similar promise in connection with the Book of Mormon. In the last chapter of this modern scripture, we read this unique statement: "And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:4-5).

I, together with tens of thousands of others, have put this promise to the test and have found it to be true. If one reads the Book of Mormon with a sincere heart and with real intent and then asks God in the name of Christ if this book is not true, God reveals the truth of it unto him by the power of the Holy Ghost.

What a wonderful promise and assurance! God does not ask us to accept his scriptures blindly. He gives us witnesses to the truthfulness of his scriptures, and then these scriptures testify to us of the divinity of Christ. Thus we can all come to a knowledge of the truth.

I have a strong testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel of Christ, and I should like to bear that testimony to you. I know that God lives and that we are his children. I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the world, the eldest Son of God in the Spirit and the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, foreordained to restore the fulness of the gospel in this dispensation. I know the Bible is the word of God, and I also know the Book of Mormon is the word of God. These truths have been made manifest unto me by the power of the Holy Ghost, and I am as sure of them as I am that I exist. They have brought joy and peace into my life, and I pray they might also bring peace and happiness into your life.

Notes

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, 2 February 1958.

---
Notas:
[^1] Read the Book of Mormon. The words these things in verse three refer back to the words these records in verse two—the records from which our present Book of Mormon was translated. He should read and ponder the Book of Mormon—all of it.
