Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 15

The Greatest Gift

A recent word-association survey, in which people were asked to name the first thing or person that came to mind when they heard the word Christmas, revealed that the thing mentioned most frequently was the word gift, and the person mentioned most frequently was Jesus Christ. Other things mentioned frequently included toys, cards, and trees; other personalities mentioned included Santa Claus.From this survey reported in the national press, it seems apparent that the giving of gifts has become a traditional feature of Christmas.

In considering the topic of this chapter, "The Greatest Gift," perhaps we can determine the real significance of Christmas by comparing the possible relationships between the thing (that is, the gift) and the person (Jesus Christ) mentioned most frequently in the word association survey mentioned above.

The Gift

According to Webster's Third International Dictionary, the word gift means "the act, right, or power of giving or conferring; that which is given or bestowed; anything which is voluntarily transferred by one person to another without compensation. Synonyms: donation, present, benefaction, gratuity, boon."

A gift is something given, something "presented as a gift or bestowed without compensation."

The dictionary defines greatest as the "superlative of Great. Much more than ordinary or average; much higher in some quality or degree; of most importance; highest in its class; main; chief. Synonyms: excellent, immense, majestic, grand, eminent, noble, powerful."

When we combine all of these elements, we see that at least three essentials are necessary for a gift given by one person to another to be considered "the greatest gift":

The offering and receiving of a gift are very similar to the making of a covenant: two parties are involved, and something of value or worth is promised and transferred.

Thus, the greatest gift any one could give to another would be the gift that would require the most right, power, authority, or means of the donor to give and that would be of most value and would have the greatest impact or influence on the receiver over the longest period of time possible.

Jesus Christ: "In the Beginning"

In considering the tremendous contribution of Jesus Christ to the giving of gifts, we need to start with an explanation of our relationship to him and to our Heavenly Father. Jesus said, "I came to do the will of him who sent me" (John 6:38-40), and "This is life eternal: that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3). Both of these great Beings have given us very significant gifts. In order to understand the magnitude of their gifts, we need to know our situation when the gifts were offered, our condition now as a result of their offer, and our possible potential position if we accept the gifts.

Thus, I would like to start at the very beginning of our relationship with our Heavenly Father and with Jesus Christ. However, I am not certain of the time that is implicit in the statement "In the beginning" regarding our relationship with them. We do know from the scriptures and from modern prophets, however, that immediately before the creation or organization of this earth in its present form, we lived with our Heavenly Father and his sons and daughters. Thus we all learned to call him Father and to refer to each other as brother and sister. Jesus Christ was our Elder Brother as the Firstborn Son of God in the spirit (see Colossians 1:15).

The scriptures do not state exactly what gifts our Heavenly Father had bestowed upon us to enable us to progress to that point of our existence. But our Heavenly Father certainly was at least partly responsible for the gift of our spiritual bodies in that pre-earthly existence.

We know much more from the scriptures, from the temple endowment, and from modern prophets concerning the new gifts our Heavenly Father made possible to us as his sons and daughters, including his greatest gift: eternal life—the same quality and kind of life he enjoys. No wonder the sons and daughters of God shouted for joy when that great gift was offered in the great council in heaven (see Job 38:7).

The plan of progression and gift of eternal life offered by our Father in Heaven involved many other gifts, including the opportunity of gaining a physical body, the opportunity to obey physical laws and to enjoy the blessings of such obedience, the opportunity to choose, and the privilege of agency. Such proferred opportunities and potential blessings could enable us to achieve our maximum destiny; the only major limiting factor would be ourselves.

As our Heavenly Father offered these gifts to us, I feel confident he explained carefully and in detail each gift with all of its ramifications and potential. Surely he must have explained the nature of law—that every law has opposite and equal consequence. Thus, in the mortal realm, when laws are obeyed (which constitutes righteousness), the consequence is a blessing that causes joy and happiness; when a law is disobeyed (which constitutes wickedness), the consequence is a punishment that causes misery and unhappiness.

He may have explained the necessity of placing a veil of forgetfulness over our minds so we could exercise true freedom of choice in our new physical existence. He may also have explained the possibility of spiritual death (the consequence of our sin or disobedience to law) and the inevitability of physical death (the eventual separation of our spiritual and physical bodies).

Perhaps it was at this point in the great council that our Elder Brother (whose names and titles include Jehovah and Jesus Christ) indicated his full acceptance of the plan by saying, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2). Jesus then offered two major gifts to his Heavenly Father and to us. He offered to help us overcome spiritual death by promising to suffer for our sins if we would stop sinning—that is, if we would repent or stop breaking the law. He also offered to conquer physical death by providing for our resurrection. Jesus would be able to do these things for us because (1) he would live a sinless life on the earth and thus would have power over all law, having broken no law, and (2) he would have power to live forever in his physical body and yet would have the capacity to die, as his physical body would be fathered by our Eternal Father in Heaven and yet mothered by a mortal mother. Jesus was willing to do these things because of his great love for us and his concern for our welfare.

At some point in the great council, some of our brothers and sisters questioned whether or not they wanted to accept the proffered plan and its associated gifts, for sometimes receiving gifts requires commitment and dedication on the part of the receiver. They evidently either lacked confidence in themselves to keep the commandments leading toward eternal life, lacked trust in the plan of our Heavenly Father, or lacked faith in the ability or willingness of Jesus Christ to atone for both spiritual and physical death and thus bring us "at one" with God again.

These doubters had a leader whose names and titles include Lucifer, Satan, and the devil. He sought to destroy the plan of progression by denying the agency of man. Thus we read in the scriptures:

"Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him. . . . And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice" (Moses 4:1, 3-4).

You know the essentials of the remainder of the story. A war was fought in heaven. It was not a war of bloodshed resulting in physical casualties, but a war involving ideologies and faithfulness, resulting in spiritual casualties. Each of us who have lived on the earth accepted the offered gifts and entered into covenants with our Heavenly Father and with Jesus Christ, who was our Advocate and Mediator with the Father. However, one third of the host of heaven decided not to accept the plan; they rejected the profferred gift and withdrew themselves from the plan that would enable them to progress toward eternal life. Through open rebellion against our Heavenly Father, they became sinful and were cast out of heaven and out of his presence.

Adam and Eve

The great plan started to be implemented. A physical earth was organized out of existing matter. Physical bodies were prepared to receive the spiritual bodies of Adam and Eve, and they became "living souls" with a veil of forgetfulness over their minds.

Our Heavenly Father then gave them the opportunity to choose by giving them laws, by telling them what they should do and should not do. He also explained the consequences of their choices. For example, the Father instructed Adam and Eve to "befruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth" and promised them that they would "have joy and rejoicing in [their] posterity" (Moses 2:27).

"But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Moses 3:17).

In this last verse of scripture, our Heavenly Father states a law, indicates its consequences, and reiterates the principle of agency.

Lucifer wanted desperately to introduce sin into the world. He tried to get Adam to break one of the laws, and later persuaded Eve to disobey a commandment of God by partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. When Adam also partook of this fruit, he and Eve became subject to the consequence of disobeying that law: physical death. They also suffered spiritual death because of their disobedience: they were cast out of the presence of God. Adam and Eve became subject to both physical death and spiritual death, as did their posterity.

The Birth of the Savior

Finally, much later in the earth's history, the time came for the promised earthly birth of Jesus. If Jesus had not been born as covenanted, or if he had failed to keep the promises made to us in the great pre-earthly council, we could not be delivered from the permanent effects of both physical and spiritual death. As one prophet has exclaimed:

"It is expedient that an atonement should be made; for according to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, . . . all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made" (Alma 34:9).

No wonder the birth of the promised Atoner was announced by an angel sent from the presence of God. Gabriel said to Mary:

"Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son and shall call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest . . . and of his kingdom there shall be no end" (Luke 1:30-33).

No wonder even choirs of heavenly hosts burst into praise when Jesus Christ was born on the earth as promised. Luke records the announcement of this momentous event in these well-known words:

"And she brought forth her firstborn son. . . .

"And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night. And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manager.

"And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of heavenly hosts praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men" (Luke 2:7-14).

Because Jesus Christ was the literal "son of the Highest" in the flesh, he was able to overcome physical death. He was able to overcome spiritual death by withstanding the temptations of Satan; he did not succumb to any of them. He also lived a sinless life. Thus he gained power over all law, including the power to apply the law of mercy and to satisfy the demands of the law of justice.

The critical question then became whether he was willing to save us from spiritual death by suffering for our sins and whether he was willing to save us from a permanent physical death by voluntarily allowing his mortal life to be taken and thus provide for our resurrection. His birth, which we celebrate on December 25 each year with the rest of the Christian world, would have become virtually meaningless without his atonement.

The Atonement of Jesus Christ

The "good news" or gospel of Jesus Christ is that because of his love for us, Jesus Christ did indeed atone for our sins and did indeed provide for our resurrection, becoming the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind.

Many of the covenants made with us in the pre-earthly existence were fulfilled in the Garden of Gethsemane, on the cross, and at the tomb when Jesus was resurrected. We must know for ourselves that these covenants were kept. We must have implicit faith, "nothing wavering" (James 1:6), in the reality of the atonement so we will be "firm and steadfast" (1 Nephi 2:10) in our determination to keep our part of the covenants and receive the promised gifts.

In this life we probably never will come to a full understanding of exactly how these great covenants were and will be fulfilled.

Jesus Christ has offered us a brief insight into his suffering in the Garden of Gethsemane:

"Behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men" (D&C 19:16-19).

We have an illuminating statement of his experience on the cross in Matthew and Mark:

"And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Mark 15:33-34; see also Matthew 27:45-46).

The combined testimonies of Luke and John continue the account to the climax of the Savior's crucifixion on the cross:

"And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit" (Luke 23:46).

"Jesus . . . said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost" (John 19:30).

A few professed ministers of religion have greatly misunderstood some of these scriptures. The expression "It is finished" was not one of despair and discouragement; it was a triumphant exclamation of accomplishment: "It is finished! I have completed the work thou sent me forth to do! I have overcome the devil and the world! I have finished my preparations unto the children of men!"

No wonder the Father allowed the Son to suffer in Gethsemane despite the petition "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me" (Matthew 26:39). How gratefully the Father must have heard the additional words: "Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt" (Matthew 26:39).

The full impact and meaning of the Savior's question "My God, why hast thou forsaken me?" can be understood when we remember the covenants made in the great pre-earthly council.

The Father withdrew his Spirit from the Son at the moment of great testing on the cross so that when the victory came—as it most assuredly would come—it would be the Son's victory. In effect, it appears our Father was saying, "Greater love hath no Father for his Son than this—he wants his Son to be faithful to his covenants, and to share in the honor, power, and glory of the Father."

A Book of Mormon prophet had the opportunity to see the relationship of these events even before they occurred on the earth. When Nephi desired to know the meaning of the various elements seen by his father, Lehi, in the "tree of life" vision, an angel was sent to tutor him. Nephi recorded:

"I saw the heavens open; and an angel came down and stood before me; and he said unto me: Nephi, what beholdest thou? And I said unto him: A virgin, most beautiful and fair above all other virgins.

"And he said unto me: Knowest thou the condescension of God? And I said unto him: I know that he loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things.

"And he said unto me: Behold, the virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh. . . . And I looked and beheld the virgin again, bearing a child in her arms.

"And the angel said unto me: Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father! Knowest thou the meaning of the tree which thy father saw? And I answered him, saying: Yea, it is the love of God . . . ; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things. And he spake unto me, saying: Yea, and the most joyous to the soul. . . .

"And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me again, saying: Look! And I looked and beheld the Lamb of God, that he was taken by the people; yea, the Son of the everlasting God was judged of the world; and I saw and bear record. And I, Nephi, saw that he was lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world" (1 Nephi 11:14-24, 31-33).

These scriptural explanations are most impressive and beautiful:

The precious tree of life, whose delicious fruit is desirable above all other fruit, represents the love of God.

The greatest example on earth of the love of God and of the condescension of God is the life, mission, and atonement of his Son. God so loved his Son—and his other children—that he allowed his Beloved Son to suffer "both body and spirit," "to bleed at every pore," "to be lifted up on a cross and crucified" so the covenants of the Father and the Son with us would be kept!

Blessed forever be the holy names of the Father and the Son! What a tremendous sacrifice the offering of their gifts required!

Our Heavenly Father has offered to us the greatest gift he can offer: the opportunity to receive and inherit eternal life. Inherent within this gift are the gift of a physical body, the gift of agency, the gift of his Only Begotten Son. As the scriptures record, "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son" (John 3:16).

Jesus Christ has offered the Father and us the greatest gift he can offer: his sinless life, his perfect example, his atonement.

The Gift We Give

A critical question remains: What is the greatest gift we can give to our Heavenly Father and to our Elder Brother Jesus Christ for their inestimable gifts to us?

We know we can never, ever fully repay. Neither individually nor collectively can we reciprocate in kind. We have neither the right, power, authority, nor the means to offer them immortality and eternal life—gifts they already possess.

We do not have the right nor ability to "bestow upon them" any gifts of wealth, or honor, or power, or position. What treasure could we possibly give to them? They created the heavens and earth and "all things which in them are" (3 Nephi 9:15). Anything we have—anything—has already come to us as a gift from them. In reality they own it; we do not. We cannot give something we do not fully possess.

What gifts could we even think to offer Gods who are omnipresent in influence and power, and who are omniscient and omnipotent?

Returning to our definition of gift, anything we offer obviously must rest upon the exercise of our agency to do it. They cannot and will not force us to do things against our will. Even if we were so forced, it would not be a gift from us, for by definition a gift is something voluntarily bestowed by the donor.

What, then, can we give?

We can honor them, revere, adore, respect, worship, and love them.

We can show our appreciation for what they have given to us by being worthy to receive and by accepting the gifts they have already offered. We do this by keeping all previous commitments with them, including those made at baptism, or when partaking of the sacrament, or in accepting a Church calling, or when receiving sacred ordinances in the temple.

We can show our appreciation for their gifts and sacrifices by repenting of our sins. We do not show love and appreciation to them if we continue to break the laws they have given to us.

In modern times, the Lord has reviewed the first and second great commandments, on which all other laws are based:

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind, and strength; and in the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt serve him. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself" (D&C 59:5-6).

He has also declared in thirteen words the principle of how we can show our love for him:

"If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments" (D&C 42:29).

Jesus Christ has indicated several ways in which we might serve him:

"Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

"Then shall the righteous answer him, saying; Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick or in prison, and came unto thee?

"And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. . . . And these [who so do] shall go . . . unto life eternal" (Matthew 25:34-40, 46).

A significant teaching of the resurrected Jesus Christ on love and service has been preserved in the writings of the apostle John:

"Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon . . . lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs.

"He saith to him again the second time, Simon . . . , lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord: thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep.

"He saith unto him the third time, Simon . . . , lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? and he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep" (John 21:15-17).

As impressive as these verses are in the English, they have additional meaning in the Greek text, which is the earliest version of the New Testament now available to us. In the Greek New Testament, the Lord uses different words for the term translated only as love in the English. Also, in the Greek he uses different expressions for the term translated in the English only as feed.

Thus, these verses state two principles in unmistakable plainness: (1) those who truly love the Lord express that love through service and (2) our service should increase in quality and quantity as we increase in love toward him.

We love by serving, feeding, nurturing, protecting, safeguarding the sheep of the Master Shepherd—which includes all of us.

However, even if we should serve him with 100 percent devotion and endure to the very end of physical life, we still would not be able to repay fully for the gifts we have received.

King Benjamin reminds us:

"I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God. . . .

"I say unto you, my brethren, that if you should render all the thanks and praise which your whole soul has power to possess, to that God who has created you, and has kept and preserved you. . . . If you should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants.

"And behold, all that he requires of you is to keep his commandments; and he has promised you that if ye would keep his commandments ye should prosper in the land; and he never doth vary from that which he hath said; therefore, if ye do keep his commandments he doth bless you and prosper you.

"And now, in the first place, he hath created you, and granted unto you your lives, for which ye are indebted unto him. And secondly, he doth require that ye should do as he hath commanded you; for which if ye do, he doth immediately bless you; and therefore he hath paid you. And ye are still indebted unto him, and are, and will be, forever and ever; therefore, of what have ye to boast?" (Mosiah 2:17, 20-24).

Even though we cannot fully repay, even though we may often feel inadequate and unworthy in our efforts, the "greatest gift" we can give to Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus Christ is still ourselves. Our earlier definition and explanation stipulated that the true value of a gift is largely determined by the "right, power, and authority" of the person to give the gift. What do we individually have the most "right, power, and authority" over? Ourselves.

Our actions, our words, our thoughts—all are determined almost exclusively by ourselves. These are gifts we can give that cannot be given by anyone else. But we must give them voluntarily. We must desire and want to do according to our Father's will, above anything else.

In light of this, several scriptures take on new meanings:

"Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you" (Matthew 6:33).

"It is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness" (D&C 58:26-27).

"He who seeketh to save his life shall lose it; and he who loseth his life for my sake shall find it" (JST, Matthew 10:34).

During the holidays, we frequently wish each other a merry Christmas and a happy New Year.

The degree to which we will have a truly joyous holiday season will depend largely upon the extent to which we are able to give ourselves as gifts in service to others. It truly is "more blessed to give than to receive" (Acts 20:35).

And, in all our giving, may we remember to give sincere thanks to those special two who have given so much to us—and who have promised to give us so much more when we have learned to accept worthily what they already have offered.

For I testify, with the apostle John, that "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16). May we find the eternal life we seek! I also testify that Jesus Christ so loved us, his friends, that he laid down his life for us—and greater love hath no man than this (see John 15:13).

May we show our love and appreciation to them by keeping their commandments and by serving them through serving others.

Note

Christmas message prepared for a sacrament meeting in the Eighteenth Ward, Salt Lake Emigration Stake, December 1983.
