Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 16

The Resurrection

In speaking of the atonement of Jesus Christ, of which the resurrection is one of the most important aspects, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "Nothing in the entire plan of salvation compares in any way in importance with that most transcendent of all events, the atoning sacrifice of our Lord. It is the most important single thing that has ever occurred in the entire history of created things; it is the rock foundation upon which the gospel and all other things rest." [^1]

President Ezra Taft Benson has borne his testimony concerning the resurrection, and in so doing has provided a measure by which we might determine the relative importance of an event: "The greatest events of history are those which affect the greatest number for the longest periods. By this standard, no event could be more important to individuals or nations than the resurrection of the Master. The eventual resurrection of every soul who has lived and died on earth is a scriptural certainty. And surely there is no event for which one should make more careful preparation.

"Nothing is more absolutely universal than the resurrection. . . . No other single influence has had so great an impact on this earth as the life of Jesus the Christ." [^2]

Another important witness of the importance of the resurrection is Jacob, the early Book of Mormon prophet who was the son of Lehi. Jacob has left his inspired words on what would have been our eternal state if it were not for the resurrection:

"For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfill the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection. . . . For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to . . . the devil . . . and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself" (2 Nephi 9:6, 8-9).

This sobering truth is also verified by the prophet Abinadi: "Were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people, . . . they must unavoidably perish" (Mosiah 13:28).

Thus, "in the mouth of two or three witnesses," as is required by the scriptures, the Atonement—including what happened in Gethsemane and at the time of the resurrection—has been proclaimed to be the most important event in the history of mankind. It will vitally and eternally affect every person who has been born on this earth or who will ever live on this earth. My mind cannot conceive of greater events than those associated with the Atonement.

I am also convinced that the resurrection of Jesus Christ is one of the most important events because it is the proof of his divinity. If Jesus Christ is indeed resurrected from the dead and has provided the resurrection for all of us, then he has power over death, which in turn proves he has the power of God, and is indeed the Son of God as he so proclaimed.

As is befitting its importance, the resurrection of Jesus Christ is one of the most carefully documented events in history. Appropriate references are found in all the scriptures pertaining to this event and to its consequences in our own lives. Some of the most important of these scriptures are indexed in the Topical Guide of the LDS Edition of the Bible under such headings as "Resurrection," "Celestial Glory," "Terrestrial Glory," and "Telestial Glory." Also insightful articles are included in the Bible Dictionary under the headings "Resurrection" and "Degrees of Glory." I urge and encourage you to read and ponder these materials. Pray about them. Organize and prepare talks and lesson materials from them. Following these suggestions will help you get these scriptures riveted in your minds.

However, in the main, we will not be discussing these scriptural references in this chapter, as important and vital as they are. They are readily available to you; study and ponder them on your own. Rather, here we will rely primarily on the inspired statements of the prophets, seers, and revelators of this dispensation. Some of these statements are not readily available in the published writings of these brethren; thus they will be included here for your convenience and reference.

In considering how I might best present this topic, I have concluded that I should cover as many aspects of the subject as possible, even though some of them may be touched upon only lightly.

Many Latter-day Saints already know a great deal about the resurrection; they have read and pondered the appropriate scriptures, they have observed the teachings of the leaders of the Church in this dispensation, they have prayed about the matter—and through these means they have gained considerable knowledge and strong testimonies of the resurrection.

However, I am persuaded that many members of the Church are still struggling to understand the various ramifications of the resurrection and to obtain a firm and strong testimony of it.

Thus, I have decided to use a "question and answer" approach here. These are the twenty-two questions we will consider, in the order that we will discuss them:

Some Answers

Now let's consider each of these questions, one at a time, and provide some answers.

The resurrection is the reuniting of the spirit with its physical body. Resurrection is one of the unconditional features of the atonement of Jesus Christ. It is also the crowning aspect, and one of the concluding aspects, of the second estate.

Elder Hyrum M. Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve provided the following brief explanation:

"Death is the dissolution of the body, and the resurrection is the reanimation of the body; yea the actual and literal reuniting of the Spirit with the body." [^3]

The resurrection applies to every person who has ever lived or will ever live on this earth, without exception. Even those who become sons of perdition in the flesh will be resurrected (see 1 Corinthians 15:22; Alma 11:44).

President Joseph F. Smith, the sixth president of the Church in this dispensation, has stated: "Every creature that is born in the image of God will be resurrected from the dead. . . . Just as sure as we go down into the grave, through the transgression of our first parents, by whom death came into the world, so sure will we be resurrected from the dead by the power of Jesus Christ. It matters not whether we have done well or ill, whether we have been intelligent or ignorant, or whether we have been bondsmen or slaves or freemen, all men will be raised from the dead." [^4]

Yes. The scriptures and the teachings of the prophets, seers, and revelators are very clear on this matter.

Jacob mentions the need for an infinite atonement in the book of 2 Nephi: "It must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption" (2 Nephi 9:7).

Amulek testifies in the book of Alma, "There can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world" (Alma 34:12).

Yes. The resurrection even applies to the earth itself (see D&C 88:17-18, 25-26) and to everything that has ever lived on this earth. Some leaders of the Church have suggested that the resurrection of Jesus Christ also applies to everything that has ever lived on any of the earths created by Jesus Christ.

Joseph Fielding Smith stated: "The Savior is not going to save only mankind. Everything God has created must be restored, . . . everything the Lord has created. . . . Everything that has life [was] created in the image of its spirit, and is a living soul, and therefore entitled to the resurrection." [^5]

The Lord states in section 29 of the Doctrine and Covenants that

"all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea . . . for it is the workmanship of mine hand" (D&C 29:24-25).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has taught: "Just as the creative [power] and [the] redemptive powers of Christ extend to the earth and all things thereon, as also to the infinite expanse of worlds in immensity, so the power of the resurrection is universal in scope. Man, the earth, and all life thereon will come forth in the resurrection. And the resurrection applies to and is going on in other worlds and other galaxies." [^6]

By the power of God the Father and of his Son Jesus Christ.

In 1 Corinthians 6:14 we read: "And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise us up by his own power."

President John Taylor made this clear in his book Mediation and Atonement:

"The Son hath life inherent in Himself, even as the Father hath life in Himself, He having received this power from the Father. Also, . . . He had power in Himself to lay down this body, and also to take it up again; and in this respect He differed from others. . . . Hence . . . He . . . becomes the means of the resurrection of all men from the dead." [^7]

Jesus Christ, as the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, inherited power over physical death. And as the Son of mortal Mary, he had the capacity to die.

Jesus declared: "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.

"No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father" (John 10:17-18).

Our spirits will be empowered by the gift of Jesus Christ to help bring forth our bodies out of the grave.

Note the following statements from some of the presidents of the Church in this dispensation. First let me quote two statements by President Joseph F. Smith:

"[As] Jesus, the Only Begotten of the Father . . . had power to lay down his life and take it up again, . . . we too, in his name and through his redeeming blood, will have power in due time to resurrect these our bodies after they shall have been committed to the earth." [^8]

"What is the body without the spirit? It is lifeless clay. What is it that affects this lifeless clay? It is the spirit, [and the spirit] will redeem these tabernacles and bring them forth out of the graves." [^9]

The following is an observation by President Spencer W. Kimball: "There will be a literal resurrection, when this live and conscious spirit will return . . . to take up its reconstructed and resurrected body." [^10]

According to Brigham Young, the resurrection is an ordinance of the priesthood, which by definition is the power to act in the name of Jesus Christ. Thus another person who has already been resurrected will give us the power that will enable us to be resurrected. Note these words of Brigham Young:

"Some person holding the keys of the resurrection, having previously passed through that ordeal, will be delegated to resurrect our bodies, and our spirits will be there and prepared to enter into their bodies." [^11]

No. Jesus Christ is the "firstfruits" of the resurrection; he then made it possible for others subsequently to be resurrected. No one was resurrected before Jesus Christ.

In 1 Corinthians 15:19-23 we read:

"If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

"But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

"But every man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits."

President Brigham Young said: "Jesus is the first begotten from the dead. . . . He is the Master of the resurrection—the first flesh that lived here after receiving the glory of the resurrection." [^12]

The first general resurrection was at the time Jesus Christ was resurrected.

Evidence that there was a general resurrection immediately after the resurrection of Jesus Christ is made clear in two of our scriptures.

In the book of Matthew in the New Testament we read:

"And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many" (Matthew 27:52-53).

A second witness of this general resurrection is also contained in the Book of Mormon. Approximately forty years before the resurrection of Jesus Christ, the prophet Samuel the Lamanite had prophesied: "And many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many" (Helaman 13:25).

So important was this additional witness of this first general resurrection that when the resurrected Jesus Christ visited with his disciples on the western continent soon after his resurrection, he commanded them to include the fulfillment of this prophecy in their records. Note these words in 3 Nephi:

"Verily I say unto you, I commanded my servant Samuel, the Lamanite, that he should testify unto this people, that at the day that the Father should glorify his name in me that there were many saints who should arise from the dead, and should appear unto many, and should minister unto them. And he said unto them: Was it not so?

"And his disciples answered him and said: Yea, Lord, Samuel did prophesy according to thy words, and they were all fulfilled.

"And Jesus said unto them: How be it that ye have not written this thing, that many saints did arise and appear unto many and did minister unto them?

"And it came to pass that Nephi remembered that this thing had not been written.

"And it came to pass that Jesus commanded that it should be written; therefore it was written according as he commanded" (3 Nephi 23:9-13).

No. The next general resurrection will be at the time of the second coming of Jesus Christ.

Concerning this next general resurrection, President Joseph Fielding Smith has written: "The Lord has promised that at the time of his Second Advent the graves will be opened, and the just shall come forth to reign with him on the earth for a thousand years." [^13]

Yes, if it is necessary for a specific person who died after the resurrection of Jesus Christ to be resurrected in order to perform a mission here on earth requiring a physical body, that person might be resurrected.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "We have no knowledge that the resurrection is going on now or that any persons have been resurrected since the day in which Christ came forth excepting Peter, James, and Moroni, all of whom had special labors to perform in this day which necessitated tangible resurrected bodies." [^14]

The term "first resurrection" refers to the resurrection of the righteous or just. If a person is resurrected at the first opportunity he has to be resurrected after his death, then he comes forth in the morning of his first resurrection.

The term "second resurrection" refers to the resurrection of the wicked or unjust.

In section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord gave the following explanation of John 5:29:

"Speaking of the resurrection of the dead [they] shall come forth; they who have done good, in the resurrection of the just; and they who have done evil, in the resurrection of the unjust" (D&C 76:16-17).

Later in that section, in verses 64-65, the Lord speaks of the resurrection of the righteous:

"These are they who shall havepart in the first resurrection.

"These are they who shall comeforth in the resurrection of the just" (D&C 76:64-65; emphasis added).

The physical body will be restored to its proper and perfect form or frame (see Alma 11:42-45; 40:23; 41:4), regardless of what might have happened to the physical body at the time of death or after the time of death.

Amulek taught: "The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame. . . . Now, this restoration shall come to all . . . ; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame" (Alma 11:43-44).

The physical body will come forth from the grave as it is laid down, except that the blood will be replaced by spirit. Immediately after the resurrection, the physical body of an infant or child begins to grow further and the physical body of all resurrected beings begins to develop toward its perfect condition.

The Prophet Joseph Smith made this very clear in his teachings:

"As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be 'added unto their stature one cubit,' neither taken from it, . . . having spirit in their bodies, and not blood." [^15]

This same concept was clearly taught by President John Taylor: "When the resurrection . . . of man shall be consummated, . . . he [will] still be in the same image, and have the same likeness, without variation or change in any of his parts or faculties, except the substitution of spirit for blood." [^16]

I must confess that when I first came to understand that the body comes forth from the grave as it is laid down with all its physical imperfections, it bothered me somewhat. I knew that eventually the resurrected body would be perfect, but from some of the funeral sermons I had heard, I had falsely assumed that the body would be perfect when it first came out of the grave.

But I must also confess that after studying the inspired teachings of the modern prophets on this subject, and after applying logic and reason, I have now reached the point that I rejoice when I realize my body will come forth from the grave with its imperfections, for then after the resurrection my spirit can help my physical body overcome these defects and deformities. If I lay down a body with scars and imperfections, and yet resurrect a perfect body, who or what has been tampering with my physical body while it has been in the grave and while my spirit has been away from it in the postmortal spirit world?

I have truly now reached a point where I can rejoice in the following words of President Joseph F. Smith:

"What a glorious thought it is, to me at least, . . . that those from whom we have to part here, we will meet again and see as they are. We will meet the same identical being . . . the same form and likeness, . . . even to the wounds in the flesh. Not that a person will always be marred by scars, wounds, deformities, defects or infirmities, for these will be removed in their course, in their proper time, according to the merciful providence of God." [^17]

Now other inspired statements of the Brethren concerning the resurrection have taken on additional meaning for me.

From President Joseph F. Smith: "The child that was buried in its infancy will come up in the form of the child that it was when it was laid down; then it will begin to develop. From the day of the resurrection, the body will develop until it reaches the full measure of the stature of its spirit, whether it be male or female." [^18]

From President Joseph Fielding Smith: "The mortal body will not grow in the grave, for that is contrary to nature. So each body will come forth the same stature as when laid in the earth. Children will rise as they were laid away, but after the resurrection their bodies will grow to the full stature of their spirits. Deformities will be erased." [^19]

There are at least three orders of glory, and at least one order not of glory:

However, there may be many degrees within each of these orders. As an example, we know from section 131 of the Doctrine and Covenants that there are three heavens or degrees within the celestial kingdom. It is not known precisely how many other degrees there are in the other "orders" or "kingdoms."

The Savior taught: "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you" (John 14:2).

Elder James E. Talmage explained: "The three kingdoms of widely differing glories are organized on an orderly plan of gradation. . . . The telestial kingdom comprises several subdivisions; this is also the case . . . with the celestial; and, by analogy, we conclude that a similar condition prevails in the terrestrial. Thus the innumerable degrees of merit amongst mankind are provided for in an infinity of graded glories." [^20]

Doctrine and Covenants 76 supplies us with most of the answers:

This is largely determined by the individual himself or herself: What laws has the individual obeyed? Over what laws does he or she have power? (see D&C 88:2-4, 15-31).

President Wilford Woodruff stated: "If a man cannot abide a celestial law, he cannot receive a celestial glory, if a man cannot abide a terrestrial law he cannot receive a terrestrial glory; and if he cannot abide a telestial law he cannot receive a telestial glory, but will have to dwell in a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory. This is according to the revelations of God to us." [^21]

President Joseph F. Smith added: "When we come forth out of the grave, . . . our spirits shall enter into [our physical bodies] again, and they shall become living souls. . . . And then those who have . . . been subject and obedient to the celestial law will . . . be quickened by the celestial glory. And those who have . . . been subject and obedient to the terrestrial law will . . . be quickened by the terrestrial glory. And those who have . . . been subject and obedient to the telestial law, will . . . be quickened by a telestial glory." [^22]

Elder George Q. Cannon asked a pertinent question and then answered it: "Why is it that there are these differences? Is it because God has chosen some of us for the telestial glory, some of us for the terrestrial glory, and some of us for the celestial glory? No, there is no such predestination as this. We are all born with our free agency; with the power within ourselves, aided by the blessing of God, to attain unto the highest glory. How shall we attain unto the highest glory? There is only one way, and that is by observing the highest laws. . . . The man or woman who expects to attain to the highest glory without obeying these laws, deceives himself or herself. It cannot be done." [^23]

Concerning resurrected celestial bodies, Elder Melvin J. Ballard wrote: "Those who come forth in the celestial glory with celestial bodies have a body that is more refined. It is different. The very fibre and texture of the celestial body is more pure and holy than a telestial or terrestrial body, and a celestial body alone can endure celestial glory." [^24]

No. The resurrection is an unconditional aspect of the Atonement. All will be resurrected without exception.

Elder James E. Talmage explained that the gospel "affirms . . . that a Redeemer was provided before the world was . . . [and] that general salvation, in the sense of redemption from the effects of the fall [including the resurrection], comes to all without their seeking it." [^25]

Absolutely yes. The individual definitely has agency to decide which laws he or she will obey and thus will determine which order of resurrected physical body he or she will receive.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie indicated: "By one degree of obedience or another, all men, in this life, develop either celestial, terrestrial, or telestial bodies (or in the case of those destined to be sons of perdition, bodies of a baser sort)." [^26]

Yes. As indicated in the answer to question 15, at the time of the resurrection, each will come forth with a body that is particular to one of the degrees of glory or one without glory. Thus, the resurrection might be considered a type of judgment.

No. The "final judgment" of a person takes place sometime after the resurrection of that person. The final judgment is also a vital part of our Heavenly Father's glorious plan of progression and eternal life.

President Hinckley penned the following lines some years ago while seated in the funeral service of a friend:

What is this thing that men call death, This quiet passing in the night? 'Tis not the end, but genesis Of better worlds and greater light. O God, touch Thou my aching heart, And calm my troubled, haunting fears. Let hope and faith, transcendent, pure, Give strength and peace beyond my tears. There is no death, but only change With recompense for victory won; The gift of Him who loved all men, The Son of God, the Holy One.27

And now, another brief testimony from President Hinckley:

"None of us fully understands the Atonement. I think it is beyond the comprehension of any man, but we know something of it, and we know that as a result of it all will be resurrected from the grave, and that those who walk in obedience to His commandments will be given the opportunity of going on to eternal exaltation. Nothing can compare with that. All of us are going to die someday, but that won't be the end. We'll go on living because Christ broke the bands of death for each of us." [^27]

Summary and Testimony

These words of our living prophet form part of my testimony concerning the subject of the Atonement and the resurrection. We may know only a portion of what there is to know about these subjects. But we know enough to understand that the Atonement is an essential part of the great plan of progression and eternal life that our Heavenly Father has made available to us. And we know enough to realize that the resurrection is made possible for us (1) through the Father's gift of his Son, and (2) through the Son's gift of his life.

Therefore, my prayer for each of us is that we might show our appreciation unto our Father and unto our Savior for these gifts by striving diligently to serve them and to keep their commandments.

Notes

From a talk given at the BYU Campus Education Week, 16 August 1999.

---
Notas:
[^1] What is the resurrection? What is the resurrection? Celestial glory. Celestial glory: "They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, . . . that by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit. . . . These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection. These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just" (D&C 76:51-52, 64-65). Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 60.
[^2] To whom does the resurrection apply? To whom does the resurrection apply? Terrestrial glory. Terrestrial glory: "These are they who died without law; . . . the spirits of men kept in prison, . . . who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it. These are they who are honorable men of the earth . . . who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus" (D&C 76:72-75, 79). Ezra Taft Benson, So Shall Ye Reap, comp. Reed A. Benson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1960), 4, 6.
[^3] Is the resurrection infinite? Is the resurrection infinite? Telestial glory. Telestial glory: "These are they who received not the gospel of Christ . . . [but] who deny not the Holy Spirit. These are they who are thrust down to hell [and] . . . who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection. . . . These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie" (D&C 76:82-85, 103). Hyrum M. Smith, in Conference Report, April 1917, 31.
[^4] Does this mean that every spirit that has had a physical body must be resurrected, whether it is the spirit of a person or the spirit of an animal, a fish, an insect, or a plant? Does this mean that every spirit that has had a physical body must be resurrected, whether it is the spirit of a person or the spirit of an animal, a fish, an insect, or a plant? An order "without glory." Those "without glory": These are they "who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, . . . [who] deny the truth and defy my power—they are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have been born; . . . concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come" (D&C 76:31-32, 34-37). Joseph F. Smith, "Discourse by President Joseph F. Smith," Millennial Star, 58 (12 March 1896): 162.
[^5] By what power or means is the resurrection accomplished? By what power or means is the resurrection accomplished? Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), 280.
[^6] What is the role of Jesus Christ so far as the resurrection is concerned? What is the role of Jesus Christ so far as the resurrection is concerned? McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 642.
[^7] What is the role of our individual spirits in regard to our own resurrection? What is the role of our individual spirits in regard to our own resurrections? John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), 146.
[^8] Was anyone resurrected before the resurrection of Jesus Christ? Was anyone resurrected before the resurrection of Jesus Christ? Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 18:277.
[^9] When did the first "general" resurrection occur? When did the first "general" resurrection occur? Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 25:250.
[^10] Has there been a general resurrection since the resurrection of Jesus Christ? Has there been a general resurrection since the resurrection of Jesus Christ? Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 46.
[^11] Can a righteous person who has passed through the experience of temporal death be resurrected now if it is in keeping with the plan and purpose of our Heavenly Father for that person? Can a righteous person who has passed through the experience of temporal death be resurrected now if it is in keeping with the plan and purpose of our Heavenly Father for that person? Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 9:139.
[^12] What is meant by the terms "first resurrection" and "second resurrection"? What is meant by the terms "first resurrection" and "second resurrection"? Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 8:260.
[^13] What is the shape, form, or frame of the body when it is resurrected from the dead? What is the shape, form, or frame of the body when it is resurrected from the dead? Doctrines of Salvation, 2:295.
[^14] What is the state or condition of the body when it is resurrected from the dead? What is the state or condition of the body when it is resurrected from the dead? McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 639.
[^15] What are the orders or degrees of the physical matter comprising resurrected bodies? What are the orders or degrees of the physical matter comprising resurrected bodies? Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith,199-200.
[^16] What are the attributes or characteristics of people who inherit each of these different degrees? What are the attributes or characteristics of people who inherit each of these different degrees? John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement, 166.
[^17] Who or what determines the order or degree of the resurrected body an individual receives? Who or what determines the order or degree of the resurrected body an individual receives? Gospel Doctrine, 23.
[^18] Does an individual person who is now on this earth have agency as to whether or not he or she will be resurrected from the dead? Does an individual person who is now on this earth have agency as to whether or not he or she will be resurrected from the dead? Ibid., 24.
[^19] Does an individual who is now on this earth have agency as to the degree or order of resurrected body he or she will receive in the resurrection? Does an individual who is now on this earth have agency as to the degree or order of resurrected body he or she will receive in the resurrection? Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 2 vols.(Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1953), 2:110.
[^20] Might the resurrection be considered a type of judgment? Might the resurrection be considered a type of judgment? James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 83.
[^21] Is the resurrection the same as the "final judgment"? Is the resurrection the same as the "final judgment"? Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 12:278.
[^22] What is the testimony of our living prophet, Gordon B. Hinckley, on the subject of the resurrection? What is the testimony of our living prophet, Gordon B. Hinckley, on the subject of the resurrection? Gospel Doctrine, 450-51.
[^23] George Q. Cannon, in Conference Report, April 1900, 54.
[^24] Melvin J. Ballard, in Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, comp. Bryant S. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949), 256.
[^25] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983),29.
[^26] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 1:196.
[^27] Gordon B. Hinckley, Teachings of Gordon B. Hinckley(Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997), 552.
