Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

The Plan of Progression and Eternal Life

Chapter 17

The Plan of Progression and Eternal Life

This chapter consists of eight outlines giving basic resources and asking fundamental questions about the various aspects of our Father's plan for his children. Those who study these materials carefully will develop a much deeper understanding and appreciation for this wonderful plan and its meaning in our lives.

Outline 1: The Pre-Earthly Existence of the Spirit

Topical Guide: "Man, a Spirit Child of Heavenly Father," 305; "Man, Antemortal Existence of," 305; "Spirit Body," 493.

Index to Triple Combination: "Premortal Existence," 274; "Spirit World," 346.

Articles in Jesus Christ and His Gospel1: "Council in Heaven," 83; "First Estate," 168; "Intelligences," 249-51; "Origin of Man," 374-76; "Pre-Existence (Pre-Earthly Existence)," 396; Premortal Life," 396-400; "Spirit Body," 441-42; "The Origin of Man," 477-83.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak2: 3-10

Selected Questions for Discussion

By what means on this earth do we learn about the pre-earthly existence? The scriptures, the word of the Lord to his prophets (including his current prophets), the temple endowment, personal revelation, the inspiration that has come to others, and so forth.

What are some of the things we know about our pre-earthly existence? Joseph Smith: "Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle." [^1]

Joseph Smith: "The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity." [^2]

Joseph F. Smith: "A spirit born of God is an immortal being." [^3]

What do we know about our existence as an intelligence ("pure" intelligence)? Very little, except that it is eternal in nature and can neither be created nor destroyed (see Abraham 3:21-23).

Joseph Smith: "The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal [co-eternal] with God himself. . . . I am dwelling on the immortality of the spirit of man. Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, and yet that it had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. . . . There never was a time when there were not spirits; for they are co-equal [co-eternal] with our Father in heaven. . . . Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit from age to age, and there is no creation about it." [^4]

What do we know about our existence as spirit children of our Heavenly Father ("organized intelligence" or "personages of spirit")? Quite a bit, especially from latter-day scriptures and teachings. (Note the significance of Abraham 3:22.)

Joseph F. Smith and First Presidency: "The doctrine of the pre-existence,—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner." [^5]

What elements are included in the term"the spirit of man"? Intelligence and personage of spirit.

Joseph Fielding Smith: "There is something called intelligence which always existed. It is the real eternal part of man, which was not created or made. This intelligence combined with the spirit constitutes a spiritual identity or individual. The spirit of man, then, is a combination of the intelligence and the spirit which is an entity begotten of God." [^6]

"The Lord had shown unto me . . . the intelligences that were organized before the world was" (Abraham 3:22).

What is the relationship of God the Father to the spirits of everyone who has ever lived on this earth or who will ever live on this earth? He is "the God of the spirits of all flesh" (Numbers 16:22). "We are the children of God" (Romans 8:16).

Joseph F. Smith and First Presidency: "All people who come to this earth and are born in mortality had a pre-existent, spiritual personality as the sons or daughters of the Eternal Father." [^7]

What is meant by the term first estate? The pre-earthly existence (see Jude 1:6).

What were some of the major purposes of the great Council in Heaven? To present, explain, and discuss the plan of progression and eternal life; to vote on this plan.

Who were some of the major personalities involved in the discussions and decisions in the great pre-earthly council? "Man of Holiness" (God the Father), "the great I AM" (Jesus Christ), "Michael" (Adam), "Lucifer" (the devil, Satan).

What were some of the major issues underlying the "war in heaven"? The role of agency and of faith; the necessity of a "veil of forgetfulness"; whether the great I AM [Jesus Christ] would be able to atone; whether Jesus Christ would be willing to atone; the selfish desire of Lucifer to put his throne above the throne of God (see 2 Nephi 24:12-14).

What were some of the consequences of the war in heaven? Those who voted against the plan (Lucifer and his followers) were not allowed to participate in the plan of having physical bodies, and so forth.

Did we have agency in that stage of our pre-earthly existence when we existed as organized intelligences (as personages of spirit, as spirit children of our Heavenly Father)? Definitely yes. Otherwise we would not have had freedom to vote on whether or not we would accept the plan of our Heavenly Father.

What is the difference between "agency" and "moral agency"? "Agency" is essentially the freedom of choice; a person has "moral agency" when and to the extent that he or she knows the consequences of the choice before the agency is exercised.

What is usually meant by the term "free agency"? Simply "agency" or "freedom of choice."

What is the stated goal ("work and glory") of our Heavenly Father in regard to his children? "To bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

Why is it important that we learn as much about our pre-earthly existence as our Heavenly Father feels he should give to us (a) as individuals, (b) as a Church, and (c) as all mankind? If we know where we came from and our potential, then we are more likely to understand and appreciate why we are here on this physical earth and what we might become in the future.

Does an individual on this earth now have agency or freedom of choice as to whether he or she will participate in a pre-earthly existence? No, that agency was "used up" when the vote was taken at the grand council.

Does an individual on this earth now have agency or freedom of choice as to whether he or she will participate in a physical, mortal existence on this earth? Obviously no.

Outline 2: Purposes of a Mortal, Physical Experience

Topical Guide: "Probation, Probationary," 393; "Test, Try, Prove," 522.

Index to Triple Combination: "Commandments of God," 54-56; "Mortal, Mortality," 232.

Articles inJesus Christ and His Gospel: "Birth," 41-42; "Commandments," 69-71; "Fall of Adam," 163-66; "Mankind," 347-49; "Mortality," 358-59; "Obedience," 366-68; "Physical Body," 381-83; "Purpose of Earth Life," 402-8; "Second Estate," 435-36; "Worlds," 470-71.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak:11-25.

Selected Questions for Discussion

What does the word create mean in regard to the creation of the earth? Footnote 1 [^8] for Genesis 1:1 in the LDS edition of the Bible gives this answer: "Shaped, fashioned, created; always divine activity; see Abr. 4:1, organized, formed."

Was the earth created spiritually before it was created physically (naturally)? Yes. "I, the Lord God, created all things . . . spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth" (Moses 3:5).

Who were some of the major personalities involved in the "spiritual" and the "physical" creations of the earth? God the Father, Jesus Christ (the Son), Michael (Adam).

When this earth was first created, what was its "order" or "degree" of physical matter? Paradisiacal, meaning terrestrial.

What are some of the major purposes of our coming to live on this physical earth?

Brigham Young: "Our mortal bodies are all important to us; without them we never can be glorified in the eternities that will be." [^10]

John Taylor: "The object of man's taking a body is, that through the redemption of Jesus Christ both soul and body may be exalted in the eternal world, when the earth shall be celestial, and obtain a higher exaltation than he could be capable of doing without a body." [^11]

Joseph F. Smith: "We have come to sojourn in the flesh, to obtain tabernacles for our immortal spirits." [^12]

Joseph F. Smith: "It is absolutely necessary that we should come to the earth and take upon us tabernacles; because if we did not have tabernacles we could not be like God, or like Jesus Christ." [^13]

Brigham Young: "There is not, has not been, and never can be any method, scheme, or plan devised by any being in this world for intelligence to eternally exist and obtain an exaltation, without knowing the good and the evil—without tasting the bitter and the sweet." [^14]

Lorenzo Snow: "We are here that we may be educated in a school of suffering and of fiery trials, which school was necessary for Jesus our Elder Brother, who, the scriptures tell us, was made perfect through suffering. It is necessary we suffer in all things, that we may be qualified and worthy to rule and govern all things, even as our Father in heaven and His Eldest Son, Jesus." [^15]

Brigham Young: "If man could have been made perfect, in his double capacity of body and spirit, without passing through the ordeals of mortality, there would have been no necessity of our coming into this state of trial and suffering. Could the Lord have glorified His children in spirit, without a body like his own, he no doubt would have done so." [^16]

James E. Talmage:"The purpose of our mortal probation is that of education, training, trial, and test, whereby we demonstrate whether we will obey the commandments of the Lord our God and so lay hold on the boundless opportunities of advancement in the eternal worlds." [^18]

4.To help in the preparation of other physical bodies so other spirits can experience an earthly existence. John Taylor: "We came here . . . and took bodies . . . to propagate our species." [^19]

5.To help family members (both descendants and progenitors) and others (friends, neighbors, associates, all mankind) learn and obey those laws and commandments that will enable them to return to live with our Heavenly Father forever. Brigham Young: "All intelligent beings who are crowned with crowns of glory, immortality, and eternal lives must pass through every ordeal appointed for intelligent beings to pass through, to gain their glory and exaltation." [^20]

Why is a "veil of forgetfulness" at the time of our physical birth necessary for the mortal experience? It is necessary in order for us to truly exercise faith.

Brigham Young: "It has . . . been decreed by the Almighty that spirits, upon taking bodies, shall forget all they had known previously, or they could not have a day of trial." [^21]

How important is our mortal physical experience? It is a necessary and important part of the plan of eternal progression.

Joseph Fielding Smith: "This life is the most vital period in our eternal existence." [^22]

Bruce R. McConkie: "In a very real and literal sense the life that we are now living is the final examination for that infinite period of preparation that we had in the premortal life. Now if we do not respond as we ought to respond . . . then in effect we are throwing away all of the preparation that we made in the premortal life. . . . Now this life is not only the final examination for the life, the eternity, that went before, but this mortal probation is an entrance examination to determine the sphere, and the place, and the kingdom and the reward that we will have in the mansions ahead. . . . In a very real and definite sense, that singles out this mortal probation as the most important part of all eternity." [^23]

In the pre-earthly existence, did we have agency or freedom of choice as to whether or not we wanted to participate in the great plan of physical life on a physical earth? Absolutely yes.

Does an individual on this earth now have choice or agency as to whether he or she will participate in the great plan of physical life on a physical earth?Obviously, no.

Outline 3: Physical (or Temporal) Death

Topical Guide: "Death," 89-90.

Bible Dictionary: "Death," 655.

Index to Triple Combination: "Death, Physical," 73-74.

Articles in Jesus Christ and His Gospel: "Afterlife," 5-6; "Death and Dying," 96-101.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak:48-49.

Selected Questions for Discussion

What is death? A separation.

What is "physical death"? The separation of the spirit from the physical body.

Brigham Young: "What is commonly called death does not destroy the body, it only causes a separation of spirit and body." [^24]

Joseph F. Smith: "That which we call death is merely the slumber and rest of this mortal clay, and that only for a little season, while the spirit, the life, has gone to enjoy again the presence and society of those from whence it came, and to whom it is joy again to return." [^25]

Orson F. Whitney: "The change called death is but a temporary separation of the spirit from the body. . . . None of our dear departed ones are dead. They have but gone before. This so-called death, when properly understood, is simply a going back home." [^26]

Boyd K. Packer: "Mortal death is no more an ending than birth was a beginning." [^27]

Why is the term temporal death often used in the Book of Mormon in place of physical death? Physical death (separation of the spirit and the physical body) is "temporary." "And we see that death comes upon mankind, yea, . . . the temporal death" (Alma 12:24).

Why is death necessary? Death is the natural consequence of the Fall of Adam. "By reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death" (Moses 6:59).

Bruce R. McConkie: "Our scriptures say: 'Death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator.' (2 Ne. 9:6.) Where the true Saints are concerned there is no sorrow in death except that which attends a temporary separation from loved ones. Birth and death are both essential steps in the unfolding drama of eternity.

"We shouted for joy at the privilege of becoming mortal because without the tests of mortality there could be no eternal life. We now sing praises to the great Redeemer for the privilege of passing from this life because without death and the resurrection we could not be raised in immortal glory and gain eternal life. . . .

"Now, we do not seek death, though it is part of the merciful plan of the great Creator. Rather, we rejoice in life." [^28]

Should we mourn for those who die? Yes. However, for the righteous who die we should mourn only because we are temporarily separated from them.

Joseph Smith: "The Lord takes many away, even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them again." [^29]

Spencer W. Kimball: "In death do we grieve for the one who passes on, or is it self-pity? To doubt the wisdom and justice of the passing of a loved one is to place a limitation on the term of life. It is to say that it is more important to continue to live here than to go into other fields. Do we grieve when our son is graduated from the local high school and is sent away from home to a university of higher learning? Do we grieve inconsolably when our son is called away from our daily embrace to distant lands to preach the gospel? To continue to grieve without faith and understanding and trust when a son goes into another world is to question the long-range program of God, life eternal with all its opportunities and blessings." [^30]

Spencer W. Kimball: "If we say that early death is a calamity, disaster, or tragedy, would it not be saying that mortality is preferable to earlier entrance into the spirit world and to eventual salvation and exaltation? If mortality be the perfect state, then death would be frustration, but the gospel teaches us there is no tragedy in death, but only in sin. '. . . blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. . . . '(D&C 63:49.)" [^31]

Who must die? Everyone. "As in Adam all die" (1 Corinthians 15:22).

Did Jesus Christ have power over death? Could he have lived forever? Yes, to both questions; however, he had to die in order to bring about the resurrection of all mankind, who "must needs die" (see 2 Samuel 14:14).

What power enabled Jesus Christ to overcome death (to bring about the resurrection)? The power he received as the "Only Begotten Son of God" in the flesh. The father of the physical body of Jesus Christ was our (and his) immortal Father in Heaven. "For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself" (John 5:26).

Are both death and the resurrection infinite? Yes. Every living thing possesses a spirit that must be separated at least temporarily from its physical body, which is death. Likewise, the spirit of every living thing must eventually be rejoined with its physical body, which is resurrection.

What is the difference between a translated being and a resurrected being? A resurrected being has already gone through the processes of both death and resurrection.

Do translated beings need to die? Yes. Joseph Fielding Smith: "Translated beings are still mortal and will have to pass through the experience of death, or the separation of the spirit and the body, although this will be instantaneous" [^32] (see also 3 Nephi 28:17, 36-40).

What is meant by the term spiritual death? The spirit is separated from God.

Can the spirit die? No. The spirit is eternal. The spiritual death referred to in the scriptures pertains to the relationship of the spirit to the Spirit of our Heavenly Father. However, the spirit cannot be destroyed or annihilated.

What did the Savior mean when he said, "Whosoever . . . believeth in me shall never die" (John 11:26)? He was referring primarily to spiritual death; however, in the preceding verse he referred also to the power of the resurrection: "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live."

What is meant by the statement that the righteous "shall not taste of death"? Their death shall not be bitter. "Those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them; And they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter" (D&C 42:46-47).

Does an individual on this earth now have choice or agency as to whether he or she will die a physical death?No.

Does that mean we are predestined to die? That depends on your definition of predestination. In the pre-earthly existence, we had agency or freedom of choice as to whether or not we would come upon this physical earth and take upon ourselves mortal bodies; however, we "used up" that agency in the pre-earthly existence. Thus, now we must die. Those people who do not believe in (or understand) our pre-earthly existence would probably say we are predestined to die. But the fact is that at one time we had agency in whether or not we would die.

Outline 4: The Postmortal Spirit World

Topical Guide: "Spirits in Prison," 494.

Bible Dictionary: "Paradise," 742.

Index to Triple Combination: "Spirit World," 346.

Articles inJesus Christ and His Gospel: "Spirit Prison," 443-44; "Spirit World," 446-49.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak: 26-35.

Selected Questions for Discussion

Who goes into the postmortal spirit world upon death? "Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection—Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, . . . whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life" (Alma 40:11).

Brigham Young: "It reads that the spirit goes to God who gave it. Let me render this Scripture a little plainer; when the spirits leave their bodies they are in the presence of our Father and God, [in the sense that] they are prepared then to see, hear and understand spiritual things. But where is the spirit world? It is incorporated within this celestial system. Can you see it with your natural eyes? No. Can you see spirits in this room? No. Suppose the Lord should touch your eyes that you might see, could you then see the spirits? Yes, as plainly as you now see bodies, as did the servant of Elijah [2 Kings 6:17]. If the Lord would permit it, and it was His will that it should be done, you could see the spirits that have departed from this world as plainly as you now see bodies with your natural eyes." [^33]

If we can be permitted to see and visit with those in the postmortal spirit world, can they also be permitted to see and visit with us? Yes.

Joseph F. Smith: "Those who have passed beyond, can see more clearly through the veil back here to us than it is possible for us to see to them from our sphere of action. . . . We live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever. For now they see the dangers that beset us; . . . their desire for our well being, must be greater than that which we feel for ourselves." [^34]

Joseph F. Smith: "Our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit relatives and friends upon the earth again, bringing from the divine Presence messages of love, of warning, of reproof and instruction to those whom they had learned to love in the flesh." [^35]

Charles A. Callis: "Death does not congeal the lips of those who go before us; they are not far from us and they help us more than we know." [^36]

Is the postmortal spirit world the same as the pre-earthly spirit world? No.

Where is the postmortal spirit world? It is on this earth.

Brigham Young: "When you lay down this tabernacle, where are you going? Into the spiritual world. . . . Where is the spirit world? It is right here. Do the good and evil spirits go together? Yes, they do. Do they both inhabit one kingdom? Yes, they do. . . . Do they go beyond the boundaries of the organized earth? No, they do not." [^37]

Brigham Young: "The spirit world . . . is on this earth." [^38]

Parley P. Pratt: "The [postmortal] spirit world is not the heaven where Jesus Christ [and] his Father . . . dwell. . . . As to its location, it is here on the very planet where we were born; or, in other words, the earth." [^39]

What are the major divisions in the postmortal spirit world?

2.Spirit "prison." Who goes to the spirit prison? What are some of the major activities there? What enables a person to leave the spirit prison?For answers, see especially 1 Peter 3:19; 4:16; Alma 40:13-14; D&C 76:73; 138:28-29, 57; Moses 7:38, 57.

Brigham Young: "Suppose . . . that a man is evil in his heart—wholly given up to wickedness, and in that condition dies, his spirit will enter the spirit-world intent upon evil." [^40]

What can we do here in this life to help people leave the spirit prison? Search out the vital statistics concerning their lives here upon earth, and then act as vicarious proxies in doing their temple work for them.

Brigham Young: "You may ask if they are baptized there [in the postmortal spirit world]? No. Can they have hands laid upon them for the gift of the Holy Ghost? No. None of the outward ordinances that pertain to the flesh are administered there, but the light, glory, and power of the Holy Ghost are enjoyed." [^41]

Is the veil of forgetfulness (the "veil of mortality") automatically removed at the time of death when the person enters the postmortal spirit world? No. However, Jesus Christ and perhaps some other righteous persons have been so faithful and diligent in this life that the veil of forgetfulness has been removed from them while they were still living on earth.

By what means or power is the veil of forgetfulness removed? By the power of the individual's spirit, working in conjunction with the Spirit of our Heavenly Father. (See D&C 8:1-4 and the accompanying footnote references for these verses.)

What are some of the major conditions or characteristics in the postmortal spirit world? The spirit body is perfect. Spirits know each other. Spirits have the ability to travel in time and space.

Brigham Young: "The brightness and glory of the next apartment is inexpressible. . . . They move with ease and like lightning. If we want to visit Jerusalem, or this, that, or the other place—and I presume we will be permitted if we desire—there we are, looking at its streets. If we want to behold Jerusalem as it was in the days of the Savior; or if we want to see the Garden of Eden as it was when created, there we are, and we see it as it existed spiritually, for it was created first spiritually and then temporally, and spiritually it still remains. . . . Here, we are continually troubled with ills and ailments of various kinds . . . , but in the spirit world we are free from all this." [^42]

Parley P. Pratt: "[The postmortal spirit world] is an intermediate state, a probation, a place of preparation, improvement, instruction, or education, where spirits are chastened and improved, and where, if found worthy, they may be taught a knowledge of the gospel." [^43]

How long will a person remain in the postmortal spirit world? From his or her death until his or her resurrection. For some, it will be a long time (as an example, Cain will spend thousands of years there); for others, it will be only the "twinkling of an eye" (as examples, translated beings and the righteous upon the earth at the Second Coming and during the Millennium).

What analogies might be used to help a person understand more about the conditions and characteristics of the postmortal spirit world? The different "frequencies" involved in sight and in hearing. Radio. Television. Internet systems. Information highway. As an example, hundreds of sounds now surround us, but we cannot hear them by ourselves—these sounds are on a frequency our ears cannot hear. However, a radio can change the frequencies of these sounds into frequencies our ears can hear.

Does an individual on this earth now have choice or agency as to whether he or she will eventually go to the postmortal spirit world?No.

Outline 5: The Resurrection

Topical Guide: "Resurrection," 426-27.

Bible Dictionary: "Resurrection," 761.

Index to Triple Combination: "Resurrection," 302-3.

Articles inJesus Christ and His Gospel: "Immortality," 242-44; "Immortality and Eternal Life," 244-45; "Resurrection of Jesus Christ," 272-73; "Resurrection," 417-20.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak:36-49.

Selected Questions for Discussion

What is resurrection? Resurrection is the reuniting of the spirit with its physical body. Resurrection is one of the unconditional aspects of the Atonement of Jesus Christ.

John Taylor: "In the resurrection, both body and spirit will . . . be reunited." [^44]

Hyrum M. Smith: "Death is the dissolution of the body, and the resurrection is the reanimation of the body; yea the actual and literal reuniting of the Spirit with the body." [^45]

Who is resurrected? All will be resurrected, without exception. Even sons of perdition in the flesh will be resurrected (see 1 Corinthians 15:22; Alma 11:44).

Joseph F. Smith: "Every creature that is born in the image of God will be resurrected from the dead. . . . Just as sure as we go down into the grave, through the transgression of our first parents, by whom death came into the world, so sure will we be resurrected from the dead by the power of Jesus Christ. It matters not whether we have done well or ill, whether we have been intelligent or ignorant, or whether we have been bondsmen or slaves or freemen, all men will be raised from the dead." [^46]

Is the resurrection "infinite"? Yes.

Does this mean that every spirit that has had a "body" must be resurrected, whether it is the spirit of a person, or the spirit of an animal, of a plant, of a fish, or even of an insect? Yes. The resurrection applies to the earth itself (see D&C 88:17-18, 25-26) and to everything that has ever lived on this earth. Some leaders of the Church have suggested that the resurrection might also apply to everything that has ever lived on any of the earths created by Jesus Christ.

Must every person be resurrected? Yes.

Is there a literal resurrection of a physical body? Yes.

Joseph Fielding Smith: "The Savior is not going to save only mankind. Everything God has created must be restored, . . . everything the Lord has created. . . . Everything that has life [was] created in the image of its spirit, and is a living soul, and therefore entitled to the resurrection." [^47]

By what power or means is the resurrection accomplished?

2.By the power of our own spirit. Joseph F. Smith: "Jesus, the Only Begotten of the Father, . . . had power to lay down his life and take it up again, and if we keep inviolate the covenants of the Gospel, remaining faithful and true to the end, we too, in his name and through his redeeming blood, will have power in due time to resurrect these our bodies after they shall have been committed to the earth." [^49]

Joseph F. Smith: "What is the body without the spirit? It is lifeless clay. What is it that affects this lifeless clay? It is the spirit, [and the spirit] will redeem these tabernacles and bring them forth out of the graves." [^50]

Spencer W. Kimball: "There will be a literal resurrection, when this live and conscious spirit will return . . . to take up its reconstructed and resurrected body." [^51]

Was anyone resurrected before the resurrection of Jesus Christ? No. No one was resurrected before Jesus Christ; he is the "firstfruits" of the resurrection (1 Corinthians 15:20) and made it possible for others subsequently to be resurrected.

What is the "first resurrection"? The resurrection of the righteous or the just. If a person is resurrected at the first opportunity he has to be resurrected after his death, then he comes forth in the morning of the first resurrection.

What is the "second resurrection"? The resurrection of the wicked or unjust.

Has there been a general resurrection since the resurrection at the time of Christ? No. The first general resurrection was at the time Jesus Christ was resurrected; the next general resurrection will be at the time of the second coming of Jesus Christ. However, if it is necessary for a specific person to be resurrected in order to perform a mission here on earth (such as the angel Moroni) that person might be resurrected.

What is the status (shape, form, frame) of the body when it is resurrected from the dead? The physical body will be restored to its proper and perfect form or frame (see Alma 11:43-45; 40:23; 41:4), regardless of what may have happened to the physical body at the time of death or after the time of death.

What is the state or condition of the body when it is resurrected? The physical body will come forth from the grave as it is laid down. Then, immediately after the resurrection, the body will begin to grow and develop (for children) and to be restored to its perfect condition (for the aged and infirm).

Joseph Smith: "All men will come from the grave as they lie down." [^52]

John Taylor: "When the resurrection . . . of man shall be consummated, . . . he [will] still be in the same image, and have the same likeness, without variation or change in any of his parts or faculties, except the substitution of spirit for blood." [^53]

Joseph F. Smith: "What a glorious thought it is, to me at least, . . . that those from whom we have to part here, we will meet again and see as they are. We will meet the same identical being . . . , even to the wounds in the flesh. Not that a person will always be marred by scars, wounds, deformities, defects or infirmities, for these will be removed in their course, in their proper time, according to the merciful providence of God." [^54]

Joseph Fielding Smith: "The mortal body will not grow in the grave, for that is contrary to nature. . . . After the resurrection . . . deformities will be erased." [^55]

Are these the same conditions for the resurrection of the bodies of children? Yes.

Joseph F. Smith: "The child that was buried in its infancy will come up in the form of the child that it was when it was laid down; then it will begin to develop. From the day of the resurrection, the body will develop." [^56]

Joseph Fielding Smith: "Children will rise as they were laid away, but after the resurrection their bodies will grow to the full stature of their spirits." [^57]

Is the resurrection a type of judgment? Yes. At the time of the resurrection, you will come forth with a body of a particular "order" of matter. Thus, this is a type or degree of judgment.

Is it the "final" judgment? No.

Does an individual on this earth now have choice or agency as to whether he or she will be resurrected from the dead?No.

Outline 6: The Three Degrees of Glory

Topical Guide: "Celestial Glory," 54; "Telestial Glory," 518; "Terrestrial Glory," 522.

Bible Dictionary: "Degrees of Glory," 655.

Index to Triple Combination: "Celestial Glory," 44; "Telestial Glory," 361-62; "Terrestrial," 364.

Articles in Jesus Christ and His Gospel: "Celestial Kingdom," 56; "Degrees of Glory," 101-4; "Telestial Kingdom," 451-52; "Terrestrial Kingdom," 454-55.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak: 61-70.

Selected Questions for Discussion

What are the "orders" or "degrees" of the physical matter comprising resurrected bodies? What are the attributes or characteristics of people who inherit each of these different "degrees"?

2.Terrestrial glory. They "who died without law," "the spirits of men kept in prison," "who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it," "who are honorable men of the earth," "who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus" (D&C 76:71-79). These people might be characterized as being "we oriented."

3.Telestial glory. They "who received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus," "who deny not the Holy Spirit," "who are thrust down to hell," "who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection," "who will not be gathered with the saints, . . . and received into the cloud," "who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie." "And . . . where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end" (D&C 76:81-88, 98-112). These people might be characterized as being "me oriented."

4.Bodies "without glory." They who "are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have been born." They "deny the truth and defy my power— . . . concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come—Having . . . crucified [the Only Begotten Son of the Father] unto themselves." These are "the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power" (compare D&C 76:31-39).

How many "heavens" or "degrees" are found within each of the orders of the resurrection? There are three heavens or degrees within the celestial kingdom. It is not known precisely how many there are in the other "orders." "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you" (John 14:2).

James E. Talmage: "The three kingdoms of widely differing glories are organized on an orderly plan of gradation. . . . The telestial kingdom comprises several subdivisions; this is also the case . . . with the celestial; and, by analogy, we conclude that a similar condition prevails in the terrestrial. Thus the innumerable degrees of merit amongst mankind are provided for in an infinity of graded glories."59

What determines the "order" or "degree" of resurrected body an individual will receive? This is largely determined by the individual himself or herself (see D&C 88:2-4, 15-31). What laws has the individual obeyed? Over what laws does he or she have power?

Wilford Woodruff: "If a man cannot abide a celestial law, he cannot receive a celestial glory, if a man cannot abide a terrestrial law he cannot receive a terrestrial glory; and if he cannot abide a telestial law he cannot receive a telestial glory, but will have to dwell in a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory. This is according to the revelations of God to us." [^58]

Joseph F. Smith: "When we come forth out of the grave, . . . our spirits shall enter into [our physical bodies] again, and they shall become living souls. . . . And then those who have . . . been subject and obedient to the celestial law will . . . be quickened by the celestial glory. And those who have . . . been subject and obedient to the terrestrial law will . . . be quickened by the terrestrial glory. And those who have . . . been subject and obedient to the telestial law, will . . . be quickened by a telestial glory." [^59]

George Q. Cannon: "Why is it that there are these differences? Is it because God has chosen some of us for the telestial glory, some of us for the terrestrial glory, and some of us for the celestial glory?No, there is no such predestination as this. We are all born with our free agency; with the power within ourselves, aided by the blessing of God, to attain unto the highest glory. How shall we attain unto the highest glory? There is only one way, and that is by observing the highest laws. . . . The man or woman who expects to attain to the highest glory without obeying these laws, deceives himself or herself. It cannot be done." [^60]

Melvin J. Ballard: "Those who come forth in the celestial glory with celestial bodies have a body that is more refined. It is different. The very fibre and texture of the celestial body is more pure and holy than a telestial or terrestrial body, and a celestial body alone can endure celestial glory." [^61]

What should be the goal of every person on the earth so far as a degree of glory in the hereafter is concerned? To inherit the highest degree within the celestial kingdom.

Wilford Woodruff: "Celestial glory is worth all we possess; if it calls for every dollar we own and our lives into the bargain, if we obtain an entrance into the celestial kingdom of God it will amply repay us." [^62]

What does the individual need to do in order to inherit the celestial kingdom? Become sanctified, pure, spotless (see 3 Nephi 27:19-27). Technically, baptism is not a prerequisite for the celestial kingdom; for example, "all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability [and thus before baptism] are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 137:10). However, for all those who have committed sin, baptism of both water and the spirit are necessary for them to be sanctified; thus "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5).

What does the individual need to do in order to inherit the highest degree of the celestial kingdom? Become sanctified and obey all of the laws and commandments of our Heavenly Father, including the law of the "new and everlasting covenant of marriage."

What about those who do not marry in this life? Everyone will have the opportunity to marry if he or she wishes, if not in this life, then in the life hereafter.

What role does the gospel of Jesus Christ play in regard to the celestial kingdom? The gospel of Jesus Christ contains the principles and ordinances that must be learned and followed in order for each of us to enter the presence of God the Father with a resurrected body of celestial matter.

George Albert Smith: "The gospel has been restored in these latter days to prepare men for the celestial kingdom." [^63]

Can a person progress from one kingdom of glory to another in the hereafter? The scriptures indicate some restrictions pertaining to progression from some of the kingdoms to other kingdoms.

Melvin J. Ballard: "So far as the telestial group is concerned . . . 'Where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end' [D&C 76:112]. I take it upon the same basis, the same argument likewise applies to the terrestrial world." [^64]

Spencer W. Kimball: "After a person has been assigned to his place in the kingdom, . . . he will never advance from his assigned glory to another glory. . . . That is why we must make our decisions early in life and why it is imperative that such decisions be right." [^65]

Does an individual on this earth now have choice or agency as to whether or not he or she will receive some "order" or "degree" of physical body at the time of his or her resurrection? No. However, the individual definitely has agency to decide which laws he or she will obey and thus which order of resurrected body he or she will receive.

Outline 7: The Final Judgment

Topical Guide: "Jesus Christ, Judge," 248; "Judgment," 262-63; "Judgment, the Last," 263.

Index to Triple Combination: "Judgment," 189-90.

Articles in Jesus Christ and His Gospel: "Judgment," 311-14; "Judgment Day, Final," 314-17.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak:50-60.

Selected Questions for Discussion

Who will be judged at the final judgment? Everyone will be judged—"we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ" (Romans 14:10).

Joseph F. Smith: "Every man will have to render an account of his stewardship, and every one will be held responsible for his own works, whether good or evil." [^66]

When does the "final judgment" occur for an individual in relationship to that individual's resurrection? After the resurrection. "When all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, . . . they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel; and then cometh the judgment" (2 Nephi 9:15).

Of what will each individual be judged at the final judgment? His or her thoughts, words, and deeds (see Alma 12:14-15). "For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; . . . and our thoughts will also condemn us" (Alma 12:14). "For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil" (Ecclesiastes 12:14). "For all thy doings thou shalt be brought into judgment" (1 Nephi 10:20). "I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment" (Matthew 12:36).

Brigham Young: "Each and every intelligent being will be judged according to the deeds done in the body, according to his works, faith, desires, and honesty or dishonesty before God; every trait of his character will receive its just merit or demerit, and he will be judged according to the law of heaven." [^67]

Brigham Young: "We shall be judged according to the deeds done in the body and according to the thoughts and intents of the heart." [^68]

John Taylor: "For every word and every secret thought we shall have to give an account in the day when accounts have to be rendered before God." [^69]

Under whose direction will the final judgment take place? Who is the judge of the "quick" and the "dead"? Jesus Christ is ordained of God to be Judge both of the living and of the dead. "I will execute judgment: I am the LORD" (Ecclesiastes 12:12). "The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth" (1 Samuel 2:10). "Every man's judgment cometh from the Lord" (Proverbs 29:26). "The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son" (John 5:22). "I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts" (D&C 137:9).

What words characterize the nature and process of the final judgment? "The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether" (Psalm 19:9). "The judgment of God is according to truth" (Romans 2:2). "He shall execute judgment in righteousness" (1 Nephi 22:21; see also John 8:16; Moses 6:57).

Spencer W. Kimball: "The Lord will judge with the same measurements meted out by us. If we are harsh, we should not expect other than harshness. If we are merciful with those who injure us, he will be merciful with us in our errors. If we are unforgiving, he will leave us weltering in our own sins." [^70]

Will the final judgment be very similar to the judgments of the world? If not, how will it differ? No. A person's status at the final judgment will be determined largely by the individual himself or herself, but will be confirmed by two or more "witnesses" serving as "judges." People after their judgment see as they are seen, know as they are known, and understand their condition as God understands it; thus everyone leaves the judgment bar knowing that God's judgment is fair and true.

John Taylor: "My understanding of the [final judgment] is, that God has made each man a register within himself, and each man can read his own register. . . . Now, if you are in possession of a spirit or intellectuality of that kind, whereby you are enabled to read your own acts, do you not think that that being who has placed that spirit and intelligence within you holds the keys of that intelligence, and can read it whenever he pleases? Is not that philosophical, reasonable, and scriptural? I think it is. . . . Well, then, upon this principle we can readily perceive how the Lord will bring into judgment the actions of men when he shall call them forth at the last day. . . . Then the secret thoughts of all men are revealed before Him with whom we have to do; we cannot hide them; it would be in vain for a man to say then, I did not do so-and-so; the command would be, Unravel and read the record which he has made of himself, and let it testify in relation to these things. . . . If a man has acted fraudulently against his neighbor—has committed murder, or adultery, or any thing else, and wants to cover it up, that record will stare him in the face, he tells the story himself, and bears witness against himself. It is written that Jesus will judge not after the sight of the eye, or after the hearing of the ear, but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity the meek of the earth. It is not because somebody has seen things, or heard anything by which a man will be judged and condemned, but it is because that record that is written by the man himself in the tablets of his own mind—that record that cannot lie—will in that day be unfolded before God and angels, and those who shall sit as judges." [^71]

John Taylor: "If I had time to enter into this subject alone I could show you upon scientific principles that man himself is a self-registering machine, his eyes, his ears, his nose, the touch, the taste, and all the various senses of the body, are so many media whereby man lays up for himself a record . . . ; and when the time comes for that record to be unfolded . . . all things, we are told, are naked and open before him with whom we have to do." [^72]

Spencer W. Kimball: "Men's deeds and thoughts must be recorded in heaven, and recording angels will not fail to make complete recordings of our thoughts and actions. . . . There will be no omissions in the heavenly records, and they will all be available at the day of judgment. . . . At that day we may be sure that we shall receive fair judgment. The judges will have the facts as they may be played back from our own records, and our voices and the pictures of our acts and the recordings of our thoughts will testify against and for us." [^73]

Can a person truly forget anything he has ever seen or said or done? Joseph F. Smith: "In reality a man cannot forget anything. He may have a lapse of memory; he may not be able to recall at the moment a thing that he knows, or words that he has spoken; . . . but let God Almighty touch the mainspring of the memory, and awaken recollection, and you will find then that you have not even forgotten a single idle word that you have spoken." [^74]

If a person has fully repented of a sin and has been forgiven, can he remember his sin? Yes. If the person could not remember the sin once he had repented, what would prevent him from committing the sin again?

Can God remember the sin of a repentant sinner? Yes. If the person can remember, but God cannot remember, then would this not make the person greater than God in this respect?

Does God remember the sin of a repentant sinner? No, he does not remember. It is not that he cannot remember the sins that have been repented of, but he himself has stated that he will not remember them: "I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins" (Isaiah 43:25). "For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more" (Jeremiah 31:34). "And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more" (Hebrews 10:17).

Does an individual on this earth now have choice or agency as to whether he or she will be judged at the final judgment?No.

Outline 8: Exaltation and Eternal Life (Godhood)

Topical Guide: "Earth, Purpose of," 115-16; "Eternal Life," 125-26; "Exaltation," 128-29; "Family, Eternal," 138; "God, Eternal Nature of," 173-74; "Jesus Christ, Mission of," 250-51; "Man, Potential to Become like Heavenly Father," 307.

Index to Triple Combination: "Celestial Glory," 44; "Continue, Continuation," 61; "Eternal Life," 98; "Exaltation," 100; "Immortality, Immortal," 161-62; "Salvation," 314-15.

Articles in Jesus Christ and His Gospel: "Endless and Eternal," 146-47; "Eternal Life," 151-53; "Eternal Lives, Eternal Increase," 153-54; "Eternal Progression," 154-56; "Exaltation," 159; "Godhood," 205-9; "Heirs," 226-28; "Immortality and Eternal Life," 244-45; "Plan of Salvation, Plan of Redemption," 383-89.

Pages in Latter-day Prophets Speak:71-79.

Selected Questions for Discussion

What is meant by the word exaltation? Exaltation is to be saved in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom with the power of eternal increase. Bruce R. McConkie: "Exaltation consists in the continuation of the family unit in eternity. Exaltation is eternal life, the kind of life which God lives. Those who obtain it . . . [have] a continuation of the seeds forever . . . ; that is, they have spirit children in the resurrection, in relation to which offspring they stand in the same position that God our Father stands to us." [^75]

What is meant by the term eternal life? Eternal life is to have the power of eternal increase; sometimes this gift is referred to as "eternal lives" (see D&C 132:24, 55).

Joseph Fielding Smith: "Eternal life is the same kind of life possessed by the Father and the Son with the power of eternal increase." [^76]

What differences are there, if any, between these two terms? The two words mean essentially the same; both of them have to do with the power of becoming as God is.

What differences are there, if any, between the terms immortality and eternal life? Immortality has to do with the resurrection. Eternal life has to do with exaltation in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom.

In what sense or degree should we be concerned with our individual "eternal life"? Marion G. Romney: "The supreme objective of men who understand God, their relationship to him, and his designs for them is to gain eternal life. This is as it should be, for eternal life ' . . . is the greatest of all the gifts of God' (D&C 14:7). To bring men to eternal life is God's 'work and glory.' To this end he conceives, brings into being, directs and uses all his creations (Moses 1:38-39)." [^77]

What are some of the attributes that characterize eternal life (eternal lives)?

2.Being in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom, in the presence of God our Heavenly Father.

3.Having the power of eternal increase (eternal lives). "This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent" (D&C 132:24).

4.Becoming perfect. "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Nephi 12:48).

5.Being a "joint-heir" with Jesus Christ in participating in and enjoying the type of life that God himself enjoys. "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ . . . that we may be also glorified together" (Romans 8:16-17).

Lorenzo Snow: "We believe that we are the offspring of our Father in heaven. . . . There is the nature of deity in the composition of our spiritual organization; in our spiritual birth our Father transmitted to us the capabilities, powers and faculties which he himself possessed, as much so as the child . . . possesses, although in an undeveloped state, the faculties, powers and susceptibilities of its parent." [^78]

6.Godhood. "Then shall they be gods, because they have no end . . . they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them" (D&C 132:20).

Joseph Smith: "You have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, . . . the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation." [^79]

Lorenzo Snow: "As man now is, God once was; As God now is, man may be." [^80]

John Taylor: "Man . . . is a God in embryo and will live and progress throughout the eternal ages, if obedient to the laws of the Godhead, as the Gods progress throughout the eternal ages." [^81]

Brigham Young: "Man is made an agent to himself before his God; he is organized for the express purpose, that he may become like his master. . . . [W]hen we have [proven ourselves] and been faithful with all things He puts into our possession . . . [we will become] capable of creating worlds on worlds, and becoming Gods." [^82]

Can men and women, as gods and goddesses, organize and populate new worlds? Yes.

Brigham Young: "I expect, if . . . faithful, . . . that [we] shall see the time . . . that we shall know how to prepare to organize an earth like this—know how to people that earth, how to redeem it, how to sanctify it, and how to glorify it, with those who live upon it who hearken to our counsels. . . . I am on the way, and so are you, and every faithful servant of God. . . . This is a key for you. The faithful will become Gods." [^83]

Is eternal progression a law of heaven? Yes.

Wilford Woodruff: "If there was a point where man in his progression could not proceed any further, the very idea would throw a gloom over every intelligent and reflecting mind." [^84]

Does an individual now have choice or agency as to whether he or she will receive or inherit exaltation or eternal life? Absolutely yes.

Concluding Thoughts

Bruce R. McConkie: "The last word has not been spoken on any subject. Streams of living water shall yet flow from the Eternal Spring who is the source of all truth. There are more things we do not know about the doctrines of salvation than there are things we do know." [^85]

Brigham Young: "Could we live to the age of Methuselah . . . and spend our lives in searching after the principles of eternal life, we would find . . . that we had been but children . . . just commencing to learn the things which pertains to the eternities of the Gods." [^86]

Notes

These outlines were prepared to help guide discussions in Education Week programs throughout the Church.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 353-54.
[^2] To be tried, tested, proven; to gain a knowledge of good and evil."We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abraham 3:25). "For a trial of their faith" (D&C 105:19). Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., Latter-day Prophets Speak (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1948).
[^3] To give our spirits the opportunity to learn to obey physical laws (and thus to receive the blessings predicated upon such obedience). Joseph F. Smith: "Man is a dual being, composed of the spirit which gives life, force, intelligence and capacity to man, and the body which is the tenement of the spirit and is suited to its form, adapted to its necessities, and acts in harmony with and to its utmost capacity yields obedience to the will of the spirit. The two combined constitute the soul. The body is dependent upon the spirit, and the spirit during its natural occupancy of the body is subject to the laws which apply to and govern it in the mortal state." [^17] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 354.
[^4] History of the Church, 3:387.
[^5] Gospel Doctrine, 12.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 353-54.
[^7] Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund, in Messages of the First Presidency, 4:205.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1964), 11.
[^10] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181.
[^11] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 9:286.
[^12] John Taylor, "Extract from a work by Elder John Taylor about to be published in France," Millennial Star, 13 (15 March 1851): 81.
[^13] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 19:259.
[^14] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 25:58.
[^15] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:237.
[^16] Lorenzo Snow, "Address to the Saints in Great Britain," Millennial Star, 13 (15 March 1851): 363.
[^18] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 23:169.
[^19] James E. Talmage, The Vitality of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948), 238.
[^20] John Taylor, "Extract from a work by Elder John Taylor about to be published in France," Millennial Star, 13 (15 March 1851): 81.
[^21] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 8:150.
[^22] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 6:333.
[^23] Doctrines of Salvation, 1:69.
[^24] Bruce R. McConkie, Report of the Brisbane Australia Area Conference,Feb.-Mar.1976, 15.
[^25] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 3:276.
[^26] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 19:263.
[^27] Orson F. Whitney, "We Walk by Faith," Improvement Era, 19 (May 1916): 608-9.
[^28] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1975, 147.
[^29] Bruce R. McConkie, in Conference Report, October 1976, 158-59.
[^30] History of the Church, 4:553.
[^31] Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 41.
[^32] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), 101.
[^33] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957-66), 1:165.
[^34] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 3:368.
[^35] Joseph F. Smith, in Messages of the First Presidency, 5:6-7.
[^36] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 22:351.
[^37] Charles A. Callis, in Conference Report, October 1939, 20.
[^38] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 3:369.
[^39] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 3:372.
[^40] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), 126.
[^41] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:333.
[^42] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:138.
[^43] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 14:231.
[^44] Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 126.
[^45] John Taylor, The Government of God (Liverpool, England: S. W. Richards, 1852), 27.
[^46] Hyrum M. Smith, in Conference Report, April 1917, 31.
[^47] Joseph F. Smith, "Discourse by President Joseph F. Smith," Millennial Star, 58 (12 March 1896): 162.
[^49] John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), 146-47.
[^50] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 18:277.
[^51] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 25:250.
[^52] Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 46.
[^53] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 199.
[^54] Taylor, Mediation and Atonement, 166.
[^55] Gospel Doctrine, 23.
[^56] Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1953), 2:301.
[^57] Gospel Doctrine, 24.
[^58] Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:301.
[^59] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 83.
[^60] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 12:278.
[^61] Gospel Doctrine, 450-51.
[^62] George Q. Cannon, in Conference Report, April 1900, 54.
[^63] Melvin J. Ballard, Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, comp. Bryant S. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949),256.
[^64] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 17:250.
[^65] George Albert Smith, in Conference Report, October 1926, 103.
[^66] Ballard, Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, 255.
[^67] Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 243-44.
[^68] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 24:78.
[^69] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 8:154.
[^70] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 14:99.
[^71] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 24:232.
[^72] Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness, 267.
[^73] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 11:77-79.
[^74] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 26:31.
[^75] Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness, 109.
[^76] Gospel Doctrine, 311.
[^77] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 257.
[^78] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), 331.
[^79] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1965, 20.
[^80] Lorenzo Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 14:300, 302.
[^81] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 346.
[^82] Lorenzo Snow, in Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1884), 467.
[^83] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 23:65.
[^84] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 3:93.
[^85] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 6:274-75.
[^86] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 6:120.
