Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 18

The Pre-earthly Existence of Man

We have two words in the English language to designate time relationships that have always seemed a little misleading and self-contradictory to me. One of these words—"prehistoric"—is used to denote something very old. I think most of us would agree that the term doesn't really mean what it says when it is broken down into its component parts. That is, it does not refer to a period before history, but to a period before some arbitrary point within history, such as before written history.

The other word that appears to me to be somewhat misleading is used in connection with the soul or the spirit of man. That word is "pre-existence." I suspect that when we use this word we are really thinking of a pre-earthly existence, not of an existence of man before he actually existed, which, of course, would be a contradiction of terms.

Therefore, in discussing the subject of an earlier existence of man, I should like to use the term "pre-earthly existence" rather than the traditional term of "pre-existence." With this as background, let us turn directly to the problem itself: Did we or did we not exist as individuals before we were born on this earth, and, if so, what was the nature of that existence and where did we live?"

All of the major philosophies and religions of the world have attempted to find an answer to this important question, but Christianity, as it is taught in both the Old Testament and the New Testament, offers the most complete and satisfactory answer of all. Although the teachings of the prophets as they are recorded in the present versions of the ancient scripture are not always as clear as many people would like them to be, I believe the prophets very clearly and definitely taught a pre-earthly existence. Modern prophets have added greatly to our knowledge of this earlier life.

First, I should like to outline the teachings of the prophets on the subject of the pre-earthly existence of man. Then I will examine together some of the statements in the Bible that support and clarify these teachings.

Joseph Smith, the prophet of the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation, taught that every person who has lived or who ever will live on this earth had a pre-earthly existence—first, as an individual entity called an "ego" or an "intelligence," and later as a spirit child of God clothed with a spiritual body. The Prophet said:

"The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal with God himself. . . . I am dwelling on the immortality of the spirit of man. Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, and yet that it had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. That is good logic. That which has a beginning may have an end. There never was a time when there were not spirits; for they are co-equal [coeternal] with our Father in heaven. . . . Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit from age to age, and there is no creation about it." [^1]

At the same time he made this statement, Joseph Smith also maintained that all matter existed in an elementary state from eternity and that it can neither be created nor destroyed, although it can be changed in nature or condition. This truth has since been verified by the researches of science.

The scriptures are not too clear on the exact status of the spirit before it became what the scriptures refer to as an "organized intelligence." However, the scriptures do indicate that sometime in the past this ego, spirit, or intelligence—in other words, the part of your being with which you are now doing your thinking—was clothed with a spiritual body by God. From this time forth we rightfully began to refer to God as our Father. This was our first birth, and through it all we became sons and daughters unto God. Thus, we are all truly brothers and sisters, for we are spiritually all sons and daughters of God.

The spiritual body that we had in the pre-earthly existence, however, was not a body of flesh and bones such as we now have. Rather, it was composed of spiritual matter—matter much more refined, elastic, and pure than the bodies we now have. This truth was taught to us by the Savior. Do you remember the account of the first appearance of the resurrected Christ to the eleven apostles? The apostles were gathered together in a room, and when the resurrected Savior appeared to them, "They were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them: Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself; handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have" (Luke 24:37-39).

In this brief statement, the Savior acknowledges two very important things: First, spirits do exist, and second, spirits do not have bodies of flesh and bones. Many of the earlier prophets were acquainted with the doctrine that we had an existence before this life as spiritual sons and daughters unto God. In Hebrews 12:9 Paul states: "Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits and live?" Here Paul clearly states that we all have a Father of our spirits.

In Numbers 16 and 17 Moses refers to the "God of the spirits of all flesh." In Ecclesiastes 12:7 we read that the spirit will return unto God who gave it. How could a spirit return to God unless it had once been in the presence of God? Also, God told Jeremiah that he was chosen as a prophet in the spirit world before he ever came here upon this earth. In chapter one of his book, Jeremiah tells us, "Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations" (Jeremiah 1:4-5).

Job also understood this doctrine. He was asked by the Lord: "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? . . . when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:4, 7). Notice in these verses that the sons of God existed before the earth existed in its present form. Also, notice the plurality of the term "sons."

Another indication that we all lived before we came upon this earth is found in Deuteronomy 32:8: "The most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel." How could God have known the number of the children of Israel before they ever appeared on the earth unless they existed somewhere else at that time. This idea is substantiated further in Acts 17:26. Here we read that the Lord "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." Apparently, God knew every person who was going to come to the earth before they were born here. Paul summarizes these ideas in his epistle to the Romans: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God" (Romans 8:16).

Perhaps the most striking scriptures of all on the doctrine of a pre-earthly existence, however, come from the teachings of the Savior in the New Testament. For example, you may recall this story as recorded in the Gospel of John: "And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from birth. And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him" (John 9:1-3).

Notice the definite implication of a pre-earthly existence in both the question and the answer. If there were no such earlier life, the easiest and most obvious answer of the Savior would have been: "There is no existence before birth; therefore this man could not have sinned before he was born." However, the Savior made no such statement. Instead, he confirmed the belief of his disciples in an existence before birth by acknowledging that it was possible to commit sins before birth, but that this was not the case in the instance of this particular man.

On other instances, the Savior also taught that we are all sons and daughters of God. Did he not teach us to pray to "our Father which art in heaven" (Luke 11:2)? Notice the use of the pronoun "our." Also, when the Savior appeared to Mary Magdalene on the morning of his resurrection, he said to her: "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father" (John 20:17). It is obvious that Jesus Christ is saying here that God is our Father in a sense that God is also his Father. That is, God is the Father of all of us as spirit children. This is exemplified in scriptures that refer to Jesus Christ as the "firstborn" (D&C 93:21-22; Colossians 1:15). If Jesus Christ were the only son of God in the spirit, why would the scriptures use the adjective "first"?

Of course, the scriptures make it clear that Jesus has another father-son relationship with God that the rest of us do not have. God is the father of the Savior's physical body as well as of his spirit body. Jesus is the "firstborn" in the spirit but the "only begotten" in the flesh.

What a wonderful message the gospel has for us concerning our pre-earthly existence. We are all truly brothers and sisters—all sons and daughters of divine parentage. This knowledge should help us understand one of the major purposes of life on this earth: to learn to walk by faith in an existence out of the presence of God where a veil is drawn over our eyes concerning our previous life with God. This enables us to gain a testimony of God through faith rather than by sight. The knowledge of a pre-earthly life should help us in our endeavors to love our neighbors as ourselves, and to love God our Father with all our heart, mind, might, and strength. It is indeed one of the greatest truths to be revealed to man.

Notes

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 3 November 1957.

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, "Free Agency . . . the Gift Divine," Improvement Era, 65 (February 1962): 86.
