Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 20

Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden

One of the most mentioned but least understood events in the history of the world is the story of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. Many of the conflicting sermons delivered on this subject clearly indicate the great diversity of belief within Christianity concerning the necessity of the Fall of Adam and the role of Adam in the gospel plan of salvation. Adam is frequently portrayed as the villain of humanity—the anti-Christ responsible for all of the pains, diseases, ills, sorrows, wars, and troubles of mankind. By others, Adam is portrayed as the unwitting tool of a capricious God—an instrument for God who, at best, served merely in starting the human race. I do not believe the scriptures warrant these harsh views of Adam and the Fall. In fact, the scriptures indicate that Adam was one of the greatest men who ever lived on the earth and that his Fall was necessary in the plan of God.

In order to understand the role of Adam and the necessity of his Fall in the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is necessary to return to the idea of our pre-earthly existence. The gospel of Christ teaches that everyone of us who has lived or who ever will live on this earth existed as a spirit son or daughter of God before we were born. These spirit bodies given to us by God had many desirable attributes, but as bodies of spirit they also had limitations. For example, they were apparently denied the powers of procreation and thus were not able to increase. As God wanted his children to partake of the same privileges and blessings he enjoyed, he called a great council in heaven and presented a plan whereby we might leave his presence and come down upon an earth to learn to walk by faith, gain experience, and obtain bodies of flesh and bones that would have the power of procreation.

All of us were present at that great council and heard the plan presented by God. After the plan had been presented, the firstborn son of God in the spirit, whose name was Jehovah (or Jesus Christ), spoke in favor of the plan. However, another of the spirit sons of God, named Lucifer, opposed the plan and led an active resistance against it. A great conflict raged in heaven over the merits of the plan. Another of the sons of God, called Michael, came to the support of, and was instrumental in defending, the plan of God. After some time, the proposal of God was accepted. Lucifer and his followers, however, refused to accept the plan of the atonement of Jesus Christ, which would enable men to return to God's presence with physical bodies. Because of their rebellion, Lucifer and his followers were denied the privilege of obtaining these earthly bodies.

Several biblical writers have written of this war in heaven and of the part Michael and Lucifer played in it. John tells us: "And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found anymore in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him" (Revelation 12:7-9). Peter writes of the "angels that sinned" who were cast out (2 Peter 2:4), and in Jude we read of the "angels which kept not their first estate" (Jude 6). Isaiah was also familiar with the war in heaven. He wrote: "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God" (Isaiah 14:12-13).

When Lucifer and his followers were cast out, the great plan of God was put into operation. First, as indicated in Moses 3:5, there was a spirit creation. Then the earth and everything that was placed on it was created physically. An account of this creation is given in the first two chapters of Genesis.

In the physical creation, God prepared a garden "eastward in Eden" (Genesis 2:8) and a physical body for man. Then the spirit of man was placed in the body, or as the scriptures put it, God "breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul" (Genesis 2:7). According to the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the spirit that was put into this body of the first man was the spirit of Michael the Archangel, who became known on the earth as Adam or, as Daniel called him, the Ancient of Days. Thus, the Adam of this world is in reality the Michael of the pre-earthly existence who helped defend the plan of God in the great war in heaven as spoken of by John the Revelator. He was one of God's chosen leaders before he ever came to the earth.

After Adam became a living soul on the earth, a female helpmate was given to him, and he called her Eve. God then placed Adam and Eve in the garden he had prepared for them, and he gave certain commandments to them. First, he commanded them to multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it. It is evident that this commandment referred to a future time and did not apply to Adam and Eve when they were in the Garden of Eden. This is evident from the fact that they did not have the knowledge necessary to use the power of procreation at that time; also, the earth was not then in need of "being subdued" by Adam, as it was spontaneously producing fruits and flowers and all the necessities of life.

The second commandment given to Adam and Eve, however, could be either obeyed or disobeyed by them at that time. This commandment of the Lord is recorded in the book of Moses: "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Moses 3:16-17).

This commandment introduced the possibility for a world of opposition—of good and evil—to come into being. Until that time, apparently, the Garden of Eden was not a world of opposition; in the absence of a knowledge of good and evil, the Garden of Eden was a world of complete innocence. This fact is brought out clearly by the Book of Mormon prophet Lehi. He states: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the Garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end. And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Nephi 2:22-23; emphasis added).

Thus the status of Adam and Eve when they were in the Garden of Eden might be summarized as follows:

Adam and Eve continued to live in the Garden of Eden in this condition until Lucifer, the personage of spirit who had opposed the plan of God in the great council of heaven, spoke through the serpent and tempted Eve to partake of the forbidden fruit. When Eve resisted the temptation, saying that God had forbidden the partaking of it upon the penalty of death, Lucifer replied: "Ye shall not surely die; For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil" (Moses 4:10-11).

After she partook of the fruit, Eve realized that because of her transgression she would be cast out of the Garden of Eden. With deep concern, she asked Adam to partake of the fruit, and Adam, seeing that he could not multiply and replenish the earth without his helpmate, decided to partake of the fruit. Then Adam and Eve suffered the penalty of the law they had broken—they suffered spiritual death or, in other words, were cast out of the presence of God; also, the seeds of physical death became part of their physical bodies.

After Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden, the Lord sent an angel to teach them the gospel. They were told that they were suffering from the consequences of sin, and in this condition they could not regain the presence of God. However, they were promised that if they would truly and humbly repent of their sins and thenceforth keep all the commandments of God, they could be forgiven through the atonement that was to be wrought by Jesus Christ and could thus return to God's presence. Also, they were assured that the Savior would bring to pass the resurrection of their bodies after their temporal death. When Adam and Eve heard these truths of the gospel, they were glad. In the book of Moses, Adam is recorded as saying, "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God. And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression, we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (Moses 5:10-11).

Once the gospel was taught to Adam and Eve, they rejoiced because of their Fall, because they could then multiply and replenish the earth, and because upon obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel they could regain God's presence.

The good news of the gospel for all of us concerning the Fall is that it did take place. Because of the Fall of Adam, we were able to be born upon this earth, and through the atonement of Jesus Christ we can return to God and experience the joy of eternal life. The prophet Lehi summarized this idea in a very brief sentence: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25).

In summary of the status of Adam and Eve after the Fall, we find that they had a knowledge of good and evil, that they could have children, that they had suffered spiritual death (were cast out of God's presence), and that they had introduced the seeds of temporal death into their bodies and had thus become mortal.

When viewed in connection with the atonement of Jesus Christ, the Fall of Adam takes on an entirely new light. Instead of thwarting the plan of God, it was the means by which God made it possible for Adam and Eve to have children and therefore for us to come to this earth. It was the means by which God made it possible for us to live in a world of opposition—of good and evil—where we could obtain valuable experience learning to walk by faith out of his presence. It was also the means ordained of God to accomplish his work and glory in connection with this earth: "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

Note

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 10 November 1957.
