Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 21

The Purposes of a Mortal Existence

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour" (Psalms 8:4-5).

This question from the book of Psalms had undoubtedly been asked before it was written, and it certainly has been asked many times since that day. "What is man?" Often this question is asked in connection with another question: "What is the purpose of our mortal existence on this earth?"

The prophets and the scriptures teach that the "ego," the "intelligence," or the "I am" part of man—the part with which we do our thinking—has always existed. This portion of our being operates on a self-existent principle and can neither be created nor destroyed; it is coequal (that is, coeternal) with God.

Somewhere in the past, however, this "ego" or "intelligence" of ours was clothed with a spirit body by an act of God. We all became sons and daughters of God, for he spiritually begot us. These spirit bodies enabled us to do many things we could not do before, but as bodies of spirit they had limitations and apparently did not have the power of increase.

Because of his great love for us, God called all of his spirit sons and daughters together in a great council in heaven and there presented a proposal whereby we could take upon ourselves bodies of flesh and bones that would have the power of increase. This existence was to take place on an earth out of the presence of God. It was also decided that at the time of our birth upon this earth, the memory of our pre-earthly existence would be taken from us. This would enable us to have another worthwhile and valuable experience—to develop our spiritual powers by learning to walk by faith.

It was further proposed that this earth life be in a world of opposition—of good and evil—where we could have our moral agency and could choose for ourselves the way we wanted to go. The experience on earth would thus be a testing place for us or, as the scriptures call it, a "probationary state" (Alma 12:24)—a place where we could prove what we could do by ourselves outside God's presence.

When this plan was presented in the great council of heaven, it was apparently received with mixed feelings. Some of the spirits, headed by Lucifer, thought they could detect a flaw in the plan of God. They maintained that all of us would undoubtedly sin inasmuch as the proposed world was to be a place of both good and evil where we could exercise our agency. In this sinful condition, they said, we could never re-enter the presence of God, as no unclean or evil thing can dwell there. These spirits opposed the plan of God.

Other spirits, headed by Jehovah, the firstborn Son of God in the spirit, defended the plan of God. They pointed out that his plan included vicarious payment for the sins of mankind upon conditions of repentance—provided someone could be found who would be willing and able to pay for those sins. Such a person would have to be the son of God in the flesh—as well as in the spirit—so that he would be able to endure suffering for the sins of man and would have power over death in order to bring to pass the resurrection. Jehovah offered himself as the sacrifice to save us from death and redeem us from the consequences of our sins if we would repent.

Lucifer and his followers, however, did not believe that Jehovah could be given this much power—they denied the power of God upon which the atonement of Christ is based. When the earth plan was finally carried out, God—knowing that Lucifer and his followers would not accept the atonement of Christ—did not allow them to obtain bodies of flesh and bones and to participate in the great earth experience.

For the other spirits, however, the great plan was carried forth. The earth was organized in a natural, physical condition, and physical bodies were prepared for the father and mother of mankind—Adam and Eve. Their spirits were placed in these bodies and they became living souls.

To introduce the possibility of a world of law, commandments were given to Adam and Eve. When they transgressed one of these commandments, they were driven out of the garden; sin entered into the world and it became a world of opposition—a world of both good and evil. At this time, a veil was drawn over their eyes so they could not remember their pre-earthly life. God then caused that angels should be sent to Adam and Eve to teach them the principles upon which they could regain the presence of God. These basic principles or fundamental truths were based on the atonement of Christ; thus they are frequently referred to as the gospel of Jesus Christ.

One purpose of this mortal, earthly existence was to obtain bodies of flesh and bones that would have the power of increase. In our mortal state we were to be the union of a pre-earthly spirit with a body composed of earthly, physical elements. This union is referred to in the scriptures as making up a soul: "And the spirit and the body are the soul of man. And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul" (D&C 88:15). This resurrection—or the permanent possession of our physical bodies after death—was to be provided for us by the resurrection, which was to be wrought by Jesus Christ.

In order to assure the fulfillment of this purpose of obtaining physical bodies, God gave us a commandment to multiply and replenish the earth. The importance of this commandment is immediately evident because the other sons and daughters of God will be privileged to come here to obtain bodies of flesh and bones only if we keep this commandment.

A second purpose of this mortal existence was to gain experience in a world of opposition or, as the Book of Mormon prophet Lehi stated, to "have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25). This joy spoken of by Lehi is not to be used as a synonym for pleasure. Rather, it is used in the scripture to indicate the feeling that comes to one who has experienced the laws of opposition—who knows the bitter but now tastes the sweet, who has suffered pain and anguish but now enjoys comfort and peace. Such experience or joy is possible only in a world of good and evil—a world of opposition. In explaining this principle to one of his sons, Lehi said: "For it must needs be, that there is opposition in all things. If not so, . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad" (2 Nephi 2:11). Later in his discussion, Lehi explains the conditions that prevailed in the Garden of Eden with Adam and Eve, and he concludes: "Wherefore, they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin. But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things. Adam fell that men might be; and men are that they might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:23-25).

A third purpose of mortality was to develop the powers of moral agency given to us by God—to see if we would choose the good rather than the evil. This purpose is outlined clearly in the book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price: "And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them, and they who keep their first estate (that is, our pre-earthly state) shall be added upon, and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate (that is, our earthly existence) shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever" (Abraham 3:25-26). Clearly, this life is a testing place whereby we can prove to God whether we are willing to keep all his commandments.

A fourth purpose of this earthly existence is to learn to develop the powers of faith that are within us. When we were living as spirit children in the presence of God, we walked by sight. We did not have to exercise faith in God's existence, for we knew he existed. However, the veil of mortality takes away our former knowledge and gives us the opportunity to come to this knowledge again through faith. This knowledge can become more deeply implanted in our hearts and minds than ever before. In his first letter to the Corinthian saints, Paul compared our present knowledge in mortality to that which we will possess after this life. He stated: "For now we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face; now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known" (1 Corinthians 13:12).

When viewed in relationship to what went before and what is going to come after, this earthly or mortal existence of ours takes on new and important significance. We are not organisms that merely happened to develop or evolve from lower orders of existence. We are not creatures who have been placed here on earth and then deserted by the God who created us. We are not—as one of the characters of Shakespeare said—"a poor player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage and then is heard no more." [^1]

Rather, we are spiritually begotten sons and daughters of God, going through perhaps the most critical period of our entire existence. We have waited for millennia for the opportunity of this experience—and the consequences of the acts performed here will be felt by us during the eternities to come. Now that we have obtained the blessings of an earthly existence, we should strive to keep all the commandments of God so that we will be worthy of the immortality we have already received and of the eternal life—or the power of eternal joy and increase—that is promised to those who prove faithful here. Only through such obedience can we experience joy in this life and eternal happiness in the life to come.

Notes

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 17 November 1957.

---
Notas:
[^1] William Shakespeare, Macbeth, 5.5.28-29.
