Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 22

The Laws of Justice and Mercy

Although there are great differences of opinion among the teachers of Christianity concerning the personality and the nature of God, there is relatively little disagreement to the fact that God is a God of order and thus a God of law. Perhaps this unanimity comes from the clearness of the teachings of the scriptures on this point.

In a modern scripture, the Lord has stated, "Behold, mine house is a house of order, . . . and not a house of confusion" (D&C 132:8).

Elsewhere, the Lord said, "Verily I say unto you, that which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same. . . . All kingdoms have a law given . . . and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified" (D&C 88:34, 37-39).

Of course, we as mortal beings understand relatively few of the laws of God, but as he teaches us more of his gospel we become better acquainted with him and his works. Also, science is helping us to understand some of the laws of God as they pertain to the physical world. However, those laws that pertain to the moral and spiritual realm are often not clearly understood by man—yet they are probably even more important to our eternal welfare than are some of the physical laws we are coming to understand. For example, there are laws associated with the gospel that every person must keep before he can regain the presence of God. Jesus Christ referred to some of these laws in John 3:5 when he said, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."

In fact, the scriptures teach that every blessing received by man comes as a result of obedience to law. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated. And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20, 21).

Some laws of God, however, work in relationship to other laws and help to keep them in a state of balance or order. This discussion is primarily concerned with two of these laws—the law of justice and the law of mercy. Although complete definitions of these laws are not available from scripture, we do know some of the major functions of the laws. The law of justice, for example, operates on the principle that for every transgressed law, a payment—a suffering or a punishment—must be made. Likewise, for every obeyed law, a payment—a reward or blessing—must be made. The law of justice, working in relation with other laws, helps to keep order or balance, and makes possible a world of opposition—good and evil, happiness and sorrow, pleasure and pain, joy and misery. The first of each of these pairs of attributes—good, happiness, pleasure, and joy—are the result of obedience to law. The second of each of these pairs of attributes—evil, sorrow, pain, and misery are the result of disobedience or transgression of law. According to the law of justice, these blessings must come with obedience and these punishments must be inflicted with disobedience.

When we sin (knowingly transgress the law), we must be punished; when we obey (observe the law), we must be blessed. This is only just—and it is based on the law of justice. Inasmuch as God is just, when we commit a sin and will not repent, God must allow the law to inflict upon us the punishment associated with that law, regardless of how much he might love us as individuals. Otherwise God would become unjust and a respecter of persons. Likewise, when we are righteous and keep the law, God must bless us because of our obedience. God stated this fact in these words: "I the Lord am bound when ye do what I say, but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10). In addition to being a just God, however, God is also a merciful being who believes in the law of mercy. This law does not make invalid any of the claims of justice, but it works in relationship with the law of justice.

The law of mercy might be stated somewhat as follows: Yes, it is true that there must be a penalty or punishment attached to every transgression of law according to the law of justice; however, the person who breaks the law does not necessarily have to make full payment of the transgressed law if someone else can be found who is willing and able to make suitable payment for him and if the transgressor is willing to accept the condition of payment. Thus the law of mercy does not in any way deny the claims of justice, but it does make possible the vicarious payment of some of those claims.

Perhaps an analogy of how these laws might work in a situation outside the gospel would help us to understand how these laws operate within the gospel. Care must be taken, however, not to carry the implications of the analogy too far. For example, we have banking laws concerning checking accounts which state that a person must not write a check for more money than he has in his account. Let us assume that you have $400 in your account, but you write a check for $1,000. You have thus transgressed a banking law, and according to the law of justice a penalty must be inflicted that at least amounts to the payment of the $600 overdraft in order to bring things back into balance. However, the bank is not too concerned whether you or someone else makes the payment so long as it receives the $600 and is able to balance its books. Let us further assume that you find someone—perhaps your father or a friend—who is both able and willing to advance you the money to pay the bank. According to the law of mercy, this vicarious payment for and in your behalf could be made by someone else if he is willing and able to do so and if you are willing to accept his conditions of payment. The law of justice has thus received all of its demands, for full payment has been made. The law of mercy—upon specified conditions—has enabled someone other than the person who transgressed the law to make the payment.

Every scripture that refers to the atonement of Christ or to any doctrine based on the Atonement—for example, the doctrine of repentance—is concerned with the laws of justice and mercy. In a sense, the Atonement was necessary because of the law of justice and was possible because of the law of mercy. In another sense, the law of mercy was made active on this earth by the atonement of Christ.

One of the clearest scriptures concerning the laws of justice and mercy is found in the Book of Mormon, wherein the prophet Alma explains to his son Corianton the functions and relationships of these two laws:

"And now, my son, I perceive there is somewhat more which doth worry your mind, which ye cannot understand—which is concerning the justice of God in the punishment of the sinner; for ye do try to suppose that it is injustice that the sinner should be consigned to a state of misery. Now, my son, I will explain this thing unto thee" (Alma 42:1-2).

Alma then explained to Corianton the plan of salvation as determined before the foundation of the world. He told the story of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, how they had been given commandments, had transgressed a law of God, and had been cast out of the presence of God. Then God caused that the gospel should be taught to Adam and Eve, and he granted unto them a probationary time to repent of their sins. He promised them that they could be saved and redeemed from their fall if they would accept the atonement of Jesus Christ that was to be wrought for them and if they would repent of their sins. Now let us return to the words of Alma:

"Therefore, according to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, . . . for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it would destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God.

"And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence. And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also.

"And mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice. For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God. And thus God bringeth about his great and eternal purposes, which were prepared from the foundation of the world" (Alma 42:13-15, 23-26).

At first glance it might appear to us as it did to Corianton—that we would be better off if there were no law of justice. This is not the case. Without the law of justice there would be disorder, confusion, and partiality—both on earth and in heaven. But the law of justice tempered by the law of mercy makes possible a world of progression, a place where there can be opposition and true joy.

These two laws are incomplete in and of themselves. However, when they work in relationship to each other and to the other laws of God, they form the basis of the gospel plan of salvation, which provides for a world of order and progression, of fairness and equality to all.

Note

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 24 November 1957.
