Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 23

The Relationship between Grace and Works

The topic of grace and works has the possibility of eternal consequences. It is timely and worthy of our attention and interest. It is fundamental to many other teachings of the gospel and thus is worthy of our study, research, and pondering.

In searching for materials on this subject, I checked under the entry "grace" in the index to Church periodicals for 1961-83. I was dumbfounded to find just five articles listed. Three were from the Church News. The fourth article, a general conference talk by Elder Mark E. Petersen titled "We Believe in Being Honest," [^1] was not related directly to the topic of grace and works. The fifth article, the only one in Church periodicals in twenty-three years to specifically address the topic, was very good. Written by Gerald N. Lund, it was titled "Salvation: By Grace or by Works?" [^2] I commend it highly.

In doing further research, I discovered the text of a masterful discourse, "What Think Ye of Salvation by Grace?" by Elder Bruce R. McConkie, given at a Brigham Young University devotional on January 10, 1984. [^3] I urge you to read and ponder the entire talk.

In his talk, Elder McConkie referred to the teaching of salvation by grace and faith alone as the second great heresy of "a now fallen and decadent Christianity." He identified the first and chief heresy as the false doctrine introduced by Catholic Christianity that God is "no longer a personal Father, no longer a personage of tabernacle, [but] an incomprehensible three-in-one spirit essence that filled the immensity of space." [^4]

He described the second heresy as "the doctrine that we are justified by faith alone, without the works of the law. It is the doctrine that we are saved by grace alone, without works. It is the doctrine that we may be born again simply by confessing the Lord Jesus with our lips while we continue to live in our sins." [^5] Elder McConkie referred to this false teaching as "one of the great religious phenomena of the ages, one that is now sweeping through Protestant Christianity." [^6]

Those of us who have been in the front lines of missionary service in recent years know how extensively the Protestants are using this heresy against the true Church. Some of the first challenges against the Church in this dispensation concerned the reality of the First Vision and whether the Book of Mormon could actually be the word of God. Later the attack was against the practice of polygamy and, still later, the denial of priesthood privileges to blacks. More recently the attacks have centered on the place of women in the Church—specifically, the position of the Church on the Equal Rights Amendment and the question of giving the priesthood to women.

Certainly one of the major charges apostate Christianity and some of the groups of ex-Mormons bring against the true Church today is that neither the Church nor its members are Christian. The supposed evidence brought against us is that we must not believe in the atonement of Jesus Christ because we do not believe man is saved by grace alone; rather, we say that works are also necessary.

Hundreds of statements against the doctrinal position of the Church on this subject could be produced, but maybe a summary of one letter will suffice. Understand that its author is bitterly opposed to the message of the Restoration. Statements such as "Mormonism is not of God" and "The only instances in which the Book of Mormon is right are those where it borrows phrases from the Bible, God's word" indicate how the author feels.

The parts of this letter that caught my eye, however, are those that imply that we are unchristian. For example, "The Book of Mormon and all of Mormonism denies the gospel message that 'it is by grace that you have been saved, through faith; not by anything of your own, but by a gift from God; not by anything that you have done, so that nobody can claim the credit.'" This, of course, is from Ephesians 2:8-9 in the Jerusalem Bible. The author continues: "Good works are not prerequisite to salvation but rather are the result of our being saved: 'For we are his [God's] workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them.'" This appears to be a paraphrase of Ephesians 2:10. Finally, the author cites Romans 11:6 in the Revised Standard Version by stating: "Paul makes it clear that salvation cannot be on the basis of both grace and works. It is an either/or situation: 'But if it is by grace, it is no longer on the basis of works; otherwise grace would no longer be grace.'"

This letter pinpoints the problem inherent in our topic as viewed by our Protestant friends. In using the word problem, I am well aware of statements by present leaders that we don't have problems in the Church; rather, we have challenges and opportunities. Therefore, the word problem is not used to reflect our understanding of the topic. I really believe that any member of the Church who has read the scriptures, especially the new editions with their accompanying chapter headings and footnotes, and who has attended meetings and classes and listened attentively should not have any serious problem with the subject of grace and works. Those outside the Church, however, think we have a problem with this subject, and it is from their viewpoint that I use the word problem. Actually, it is their problem, not ours.

Definition of Terms

An understanding of the meanings and implications of the major terms in my title is critical to this discussion. I can think of few topics to which an understanding of the terms would be more important.

Relationship. The word relationship is defined only briefly in the dictionary: "the state or character of being related or interrelated: a connection by way of relation." [^7] A statement under the word relation seems to be relevant: "an aspect or quality (as resemblance, direction, difference) that can be predicated only of two or more things taken together: something perceived or discovered by observing or thinking about two or more things at the same time." [^8]

Grace. The unabridged dictionary devotes eleven column inches to a definition of grace. This long definition includes "beneficence or generosity shown by God to man . . . ; disposition to kindness, favor, clemency, or compassion: benign goodwill . . . ; the favor shown or the portion allotted by fortune or Providence." [^9]

I also went to Strong's Exhaustive Concordance to obtain help on the meaning of the word grace as used in both the Old Testament and the New Testament. I discovered that this English word is used 37 times in the Old Testament and 130 times in the New Testament (King James Version). Of the 130 usages in the New Testament, 107 are from the writings of Paul. The word grace appears only 4 times in the Gospels and is used 19 additional times by authors other than Paul.

The primary root of the Hebrew word defined as grace is chÃ¢nan (khaw-nanÂ´), which means "to bend or stoop in kindness to an inferior; to favor, bestow"; to "have (shew) mercy (on, upon)." [^10]

The primary root of the Greek word translated as grace in the New Testament is chairo (khahÂ´ee-ro), which means "to be 'cheer'ful, i.e., calmly happy or well-off." Other definitions for this Greek word are "the divine influence upon the heart," "grace (-ious)" manner or act; "benefit, favour, gift, . . . pleasure, thank (-s, -worthy)." [^11]

Note that all three of these definitions—English, Hebrew, and Greek—include the idea that grace is a gift from God to man. Hence, in order to have a true concept of grace, we must have a true concept of God.

Works. The word works is, of course, the "plural of work," and Webster's Unabridged Dictionary devotes eight column inches to definitions of the word work. For purposes of brevity, I have paraphrased some of these definitions: to bring to pass; to fashion or create by expending labor or exertion upon; to set or keep in motion, operation, or activity; to cause to toil or labor; to pay with labor or service; to get oneself into or out of a condition or position by gradual stages.

When we apply the dictionary definitions of work to the principles and ordinances of the gospel, it is readily apparent that all ordinances would be considered works because they require the action of one who is ordained.

Basic Scriptures

Let us refer briefly to some of the major scriptures from the New Testament on this subject. Many of these references have been interpreted by some to be contradictory to the official position of the Church.

Acts 15:11: This passage is not changed in the Joseph Smith Translation: "But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved."

Romans 3:23-24, 27-28: "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. . . . Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law."

Compare that passage in the King James Version with the same passage in the Joseph Smith Translation: "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; Therefore being justified only by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. . . . Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay; but by the law of faith. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith alone without the deeds of the law."

Romans 4:2-5: "For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory, but not before God. For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness."

Compare those verses in the King James Version with the same verses in the Joseph Smith Translation: "For if Abraham were justified by the law of works, he hath to glory in himself; but not of God. For what saith the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. Now to him who is justified by the law of works, is the reward reckoned, not of grace, but of debt. But to him that seeketh not to be justified by the law of works, but believeth on him who justifieth not the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness."

Romans 4:13-16: "For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect: Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us all."

Compare that passage in the King James Version with the same passage in the Joseph Smith Translation: "For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect. Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression. Therefore ye are justified of faith and works, through grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to them only who are of the law, but to them also who are of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us all."

Romans 11:5-6: "Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace. And if by grace, then is it no more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace: otherwise work is no more work" (no changes in the Joseph Smith Translation).

Galatians 2:16: "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified" (no changes in the Joseph Smith Translation).

Galatians 5:4: "Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace" (no changes in the Joseph Smith Translation).

Ephesians 2:4-10: "But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.

"For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them" (no changes except in verse 8 in the Joseph Smith Translation).

Ephesians 4:5-8: "One Lord, one faith, one baptism, One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men" (no changes in the Joseph Smith Translation).

James 2:14-20: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?

"Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?"

Compare that passage in the King James Version with the same passage in the Joseph Smith Translation. The correction is primarily a change in organization:

"What profit is it, my brethren, for a man to say he hath faith, and hath not works? can faith save him? Yea, a man may say, I will show thee I have faith without works; but I say, Show me thy faith without works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. For if a brother or sister be naked and destitute, and one of you say, Depart in peace, be warmed and filled; notwithstanding he give not those things which are needful to the body; what profit is your faith unto such?

"Even so faith, if it have not works is dead, being alone. Therefore wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead and cannot save you? Thou believest there is one God; thou doest well; the devils also believe, and tremble; thou hast made thyself like unto them, not being justified" (James 2:14-19).

After reviewing all the pertinent scriptures on this subject in the New Testament in the King James Version and after carefully comparing them with the primary Greek words from which they were translated, with the Joseph Smith Translation, and with the teachings of modern prophets, I am convinced that the problem is neither with the translation nor with the wording of the scriptures. I am also convinced that Paul and all the other authors of New Testament books understood the doctrine of grace and works completely and spoke from a true gospel perspective as well as from the perspective of the old covenant.

Part of the problem is the failure of some persons to read all the scriptures pertaining to the subject. They select only those references that agree with their particular philosophy, and then they conveniently ignore others that shed additional light on the subject.

Another problem is in the interpretation. Here Peter's warning is appropriate: "Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Peter 1:20-21).

Still another problem concerns the definition and meaning of such basic terms as grace, faith, works, saved, and salvation. We need to clarify these terms with our friends in other Christian churches and then be certain we use them precisely and correctly. We should be more precise, for example, than some of us have been over the controversy about which day of the week is the correct Sabbath day. One particular Christian group has indicated that we should worship on the Sabbath day, which they say is Saturday. Too many of us argue that Saturday is not the Sabbath day, whereas we should be pointing out that Saturday is not the day of Christian worship. We should know, however, that the word Sabbath comes from the same Hebrew root as the word seventh. Saturday is the seventh day; therefore, it is the Sabbath day. Sunday is not the Sabbath (the seventh) day. Rather, Sunday is the first day of the week; it is the "Lord's day" and the day on which Christians worship. Although the terms Sabbath and Lord'sday are used correctly in the pamphlet prepared by the Church on that subject, some of us as members do not use the terms precisely. Let us not be guilty of such carelessness in regard to the terms associated with our subject of grace and works.

The extent of the problem, however, goes beyond mere definition of words. It is concerned with such questions as the following:

Also, does the Atonement apply only to those who have lived on the earth after the time of Christ and to those who had the privilege of hearing the gospel while they lived upon the earth? Or does the Atonement apply also to those who lived before the birth of the Savior? What about those who have never had an opportunity to hear the gospel, whether they lived before or after the birth of Jesus Christ?

The answers to these questions are essential to an understanding of the nature of man and the potential of mankind. They are also essential to an understanding of our topic of grace and works. Here is my understanding of the answers to these questions as taught by the Church:

Furthermore, both the unconditional and the conditional aspects of the Atonement pertain to all mankind, without exception, whether the person lived on the earth before or after the time of Christ, and whether the person had opportunity to hear the gospel while living upon the earth. Herein lies the importance of teaching the gospel to those in the postmortal spirit world, as indicated in 1 Peter 3-4, and the importance of performing vicarious ordinances for those who have died without the opportunity of hearing and accepting the gospel, as indicated in 1 Corinthians 15:29, where Paul mentions baptism for the dead.

Now that we have reviewed these essential questions and answers, it is easy to see that the fundamental question before us is not "Are we saved by grace?" The answer to that question is a definite, firm, everlasting yes. Rather, the question is "Are we saved by grace alone?" The answer to that question is an equally definite no.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has answered the question "Does salvation come by grace?" in these words:

"It surely does, without any question, in all its parts, types, kinds, and degrees.

"We are saved by grace . . . ; it is a gift of God. . . .

"In his goodness and grace the great God ordained and established the plan of salvation. No works on our part were required.

"In his goodness and grace he created this earth and all that is on it, with man as the crowning creature of his creating. . . . No works on our part were required.

"In his goodness and grace he provided for the Fall of man, thus bringing mortality and death and a probationary estate into being—without all of which there would be no immortality and eternal life. And again no works on our part were required.

"In his goodness and grace—and this above all—he gave his Only Begotten Son to ransom man and all life from the temporal and spiritual death brought into the world by the Fall of Adam.

"He sent his Son to redeem mankind, to atone for the sins of the world, 'to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man' (Moses 1:39). And again all this comes to us as a free gift and without works.

"There is nothing any man could do to create himself. This was the work of the Lord God.

"Nor did we have any part in the Fall of man, without which there could be no salvation. The Lord provided the way, and Adam and Eve put the system into operation.

"And finally, there neither has been, nor is, nor ever can be any way nor means by which man alone can, by any power he possesses, redeem himself." [^13]

It is true that the atonement of Jesus Christ has several unconditional aspects, requiring neither effort nor works on our part. These include (1) the resurrection of all mankind and (2) the removal of responsibility for original sin. These gifts come to us as an act of grace, of pure love, on the part of our Heavenly Father and his Son, Jesus Christ.

But it is also true that the Atonement contains conditional aspects. For example, entrance into the kingdom of God is conditional upon our being baptized of the water and of the Spirit, as taught so clearly by the Savior in John 3:3-5. The enjoyment of a fulness of joy in the presence of our Heavenly Father and of Jesus Christ—that is, the achievement of eternal life—is conditional upon our keeping all of the commandments upon which this blessing is predicated and upon our enduring and remaining faithful to the end. That works are also required on our part to inherit eternal life is clearly and plainly taught in other places in the scriptures. Note the following statements from the New Testament:

Acts 16:30-33: The jailer said, "Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house. And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house. And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway."

I listed this reference first because it is a classic example of how too many people quote one part of a scripture but ignore other verses that pertain to the same subject.

Matthew 5:48: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."

Matthew 7:21, 24, 26: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. . . . Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock. . . . And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand."

Mark 1:15: "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel."

Mark 16:16: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned" (this verse was not changed in the Joseph Smith Translation).

Luke 6:46: "And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?"

Luke 8:21: "And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it."

John 7:17: "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."

Acts 2:37-38: "Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."

Romans 10:9-10: "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation" (no changes in the Joseph Smith Translation).

James 4:17: "Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin."

Revelation 22:14: "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life."

Additional Ideas on the Topic of Grace and Works

If I had the opportunity, I would enlarge the topic of grace and works to include the word faith and the relationship among grace, faith, and works. I might even be tempted to include the word justification. Many of Paul's writings include elements of faith and justification in his explanation of salvation. Concerning this relationship, Gerald N. Lund has written: "Remember that Paul said we are justified through and by faith (see Gal. 2:16; Rom. 3:28), which is the first principle of the gospel. In other words, faith is the principle that activates the power of the Atonement in our lives, and we are put back into a proper relationship with God (justification) as faith activates that power. There are marvelous implications in this concept, and perhaps [an] analogy can help us see more clearly the role faith and works play in achieving salvation:

"We are like a powerhouse on a mighty river. The powerhouse has no power residing in itself; the potential power rests in the energy of the river. When that source of power flows through the generators of the power plant, power is transferred from the river to the power plant and sent out into the homes (lives) of others. So it is with faith. The power to achieve justification does not reside in man. Man requires the power of the atonement of Christ flowing into him. If no power is being generated, one does not—indeed, cannot—turn the generators by hand (justification by works); but rather, an effort is made to remove those things which have blocked the power from flowing into the generators (working righteousness as a result of faith). With this background then, one can understand why the scriptures clearly stress that faith includes works (see James 2:17-26); that is, obedience, commitment, and repentance—these are the works of faith that open up the channels so that the power of the atoning sacrifice of Christ can flow into us, redeem us from sin, and bring us back into the presence of God. Disobedience and wickedness dam those channels. (How literal is the word damnation!) The righteous works in themselves do not save us. The atoning power of God saves us. But our righteous works, activated by our faith in the Savior, are the condition for the operation of that power. Thus, each of us has something to say about whether he will be able to seek the gift and power of the Atonement in his behalf." [^14]

If we examined the problems of understanding the relationship between grace and works from the viewpoint of explaining to others the place of original sin in the plan of salvation, perhaps we could see more clearly the major components in the relationship between grace and works.

Several years ago I was privileged to serve as dean in the College of Religious Instruction at Brigham Young University. During that time, one of our more able and forceful faculty members used to dramatize the importance of the Atonement by emphasizing what would have happened if the Atonement had not occurred. He used to begin his discussion somewhat as follows:

"If there is no atonement of Jesus Christ, we are all born in original sin. Thus, the Catholics are right from their viewpoint when they teach about original sin, for they do not fully believe in the Atonement."

He emphasized the various elements of this statement as I have emphasized them here and, unfortunately, some of his students heard (or remembered) only those elements he had emphasized: "We are all born in original sin. Thus, the Catholics are right." Also, unfortunately, many confused students wrote letters to dismayed parents, who inquired of concerned General Authorities, who called a responsible President Ernest L. Wilkinson, who contacted a wondering Dean Ludlow, who met with a worried faculty member to find out what was actually said.

You may question the methodology or the emphasis of the faculty member—especially in a 7 a.m. class when half the students were still sleepy—but when you objectively and dispassionately examine his teachings, isn't he right? In substance, if it were not for the Atonement, wouldn't we all be born in (or with the consequences of) original sin? In substance, did not the atonement of Jesus Christ either remove these consequences fully or make it possible for us to remove them through our actions? If these two statements are true, then do not the rules of logic and reason lead to the conclusion that if you believe in original sin, you do not believe in the atonement of Jesus Christ? Isn't this essentially what the Lord is teaching us through his prophet Mormon, as explained in Mormon's inspired letter to his son Moroni:

"Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them. . . .

"And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore . . . I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children. . . . Little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world. . . . Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

"And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption.Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment. I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me" (Moroni 8:8-9, 12, 19-21; emphasis added).

Do not these words really indicate that if you believe in the necessity of infant baptism to remove the effects of original sin, you do not believe in the full atonement of Jesus Christ? I will now use the technique of my faculty friend to put over a major point concerning the relationship between the Atonement and our subject of grace and works:

If salvation consists only of the resurrection from physical death and if the atonement of Jesus Christ is not concerned with redemption from spiritual death, the doctrine of grace as taught by the Catholic church and by many of the born-again groups is true so far as it goes, when taught from their viewpoint. You are born in original sin, and in this condition your works will never save you.

Nevertheless, any group is wrong—whether they call themselves Christian or not—if they say they believe that Jesus Christ atoned for original sin and for our individual sins, and yet claim that works are not necessary for full salvation. Please do not consider it sacrilegious if I paraphrase the same thoughts in the style of the words of the Lord as revealed to the prophet Mormon pertaining to infant baptism:

It is solemn mockery before God that you should say Jesus Christ had power only to provide the resurrection from physical death and that he did not have power to atone for the fall of Adam and Eve, for he did. Thus the curse of Adam is taken from all men and women in him, that it hath no power over them. All God's children can be alive in Christ and be sanctified from their individual sins if they accept and live the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. He that saith that the works of faith, repentance, baptism of water, and the reception of the Holy Ghost are not necessary to the full salvation of mankind does not understand the gospel of Jesus Christ as taught in the holy scriptures. Such deny the mercies of Christ and set at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption. Wo unto such persons, for if they do not do the things required, they are in danger of spiritual death, which is hell (see Moroni 8:8-9, 12, 19-21).

In case you wonder why I emphasized the last part of the earlier statement or why I paraphrased Moroni 8 the way I did, let me quote Elder Bruce R. McConkie who discussed the relationship between grace and works in these terms:

"Now, let us reason together on this matter of being saved without the need to do the works of righteousness. Did you ever wonder why our missionaries convert one of a city and two of a family while the preachers of this doctrine of salvation by grace alone gain millions of converts?

"Does it seem strange to you that we wear out our lives in bringing one soul unto Christ, that we may have joy with him in the kingdom of the Father, while our evangelist colleagues cannot even count their converts, so great is their number?

"Why are those who come to hear the message of the Restoration numbered in the hundreds and thousands, rather than in the hundreds of thousands?

"May I suggest that the difference is between the strait and narrow way, which few find, and the broad way, 'that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat' (Matthew 7:13-14). . . .

"As we are aware, since the Fall all men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature; they have become worldly; and their inclination is to live after the manner of the flesh and satisfy their lusts and appetites.

"Accordingly, anytime men can devise a system of worship that will let them continue to live after the manner of the world, to live in their carnal and fallen state, and at the same time one which will satisfy their innate and instinctive desires to worship, such, to them, is a marvelous achievement." [^15]

Then, after defining what he calls the "true doctrine of salvation by grace," including definitions of salvation, the plan of salvation, and the grace of God, Elder McConkie continues:

"Truly, there is no way to overstate the goodness and grandeurs and glories of the grace of God which bringeth salvation. Such wondrous love, such unending mercy, such infinite compassion and condescension—all these can come only from the Eternal God who lives in eternal life and who desires all of his children to live as he lives and be inheritors of eternal life.

"Knowing these things, as did Paul and our fellow apostles of old, let us put ourselves in their position. What words shall we choose, to offer to the world the blessings of a freely given atoning sacrifice?

"On the one hand we are preaching to Jews who, in their lost and fallen state, have rejected their Messiah and who believe they are saved by the works and performances of the Mosaic law.

"On the other hand, we are preaching to pagans—Romans, Greeks, those in every nation—who know nothing whatever about the Messianic word, or of the need for a Redeemer, or of the working out of the infinite and eternal atonement. . . .

"Can either the Jews or the pagans be left to assume that the works they do will save them? Or must they forget their little groveling acts of petty worship, gain faith in Christ, and rely on the cleansing power of his blood for salvation?

"They must be taught faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and to forsake their traditions and performances. Surely we must tell them they cannot be saved by the works they are doing, for man cannot save himself. Instead they must turn to Christ and rely on his merits and mercy and grace." [^16]

In order to understand the teachings of Paul in the New Testament on the relationship of grace and works, let us do as Elder McConkie has suggested and put ourselves in the place of Paul.

Paul fully understood that the members of his Jewish audiences believed in and emphasized the importance of works. Their master teachers, the rabbis, over the centuries had formalized the laws of God in the scriptures into hundreds of laws based on the rabbis' interpretations. The Jews had become obsessed with what they could and could not do in nearly every conceivable situation. Their lives were oriented to what they should do in their dress and grooming, what they should eat, how they should worship, what they should do (and should not do) on the Sabbath day, and so on. In fact, in their religious beliefs they had emphasized the doing so much that they overlooked the need for someone with greater power than they who could give them the privilege of living forever and the opportunity of receiving forgiveness through repentance of their sins.

Because Paul knew how much the Jews emphasized the doing, he emphasized grace—the absolutely essential element. Thus, in the formula for achieving full salvation, he emphatically taught and wrote about grace in order to compensate for the Jewish emphasis on doing.

I have not found any prophet of the Church in this dispensation who has found it necessary to minimize the writings of Paul concerning grace. Perhaps some persons have felt that Paul stressed grace too much, but evidently he felt it necessary for the people he was teaching. Concerning Paul's teachings, President Joseph Fielding Smith observed: "[The people whom Paul was teaching thought] they could be saved by some power that was within them, or by observing the law of Moses—he pointed out to them the fact that if it were not for the mission of Jesus Christ, if it were not for this great atoning sacrifice, they could not be redeemed. And therefore it was by the grace of God that they are saved, not by any work on their part, for they were absolutely helpless. Paul was absolutely right.

" . . . [But Paul also] taught in other scripture, that it is our duty, of necessity, to labor, to strive in diligence, and faith, keeping the commandments of the Lord, if we would obtain that inheritance which is promised to the faithful. . . .

"So it is easy to understand that we must accept the mission of Jesus Christ. We must believe that it is through his grace that we are saved, that he performed for us that labor which we were unable to perform for ourselves, and did for us those things which were essential to our salvation, which were beyond our power; and also that we are under the commandment and the necessity of performing the labors that are required of us as set forth in the commandments known as the gospel of Jesus Christ." [^17]

Let me now call an additional witness concerning Paul's writings. Brother Gerald N. Lund has written: "There is no need to go to extraordinary lengths to apologize for Paul, or try to explain away his statements on salvation by grace. We are saved by grace—saved by Christ's love from physical and spiritual death; saved by Christ's love from Adam's fall and our own; saved from sin and transgression by the grace or gifts of God. The atoning power of God unto salvation is a freely available gift from him—but our works of righteousness are essential to bring the gift into power in our lives. Sin brings alienation from God. The more we sin, the greater the alienation and the more difficult it becomes to effectively tap the power of God, which alone is sufficient to save us from our sins." [^18]

Paul was so successful in emphasizing the importance of grace that the creeds of the predominant Christian churches have also stressed it until they verily have come to believe it is the only necessary component for full salvation. Thus, generation after generation of Christians have come and gone from this earth thinking that the grace of God (and of Jesus Christ) is all that is necessary.

When this doctrine of grace alone is combined with the doctrine of election—that God decides who is to receive his grace and who is not—we get the damning doctrine of predestination, which, if examined and analyzed carefully, indicates that even if it is felt that works might be necessary, they are accomplished only because God wills it. Such actions do not come from the will, or the agency, of man. As a result, in the terminology of the largest of the Christian churches today, we hear the terms "election to grace" for some and "election to salvation" for a very favored few.

These teachings of apostate Catholicism have now been largely adopted by apostate Protestantism—truly a case of the blind leading the blind. The challenge faced by our missionaries today is how to reconvert an apostate Christianity, which stresses only grace. Our approach has largely been to emphasize the other essential ingredient for full salvation—works. We have done this so much that many of our Christian friends have honestly concluded that we don't believe in the grace of God at all and, therefore, neither we nor our Church are truly Christian. Perhaps the time has come for us to start emphasizing again our belief in the grace of God and of his Christ; the new subtitle of the Book of Mormon, "Another Testament of Jesus Christ," is a good beginning.

Conclusion

The best definition or explanation of grace I was able to find in my research comes from the dictionary in the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Bible:

"A word that occurs frequently in the New Testament, especially in the writings of Paul. The main idea of the word is divine means of help or strength, given through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ.

"It is through the grace of the Lord Jesus, made possible by his atoning sacrifice, that mankind will be raised in immortality. . . . It is likewise through the grace of the Lord that individuals, through faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ and repentance of their sins, receive strength and assistance to do good works. . . . This grace is an enabling power that allows men and women to lay hold on eternal life and exaltation after they have expended their own best efforts.

"Divine grace is needed by every soul in consequence of the fall of Adam and also because of man's weaknesses and shortcomings. However, grace cannot suffice without total effort on the part of the recipient. . . . It is truly the grace of Jesus Christ that makes salvation possible." [^19]

Again we plead with our Christian friends: read all the scriptures. Don't read and ponder only the verses you want to believe, those that do not require repentance of your sins. Read all the references pertaining to each topic, placing plus marks between the scriptures. After you have listed all the scriptures, place an equals sign; then list honestly in your own words, all the components of the equation. If you will do this, even if you read prayerfully and carefully only the New Testament, you will come to understand the true relationship between grace and works. But if you continue to select only those scriptures you want to believe and ignore others that give additional insights on the same subject, you prove anew the statement by one of Shakespeare's characters, that even "the devil can cite Scripture for his purpose." [^20]

If we could just get Christians to read and believe one short verse from that second testament of Jesus Christ called the Book of Mormon, the whole Christian world would come to an instant understanding of the relationship between grace and works. As Nephi explained so beautifully and succinctly:

"For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Nephi 25:23).

Notes

From an address delivered at the CES Symposium on the New Testament, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 15-17 August 1984.

---
Notas:
[^1] James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), 87-88, 89.
[^2] Are others associated with God in a group known as the Godhead? If so, are they simply different manifestations of the one God as proposed in the Trinitarian creeds? Or are they separate individuals, distinct from each other, with different functions, as explained by believers in tritheism? Yes, others are associated with him in a special quorum known as the Godhead. One other member is the firstborn Son of God in the Spirit, our elder brother, whom we know by his earthly name and title, Jesus Christ. Another member is the Holy Ghost, a personage of spirit, whose functions include testifying that Jesus Christ is the divine Son of God. See Gerald N. Lund, "Salvation: By Grace or by Works?" Ensign, April 1981, 17-23.
[^3] Exactly what were the consequences of the fall of Adam and Eve? Was the Fall necessary? Are we born in original sin? That is, do we as descendants of Adam and Eve individually carry responsibility for their fall? The fall of Adam and Eve introduced both physical death and spiritual death into the world. As indicated in the dictionary at the end of the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible, the Fall "was a necessary step in the progress of man, and provisions for a Savior had been made even before the fall had occurred. Jesus Christ came to atone for the fall of Adam and also for man's individual sins." [^12] Because of the atonement of Jesus Christ, we are not born in original sin. Bruce R. McConkie, "What Think Ye of Salvation by Grace?" in Brigham Young University 1983-84 Fireside and Devotional Speeches (Provo, Utah: University Publications, 1984), 44-50.
[^4] Was Jesus Christ the divine Son of God? If so, does that mean he is simply God made incarnate among men, or was he actually, literally, physically, biologically the Son of God in the flesh? Yes, Jesus Christ was actually, literally, physically, biologically the Son of God in the flesh, the Only Begotten of the Father in this sense. Ibid., 44.
[^5] Did Jesus Christ accomplish the Atonement? If so, what does that mean? Did the Atonement pertain only to the physical death introduced by the fall of Adam and Eve, and is the resurrection universal? Or did the Atonement also pertain to spiritual death, and to the original transgression of Adam and Eve? If the atonement of Jesus Christ has been fully accomplished, is there anything man can or should do to be saved in the kingdom of God? Or does the Atonement of Jesus Christ guarantee that all believers in him will automatically be saved in his presence in a fulness of joy? Yes, Jesus Christ has completed the Atonement. Because he was the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, he inherited power over death from his immortal Father and was able to atone unconditionally for the physical death introduced by the fall of Adam and Eve and provide for the resurrection of all mankind. Because he lived a sinless life upon the earth, Christ was able, by assuming full responsibility for the original transgression of Adam and Eve, to atone unconditionally for the spiritual death of mankind introduced by their fall. Adam and Eve, however, were still responsible for any sins they committed after they obtained a knowledge of good and evil, just as we are responsible for our own sins after we arrive at the age of accountability. The atonement of Jesus Christ has made it possible for us to receive a full remission of our sins, but such forgiveness is conditional upon our observing and keeping the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. Thus, there are still some things that man can and must do before he can enter into the kingdom of God, and there are some additional things man can and must do before he can enjoy a fulness of joy in the presence of God. Ibid., 45.
[^6] Ibid., 44.
[^7] Webster's New International Dictionary of the English Language, ed. Philip Babcock Gove, 3d ed. (Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam Co., 1993),"relationship."
[^8] Ibid., "relation."
[^9] Ibid., "grace."
[^10] James Strong, "Hebrew and Chaldee Dictionary," in Strong's Exhaustive Concordance (New York: Abingdon Press, 1894), "chanan" (no. 2603).
[^11] Ibid., "Greek Dictionary of the New Testament,"in Strong's, "chairo" (no. 5463) and "charis" (no. 5485).
[^13] McConkie, "What Think Ye of Salvation by Grace?" 47.
[^14] Lund, "Salvation: By Grace or by Works?" 22-23; emphasis in original.
[^15] McConkie, "What Think Ye of Salvation by Grace?" 46; emphasis in original.
[^16] Ibid., 47-48.
[^17] Doctrines of Salvation, 2:310-11.
[^18] Lund, "Salvation: By Grace or by Works?" 23; emphasis in original.
[^19] Bible Dictionary, "grace," 697.
[^20] William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, 1.3.99.
