Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 24

The First Principles of the Gospel: Faith in Jesus Christ and Repentance

In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, "We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Articles of Faith 1:4).

Perhaps we should first define some of these terms. The dictionary defines a principle as a fundamental truth, or a primary or basic law. An ordinance is defined as a prescribed practice or usage—an outward manifestation or symbol of a principle. In the true Church of Christ, an ordinance must always be performed by one who is ordained—or in other words, an ordinance requires the action of the priesthood. An ordinance, of course, is also a principle because it is based on fundamental truth, but a principle is not always an ordinance because not all principles require the action of the priesthood. Why is faith in Jesus Christ referred to as the first principle of the gospel? What unique powers or attributes does true faith have that would make it the prerequisite to all other principles of the gospel?

Faith denotes action. As James said in the New Testament: "Faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works" (James 2:17-18). Faith is a motivating power—it is the motivating principle that impels men to resolve and to act.

Although I am convinced that faith in Jesus Christ is rightfully the first principle of the gospel, I believe in practice another element usually precedes faith. That element is hope. We usually desire or hope for a thing before we have the faith in it that causes us to do something about it. The two best scriptural definitions of faith both refer to hope as an element of faith. Paul's much-quoted definition of faith is recorded in Hebrews 11:1: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen."

Another definition of faith is given by the prophet Alma in the Book of Mormon as follows: "Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things: therefore if ye have faith, ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true" (Alma 32:21). Later in his sermon, Alma suggests how we can transform hope into faith. He states: "Now, as I said concerning faith—that it was not a perfect knowledge—even so it is with my words. Ye cannot know of their surety at first, unto perfection, any more than faith is a perfect knowledge. But behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words" (Alma 32:26-27). We frequently gain faith by first hoping—or desiring—to believe.

One of the most difficult concepts to master concerning faith is its relationship to belief and knowledge. The late James E. Talmage has written concerning this problem: "The terms faith and belief are sometimes regarded as synonyms; nevertheless each of them has a specific meaning in our language, although in earlier usage there was little distinction between them, and therefore the words are used interchangeably in many scriptural passages. Belief . . . may consist in a merely intellectual assent, while faith implies such confidence and conviction as will impel to action. . . . Belief is in a sense passive, an agreement or acceptance only; faith is active and positive, embracing such reliance and confidence as will lead to works. Faith in Christ comprises belief in Him, combined with trust in Him. One cannot have faith without belief; yet he may believe and still lack faith. Faith is vivified, vitalized, living belief. . . . Neither belief nor its superior, actual knowledge, is efficient to save; for neither of these is faith." [^1]

Both Elder Talmage and Alma indicate that faith is not knowledge, although faith plus the action it motivates may lead to the acquisition of knowledge.

These statements should make it clear why faith precedes repentance as a principle of the gospel. I don't believe any of us would repent of our sins if we did not have hope in a better way of life and if we did not have the faith to attempt to realize that hope.

Let us turn, then, to the second principle of the gospel—repentance.

Unfortunately, when most of us hear the word repentance we think it is something that applies only to the other person. This is not true. I'm sure all of us are in need of repentance.

Repentance has always been an important theme in the gospel of Jesus Christ. In fact, one of the distinguishing features of a prophet of God is that he always cries repentance unto the people.

In the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, we find that repentance was taught even in the day of Adam and his family: "And the Lord God called upon men by the Holy Ghost everywhere and commanded them that they should repent; and as many as believed in the Son, and repented of their sins, should be saved; and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned; and the words went forth out of the mouth of God in a firm decree; wherefore they must be fulfilled" (Moses 5:14-15).

John the Baptist prepared the people for the coming of Christ by preaching, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand" (Matthew 3:2). The Savior also preached repentance when he was upon the earth. According to Mark, the first statement made by Christ after formally beginning his ministry was: "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye, and believe the gospel" (Mark 1:15). In Luke 13:3 the Savior said, "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish."

The words of Peter on the day of Pentecost are as applicable to all mankind as they were to those whom he addressed. When they asked, "Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 3:37-38).

If repentance has been preached by all the prophets, it must be very important. But why, one might ask, is it necessary to repent?

One answer to this question is that repentance of our sins is the only way we can regain the presence of God. The scriptures tell us that no unclean or sinful thing can dwell in God's presence; thus we must repent of our sins and receive a remission of them if we are to enter into the presence of God.

Another answer to the necessity of repentance is that repentance is the principle upon which all progress is based. Essentially repentance is forsaking a wrong thing or way for a right or better thing or way. That is the only method by which progress is made.

Along this line, it is interesting to note that modern science employs the principle of repentance. At first, this statement might appear to be strange or even paradoxical, for most of us have become accustomed to thinking of repentance only in terms of religion. However, this principle has applications in other areas as well. The whole structure of modern science is based on the idea of finding the best way of doing things. When one procedure or method proves to be unsatisfactory, another procedure or method is tried until a better way is found. Then the faulty or inferior way is discontinued, and the improved or superior way is adopted. This is a clear application in science of the principle of repentance.

In the gospel, of course, we are not left to the gropings of trial and error to find the right way. That way has been clearly marked by the teachings of the prophets and the scriptures.

When we learn of the better way, however, how do we proceed to forsake our old way and adopt the new? Or, expressed differently, how can we repent of our sins?

When most of us think of repentance of sin, we probably think of the times we have stopped doing things that we shouldn't do. However, this is only one type of repentance. In the scriptures, God has given us two types of commandments. One of these begins with the injunction "Thou shalt not." For example, we are warned "Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not steal," etc. Whenever we break one of these commandments, we are committing an act we should not commit; these sins are referred to as sins of commission. In order to repent of a sin of commission, we must stop doing the wrong thing.

However, God has also given us another type of commandment. In essence, he is saying "Thou shalt" do thus and so—for example, "Thou shalt" be baptized by water and by the spirit, "Thou shalt" pay an honest tithe, etc. Whenever we omit doing those things we have been commanded to do, we are guilty of a sin of omission. In order to repent of a sin of omission, we must start doing the thing that is right.

Before we can repent of either of these types of sin, however, we must first recognize that we have been doing something wrong. Then we must have a feeling of remorse or sorrow for our sinful action, which in turn will help us resolve to do better. Then we must refrain from the breaking of the commandment. If the sin is of such a nature that we have deprived someone of something, we must make restitution insofar as we are able to do so.

These steps have been referred to as the five R's of repentance: Recognition, Remorse, Resolution, Refraining, and Restitution. Notice that true repentance involves a change in both attitude and action. It is not enough to be sorry for a wrong deed; we must change our behavior and refrain from future error if we would truly repent. As modern scripture so clearly states: "By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them" (D&C 58:43).

One of the most difficult things for most of us to do concerning faith and repentance is to begin the action that produces them. They both require action by us. No one else can exercise faith for us; neither can another person repent for us. We must do these things ourselves.

It is my sincere hope that we might all follow the admonition of the prophets—that we might develop our powers of faith and that we might not procrastinate the day of our repentance.

Notes

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 15 December 1957.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, 6:474.
