Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 25

The Functions and Powers of the Holy Ghost

Since it was organized on April 6, 1830, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the so-called Mormon Church—has been considered a unique organization in the world both by its own members and those not of its faith. This unique status comes partly from its claim of being the only true restored Church of Christ on the earth, and partly from some of its teachings. In the past 127 years, hundreds of sermons have been given and dozens of books have been written attempting to point out the major differences between this Church and other Christian churches. On one occasion, the founder of the Church in this dispensation—Joseph Smith—made this distinction in a single sentence. This brief chapter will consider a few of the implications of this sentence by Joseph Smith.

In the course of an 1839 conversation with United States President Martin Van Buren, Joseph Smith was asked how his religion differed from the other religions of the day. Joseph Smith answered very simply and briefly, "We have the Holy Ghost."

In order to understand the import of Joseph Smith's statement, one must know something of the thoughts and teachings of the Prophet concerning the Holy Ghost. In the writings of Joseph Smith we find this statement: "I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods." [^1]

In modern scripture written by the Prophet Joseph Smith, we find this verse: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us" (D&C 130:22).

Joseph Smith taught that as a personage of Spirit, the Holy Ghost is able to dwell in the actual presence of God, and yet is also able to come to earth to visit and give counsel and instructions to man. Thus the Holy Ghost is a mediator between man and God, or as the Savior put it, the Holy Ghost is a comforter. In this role as a comforter, the Holy Ghost performs many functions. Through the Holy Ghost we gain a testimony concerning the other members of the Godhead. In his first letter to the Corinthian Saints, Paul stated, "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost" (1 Corinthians 12:3). And in John 15:26 the Savior is recorded as having said, "When the Comforter is come, . . . he shall testify of me."

A further function of the Holy Ghost is to reveal knowledge unto man. Recall the statement of the Savior in John 16:13: "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth." Earlier in his ministry, the Savior said to his apostles, "The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you" (John 14:26).

In these functions and in many other functions, the power of the Holy Ghost can and does come to man. However, as a pure and sinless member of the Godhead, the Holy Ghost can dwell within only those individuals who have accepted the atoning sacrifice of the Savior and who have followed the Savior's admonition to be baptized of water for the remission of sins. It is this "gift of the Holy Ghost," or the right to the permanent companionship of the Holy Ghost, that is unique to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and to which Joseph Smith made reference in his conversation with President Van Buren.

But, one might ask, why is the right to have the Holy Ghost as a permanent companion so important to man. Once again the answer appears to be simple and brief, yet entails a great deal of the gospel. The companionship of the Holy Ghost is necessary for any person so that he can be sanctified from his sins and return to the presence of God.

Perhaps you recall the conversation the Savior had with the Pharisee ruler, Nicodemus, as recorded in the third chapter of John. Nicodemus acknowledged the Savior as "a teacher come from God." Jesus said unto him, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." Nicodemus, a grown man, did not understand the nature of this rebirth, and so he asked, "How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born?" The Savior's answer is again clear and definite: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:2-5).

We see that two baptisms—one of water and the other of the Holy Ghost—are necessary before we can enter the kingdom of God. The purposes of these two, separate baptisms are made quite clear in the scriptures. In Acts 2:38 Peter states, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." The purpose of baptism by water is for the remission of sins. Baptism, which should be performed after repentance, is to be followed by the gift of the Holy Ghost. The purpose of the baptism of the Holy Ghost is made equally clear. In Romans 15:16 Paul talks of "being sanctified by the Holy Ghost," and in 1 Corinthians 6:11 he tells the baptized members of the Church, "Ye are washed . . . ye are sanctified."

Synonyms of the word sanctified in the scriptures are sinless, purified, and cleansed. Thus the purpose of baptism of the Holy Ghost is to sanctify, purify, or cleanse us from our sins after we have been baptized of water so that we can become sinless once again. Without this cleansing action of the Holy Ghost, we cannot regain the presence of God. The scriptures are clear that no evil, wicked, or unclean person can enter into his presence.

Although the Savior's teachings on these matters are quite clear in the New Testament, perhaps his clearest statements are found in the Book of Mormon. After the Savior had been crucified in the Old World and resurrected from the dead, he came to the New World and appeared as a resurrected being to the people who were living here. The Savior taught these people the principles and ordinances of the gospel. He put particular stress on the ordinances of baptism of water and baptism of the Holy Ghost. Concerning baptism of water, the Savior stated: "Whoso repenteth of his sins and desireth to be baptized in my name, on this wise shall ye baptize . . . ye shall go down and stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them. And these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name, saying: Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth again out of the water." The purpose of this baptism of water, according to the Savior, is so that the people "shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins" (3 Nephi 12:2).

Later during his ministry among the people in the Americas, the Savior gave his disciples power that they might confer the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. The teachings of the Savior on these matters might be summarized somewhat as follows: No evil, wicked, or unclean person can regain the presence of God. All people, after they arrive at the age of accountability, become sinful as they commit sin. This results in their being thrust spiritually out of God's presence or, as the scriptures put it, they become spiritually dead, or dead to things pertaining to the Spirit.

In order to be born again to a spiritual life, people must have faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ, repent of their sins, and be baptized in water for the remission of their sins. Then—and not until then—can they be baptized with the Holy Ghost and be sanctified from their sins. This gift of the Holy Ghost is given only by the laying on of hands by those who have the proper authority, and it is given only to those who have been previously baptized of water. The first principles and ordinances of the gospel are: "first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Articles of Faith 1:4). All four steps are necessary in order for people to be cleansed or sanctified from their sins and to be found worthy to regain the presence of God. Therefore, the Savior meant exactly what he said to Nicodemus: "Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."

I conclude with a direct statement of the Savior that summarizes his teachings. This statement is contained in the last sermon the Savior delivered to the Nephites in the days immediately after his resurrection. In answer to a question from his disciples regarding the name of his Church, the Savior said: "Whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake. And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel" (3 Nephi 27:7-8; emphasis added).

The Savior then gave a beautiful description of his gospel. He indicated that the Father sent him to earth to be lifted up on the cross so that he could draw all people unto him. He said everyone would be resurrected and judged of their works, and he emphasized the importance of repentance. Then, in a brief paragraph, he summarizes the gospel and the need for it in our lives. Concerning the kingdom of God, he stated:

"And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel" (3 Nephi 27:19-21).

Notes

From a radio address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 27 October 1957.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, 6:474.
