Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 26

Temple Ordinances for the Living and the Dead

A few years ago as a graduate student at Indiana University I had the opportunity of interviewing twenty-seven Christian ministers concerning their beliefs on various principles and doctrines of the gospel. Among the 150 questions I asked these ministers was this one: "Do you believe in baptism for the dead?" The ministers, without exception, replied, "No." Immediately most of them would say, "You must be a Mormon, or a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." I assured the ministers I was.

Several beliefs or practices have made The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints unique among the churches of Christianity. One of these is its belief in the Word of Wisdom, which prohibits the use of alcoholic beverages, tobacco, coffee, and tea. Another is the principle of tithing—each member is expected to pay one-tenth of his income to the Church as a tithe. And still another is the observance of a day of fasting: One day each month is set aside for members to abstain from two consecutive meals. The cost of these meals is then donated to help take care of the poor and needy.

To those who have studied the doctrines of the Church, however, the feature that makes it most singular or unique—or to use a scriptural term, most peculiar—is perhaps the ordinance work performed in the temples.

The meaning of and reasons behind this temple work are not understood by many who are not of our faith. Temples are sacred places to Latter-day Saints. They are not built for general religious meetings but are reserved for sacred priesthood ordinances—some of which must be performed only in a temple.

Up to the present time (December, 1957), the Church has ten temples used for ordinance work. They are located in Utah at Salt Lake City, Logan, Manti, and St. George; at Mesa, Arizona; Idaho Falls, Idaho; Los Angeles, California; Cardston, Alberta, Canada; Laie, Hawaii; and Berne, Switzerland. New temples are under construction in London and New Zealand.

Once a temple is dedicated, only members of the Church who have received certificates of worthiness from their bishops and stake presidents are allowed to enter these sacred edifices.

What do Latter-day Saints do in their temples? Perhaps I can briefly outline our major beliefs and practices concerning temple work.

In the first place, we believe the Church possesses the same priesthood that was possessed by Elijah and was later given to Peter by the Savior. Recall that the Lord said to Peter, "And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 16:19).

This authority to "seal on earth that it might be sealed in heaven" was restored in this dispensation by Elijah to Joseph Smith in 1836. This event was in fulfillment of the words of Malachi, which appear as the last verses in the Old Testament: "Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse" (Malachi 4:5-6). This sealing power of the priesthood restored by Elijah is manifest in many of the ordinances performed in the temple. For example, Latter-day Saints who receive temple marriages are "sealed" for time and all eternity. We believe that marriage is intended to be eternal—not "until death do us part."

Perhaps the most unique thing about our temple ordinances, however, is that they can be performed for the dead (those who have lived on the earth during earlier periods) as well as for the living (those living on the earth now). Such ordinances as baptism, the reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost, and temple marriage are performed in our temples for the dead and the living. The ordinances for the dead are performed by proxy—a person living on this earth stands as a proxy and receives these ordinances "for and in behalf" of the deceased person. This work is often referred to as vicarious work for the dead.

The doctrine of vicarious work is not a new concept in the gospel. Indeed, the atonement of Jesus Christ is an example of vicarious work. Jesus Christ atoned for the original sin of Adam, doing something for and in behalf of Adam that Adam could not do for himself. Jesus Christ also brought to pass the resurrection of all mankind, doing something for and in behalf of all mankind that all of us together could not do for ourselves. Both of these acts by the Savior were made possible because of the doctrine of vicarious work. He stood as proxy for Adam and for all of us and performed acts that were necessary for our salvation but that we could not perform for ourselves.

But, one might ask, "Why do you perform these vicarious ordinances in the temple for people who are already dead?" We believe that the gospel pertains to the dead as well as the living. These ordinances are required of all people before they can inherit the blessings available to them. For example, the Savior very clearly taught: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5). If the Savior really meant what he said—and I sincerely believe he did—then everyone must be baptized before they can return to God's presence. This law applies to the dead as well as to the living.

Nowhere in scripture is a distinction made between the living and the dead so far as obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel is concerned. The New Testament clearly teaches that the doctrine of ordinance work for the dead is as much a part of the gospel as the doctrine of ordinance work for the living. Let me refer briefly to several scriptures in the New Testament that teach this doctrine.

While the Savior was on the earth he taught of his impending visit to those who were dead. The book of John records him as saying: "Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and they that hear shall live. . . . Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice" (John 5:25, 28). In his first epistle, Peter tells us that the spirit of Christ went to the spirit world to preach to the dead during the three days the body of the Savior was in the tomb. Then Peter mentions why Christ visited these spirits: "For this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit" (1 Peter 3:18-20; 1 Peter 4:6). Peter states clearly that the Savior taught the gospel to those who are dead.

But of what does the gospel of Christ consist? It consists of faith, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Does it sound reasonable that Christ would preach faith and repentance to these spirits unless they could exercise these principles? I believe most of us would say, "No." Does it sound reasonable that Christ would preach the necessity of baptism by water and the reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost to these spirits unless these ordinances could be performed for them? Again, the answer is no. But how could these disembodied spirits—who were not as yet resurrected with their bodies—be baptized in water and receive the laying on of hands? The answer is that provision was made whereby this work could be done for them vicariously—in exactly the same manner that we could not bring to pass our own resurrection, and so Christ did it for us vicariously.

Paul was well acquainted with the doctrine of vicarious work as it pertained to baptism for the dead. I am certain Paul had this doctrine in mind when he wrote to the Saints at Corinth: "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable" (1 Corinthians 15:9). In this same letter, Paul uses the doctrine of vicarious work as proof of the resurrection of Christ. In attempting to convince the Corinthian saints of the actuality of the resurrection of all mankind through Christ, Paul asks: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Corinthians 15:29). These words are clear and definite. Baptism for the dead was performed in the days of Paul, and the fact that Paul refers to this practice without explanation or argument indicates that this doctrine was understood among the people to whom the letter was addressed.

This doctrine substantiates the teaching of Christ that the ordinances are absolutely necessary, but it also indicates that God is not unjust, nor partial, nor a respecter of persons. If a person did not have the opportunity to accept the gospel while he lived on the earth, he will be given that opportunity in the spirit world after his death and before his resurrection. Thus temple work for the dead in the temples has its counterpart in the spirit world where the missionary labor, instituted by Christ, is still in progress.

This doctrine also removes one of the most serious charges leveled against Christianity—the condemnation to eternal damnation and punishment those hundreds of millions of persons who lived on the earth before the time of Christ or who have lived since the time of Christ but did not have the opportunity or disposition to be baptized.

The following story illustrates the fallacy of this position. A missionary of one of the well-known Christian churches once went to China, where ancestor worship is quite common. He succeeded in converting a young man to Christianity, but before the young man was willing to be baptized, he asked the missionary: "What will happen to my ancestors? You have taught me that baptism is necessary to go to heaven. My ancestors were never baptized because they never even heard of the name Jesus Christ. What will happen to them?" The Christian missionary replied: "They cannot go to heaven, for baptism is necessary to enter there. Thus they must endure eternal damnation." The young Chinese replied: "If this is the teaching of Christianity, then I refuse to be baptized. Your God is very unfair and unjust. I will remain as I am, even if it means that I will go to hell with my ancestors."

The glorious truth of the restored gospel of Christ is that all is not lost for those who have died without the saving ordinances of the gospel. They will be taught the gospel in the spirit world, and if they accept it and exercise the necessary faith and repentance, the ordinance work will be performed in their behalf in the temples and will be as valid as though they had done the work themselves.

Despite the Biblical teachings on baptism for the dead, so far as I know this doctrine is practiced only by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is part of the fullness of the gospel of Christ that has been restored in this dispensation.

Note

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 29 December 1957.
