Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 27

Spiritual and Temporal Death

I believe it was Benjamin Franklin who said there are two certainties in this existence: death and taxes. Although it might be possible to live in a time or place where we would not have to pay taxes, we cannot live in a time or place on this earth where we would not have to die. Every mortal person who has ever lived or who will ever live on this earth must die.

Despite the universality of death, however, the topic of death is not discussed very frequently. In fact, not only do we tend to avoid the subject, but when we do talk about death or about a person who has died, we substitute those terms with such euphemisms as "he passed away," "the deceased," "the departed," or "the late person." I don't think this great fear and apprehension about death is warranted; I have therefore chosen it as the topic of this discussion.

The scriptures refer to two types of death: temporal death and spiritual death. The term spiritualdeath does not refer to the death of the spirit; rather, it refers to a death, or separation, from things referring to the spirit. If you are spiritually dead, you are in a state of spiritual alienation from God—you are dead as to things pertaining to righteousness. Two types of spiritual death are referred to in the scriptures: the first spiritual death, which is, or at least can be, temporary alienation or banishment from the presence of God; and the second spiritual death, which is permanent.

God apparently had the first spiritual death in mind when he gave this commandment to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, as it is recorded in a modern scripture, the Pearl of Great Price: "And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die" (Moses 3:16-17).

When Adam and Eve transgressed this commandment, they suffered the penalty of the broken law, which was spiritual death—that is, they were spiritually alienated from God and in this case were also physically cast out of his presence. In a similar manner, all of us have suffered this first spiritual death: whenever we commit sin or break one of the commandments of God, we alienate ourselves from God and become spiritually dead. Neither God nor his emissary the Holy Ghost can dwell in sinful or unclean tabernacles.

The only way we can then become spiritually alive again is to stop sinning and to repent—and to become sanctified and pure again. The Savior referred to this process as "being born again" (1 Peter 1:23). This concept of being reborn has confused many people, as it did Nicodemus in the days of Christ. The story in the third chapter of John records that the Pharisee Nicodemus "came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old. Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit" (John 3:2-6).

There is hope for us if we have suffered the first spiritual death, for we can be spiritually reborn if we have faith in Jesus Christ, if we repent of our sins and then are "born of water and of the Spirit" or, in other words, if we are baptized in water and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

There is, however, apparently little if any hope for those who suffer the second spiritual death, which takes place at the final judgment, after the resurrection. Alma, one of the prophets of the Book of Mormon, describes this death as follows: "Then cometh a death, even a second death, which is a spiritual death; then is a time that whosoever dieth in his sins, as to a temporal death, shall also die a spiritual death; yea, he shall die as to things pertaining unto righteousness. Then is the time when their torments shall be as a lake of fire and brimstone. . . . Then . . . they shall be as though there had been no redemption made; for they cannot be redeemed according to God's justice; and they cannot die, seeing there is no more corruption" (Alma 12:16-18).

The people who suffer this second spiritual death are referred to as "sons of perdition" (D&C 76:32) because they have willfully decided to follow after Perdition, or Satan, after understanding and being partakers of the gospel plan of salvation, which was made possible through the atonement of Jesus Christ. Thus they deny the power of Jesus Christ to bring about the atonement, and inasmuch as repentance and mercy are based on the atonement of Jesus Christ, they deny the very power upon which repentance is based. Their sin is unpardonable or unforgivable because they cannot repent of it.

In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord has defined the state of sons of perdition as follows: "Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power—They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say it had been better for them never to have been born; for they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, and with the devil and his angels in eternity; concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come—Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame. These are they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels—And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power; yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed" (D&C 76:31-38). From this description of the second spiritual death, it is to be hoped that this death will come upon relatively few people.

The other type of death mentioned in the scriptures—temporal, or physical, death—comes upon everyone without exception. To comprehend the real significance of this temporal death, we must understand our true position and nature in this mortal life. We are now made up of two separate and essential things. One of these is a physical, natural body, the body of flesh and bones and blood and sinew that we can see with our eyes and feel with our hands. We can use the adjectives physical and natural to refer to this body because it is physical and it is composed of the natural elements of this earth.

We also are composed of another type of body—a spiritual body, or, as the scriptures sometimes call it, a "spirit." It is this "spirit" that gives life to the physical body. The spirit lived and had an existence before this earth was ever created. The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that the "ego" or the "intelligence" of men—the part of our being which gives us life, which enables us to think, which makes us what we are and different from every other person—has always existed. It operates on a self-existent principle and can neither be created nor destroyed. At one stage of our development, however, this ego or intelligence of ours was clothed by a spirit body by an act of procreation on the part of God. Thus we rightfully began to refer to God as our Father—because he was literally the father of our spirit body. When we came to this earth, however, we were also provided with a physical body by an act of procreation on the part of our earthly father and mother. Our spirit was placed in this body to give life to it; we then became what the scriptures call a "living soul" (Genesis 2:7). At the time of our birth on this earth, there was also a death, for our spirit was separated from the persons and things it had known and experienced in the premortal existence.

Our spirit is thus capable of life and existence outside of our physical body. Our physical body, however, cannot live without our spirit. When our spirit leaves (or is separated from) the body, the body dies. That is exactly what temporal death is—the separation of the body and the spirit, or the separation of the physical body and the spiritual body. As James stated in his epistle in the New Testament, "The body without the spirit is dead" (James 2:26). The term death, however, refers only to the physical body, for the spirit continues to live when it leaves the body. Thus, at temporal death, there is also a rebirth, for, although the physical body dies, the spiritual body is reborn to the life it knew before it came to tabernacle in the flesh. Fortunately, the separation of the body and the spirit is only temporary, and that is why we call this state temporal death. Although all of us must go through the experience of having our spirits leave our bodies—which is death—we will also have the wonderful experience of having our spirits reenter and possess these bodies again—which is the resurrection. The power of resurrection was given to us through the gift of Jesus Christ in the atonement.

In conclusion, I would like to read two quotations from the prophets. The first of these is from Amulek in the Book of Mormon. Although Amulek lived nearly one hundred years before Christ was born, he clearly understood the purpose of the life and mission of the Savior: "Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death, and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death. The spirit and the body shall be reunited again. . . . Now this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous. . . . I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death . . . unto life" (Alma 11:42-45).

The second quotation is from Paul's first epistle to the saints at Corinth: "For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Corinthians 15:53-55).

Note

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, 5 January 1958.
