Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 29

The Postmortal Spiritual Existence

The subject of our postmortal existence has interested me a great deal over the past several years while I have researched all the major topics associated with the plan of progression and eternal life that our Heavenly Father has prepared for us. As I have read, studied, and pondered the subject as to what might happen immediately after our physical mortal experience on this earth, I have been surprised and amazed as to what has been revealed on this subject. The Lord has given us information through revelations to prophets in ancient times as recorded in scripture and through revelations to prophets today in the dispensation of the fulness of times.

I am convinced that we as Latter-day Saints have more information and testimonies concerning this matter than anyone else. We not only have the Bible and the literature readily available to the world, but we have the modern scriptures and the words of the living prophets concerning this subject.

However, I am equally convinced that many of us have not considered and thought about this subject as much as we might. After all, we all have family, friends, and other loved ones who have already entered into the realm of that great experience. And all of us, without exception, will enter that realm ourselves.

Preparing for the Postmortal Existence

In the past forty years or so I have had the opportunity of leading over seventy tours for the BYU Travel Study Department, primarily to the Near East and Middle East, and to Central America and South America. I have noted that virtually without exception, participants who make the most preparations for the tour gain the greatest benefit from the experience.

I suspect that somewhat in the same manner, those who study, learn, and prepare for the next phase of our eternal existence will be able to benefit more, at least initially, from the opportunities available to us there. Indeed, the Lord has revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come" (D&C 130:18-19).

The title of this chapter suggests that we also had a premortalspiritual existence, which we did. Also, premortal and postmortal suggest that we must now be living between the two, in a mortal existence, which, of course, we are.

To better understand some of the features and characteristics of the postmortal spiritual existence developed later in this chapter, I will briefly review (1) a few of the major features of what we know concerning our premortal spiritual existence and (2) a few salient facts pertaining to the state of existence we are now in as spiritual, physical, mortal beings.

The Premortal Existence

I would like to begin at the very beginning of time concerning these subjects, but if I understand the teachings of the scriptures and the prophets correctly concerning our premortal existence, there never really was a "time" beginning.

Numerous scriptural references on this subject are listed in the Topical Guide under such entries as "Man, a Spirit Child of Heavenly Father" and "Man, Antemortal Existence of" and in the index published with the Book of Mormon under such titles as "Premortal Existence" and "Spirit World." However, for this review of our premortal existence, I will rely primarily upon four brief statements by prophets of this dispensation.

The Prophet Joseph Smith stated: "The mind [spirit] or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal with God himself. . . . The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. . . . There never was a time when there were not spirits; for they are co-equal [co-eternal] with our Father in heaven. . . . Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit from age to age, and there is no creation about it." [^1]

The Prophet Joseph Smith also said: "Spirit is a substance; . . . it is material, but . . . it is more pure, elastic and refined matter than the body; . . . it existed before the body, can exist in the body; and will exist separate from the body, when the body will be mouldering in the dust; and will in the resurrection, be again united with it." [^2]

The First Presidency said in 1909: "The doctrine of the pre-existence . . . shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality." [^3]

President Joseph F. Smith said: "The written standards of scripture show that all people who come to this earth and are born in mortality had a pre-existent, spiritual personality as the sons or daughters of the Eternal Father. . . . A spirit born of God is an immortal being." [^4]

The scriptures and prophets sometimes refer to this premortalexistence as our first estate (see Jude 1:6). In this first estate, all of us lived as personages of spirit in the presence of our Heavenly Father before we were born on this earth. In this condition we were capable of tremendous accomplishments. We had spirit bodies with spirit eyes, hands, feet, and so on. We could obey spiritual laws and enjoy the blessings predicated upon obedience to such laws.

However, a whole world of blessings based upon obedience to physical laws was denied us. In order to give us an opportunity to progress as much as possible, our Heavenly Father proposed that a physical world be created, that physical bodies be provided for primal parents, and that each of us in due time be given the privilege of having our spirit bodies placed in physical bodies.

Our Heavenly Father also proposed that when we were born into this world a "veil of forgetfulness" be placed over our minds so we could learn to walk by faith. President Brigham Young explained why the "veil of forgetfulness" is necessary: "It has also been decreed by the Almighty that spirits, upon taking bodies, shall forget all they had known previously, or they could not have a day of trial— . . . in darkness and temptation, in unbelief and wickedness, to prove themselves worthy of eternal existence." [^5]

Our Present Physical Mortal Existence

We already know a great deal about the spiritual, physical, mortal existence in which we now live. Again, major scriptures pertaining to this topic are available in the Topical Guide under the titles of "Probation, Probationary" and "Test, Try, Prove," and in the index under the entries "Commandments of God" and "Mortal, Mortality."

We will limit our review to only two statements pertaining to our current probationary state, in which we may learn through the exercise of our spirits to keep all the commandments of our Heavenly Father, both spiritual and physical.

President Joseph F. Smith said: "Man is a dual being, composed of the spirit which gives life, force, intelligence and capacity to man, and the body which is the tenement of the spirit. . . . The two combined constitute the soul. The body is dependent upon the spirit, and the spirit during its natural occupancy of the body is subject to the laws which apply to and govern it in the mortal state." [^6]

President Young said: "If man could have been made perfect, in his double capacity of body and spirit, without passing through the ordeals of mortality, there would have been no necessity of our coming into this state of trial and suffering. Could the Lord have glorified his children in spirit, without a body like his own, he no doubt would have done so." [^7]

The scriptures and the prophets of this dispensation have referred to our present condition—a combination of spirit body and physical mortal body—as being part of our second estate. This estate began when our spirit body and physical mortal body came together initially, and it ends at the resurrection when our spirit body and our immortal physical body come together, never to be separated again. Our second estate does not end with our physical temporal death; it ends with our resurrection. Therefore, our next major phase of existence—the postmortal spiritual existence—is part of our second estate.

The Postmortal Spiritual Existence

Let us now examine what has been revealed concerning the postmortalspiritual existence. I will list related revelations in the following order: (1) revelations pertaining to the state or condition of the spirit, (2) revelations pertaining to the place or location of the postmortal spirit world, and (3) revelations pertaining to other major features or characteristics of the postmortal spiritual existence.

State or Condition

Perhaps the foremost scriptural authority on the subject of the state or condition of the spirit in the postmortal spirit world is Alma the Younger, who attributes his information on this subject to "an angel" sent from God:

"Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection—Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life.

"And then shall it come to pass, that the sprits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow.

"And then it shall come to pass, that the sprits of the wicked . . . shall be cast out into outer darkness . . . and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil.

"Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked, yea, in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection" (Alma 40:11-14; emphasis added).

Note that in this entire quotation Alma is talking only of the state or condition of the soul between death and the resurrection; he is not talking of the place or the location of the postmortal spirit world.

The state or condition of our spirit bodies in the postmortal existence will be essentially the same as when our spirits were in the presence of our Heavenly Father before our birth on earth. At the time of temporal physical death, the spirit body will be separated from the physical mortal body and will be free of all physical ailments, pains, and sufferings.

Place or Location

Alma said that when temporal physical death occurs, "the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life" (Alma 40:11). President Young has clarified Alma's words:

"It reads that the spirit goes to God who gave it. Let me render this Scripture a little plainer; when the spirits leave their bodies they are in the presence of our Father and God, [in the sense that] they are prepared then to see, hear and understand spiritual things. But where is the spirit world? It is incorporated within this celestial system. Can you see it with your natural eyes? No. Can you see spirits in this room? No. Suppose the Lord should touch your eyes that you might see, could you then see the spirits? Yes, as plainly as you now see bodies, as did the servant of Elijah. If the Lord would permit it, and it was His will that it should be done, you could see the spirits that have departed from this world, as plainly as you now see bodies with your natural eyes. . . . The spirit world . . . is on this earth." [^8]

He also taught: "When you lay down this tabernacle, where are you going? Into the spiritual world. . . . Where is the spirit world? It is right here. Do the good and evil spirits go together? Yes, they do. Do they both inhabit one kingdom? Yes, they do. Do they go to the sun? No. Do they go beyond the boundaries of this organized earth? No, they do not." [^9]

In a supporting statement regarding the place or location of the postmortal spiritual world, Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote: "The [postmortal] spirit world is not the heaven where Jesus Christ, [and] his Father, . . . dwell. . . . As to its location, it is here on the very planet where we were born; or, in other words, the earth." [^10]

The account of the resurrected Jesus Christ in the New Testament also verifies that the location of the postmortal spirit world is not in the presence of God. Remember that after his resurrection—and after his experiences in the postmortal spirit world—Jesus Christ reported to Mary Magdalene, "I am not yet ascended to my Father" (John 20:17).

Now that we have established the essentials of the state of the spirit in the postmortal spirit world and the location of the postmortal spirit world, let's examine seven major features or characteristics of the postmortal spirit world.

Characteristics of the Postmortal Spirit World

At the time of our temporal physical death, the spirit is separated from the physical body and from the physical world it has known while in the physical body. However, the spirit continues to exist as real and lively as before; in fact, it is reborn in the presence of those spirits it came to know during its physical mortal experience. In a sense, then, so far as the spirit is concerned the time of death (that is, separation from the physical body) is also a time of rebirth (reuniting with those we have known on the earth who have gone before).

This decision-making power was with us in the pre-earthly existence, and we exercised it in the Grand Council in Heaven. The vital principle of agency proved to be a major cause of the great war in heaven, when "Satan . . . sought to destroy the agency of man" (Moses 4:3). Fortunately, we and all who have lived or will yet live on this earth had enough confidence in ourselves, and enough faith in the plan of our Heavenly Father and in the promised atonement of Jesus Christ, to use our decision-making power to support our Heavenly Father's plan of progression and eternal life. This plan depends upon our freedom or right of choice, upon our power to make decisions, upon the exercise of our will. This power will continue with us forever. Obviously, if we have no spirit (mind, intelligence), we have no agency. And if we have no agency, we have no freedom of choice and no true opportunity of moral choice.

Certainly a major reason for our probation and its "veil of forgetfulness" is to see whether our spirits will use their inherent decision-making powers to choose to do right. Notice this pertinent conversation in the council of the Gods even before the foundations of the earth were laid:

"And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever" (Abraham 3:24-26).

Remember, the postmortal spiritual existence is part of our second estate and remains a time of testing and proving. It is evident that agency will continue to play an important part of that realm, and will undoubtedly do so throughout all the eternities to come.

It is important to note that this veil will not automatically be removed at the time of our temporal death. Remember, this veil was a condition of our second estate. It is associated with our time of trial, testing, and proving, and it will continue into the postmortal spiritual existence unless we have removed it by our faithfulness before that time.

It is intriguing to realize that the spirit has the potential to remember everything it has ever experienced, seen, heard, done, or thought. Regarding the ability of the spirit to remember, President Joseph F. Smith has written: "In reality a man cannot forget anything[.] He may have a lapse of memory; he may not be able to recall at the moment a thing that he knows, or words that he has spoken; he may not have the power at his will to call up these events and words; but let God Almighty touch the mainspring of the memory, and awaken recollection, and you will find then that you have not even forgotten a single idle word that you have spoken!" [^11]

Also, it is important to know we can continue to receive knowledge in the hereafter directly from our Heavenly Father through the power of the Holy Ghost and on the same principles that we can obtain knowledge in this life. The Savior's counsel to ask, seek, and knock (see Matthew 7:7) in faith and the promise that we will have revealed unto us "by the power of the Holy Ghost" (Moroni 10:5) "whatsoever [we] ask that is right" (Mosiah 4:21) are as applicable there as they are here. Notice this promise in a modern scripture: "Assuredly as the Lord liveth, who is your God and your Redeemer, even so surely shall you receive a knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith. . . . Now, behold this is the spirit of revelation. . . . Whatsoever you shall ask me to tell you by that means, that will I grant unto you, and you shall have knowledge concerning it" (D&C 8:1, 3, 9).

Alma stated, "the Spirit knoweth all things" (Alma 7:13). Jacob adds his supporting testimony: "The Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls" (Jacob 4:13).

In regard to what the spirit might have acquired in this life by the power and Spirit of God, notice the completeness and exactness of the following scripture: "All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise . . . are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead" (D&C 132:7). This, of course, refers also to the marriage covenant, as is made clear later in that section.

In the postmortal spiritual existence, the spirit will continue to be governed by spiritual laws, much as it was when it existed in the presence of our Heavenly Father before birth into a physical mortal body. However, the spirit will be free from some restraints related to the time and space usually associated with this mortal existence.

President Brigham Young explains: "The brightness and glory [of the postmortal spirit world] . . . is inexpressible. It is not encumbered. . . . [The spirits] move with ease and like lightning. If we want to visit Jerusalem, or this, that, or the other place—and I presume we will be permitted if we desire—there we are, looking at its streets. If we want to behold Jerusalem as it was in the days of the Savior; or if we want to see the Garden of Eden as it was when created, there we are, and we see it as it existed spiritually, for it was created first spiritually and then temporally, and spiritually it still remains." [^12]

Because of physical laws, our physical bodies can be in only one place at one time. Although the spirit is restricted within the physical body so far as location is concerned, it is not so restricted in the postmortal spirit world. When this attribute of the spirit is combined with the knowledge that all things past, present, and future are continually before the Lord (see D&C 130:7), it is evident that man's spirit has the potential, through the Holy Spirit, to know all things past, present, and future.

Two vital questions have been asked by many concerning our possible contact with those who have gone before us into the postmortal spiritual existence: (1) Are those who have already gone through the experience of temporal physical death able to communicate with us here in our physical mortal existence? (2) Can we communicate with those in the postmortal spirit world?

The answer to both questions is yes, if we are permitted to do so. Remember, in addition to being physical and mortal at the present time, we are also spiritual. Indeed, it is our spirit that gives life to our physical body as indicated in the scriptures. "The spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6), and the things of the spirit are known only "by the power of the Spirit" (D&C 76:12).

Note some of the teachings of the Brethren concerning the possibility of communication between those who are in the postmortal existence and those who are still in the physical mortal realm.

Joseph Smith taught: "The spirits of the just are . . . blessed in their departure to the world of spirits. . . . [T]hey are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions, and are often pained therewith." [^13]

President Joseph F. Smith said: "Our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth . . . may have a mission given them to visit their relatives and friends upon the earth again, bringing . . . messages of love, of warning, of reproof and instruction to those whom they had learned to love in the flesh." [^14]

In a First Presidency message, he added: "If we can see, by the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God . . . , beyond the veil that separates us from the spirit world, surely those who have passed beyond, can see more clearly through the veil back here to us than it is possible for us to see to them from our sphere of action. I believe we move and have our being in the presence of heavenly messengers and of heavenly beings. . . . If this is the case with us in our finite condition, . . . how much more certain it is and reasonable and consistent to believe that those who have been faithful, who have gone beyond . . . can see us better than we can see them; that they know us better than we know them. . . . We live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever." [^15]

Elder Charles A. Callis added: "We believe that there is consciousness of the spirit in the life hereafter, between death and the resurrection. . . . Death does not congeal the lips of those who go before us; they are not far from us and they help us more than we know." [^16]

Some persons have wondered whether there is a sudden radical change in the feeling of a person at the time of physical death, particularly concerning such things as the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel. Such people think, "Surely when the spirit of the departed person realizes there is life after death, that person will immediately accept the idea of a resurrection, of a final judgment, and so on." That such is not the case is made clear by the scriptures and by modern prophets:

"That same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world" (Alma 34:34).

Elder Heber C. Kimball said: "The separation of body and spirit makes no difference in the moral and intellectual condition of the spirit[.] When a person, who has always been good and faithful to his God, lays down his body in the dust, his spirit will remain the same in the spirit world. . . . When the spirit leaves the body the body becomes lifeless. The spirit has not changed one single particle of itself by leaving the body." [^17]

Remember that so far as knowledge is concerned, the spirit takes with it only what it has acquired during the time of its physical mortal existence. Remember also that the spirit still has agency in the world to come, and that the world to come continues to be a time of testing and proving, and that missionary work will be one of the major activities in the postmortal spiritual existence.

How can we best understand and comprehend these things? Perhaps it would help if we remember first of all that all spirit is matter, and that all matter operates according to divine law. The spirit in our physical body is able to comprehend physical things (see things, hear things, feel things, and so on) because these things operate on the same laws of frequency as our physical bodies. But there are countless things that exist on frequencies that our spirits are not able to comprehend while in our present physical bodies.

When the spirit leaves the physical mortal body, it can then comprehend some of these things when they become real to the spirit, meaning that they operate on the same frequency that the spirit can interpret. I suspect that many of us have had difficulty understanding the concept that the earth is really the place of the postmortal spirit world because we are now living on the same earth, and we normally are not aware of spirits around us. That is, we normally cannot see or hear them.

Of course, the fact that we currently cannot either see or hear those who have gone before does not mean they do not exist; they simply exist in a condition, on a frequency, or according to laws that we cannot normally perceive. However, if our sight, hearing, or other senses could be modified to include their spheres of existence, we could then comprehend, see, and hear them.

Seeing

President Young said, "Can you see spirits in this room? No. Suppose the Lord should touch your eyes that you might see, could you then see the spirits? Yes, as plainly as you now see bodies." [^18]

We cannot see them with our natural eyes because they are operating on a different frequency than our eyes can normally see. This subject of sight so intrigued me that I decided to go to the standard encyclopedias, including the Encyclopedia Britannica, the Encyclopedia Americana, and three encyclopedias of physics, to learn what I could about the subject. But I searched in vain for any article under an entry titled "sight." One brief entry simply stated, "See eye and light." Of course, that's what sight is—the effect of light on the eye.

I then reviewed what they had to say about the eye. The encyclopedias all had long and interesting discussions on the eye. One of them began, "Although virtually all animals are responsive to light, visual organs are as varied as the animals that possess them."

The encyclopedia then explained the structure of the human eye using drawings and words. The characteristics of the human eye were then compared with other physical eyes. Concerning the eyes of bees, for example, the article noted:

"The visible spectrum for the bee does not extend as far into the red region as it does for man, but it reaches to 300 nanometers in the near ultraviolet portion. Moreover, for bees, as for many insects, near ultraviolet is a distinct color, and many flowers have patterns of ultraviolet reflectance (so-called nectar guides) that are invisible to man but are important visual clues to the insect." [^19]

But, the article continued, "so far as can be determined, all the eyes of all the humans, animals, fish, fowls, insects, and other physical organisms known to exist comprehend only a very small range of the electromagnetic energy known as 'light.'"

I eagerly read the articles in the encyclopedias on light. The following statements are direct quotes from these sources:

"Light is radiant electromagnetic energy that can be detected by the human eye. Visible light is only one very small part of a vast spectrum of electromagnetic radiation." [^20]

"Which encompasses radio waves and infrared radiation at wavelengths longer than light, and ultraviolet, x-ray, gamma ray, and cosmic-ray radiation at progressively shorter wavelengths." [^21]

"The frequency of light waves is . . . almost a billion times higher, their wavelength a billion times shorter, than the waves of standard radio broadcast bands. . . . The eye is a detector [of light] with a relatively long response time. Photoelectric cells can react more than a million times faster." [^22]

"The electromagnetic spectrum is a broad band of radiant energy which extends over a range of wavelengths running from trillionths of inches to hundreds of miles; wavelengths of visible light are measured in hundreds of thousandths of an inch." [^23]

These statements were enough to convince me that the human physical eye, as marvelous and miraculous as it is, comprehends only a very small fraction of the light and electromagnetic energy that is available.

So much for the limited things we can see. How about what we can hear?

Hearing

The articles pertaining to hearing (listed primarily under the titles "sound" and "ear") were also interesting and challenging. Concerning our present very limited capacity to hear, I found the following statement under "Sound" in the Encyclopedia Americana:

"Hearing Ranges. The ear of an adult human can hear sounds at frequencies ranging from 15 hertz (oscillations or cycles per second) to 15,000 hertz, and children can hear sounds at frequencies up to 20,000 hertz. (A child has a hearing range of more than 10 octaves, which is considerably more than the 7.5-octave playing range of the piano.) Sounds at frequencies lower than 15 hertz (infrasonic frequencies) and higher than 20,000 hertz (ultrasonic frequencies) also exist, although such frequencies are not audible to man. Small creatures such as birds, bats, and insects regularly produce ultrasonic pulses. Even the dog has a range of sound perception that reaches into higher frequencies than man can hear. Some dog whistles produce ultrasonic vibrations to which a dog will answer, although a man will hear nothing." [^24]

Again, our present physical sound-receiving capabilities—including our ears, as marvelous and miraculous as they are—can hear only a fraction of the sounds that actually exist.

Possible Analogies

Frequencies used by the media in radio and television offer a good analogy to help us understand more about the different frequencies involved in sight and sound that might exist in the postmortal spirit world.

Sights: There are sights, including images of persons, present in the very air between you and this book you are reading. These scenes and facial images are as real on the frequencies on which they exist as is the image of your face as your look at someone else. This can be proven by scientific means, available to, and at least partially understood, by all of us.

Take, for example, a small battery-operated television set. It is not a video recorder. It does not simply play back something that has already been recorded. Rather, a small television set receives light waves on very high and ultra-high frequencies that our eyes cannot normally interpret, and it changes those light waves into frequencies we can see.

It should now be easier to understand the meaning of President Young's statement: "Can you see spirits in this room? No. Suppose the Lord should touch your eyes that you might see, could you then see the spirits? Yes, as plainly as you now see bodies." [^25]

Sounds: There are sounds of voices in the room in which you are sitting that are not currently audible to your ears, yet they really exist. If the listening capabilities of your ears could be modified to listen on the frequencies on which these inaudible sounds exist—or if these inaudible sounds could be changed to a frequency that your ears could interpret—you could hear them as clearly as you hear your own voice. This also can be proven by scientific means.

Take, for example, a small portable radio operated by a battery. It is not an audio tape recorder. It does not simply play back something that has already been recorded. A small radio intercepts sound waves in the air around us, operating on frequencies that our human ears normally cannot interpret. It then converts these sound waves to frequencies our ears can hear.

Concerning our ability, or lack thereof, to hear all the sounds around us, may I paraphrase President Brigham Young? "Can you hear spirits in this room? No. Suppose the Lord should modify your hearing capacity that you might hear on the same frequency that they exist, could you then hear the spirits? Yes, as plainly as you now hear each other."

Summary

I have scarcely scratched the surface of what we will eventually know about the next major phase of our eternal existence—the postmortal spiritual world. Our current limited knowledge is only natural in a phase of existence during which we learn to walk by faith, receive "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little" (2 Nephi 28:30), and remove the "veil of forgetfulness" by coming to a knowledge of the power of the Spirit and of more and more gospel truths.

We come to this knowledge by reading and pondering pertinent scriptures; by searching the truths revealed to the prophets, seers, and revelators of this dispensation; and by receiving personal revelation through the power of the Holy Ghost.

May we do more in preparation for the next major phase of our eternal existence. If we are wise, we will spend more time on those things we can take with us—family relationships, knowledge, the ability to obey our Heavenly Father's commandments and serve our fellowman—rather than on things we must leave behind, such as worldly possessions. I hope we will not fear death but rather prepare with confidence and faith to meet it. As Jacob explained, death is part of "the merciful plan of the great Creator" (2 Nephi 9:6).

If we learn more about our postmortal existence and prepare for its coming, perhaps an additional promise of the Lord will be fulfilled for us: "Blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more" (2 Nephi 28:30).

Notes

Excerpts from a talk given at BYU Campus Education Week, 17 August 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Death" essentially has to do with "separation." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 353-54.
[^2] Agency—the power and opportunity to choose—is directly associated with the spirit. History of the Church, 4:575.
[^3] The "veil of forgetfulness" that came over our spirit at our birth will continue until it is removed by the power of the Spirit, either in this life or in the life to come. Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund, in Messages of the First Presidency, 4:205.
[^4] The scriptures and the teachings of the prophets indicate that the spirit is able to take with it from this physical mortal experience into the postmortal spiritual existence (1) everything it has acquired by the power of the Spirit through the use of its agency and (2) everything it has been given by the gift and power of God. Gospel Doctrine, 12.
[^5] The spirit will be freed of some of the restraints of time and space associated with the physical mortal existence. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 6:333.
[^6] The spirit will continue to learn and communicate things pertaining to the spirit, as allowed and permitted by God. Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 23:169.
[^7] The spirit takes with it into the postmortal spiritual world the same dispositions and tendencies it has acquired here. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 11:43.
[^8] Ibid., 3:368, 372.
[^9] Ibid., 3:369.
[^10] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), 126.
[^11] Joseph F. Smith, "A Sermon on Purity," Improvement Era, 6 (May 1903): 503-4.
[^12] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 14:231.
[^13] History of the Church, 6:52.
[^14] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 22:351.
[^15] Joseph F. Smith, in Messages of the First Presidency, 5:6-7.
[^16] Charles A. Callis, in Conference Report, October 1939, 20.
[^17] Heber C. Kimball, in Journal of Discourses, 3:108.
[^18] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 3:368.
[^19] Encyclopedia Americana, 30 vols. (Danbury, Conn.: Grolier, Inc., 1997), "Eye."
[^20] Encyclopedia Americana, "Light."
[^21] Encyclopedia of Physics, ed. Rita G. Lerner and George L. Trigg, 2d ed. (New York: VCH, 1991), "Light."
[^22] Encyclopedia of Physics, ed. Robert M. Besancon (New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1985),"Light."
[^23] McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Physics, ed. Sybil P. Parker, 2d ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1993), "Light."
[^24] Encyclopedia Americana, "Sound."
[^25] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 3:368.
