Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 30

The Three Heavens, or the Three Degrees of Glory

The idea is quite generally taught in Christianity that at the time of resurrection a person is assigned either to heaven, a place in the presence of God, or to hell, a place in the presence of the devil. According to this belief there is no other alternative: If a person is not worthy of the presence of God, he is thrust into the presence of the devil.

The doctrine of one heaven and one hell means that all who go to heaven share and share alike in the blessings and that all who fail to go to heaven are sent to hell, where they share and share alike in the miseries. This teaching does not seem to be consistent with the other teachings of the gospel, which indicate that a man reaps what he sows. Also, such a doctrine does not encourage people to do the very best they can—after all, if they are reasonably good, they will still get into heaven and enjoy all the blessings enjoyed by the most valiant, righteous, and faithful. In a similar way, if people are more wicked than the average, they sometimes feel they might as well do all the bad they can, because they are doomed to damnation anyway.

Also the doctrine of one heaven and one hell is not consistent with the character of a merciful God who claims he is not a respecter of persons and yet is a rewarder of all good. Certainly God is a God of justice as well as a God of mercy; therefore, if a person willfully and knowingly breaks the commandments of God and refuses to repent of them, he must be cast out. No evil, wicked, or unclean thing can dwell in God's presence.

But what of the multitudes of people who are willing to accept some of the teachings of Christ and yet are unwilling to obey all the commandments necessary to get back into the presence of God? Is there no hope for them? Is there no place provided for people who are unworthy of the direct presence of God and yet who are not wicked enough to justify condemnation with Satan? I believe there is such a place, and I further believe this doctrine, which is called the doctrine of a plurality of heavens, is taught in the gospel of Christ.

The New Testament contains statements by Christ and his apostles that clearly indicate there are different orders of heaven, or degrees of glory. In the book of John the Savior said: "Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also" (John 14:1-3).

The whole doctrine of being judged of our works at the final judgment and of receiving rewards or punishments according to our deeds indicates there must be different levels of rewards and punishments, for certainly there is great variety in the number and quality of works performed by different people. John the Revelator mentions this judgment in his book of Revelation: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works" (Revelation 20:12).

Paul also understood and taught the doctrine of various heavens, or degrees of glory. In fact, in his second letter to the saints at Corinth, he states that he knew a man who was "caught up to the third heaven" (2 Corinthians 12:2). Naturally, if there is a "third" heaven, there must also be a first and a second. In 1 Corinthians 15, Paul identifies three degrees of glory and gives names to two of these heavens. In speaking of the order of resurrected bodies, he states: "There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead" (1 Corinthians 15:40-42; emphasis added). Thus Paul indicates that the highest heaven, whose glory is like the sun, is called the celestial. The second heaven, whose glory is like the moon, is the terrestrial. The lowest order of heaven, whose glory is like the stars, is not named by Paul.

The clearest and most comprehensive statement in all scripture on the three heavens, or degrees of glory, comes from modern scripture, the Doctrine and Covenants. This book contains the testimony of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, who, on 16 February 1832, were shown these heavens in vision and who recorded their experience.

Concerning the celestial glory, they said: "And again we bear record—for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just—They are they who received the testimony of Jesus and believed on His name and were baptized after the manner of His Burial, being buried in the water in His name. . . . That . . . they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power; And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon those who are just and true. They are they who are the church of the Firstborn. . . . They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things. . . . These shall dwell in the presence of God and His Christ forever and ever" (D&C 76:50-55). "These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood. These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical" (D&C 62:69-70).

To obtain the celestial heaven, or the kingdom of glory where God dwells, one must be baptized of water, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands of one who has authority, and fully repent of all one's sins. Only then will one be worthy to enter into the presence of God.

Those who are unwilling to accept the fulness of the obligations of the gospel but who still repent of their sins and acknowledge the atonement of Christ enter into the second heaven, or degree—the terrestrial. This heaven is described as follows: "And again, we saw the terrestrial world. . . . These are they . . . whose glory differs from that of the church of the Firstborn who have received the fulness of the Father, even as that of the moon differs from the sun in the firmament. Behold, these are they who died without law; And also they who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh; Who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it. These are they who are honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men. These are they who receive of his glory, but not of his fulness. These are they who receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father. . . . And now this is the end of the vision which we saw of the terrestrial, that the Lord commanded us to write while we were yet in the Spirit" (D&C 76:71-77, 80).

The lowest order of heaven, the telestial, will be occupied by people who are not willing to accept the full obligations of the gospel either in this life or in the life to come, yet they acknowledge and recognize Christ as the Savior and Redeemer. These people are not worthy of the presence of either the Father or the Son, but they likewise are not so wicked nor rebellious that they should be cast entirely out of heaven. Therefore, they enter into the lowest degree of glory, which is described as follows: "And again, we saw the glory of the telestial, which glory is that of the lesser, even as the glory of the stars differs from that of the glory of the moon in the firmament. These are they who received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus. These are they who deny not the Holy Spirit. . . . These are they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished His work. . . . And they shall be servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell, they cannot come, worlds without end" (D&C 76:81-83, 85, 112).

Those who inherit the telestial kingdom are required to repent and suffer fully for all their sins before their redemption comes, but eventually they areredeemed. Thus, everyone who inherits a kingdom of glory will be redeemed through the atonement of Christ.

In addition to the three degrees of glory, there is at least one kingdom that is not a kingdom of glory. This kingdom is inhabited by the devil and his followers and by all those who become sons of perdition in this life. The Lord has revealed that the occupants of this kingdom are the only ones on whom the second spiritual death shall have power—that is, they shall not be redeemed. Their condition is described in the scriptures as follows: "And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot abide a telestial glory; therefore, he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore, he must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory. . . . And they . . . shall . . . be quickened; nevertheless, they shall return again to their own place to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received" (D&C 88:24, 32). "They shall go away into everlasting punishment, which is endless punishment, which is eternal punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels in eternity" (D&C 76:44).

What glorious principles of truth! The hell that is outer darkness, which is as a lake of fire and brimstone to be endured eternally, is not a place where approximately 50 percent of the human race are destined to go; rather, it pertains only to those relatively few who are so rebellious and wicked that they become sons of perdition. Every other person will eventually repent of his sins and enter the heaven, or degree of glory, to which he is entitled. In the justice and mercy of God, however, only those who are willing to accept and keep the first principles and ordinances of the gospel are worthy to enter into the actual presence of God, which is the celestial heaven.

These are the teachings of the scriptures. So far as I know, however, this doctrine is now taught by only one church—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is part of the fulness of the gospel, which has been restored in this dispensation.

Note

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, 19 January 1958.
