Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 31

Eternal Life or Exaltation within the Celestial Kingdom

In this discussion I will consider a doctrine of the gospel that pertains to our eternal happiness because it is concerned with the type of life we might enjoy in the eternities to come after the resurrection. This topic might be introduced by two very brief scriptures. The first of these is a statement by the Savior recorded in the New Testament: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou has sent" (John 17:3). The second scripture is a statement by God and is recorded in the Pearl of Great Price: "This is my work and my glory—the bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

These two scriptures indicate that eternal life is the great gift of God and that we obtain this gift only as we learn to know God and to understand the mission of his Son, Jesus Christ.

But what is eternal life? It is not the mere promise of immortality or the power to live forever but is something in addition to immortality. Notice again the words of God: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." The immortality of man has now been realized through the resurrection of Christ; all of us will be resurrected from the dead. But the other aspect of God's work, the eternal life of man, depends primarily upon man himself and has not yet been fully achieved.

Perhaps we can best determine what eternal life is by examining some of its synonyms in the scriptures. For example, the word "exaltation" is a scriptural term frequently used to denote the end goal of life. Also, in some cases the word "salvation" or the idea of "being saved" is used. But when we receive eternal life, to what are we being exalted and from what are we being saved?

These questions can be answered by referring to the three heavens or degrees of glory. Recall that these are identified in the scriptures: first, the celestial—the highest heaven where God dwells, which is as the glory of the sun; second, the terrestrial—which is as the glory of the moon; and third, the telestial—which is as the glory of the stars. Recall that certain conditions prevail in all of these heavens. For example, each of these heavens is a place of purposeful activity—we do not spend the eternities playing harps. Also, we retain our individual entity in heaven; we continue to be thinking personalities—to be ourselves, different from everyone else. Thus we are able to enjoy the friendship and companionship of others. We also will have our bodies after the resurrection, just as the Savior had his body after his resurrection. Of course, our resurrected bodies will not be subject to death or to the pains or diseases of mortality. As Paul states, our bodies will be immortal and incorruptible.

However, different conditions also exist within each of the heavens. For example, Paul states that resurrected bodies are of different orders; some are of the celestial order, others of the terrestrial, and still others of the telestial (1 Corinthians 15:40-42). Our resurrected bodies will be suited to the heaven we obtain, which in turn depends upon our degree of worthiness.

If a person attains any of the three degrees of glory, however, he achieves a degree of salvation, for he is "saved" from the permanent effects of temporal death through the resurrection and is also "saved" from the eternal influences of the devil. But in order to obtain a fulness of salvation, or an exaltation, one must obtain the highest heaven where God dwells—the celestial—and then must be exalted within that kingdom. Such a person receives the gift of eternal life. Thus eternal life might be defined as life in the presence of God and also as "the type of life that God lives." This means that a person who has eternal life becomes as God is.

In order for a person to inherit eternal life, however, he must keep not only the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, which are prerequisites to the celestial kingdom, but also the higher ordinances of the gospel, including temple marriage for time and all eternity. A man cannot obtain eternal life by himself; he must have the companionship of a wife. If a man and his wife receive these higher ordinances and remain faithful to the covenants they make, they are entitled to the gift of eternal life, which includes the right of eternal increase—the power and right to have children after the resurrection. This right and power will be given only to those who fulfill all the requirements. Notice the clarity of God's word on this subject: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood (meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage); And if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase" (D&C 131:1-4).

An erroneous concept has crept into Christianity that men and women do not live together as husbands and wives after death—that there are no family groups or family relationships after the resurrection. This is not the teaching of the gospel of Christ. In the second chapter of Genesis, God said it is not good that man should be alone (Genesis 2:18), and later he instituted marriage between Adam and Eve. It is evident that this marriage was to last forever, for Adam and Eve were not even subject to death at the time they were joined together as husband and wife by the Lord. There was no clause saying, "I pronounce you husband and wife until death do you part" in this marriage or in any other marriage performed by the sealing power of God. The Savior made it clear that marriage is meant to be eternal when he said: "Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder" (Matthew 19:4-6).

Earlier the Savior said to Peter, "And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matthew 16:19).

This sealing power—given to Peter by the Christ and restored in this dispensation to Joseph Smith by the prophet Elijah—enables a man and woman to be married or sealed together as husband and wife not only for this life but for time and all eternity. As the Savior said, "They are no more twain, but one flesh" (Matthew 19:6).

Paul taught this same doctrine in his first letter to the saints at Corinth when he said, "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Corinthians 11:11).

But, one might ask, if the gospel teaches that a husband and wife can continue to live as a married couple after the resurrection, why is the belief so common in Christianity that there are no marriage relationships in heaven? This false idea has come from a misinterpretation of a statement by the Savior in the New Testament. The Sadducees—who did not even believe in a resurrection—came to the Savior in an attempt to trick him, saying, "Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and having no issue, left his wife unto his brother: Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh. And last of all the woman died also. Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven? . . . Jesus answered and said unto them. Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven" (Matthew 22:24-30).

This answer has often been construed to mean there are no marriage relationships in heaven. However, a careful reading of these verses indicates the Savior is merely saying that marriage cannot be performed in heaven; it is an earthly ordinance and must be performed on earth. There are no marriages in heaven.

An explanation by the Savior in a modern scripture helps to make this distinction clear. He states: "Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world. Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage" (D&C 132:15-16).

However, the Savior also makes it clear that the marriage of those who are "sealed" by the power of the priesthood and who remain faithful will be in effect in heaven for time and all eternity. He continues: "And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood . . . it shall be . . . of full force when they are out of the world; and they shall pass . . . to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever" (D&C 132:19).

The wonderful message of the restored gospel of Christ is that we not only live after death but that we can live in the presence of God and become as God is. This means that we can live together with our husband or wife and can receive the gift of eternal increase or the "continuation of the seeds." These blessings are predicated upon our faithfulness and obedience to the higher ordinances of the gospel, which are performed only by priesthood power in the temples of God. These ordinances can be performed either for the living or, by proxy, for and in behalf of the dead who did not have the opportunity to learn of these truths during mortality.

Thus can the great gift of eternal life be realized by man. No wonder God said that this was his work and his glory.

In conclusion, I turn to a statement by the resurrected Christ that he gave to Joseph Smith in 1843: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory. For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me. But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also. This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am He. Receive ye, therefore, my law" (D&C 132:21-24).

Note

From an address delivered over KSL Radio, Salt Lake City, Utah, 26 January 1958.
