Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 32

Our Divine Destiny—A Third Dimension View

Four Background Incidents

I would like to refer to four incidents or experiences that will provide background for the ideas I would like to present in this chapter regarding our divine destiny.

The first of these is an experience Jedediah Morgan Grant had while serving a mission for the Church in the Southern States from 1837-38. Brother Grant, with his knowledge of the scriptures, soon earned a degree of notoriety because of the debates he had participated in with several Protestant ministers. Finally, a Baptist minister decided he would try to put Brother Grant in his place, challenging him to debate. He knew that Brother Grant was not an ordained minister in the regular sense of the word, and that he was not even a presiding elder in the Church. The minister evidently felt Brother Grant was not trained for the ministry; therefore, he thought he could surely best him in the debate.

As the debate started, this rather pompous individual stood up and introduced himself somewhat as follows: "I am Reverend Baldwin, and I stand at the head of my church in southwest Virginia. Mr. Grant, who stands at the head of your church in southwest Virginia?"

Brother Grant stood up and said, "Jesus Christ, sir," and then sat down. [^1]

The second incident occurred on November 29, 1839, when the Prophet Joseph Smith had an interview with President Martin Van Buren. During that interview, President Van Buren asked the Prophet, "What is there about your Church that makes it different from all of the other Christian churches?" Joseph Smith answered that we differ "in mode of baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands." [^2]

The third incident occurred in March 1842 when Mr. John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat, asked the Prophet Joseph Smith if he would write a statement concerning the basic beliefs of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Joseph Smith agreed to do this on the condition that his statement would not be edited and would be published in its entirety. This letter, which we refer to in Church history as the "Wentworth Letter," marks one of the high points of the literary efforts of the Prophet. In fact, the last thirteen paragraphs of that letter have been canonized; they appear as the Articles of Faith in the Pearl of Great Price. [^3]

In answer to the question, "Why The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?" the Prophet answered, in substance, in these words, "This Church was restored to prepare a people to be worthy to live with Christ when he comes."

The fourth and last incident occurred with the publication of a guest editorial by Brigham Young University President Ernest L. Wilkinson in the Provo Daily Herald. In the editorial, President Wilkinson indicated that he was asked by a student, "What is the most important accomplishment of your eighteen years as president of BYU?" He answered, "If I had to name the one single most important development with the greatest impact and influence, I would have to choose the establishment on campus of the wards and stakes of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

In his next sentence President Wilkinson said he guessed that many people would be surprised at his answer. I am sure some of them thought he would mention something about the tremendous buildings that have been erected on campus, or the large increase in number of students and faculty. But I am convinced that the verdict of history and of eternity will prove that President Wilkinson was right. The most important thing that happened during the first eighteen years of his tenure was the organization of wards and stakes by President David O. McKay and other Church leaders.

Our Divine Destiny

I should explain how I am going to use the words "our divine destiny" in this chapter. First, I will use the pronoun "our" to refer not only to the Church but also to members of the Church, individually and collectively.

Second, the Church is "divine" because Jesus Christ is its head—not only in southwest Virginia but on the whole earth and in heaven as well. We members of the Church are also "divine" because we are of divine parentage. We are sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father; in this relationship, Jesus Christ is our elder brother. If we follow the teachings of the Church, we can receive our "divine" inheritance, to which we are all heirs if we are faithful to the principles and ordinances we espouse.

Of course, the divine "destiny" of the Church, as the kingdom of God on earth, is to someday become one with the kingdom of God in heaven. It is with this union in mind that the Savior counseled us to pray, "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven" (Matthew 6:10). I will use the term "divine destiny" in relationship to individual members of the Church to indicate that we and our families can achieve exaltation in the celestial kingdom. I believe that our divine destiny is intertwined with the divine destiny of the Church. We cannot achieve our divine destiny without the Church, and the Church cannot achieve its divine destiny without us.

A Third Dimension View

In photography you can take certain elements or parts of a picture and put them on two separate transparencies. Put the two transparencies together, and sometimes a new dimension—referred to as a third dimension—becomes evident. In a third-dimensional picture, there appear to be more elements than in any of the original pictures.

I would like to examine some of the basic doctrines of the Church and then (1) attempt to look at them through the viewpoint of our Heavenly Father and his efforts to bring about our eternal life and (2) attempt to look at them from the viewpoint of Lucifer, who is trying to thwart our efforts to achieve our divine destiny. If we can see these doctrines in a new relationship and visualize ourselves in relation to these doctrines, we will be able to achieve a new perspective, a third-dimensional outlook.

I am going to list seven reasons why we came to earth. Obviously, I could list more reasons; there is nothing sacred about the number seven. The seven reasons are:

Gospel Principles: God's View and Lucifer's View

Let us look at each of these reasons through the transparency of the principles of the gospel as espoused by God, and then see what Lucifer is trying to do to keep us from achieving our divine destiny in these particular areas.

Man's Power of Procreation

We came to earth to obtain a physical body capable of procreation and to learn to use this power righteously. God instituted marriage; marriage, therefore, is ordained of God. As we are told in the Doctrine and Covenants, "Whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man" (D&C 49:15). God built into our physical bodies the miraculous power of increase, but we don't receive that power until we reach an age (puberty) in which we are able to exercise judgment in the use of it. He has given us direction and counsel as to how this power should be used, and he has reserved its use for the marriage relationship. Finally, he has commanded married couples to multiply so that they might have "joy and rejoicing" in their posterity.

On the other hand, let us see what Lucifer has to say about this particular area. This might be clearer if I could do a bit of role playing and put myself in the place of Lucifer. If I were Lucifer, knowing what I know about the plan of God concerning man's power to procreate, I think I would do everything I could do to prostitute those powers. I would forbid marriage if this would do any good, and if I could get churches to forbid marriage so much the better. I would advocate celibacy and, if I could, get large groups of people, particularly religious leaders, to practice celibacy, I could make marriage appear to be a second-rate institution. I would do everything that I could do, if I were Lucifer, to weaken the marriage vows. I would advocate easy divorce; I would advocate free love; I would emphasize every way I could through the news media and television that marriage really is not important. I would inspire people to write movie scripts and television scripts that mock marriage and flaunt immorality. In short, I would do everything I could to weaken the marriage vow.

I would also do everything I could to promote promiscuity and prostitution, and I would emphasize a "new morality," which is really the old immorality. I would also belittle the power of reproduction, and I would have people refer to it as a mere animal instinct. If all these efforts failed, I would do everything I could to discourage married couples from having children, even if I had to influence someone to invent a pill that would prevent conception. If I had to, I would influence legislators, parliamentarians, and other government leaders to legalize abortion. Then I would influence celebrities—entertainers, athletes, news commentators, and others—to say that it is a shame for any family to have more than two children.

When you take the teachings of our Heavenly Father on the one hand and the teachings of Lucifer on the other hand, and then put them together, you can sometimes see the issue in a new relationship. For example, the basic question today concerning population growth is not whether the earth can take care of this increased population. After all, doesn't God have the power, inasmuch as he created the earth, to even create another earth if necessary? Doesn't he have power to bless this earth so that it could produce spontaneously and abundantly? You see, that is not the question. The question is very simply this: "Will we or will we not obey God's command to multiply so that we can have joy and rejoicing in our posterity?"

Moral Agency

We came to earth to exercise our agency. To enable us to do so, the Lord, first of all, gave us law. We have to have law in order to exercise agency; that is, we have to have the opportunity of choice. Second, he gave us freedom of choice. He said to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself" (Moses 3:16-17). So he gave them their agency. Of course God realizes that when he gives us law he also gives us two possible consequences. We can obey the law, which results in a blessing, which in turn results in happiness or joy; or we can disobey the law, which results in punishment, which in turn results in misery. But if we want to have the one possibility (joy), we must have the other possibility (misery). Therefore, our Heavenly Father is trying to guarantee us opportunity of choice as well as freedom of choice. To accomplish this, among other things, he raised up men to establish a Constitution. He has raised up countries that will protect citizens in certain inalienable rights.

Now let us see how Lucifer looks at agency by playing his role. If I were Lucifer, I would not give people choice. I would advocate a dictatorship, and if I were not successful in that, I would do everything I could to get people to delegate their agency to some superpower or government, either through a welfare state, socialism, a guaranteed annual-wage-forever plan, or something of this type. If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could to destroy the exercise of agency on this earth. I would destroy law and order; I would bring the police into ill-repute, if I could. Above all else, I would hamper and, if possible, destroy the judicial system of every country on earth because this is the system that has been given the responsibility for upholding law and order. In particular, I would set my sights on America, and I would do everything I could to destroy her bastion of moral agency and free enterprise.

Once again, when you put the two transparencies together and see the issue in a new dimension, you find that what Lucifer really wants to do is what is so obviously being done in the world today. Among other things, he is trying to tell people: "Look, it doesn't make any difference what you do; rationalize your sins. Wickedness does not result in unhappiness." The Book of Mormon prophet Alma exposed this lie when he said, "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). Let us read what Samuel the Lamanite said about this principle in speaking to apostate Nephites: "Your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Helaman 13:38).

Nevertheless, people in the last days will say: "[God] will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God. . . . And thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell" (2 Nephi 28:8, 21).

If I were Lucifer, I would try to get people, particularly Latter-day Saints, to rationalize away their sins. The story is told that on one occasion, a brother in the Church told Brigham Young that he knew that Joseph Smith was a fallen prophet. Brigham Young said, "How do you know that Joseph Smith is a fallen prophet?" The man said, "Because Joseph Smith once taught, and I heard it from his own lips, that if a man commits adultery he will lose the spirit and deny the faith, and I have committed adultery and I have not lost the spirit, and I have not denied the faith; therefore I know that Joseph Smith is a fallen prophet." [^4] Such an incident is a good example of rationalizing away one's sins.

Subject the Physical to the Spiritual

We came to this earth to learn to subject the physical to the spiritual through the use of our agency. The Lord has given us certain principles on this. For example, in Matthew he says, "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell" (Matthew 10:28). And in Mark he adds, "For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Mark 8:36).

In other words, our spirits are more important than the physical elements of the earth, and we came here so that our spirits could learn to control matter. In fact, God gave us dominion over the earth and a command to subdue the earth. He also gave us the law of consecration and the law of stewardship whereby we might learn to do this.

How does Lucifer try to thwart or defeat us in this? To me this is the real issue involved in the Word of Wisdom. You see, one thing that is wrong with smoking, drinking, and the other harmful things mentioned in the Word of Wisdom is that their use is entirely contrary to the purposes of our coming here. The use of addictive substances puts the physical above the spiritual. If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could do to get people to smoke. Tobacco would be all right, but marijuana would be better. I would also try to get people to use heroin and other drugs, including alcohol, because by doing so they would be subjecting their spirits to the physical. If you don't think these things addict or influence the spirit, just sit in an airplane next to a heavy smoker and watch his hands shake during the flight.

If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could to tell people to "eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow [they] die" (2 Nephi 28:7), and I would tell them that God has no right dictating what they may or can eat and drink.

I would also tell them that they are entitled to a living and that other people owe them a living. I would tell them, "You have certain rights, and if someone has something you need or want, go ahead and take it."

If you want to do some reading that will quickly sober you, pick up a newspaper and read the articles about crime, including murder, rape, robbery, assault, and drug abuse. Lucifer is doing quite well in this world in getting people to emphasize the physical over the spiritual and, therefore, keeping them from achieving their divine destiny.

A Knowledge of God "In and of Ourselves"

We were born on earth to come to a knowledge of God "in and of ourselves." The Savior said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3).

God has sent prophets to us to teach the gospel. God has also given us scriptures. In these scriptures he has put the essentials of the gospel, including some great principles that will help us to solve our problems. He has commanded and encouraged us to read the scriptures: "Search the scriptures . . . they are they which testify of me" (John 5:39).

Furthermore, he has promised us additional scriptures if we will read and live up to what we have. He said: "I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; . . . for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:30).

If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could to belittle the words of the prophets; in fact, I would even deny the power of prophecy. And I would inspire the scholars of the earth to criticize the Bible by saying that the prophetic elements of the Bible could not have occurred because no one can know about anything before it happens. Soon thereafter I could influence people to consider the Bible simply as sort of a book of myths. If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could to keep people from reading the scriptures. If you don't think Lucifer has been quite successful in this, read the results of a survey by Dr. George Gallup, director of the American Institute of Public Opinion, which he conducted concerning the religious literacy of people in the United States.

I offer here the results of one question Dr. Gallup included in his questionnaire: "Will you tell me the names of any of the first four books of the New Testament of the Bible, that is, the Four Gospels?" In a select group of people (all of whom were twenty-one years of age and over, and all of whom were high school graduates and above), he found out that 35 percent of the people could name all four of the books, 4 percent could name three of the books, 4 percent could name two of the books, and 4 percent could name one of the books. In other words, he found that 47 percent of the people could name one or more of the books, while 53 percent of the people in the United States, twenty-one years of age and over, could not even name one of the four Gospels of Jesus Christ!5

If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could do to keep people from reading the scriptures, and I would especially try to keep Latter-day Saints from reading the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. And if they insisted on reading them, I would encourage them to read them as history and to ignore the great teaching principles contained therein. After all, some of them might apply these principles in their lives. If I were Lucifer, I would prefer to have the scriptures destroyed, but if I couldn't do that, I would have them altered or taken away.

To Walk by Faith and to Follow Christ's Teachings

We came to earth to learn to walk by faith and to follow the teachings of Christ. We are told to pray—to ask, to seek, to knock. We are told that certain signs will follow them that believe. Our Heavenly Father has established the true church to help us fellowship each other and to live the truth. Our Heavenly Father wants us to have freedom of religion so we can exercise our agency and worship as we want so long as doing so does not impinge on the freedoms of others to do the same.

Lucifer does the opposite. He tries to keep us from praying. He belittles faith and emphasizes knowledge and reason. If I were Lucifer, I would work particularly among college students by saying, "Belittle faith, enthrone knowledge and reason, and ask for signs." I wouldn't tolerate freedom of religion.

Preparation for Exaltation

We came to earth to help prepare individual members of the Church and their families to become worthy to be exalted in the presence of God. The gospel is relatively simple. I am afraid those of us who teach religion make it much too complex. The Savior defined the gospel in one verse of scripture:

"Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel" (3 Nephi 27:20-21).

Notice the phrase "that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost." Now do you understand what Joseph Smith meant when he told President Martin Van Buren, "We have the Holy Ghost"? If we have the Holy Ghost, we have the power to give the Holy Ghost. If we have the power to give the Holy Ghost, we have the true priesthood of God. If we have the true priesthood of God, we are the true church upon the earth.

The gift of the Holy Ghost is necessary in order for us to achieve our individual destiny. The statement of the Savior in 3 Nephi 27 indicates that God is a holy person and that no sinful person can enter his presence. In fact, the Savior said, "No unclean thing can enter into his kingdom" (3 Nephi 27:19). The question, then, is how can a sinful person become sinless so that he can qualify for God's presence? The answer is that he must become sinless through the cleansing power of the Holy Ghost. This power is a gift of the Holy Ghost and is given only by the laying on of hands by one who has authority (or priesthood) of God. This "baptism of the Holy Ghost" is received only after the baptism of water, which is for the remission of sins. However, a remission of sins is achieved only through repentance, and a person repents only if he has faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ. Thus, I have listed in reverse order the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel. As we usually list them, we state that a person must have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repent, be baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, and then receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost is a necessary prerequisite for the celestial kingdom once a person has committed a sin.

If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could to get people not to believe in the Holy Ghost, even if I had to tell them to deny the power of the Holy Ghost and to convince them that the Holy Ghost is not separate from the spirit of God the Father. In fact, if I were Lucifer, I would say: "There are no saving ordinances so far as the gospel is concerned. If you want to be baptized, that is fine, but baptism is simply a symbol; it is not necessary. If you want to be baptized, then anyone can baptize you." Many Protestant churches believe in the priesthood of all believers; they believe that anyone who believes in Christ has as much priesthood as any other believer. The predominant Christian church in the world today, meanwhile, doesn't even require priesthood authority in order to baptize. Anyone can baptize a person into this church. If I were Lucifer, I would make sure that people didn't believe in the saving ordinances and principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Preparation for the Millennial Reign

We came to earth to help prepare the earth and all mankind for a more glorious future—the millennial reign of Jesus Christ upon the earth. How is God helping us prepare for the Millennium? First of all, he has given us the Holy Ghost so we can improve our personal worthiness. He has also given us such programs as family home evening, during which we can be taught the gospel. Second, we see in priesthood correlation today an attempt by our Heavenly Father to prepare qualified and experienced leadership so that within the Church we can develop our own system of government. Thus, if other governments fall (federal governments, state governments, municipal governments), we can still govern ourselves.

Once you see priesthood correlation in the perspective of training qualified and worthy priesthood leaders, then all of a sudden home teaching, priesthood quorum leadership, ward bishoprics, ward priesthood executive committees, stake presidencies and high councils, stake councils, and regional meetings all come a little bit more into focus. This Church was restored to prepare a people to be worthy to live with Jesus Christ when he comes.

If I were Lucifer, I would attack people's preparation for the Millennium from two main points. I would tell them not to believe in the Second Coming or the Millennium. Lucifer has succeeded in this area very well. Well over two-thirds of the people on earth aren't even Christian; they don't look forward to the Second Coming, much less believe in it. And of those who are Christian, an overwhelming majority of them don't believe in a millennial reign here on the earth—they don't believe in the Millennium.

According to a book published by the Catholic Church: "The Catholic Church has never considered the Millennium as an article of faith or held that it was taught by the Scriptures or Apostolic tradition. There is no trace of Millenarianism [the teachings of a millennium] in the Gospels or the Epistles. The resurrection of the just and the unjust, the general Judgment and the end of the world are mentioned as happening in close succession, leaving no possible room for the mythical reign of Christ for one thousand years." [^5]

If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could to prevent people from believing in the Millennium, but if some strange, independent, separate group insisted on doing so, I would do as much as I could to prevent them from preparing themselves to be worthy to be with Christ.

When we put together these two transparencies of what is happening in these last days, don't things come into focus a little bit? And yet, I wonder why we have so much difficulty getting the priesthood members of the Church to carry out their home teaching responsibilities. Why are we having so much difficulty with this important "weld" program, this program that brings the authority of the Church into contact with the home? If I were Lucifer, I would strike quickly at the home teaching program. I wouldn't want to connect the homes of the Church to the power and authority of the Church.

In preparation for the millennial reign, two great world capitals will be established: one here in America and one in Israel. Lucifer knows this. He has read the scriptures; in fact, he probably knows them better than we do. Now do you understand a little better why the Saints were driven out of Missouri, which is the area designated by the Lord as one of these world capitals? Now do you see what was really behind the extermination order of Governor Boggs? When you remember the scriptural promise that the descendants of Judah are to gather back to Israel before the Second Coming of Christ, do you understand a little better why a dictator was devilishly inspired to kill over six million Jewish people in the gas chambers of Germany, thus preventing them from returning to Israel? According to the scriptures, Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, the temple in Jerusalem must be built, and the temple in Jackson County, Missouri, must be built—all before Jesus Christ returns to earth to rule as King of kings and Lord of lords. If I were Lucifer, I would do everything I could to destroy America and Israel so that these two great world capitals could not be established.

May we be worthy of the great responsibility the Lord has placed upon us, that we might individually achieve our eternal destiny. Only in this way can we save ourselves and be the means by which this Church can achieve its divine destiny of having the kingdom of this earth and the kingdom of heaven become one, with Jesus Christ as the rightful head of the Church.

Notes

From an address given to the Brigham Young University student body, 17 March 1970.

---
Notas:
[^1] To obtain a physical body capable of procreation and to use these powers righteously. See Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Andrew Jenson History Co., 1901), 1:58.
[^2] To exercise our moral agency. History of the Church, 4:42.
[^3] To learn to subject the physical to the spiritual through the use of our moral agency. The entirety of "The Wentworth Letter" can be found in History of the Church, 4:535-41.
[^4] To come to a knowledge of God "in and of ourselves." See John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 1:372-73.
[^5] To learn to walk by faith and to follow the teachings of the Church. See Leo Rosten, ed., Religions in America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963), 327.
