Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 34

Paul—The Man and the Message

I introduce this chapter by briefly discussing a subject on which I know very little, but in which I have a great deal of interest: laser beams. Perhaps one reason I am so interested in laser beams is that this whole field of science has been developed in my lifetime. In fact, the first laser was built in 1960, and since then I have read of many remarkable things that can be done with lasers.

Lasers have revolutionized several fields of science and medicine. They are used to "spot weld" detached or torn retinas, to excise malignant tumors, to cut through thick steel beams at the rate of fifteen inches per minute, to drill holes in ruby watch jewels, to resize holes in worn wire-drawing diamond dies, and to determine long distances accurately (for example, measurements of the earth-moon separation have been made to an accuracy of six inches). Lasers may prove to be useful in predicting earthquakes, since a change in earth surface strain as small as one part in ten billion can now be detected.

In communications, high frequency light waves from lasers provide one hundred thousand times the bandwidth that is present in the microwave frequency range. In the military, ruby-laser tank range finders are operational, and "smart bombs" have been developed that direct a laser infrared beam at targets, allowing bombs with infrared sensors to home in on the reflected infrared light. Research is being done secretly on the ability of high-powered continuous-wave lasers to disable aircraft or missiles in mid-flight.

What enables the laser to perform these feats? In simple language, the laser changes incoherent light into coherent light.

In preparation for this brief reference on laser beams, I reviewed an eight-page article in the Encyclopedia Americana and a three-page article in the Encyclopedia Britannica. From these readings, I offer two abridged statements:

"The word LASER is an acronym derived from light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. A LASER is a device that produces an intense beam of light of a very pure single color. This light beam may be intense enough to vaporize the hardest and most heat-resistant materials." [^1]

"Fundamental principles: Atoms and molecules exist at low and high energy levels. Those at low levels can be excited to higher levels, usually by heat, and after reaching the higher levels they give off light when they return to a lower level. In ordinary light sources the many excited atoms or molecules emit light independently and in many different colors (wavelengths). If, however, during the brief instant that an atom is excited, light of a certain wavelength impinges on it, the atom can be stimulated to emit radiation that is in phase (in step) with the wave that stimulated it. The new emission thus augments or amplifies the passing wave; if the phenomenon can be multiplied sufficiently, the resulting beam, made up of wholly coherent light (i.e., light of a single frequency or color in which all the components are in step with each other) will be tremendously powerful." [^2]

Possible Applications of "Laser Beam" Principles in Teaching

I am convinced that there is strength and power in the unity of teaching and living spiritual truths, just as there is strength and power in the unity or coherence of physical light. Isn't faith, in a sense, the concentration of one's spiritual power into a coherent whole? The Savior said: "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you" (Matthew 17:20).

Moroni quoted Christ as follows: "If ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me" (Moroni 7:33).

Also, isn't faith an exercise of the spirit, and hasn't the word light been used by the Lord to define both Spirit and truth?

Notice these teachings of the Lord:

"And I now give unto you a commandment to beware concerning yourselves, to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life. For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ. And the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father" (D&C 84:43-47).

"The Spirit may be given to every man to profit withal" (D&C 46:16).

"The holy scriptures are given of me for your instruction; and the power of my Spirit quickeneth all things" (D&C 33:16).

"And again, the . . . teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel . . . as they shall be directed by the Spirit. And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach. And all this ye shall observe to do as I have commanded concerning your teaching, until the fulness of my scriptures is given" (D&C 42:12-15).

Concerning this subject, Paul has testified: "And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing [persuasive] words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power" (1 Corinthians 2:4).

This power principle concerning spiritual matters is similar to the "laser beam" principle with physical matter: we should concentrate all our efforts to be one with God's Spirit—or to obtain the companionship of God's Spirit. Then all things will be possible to us.

We need to obtain the Spirit in order to teach by the power of the Spirit; we need to teach by the power of the Spirit in order for our children and our students to learn by that same power. I am convinced that the light of Christ in each of us can be reflected in the hearts and minds of those we teach.

Now let's read from the scriptures a few references that might indicate another "homing" technique used by God in the realm of the Spirit:

"For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night. For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. . . . And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged" (Mormon, in Moroni 7:15-16, 18).

The Lord obviously knows much more about light—including physical light—and how to use it than we know. Note for example the following wording from the account of Joseph Smith concerning the first visit of the angel Moroni: "Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me. . . .

"While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it.

"After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance" (Joseph Smith—History 1:32, 42-43).

Use of One "Laser Beam" Principle with Israel Tour Groups

I now relate that principle to the ending of a trip I took to Israel, where I directed two consecutive tours. Upon completion of the tours, we made our way to the airport early one morning so that we could be there by 5 a.m. to get through strict Israeli security, obtain boarding passes, and go through passport control.

As we traveled from Jerusalem to the International Airport at Tel Aviv in the darkness of 4 a.m., I sat in the guide seat at the front of the bus, and over the microphone I invited the tour members to review with me intheirminds with a concentration of thought some of the major places we had visited in Israel during the previous ten days. I then said—with a substantial pause between each item—such words or terms as: Sea of Galilee, Capernaum, Mount of Beatitudes, Lazarus' tomb in Bethany, Shepherds' Field in Bethlehem, room of the Last Supper, Garden of Gethsemane, and Garden Tomb. I could almost feel the spirit and strength of our collective coherent thoughts as we concentrated and pondered over our experiences in these various places. Because of the freshness of our visits there, I felt confident that we all visualized essentially the same thing as we remembered these places.

I would never have engaged in that activity with that group of tour members just a few weeks earlier. I am confident our thoughts would not have been coherent if I had said the word "Bethlehem" fourteen days earlier; the particular vision of each group member would have varied greatly from the image of the other members. There is power in "thinking together" on a particular subject.

Paul, the Man

Now, as you read this chapter, think deeply about the topic. As you read the words Paul, the man, what impressions come to your mind?

Individual impressions vary widely. Undoubtedly, when you think of a "man" you think of various characteristics and attributes, such as height, weight, color of hair and eyes, manner of speech, personal traits such as strength, kindness, and so on. Do you think of Paul as being tall, or short, or about average? Did he have brown hair? Or was it black, blond, or red? Was he dark complexioned or fair? Did he have a deep resonant voice—or more of a shrill whine? Do you think of Paul as being a fanatic, a religious zealot, or a devoted and dedicated servant?

Let's review what we can learn from the scriptures and the teachings of the prophets concerning "Paul—The Man and the Message." The Prophet Joseph Smith gave the following description of the Apostle Paul on January 5, 1841, at the organization of a school of instruction: "He is about five feet high; very dark hair; dark complexion; dark skin; large Roman nose; sharp face; small black eyes, penetrating as eternity; round shoulders; a whining voice, except when elevated, and then it almost resembled the roaring of a lion. He was a good orator, active and diligent, always employing himself in doing good to his fellow man." [^3]

Do you now have a different image of "Paul, the man" than you had only a few minutes earlier? What else do we know of the Apostle Paul?

In addition to giving us the above description of Paul, Joseph Smith has listed some of Paul's characteristics and attributes as follows: "Though he once, according to his own word, persecuted the Church of God and wasted it, yet after embracing the faith, his labors were unceasing to spread the glorious news: and like a faithful soldier, when called to give his life in the cause which he had espoused, he laid it down, as he says, with an assurance of an eternal crown. Follow the labors of this Apostle from the time of his conversion to the time of his death, and you will have a fair sample of industry and patience in promulgating the Gospel of Christ. Derided, whipped, and stoned, the moment he escaped the hands of his persecutors he as zealously as ever proclaimed the doctrine of the Savior. And all may know that he did not embrace the faith for honor in this life, nor for the gain of earthly goods. What, then, could have induced him to undergo all this toil? It was, as he said, that he might obtain the crown of righteousness from the hand of God. No one, we presume, will doubt the faithfulness of Paul to the end. None will say that he did not keep the faith, that he did not fight the good fight, that he did not preach and persuade to the last." [^4]

Most of the information we have of Paul comes from the New Testament, although he is mentioned also in the Doctrine and Covenants (18:9; 76:99; 127:2; 128:13, 15-16.) Note the following information as provided in the Bible Dictionary of the LDS edition of the Bible under the title "Paul": "He was known in early life as Saul; his Latin name Paul is first mentioned at the beginning of his gentile ministry (Acts 13:9). He belonged to Tarsus, in Cilicia (Acts 9:11); was a Pharisee and a pupil of Gamaliel (Acts 22:3); was active in the persecution of Christians (Acts 8:3; 26:10; Gal. 1:13; Philip. 3:6); and took part in the martyrdom of Stephen (Acts 7:58; 8:1). He started for Damascus for the purpose of further persecution (Acts 9:1) and on the road saw a vision of the Lord Jesus, which changed the whole current of his life (Acts 9:4-19; 22:7; 26:14; Gal. 1:15-16). After his baptism by Ananias (Acts 9:18), he retired into Arabia (Gal. 1:17), and then returned to Damascus, where he preached (Acts 9:19-25; 2 Cor. 11:32; Gal. 1:17-18). Being compelled to flee, about three years after his conversion he went to Jerusalem, where he stayed 15 days, Barnabas introducing him to Peter and James (Acts 9:26-30; Gal. 1:18-19). Being in danger, he retired to Tarsus (Acts 9:29-30) and there remained six or seven years, preaching in Syria and Cilicia (Gal. 1:21-24). He was then brought by Barnabas to Antioch (Acts 11:26), and after one year paid a visit to Jerusalem (Acts 11:29-30). After two more years' work in Antioch, he started with Barnabas and Mark on his first missionary journey (Acts 13:1-14:26). Then came another visit to Jerusalem with Barnabas to attend a conference with the other apostles (Acts 15:1-33; Gal. 2:1-10), after which they returned to Antioch (Acts 15:35). He then started on his second missionary journey (Acts 15:36-18:22), which lasted about three years, and ended with a visit to Jerusalem. After a short stay in Antioch, Paul began his third journey, which occupied about 3 1/2 years (Acts 18:23-21:15). On his return to Jerusalem he was arrested and sent to Caesarea (Acts 21:17-23:35), where he remained a prisoner for two years (Acts 24:1-26:32), and was then sent for trial to Rome, suffering shipwreck on the way (Acts 27:1-28:10). He remained in Rome two years (Acts 28:30) and was then released. He then appears to have visited Asia, Macedonia, Crete, and perhaps Spain. At the end of about four years he was again taken a prisoner to Rome, and suffered martyrdom, probably in the spring of a.d. 65." [^5]

Reviewing the Bible Dictionary Entry "Paul" Sentence by Sentence

When you begin teaching about Paul either in class or at home, have your students or children review the article from the Bible Dictionary under the title "Paul." It then becomes "their" resource! Then you might want to provide additional background on each of the fifteen sentences of the article that are quoted here. Let's try this, sentence by sentence. (Note: The following key applies to these examples: BD=Bible Dictionary; GAZ=Gazetteer; LTJA=The Life and Teachings of Jesus and His Apostles; NTSTO=New Testament Seminary Teacher Outline.)

"Saul"

BD, "Saul," 769.

LTJA, "Who Was Saul?" 245-46.

NTSTO, "Saul's Conversion," 267-68.

"Paul"

BD, "Paul," 742-43.

LTJA, "Biography of Paul," 238-39, with a note indicating that additional biographical material on Paul is included in other sections.

NTSTO, "Paul's Preparation," 269.

"Tarsus"

BD, 780. "Capital of Cilicia, Paul's city. . . . It was a place of considerable importance (Paul calls it 'no mean city'), containing a university celebrated for its school of philosophy and literature. It was situated on an important highway leading from Antioch . . . toward the cities of the Roman province of Asia."

GAZ, 825, on eight maps.

"Pharisees"

BD, 750. "A religious party among the Jews. The name denotes separatists. They prided themselves on their strict observance of the law, and on the care with which they avoided contact with things gentile. Their belief included the doctrine of immortality and resurrection of the body and the existence of angels and spirits. They upheld the authority of oral tradition as of equal value with the written law. The tendency of their teaching was to reduce religion to the observance of a multiplicity of ceremonial rules, and to encourage self-sufficiency and spiritual pride."

"Gamaliel"

BD, 677. "A Pharisee, a doctor of the law, held in honor with all the people (Acts 5:34). He was a celebrated Jewish teacher who belonged to the more liberal school. His influence carried great weight in the Sanhedrin (Acts 5:35-40)."

"Stephen"

BD, 777. "One of the seven, 'a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit' (Acts 6:5); . . . [he] proclaimed that the law of Moses was fulfilled in Christ and ought not to be continued in the Church. In this thing he foreshadowed the great work of Paul. . . . Paul was present when this speech was made [Stephen's speech before the Sanhedrin] (Acts 8:1; 22:20), and was probably influenced by it, though at the moment he was a consenting party to his death. A few years later he went on with the work that Stephen had introduced to him."

"Damascus"

BD, 652. "An ancient city of Syria. . . . In New Testament times it was . . . part of the dominions of Aretas, an Arabian prince subject to the Roman emperor."

GAZ, 819, on fifteen maps.

LTJA, 257-58, "What Was the Importance of Damascus?"

"Paul's Vision"

LTJA, 258, "What Are Two Important Lessons We Can Learn from the Accounts of Paul's Conversion?"

LTJA, 258, "It Is Hard for Thee to Kick Against the Pricks."

LTJA, 258, "What Blinded Saul on the Road to Damascus?"

LTJA, 258, "Why Was It Necessary for Paul, Who Saw a Vision, to Submit to Baptism?"

LTJA, 259, "What New Problems Did Paul Face Following the Conversation?"

"Ananias"

BD, 608 (three different ones). "(2) A Christian disciple at Damascus who baptized Paul (Acts 9:10-18; 22:12)."

"Arabia"

BD, 612 (including help on "Arabians").

GAZ, 817, on three maps.

"Jerusalem"

BD, 712. "Formerly Salem (Gen. 14:18; Ps. 76:2), a Jebusite city until it was captured by David (2 Sam. 5:6ff.)."

GAZ, 822, on twenty maps.

"Barnabas"

BD, 619. "Son of consolation. A name given to Joseph, a Levite of Cyprus, who sold his possessions and gave the proceeds to the apostles (Acts 4:36-37); was of service to Saul after his conversion (9:27); was sent by the apostles to Antioch, where he worked with Saul (11:22-30; 12:25); with Paul on missionary journey (chs. 13-14); and at Jerusalem, (ch. 15); they parted (15:39). . . . Though not one of the twelve, he was regarded as an apostle (Acts 14:4, 14)."

LTJA, "Who Was Barnabas?" 259.

"Peter"

BD, 749. "Rock. Brother of Andrew (John 1:40) son of Jonah (Matt. 16:17); also known as Simeon (Acts 15:14; 2 Pet. 1:1) or Simon; . . . Peter was one of the greatest of men. . . . Peter was the chief apostle of his day. . . . In the latter days Peter, with James and John, came from heaven and literally conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood and the keys thereof upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery."

"James"

BD, 709. "An English form of the Hebrew name Jacob. . . . (1) Son of Zebedee. . . . He was beheaded by Herod (Acts 12:2)."

"Syria"

BD, 778. "Originally known as Aram (or 'the highlands'), a general name for the country north and northeast of Palestine."

GAZ, 825, on twelve maps.

"Antioch"

BD, 609. "In New Testament times the third city in the Roman Empire. It was the chief meeting point of East and West. . . . During Paul's life it was a center of gentile Christianity (Acts 6:5; 11:19-30; 13:1; 14:26; 15:22-35; 18:22; Gal. 2:11)."

GAZ, 817, on six maps.

"Mark"

BD, 728. "Also called John; son of Mary, who had a house of considerable size in Jerusalem (Acts 12:12); cousin (or nephew) of Barnabas (Col. 4:10); accompanied Paul and Barnabas from Jerusalem (Acts 12:25). . . . Tradition states that after Peter's death, Mark visited Egypt, founded the Church of Alexandria, and died by martyrdom."

LTJA, "Who Was John Mark?" 253.

"Paul's First Missionary Journey"

GAZ, map 19.

LTJA, "What Is the Primary Significance of Paul's First Missionary Journey?" 263.

"Paul the Missionary," 270-71.

NTSTO, "Paul's First Missionary Journey," 271.

BD. All the major terms have already been examined in the first eight sentences.

"Paul's Second Missionary Journey"

GAZ, 20.

LTJA, "What Are the Significant Elements of Paul's Second Missionary Journey?" 265.

NTSTO, "Paul's Second Missionary Journey," 273-74.

"Paul's Third Missionary Journey"

GAZ, map 21.

LTJA, "Background to Paul's Third Missionary Journey," 281.

NTSTO, "Paul's Third Missionary Journey," 277-78.

"Caesarea"

BD, 628. "An important seaport town of Palestine, on the main road from Tyre to Egypt. . . . The official residence of Festus, Felix, and other Roman procurators of Judaea (Acts 23:23, 33; 25:1-13)." Philip, Cornelius, and Herod Agrippa all taught, lived, or died here. "Caesarea is also frequently mentioned in connection with Paul's journeys (Acts 9:30; 18:22; 21:8, 16; 23:23, 33; 25:1, 4, 6, 13)."

GAZ, 819, on nine maps.

"Rome"

BD, 764. The capital of the ancient world. See "Roman Empire."

GAZ, 824, "Rome," on two maps.

"Paul's Journey to Rome," map 22.

NTSTO, "Paul's Imprisonment and Defense," 279-80. "A Shipwrecked Journey to Rome," 283-84.

"Asia"

BD, 615. In the New Testament, Asia "denotes the Roman province that included the western parts of what is now called Asia Minor, . . . Ephesus being the capital."

GAZ, 818, under "Asia, Roman province," on four maps.

"Macedonia"

BD, 727. "South of what are now called the Balkan Mountains . . . a Roman Province under the government of a proconsul, who lived at Thessalonica."

GAZ, 823, on five maps.

"Crete"

BD, 651.

GAZ, 819, and on seven maps.

"Spain"

Paul's reference to a possible visit to Spain is in Romans 15:24.

Paul, the Message

Paul's teachings in his various epistles span the whole range of beliefs, doctrines, practices, and principles of organization needed by new members of new branches of the Church widely scattered from each other. How can one major message be selected and separated from all the others?

I decided to make this selection initially by participating in a word association activity with myself (noting the first thing that came to mind when I thought of a certain word or phrase). I then thought: "The major message of Paul."

The responding thought was strikingly clear and definite: "Jesus Christ is the Son of God."

After a few minutes, I repeated the activity. My mental response was a reinforcement and expansion of my first thought: "Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the long-awaited message of Jewish hope and expectation."

I then quickly read through the epistles of Paul, and this major message seemed to leap out from almost every page. In fact, in twelve of Paul's fourteen epistles, he declares within the first three verses of each epistle that Jesus Christ is the Son of God! I list only a few examples of Paul's teachings here:

Jesus Christ Is the Messiah

Paul introduced himself in the first verse of his first epistle as contained in our present New Testament as follows: "Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God, (Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures,) Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead: . . .

"For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek" (Romans 1:1-4, 16).

Also, in the beginning of his letter to the Colossians, Paul identified Jesus Christ as the Son of God and then stated: "In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins: Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist" (Colossians 1:14-17).

The Resurrection of Jesus Christ—and of All of Us

In compiling a list of Paul's quotations on Jesus Christ as the Messiah, I became aware of the frequency of another teaching of Paul: Just as Jesus Christ was resurrected from the dead, so will all of us be resurrected. Space will permit only a few of Paul's statements on this subject:

Paul taught concerning the resurrection (and thus of the proof of the divinity of Jesus Christ):

"Christ died for our sins . . . he was buried, and . . . rose again the third day . . . he was seen of Cephas [Peter], then of the twelve. After that . . . of above five hundred at once . . . of James: then of all the apostles. And last of all he was seen of me also. . . .

"If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. . . . If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable [Greek: to be pitied]. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Corinthians 15:3-8, 17, 19-22).

Paul also wrote to the Hebrews concerning the universal nature of Christ's resurrection:

"But we see Jesus . . . that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, . . .

"Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; And deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage" (Hebrews 2:9-11, 14-15).

"Christ died for us" (Romans 5:8).

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Corinthians 15:21-22).

It soon became evident to me why Paul emphasized that "Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Messiah" and that "Jesus Christ was resurrected from the dead, and that we will all be resurrected." The second topic or message establishes and reinforces the first:

Before reviewing some of the other major teachings of the Apostle Paul, let me digress long enough to share some ideas I discovered while researching another topic.

The "Grandest Principle" of the Gospel

In The Contributor magazine for August 1895, I found a letter prepared by the editors of a ward newspaper. In this letter the editors invited readers to respond to the following question: "What, in your opinion, constitutes the greatest principle, or the most attractive feature of the Gospel?" The responses included the following:

S. W. Jenkinson thought that the grandest principle was the principle of progression: "For what are we striving but eternal life, and what is eternal life but eternal progression? . . . Is not progression the underlying principle of all?"

Joseph F. Smith responded: "The principle of exaltation to a fullness of power and glory in the presence of God. This may constitute the most attractive feature to all such as desire through obedience, humility and righteousness to fulfill their high and glorious destiny."

B. H. Roberts suggested: "The grandest principle of the Gospel, its most attractive feature, is that which teaches that man may become like God. It is the sun into which the scattered rays of the Gospel meet. . . . Hence it is an idea that we may say is the parent of all the virtues."

Orson F. Whitney added: "Eternal progress is to me the grandest doctrine of Mormonism."

Thomas Hull, after listing most of the teachings of the gospel, concluded: "I cannot and dare not particularize, but can simply exclaim, 'how glorious is the work, and how boundless the love of our God!'" [^6]

A Possible List of the "Ten Grandest Principles of the Gospel"

I was so impressed with the ideas from this article that I decided to prepare my own list of "ten grandest principles of the gospel." After I list my ten principles, I will tie them in to "Paul, the Message."

Paul's Contributions to the "Grandest Principles"

Now let us consider some of Paul's contributions to each of these areas:

Paul clearly taught that the Father and the Son are separate from each other: "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high" (Hebrews 1:1-3).

Notice also the following salutation that Paul uses at the beginning of eleven of his epistles (Galatians 1:3; 1 Corinthians 1:3; 2 Corinthians 1:2; Ephesians 1:2; Philippians 1:2; Colossians 1:2; 1 Thessalonians 1:1; 2 Thessalonians 2:2; 1 Timothy 1:2; 2 Timothy 1:2; Philemon 1:3.): "Grace be to you and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (2 Corinthians 1:2-3).

In the epistle to the Galatians this salutation is expanded to read: "Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father" (Galatians 1:3-4).

Paul ties in the Saints with God the Father and Jesus Christ, the Son, in his first epistle to the Thessalonians: "Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you. And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints" (1 Thessalonians 3:11-13).

We have already discussed some of Paul's teachings indicating that he fully believed Jesus Christ was the Savior and Redeemer of mankind. Paul taught that salvation was made possible through the atonement of Jesus Christ, not through the legalism of the ceremonial law. (See Romans 4:16; JST, Romans 4:16; Romans 3:23-30; and the entire epistles to the Galatians and Colossians.)

Paul taught concerning the principle of pre-earthly existence: "He hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love" (Ephesians 1:4).

Paul taught that we are all the spirit children of God: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God" (Romans 8:16).

Paul taught concerning the three major degrees of glory: "There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestial. . . . There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars. . . . So also is the resurrection of the dead" (1 Corinthians 15:40-42; see also JST, 1 Corinthians).

Paul taught that Christ could and did become like God the Father, and that we can become like Christ: "Christ Jesus: Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. . . . Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him. . . . Wherefore, my beloved . . . work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. . . . That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God" (Philippians 2:5-6, 9, 12, 15).

Paul taught concerning the importance of marriage, or of the relationship of the family to the Church and to Christ and our Heavenly Father: "But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God. . . . Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Corinthians 11:3, 11).

"Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband" (1 Corinthians 7:2-3).

"Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it. . . . For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh" (Ephesians 5:25, 31).

Paul also indicated that it is wrong to forbid to marry: "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron; Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth" (1 Timothy 4:1-3).

Paul taught with clarity and emphasized the principle of faith: "Now faith is the substance [Greek: assurance] of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen" (Hebrews 11:1). (See the entire epistle to the Hebrews, especially chapter 11, and Romans 4:1-13.)

Paul taught concerning the sacrament of the Lord's Supper: "The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread: And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup . . . saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew [Greek: proclaim, announce] the Lord's death till he come" (1 Corinthians 11:23-26).

Paul taught of the gifts of the Spirit that should be enjoyed by the Saints. (See 1 Corinthians 11:2-14:40.)

Paul taught concerning the healing of the sick by the power of the Spirit, and of casting out devils: "And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul: So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them" (Acts 19:11-12).

Then we read how the seven sons of Scerva, a Jew and chief of the priests, tried to cast out a devil: "And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? . . . And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus; fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. . . . So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed" (Acts 19:15, 17, 20).

Paul taught of the grace of God, and of the relationship of grace to faith and to works: "By grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast" (Ephesians 2:8-9).

Paul wrote to Timothy concerning confession, penance, humility, contriteness, grace, and mercy: "[I] . . . was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant. . . . Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting" (1 Timothy 1:13-16).

The word grace appears 130 times in the New Testament; of these, 107 are from the writings of Paul. Paul preached largely to a people who believed that they were saved through their works. Therefore, he emphasized the saving power of grace. Of course, other apostles also taught the principle of grace, including Peter: "But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved" (Acts 15:11).

Perhaps the most widely quoted statements of Paul on grace are as follows: "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified" (Galatians 2:16).

"But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them" (Ephesians 2:4-10).

Paul was evidently so successful in stressing the importance of grace that today members of some Christian groups believe that only grace is necessary. Our missionaries stress works when they teach such people.

Of course, both grace and works are necessary. As recorded in 2 Nephi 25:30: "It is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do."

Paul taught concerning the offices in the Church and of the possibility of becoming perfect: "And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ" (Ephesians 4:11-13).

Paul wrote concerning the organization of the Church and the family spirit of members of the Church: "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord. In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit" (Ephesians 2:19-22).

Paul wrote concerning the importance of unity in the Church and among members of the Church: "I beseech you . . . by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions [Greek: factions, schisms] among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment" (1 Corinthians 1:10).

"Keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one Spirit . . . One Lord, one faith, one baptism, One God and Father of all" (Ephesians 4:3-6).

Paul taught that divisions in the Church should be avoided, as should petty grievances and the apostasy of individuals or groups: "[Let] there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. . . . [Let there be no] contentions among you. . . . Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" (1 Corinthians 1:10-13).

Paul cautioned against unnecessary lawsuits and against going to civil courts for every matter: "Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints? Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this life?" (1 Corinthians 6:1-3).

Paul taught that vengeance is contrary to the spirit of the gospel: "Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of all men. If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good" (Romans 12:17-21).

Paul taught concerning the many sins of sexual impurity: "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators [Greek: sexually immoral persons, male prostitutes], nor idolaters, nor adulterers, . . . nor abusers of themselves with mankind [Greek: male homosexuals] . . . shall inherit the kingdom of God. . . . Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's" (1 Corinthians 6:9-10, 19-20).

Paul also clearly taught of the existence of the devil, and of the devil's opposition to the things of God. He counseled and warned: "Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore, it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works" (2 Corinthians 11:14-15).

Paul emphasized the universal nature of the gospel. It is not limited to the Jew only, nor to the Gentile only, nor alone to the Roman, Greek, master, or slave. (See 1 Corinthians 12:12-20; Ephesians 2:1-3:21.)

Paul taught the importance of missionary work: "Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel. . . . For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel! For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward. . . . What is my reward then? Verily that, when I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel of Christ without charge . . . yet have I made myself servant unto all, that I might gain the more . . . that I might by all means save some" (1 Corinthians 9:14, 16-19, 22).

Paul taught concerning baptism for the dead: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Corinthians 15:29).

Paul foresaw, witnessed, and warned against the impending apostasy. (See Galatians 1:6-8; 3:1; 1 Timothy 4:1-3; 2 Timothy 3:1-8; 4:3-4.)

Paul taught concerning the restoration in the last days: "That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him" (Ephesians 1:10).

Paul taught of putting on the whole armor of God (see Ephesians 6:10-18), and of the importance of example: "Take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumblingblock to them that are weak. . . . Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend [Greek: cause my brother to stumble, falter], I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend" (1 Corinthians 8:9, 13).

Paul taught of courage, bravery, devotion, and commitment: "If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not?" (1 Corinthians 15:32).

"But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost. For a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries. . . . Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you [Greek: behave] like men, be strong" (1 Corinthians 16:8-9, 13).

In connection with the mobs aroused by Demetrius the silversmith ("Our craft is in danger"), the people cried in the theater for about two hours ("Great is Diana of the Ephesians"). Then we read: "And when Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples suffered him not" (Acts 19:27-28, 30, 34 ).

Paul taught concerning the futility of man's unaided learning or of unreasonable emphasis on knowledge alone or of the acquirement of degrees: "For Christ sent me . . . to preach the gospel: not with wisdom of words. . . . For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. . . . Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? . . . the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom. But we preach Christ crucified. . . . The foolishness of God is wiser than men. . . . God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty" (1 Corinthians 1:17, 19-20, 22-23, 25, 27).

Paul taught the importance of boldly bearing testimony: "[Pray] for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel, For which I am an ambassador . . . that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak" (Ephesians 6:19-20).

Paul taught that charity (the pure love of Christ) is basic to everything else. (See 1 Corinthians 13 and Articles of Faith 1:13.) Note Paul's words to the Philippians: "Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things" (Philippians 4:8).

Paul taught concerning the ending of mortal life and of the final judgment: "I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing" (2 Timothy 4:6-8).

Contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation to Understanding Paul's Epistles

The Joseph Smith Translation makes changes in 340 verses in the 100 chapters of the 14 epistles of Paul. The essential changes in 162 of these 340 verses are included in the footnotes of the LDS edition of the Bible. Some of them are listed here:

Romans

In sixteen chapters, changes in 114 verses; LDS Bible includes fifty-six of these: 1:5-6, 17, 18; 3:1-2, 5-8, 24; 4:2-5, 16; 6:7, 14; 7:5-27; 8:8, 9, 10, 29-30, 31; 9:3, 7; 13:1, 6-7; 14:15; 16:10, 11, 16.

1:18 (KJV) "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness."

1:18 (JST) "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; who love not the truth, but remain in unrighteousness."

3:5 (KJV) "But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance? (I speak as a man)."

3:5 (JST) "But if we remain in our unrighteousness and commend the righteousness of God, how dare we say, God is unrighteous who taketh vengeance? (I speak as a man who fears God,)" (compare KJV, Romans 7:14-25 to JST, Romans 7:14-27).

1 Corinthians

In sixteen chapters, changes in seventy-two verses; LDS Bible includes thirty-five of these: 1:24, 26; 2:11; 3:15; 4:4; 5:4; 6:12; 7:1, 2, 5, 9, 26, 29-33, 38; 8:4; 10:11, 23, 24; 11:20; 14:2, 4, 13, 14, 19, 27, 34, 35; 15:31, 40; 16:20.

2:11 (KJV) "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God."

2:11 (JST) "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, except he has the Spirit of God."

4:4 (KJV) "For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord."

4:4 (JST) "For though I know nothing against myself; yet I am not hereby justified; but he who judgeth me is the Lord."

6:12 (KJV) "All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any."

6:12 (JST) "All these things are not lawful unto me, and all these things are not expedient. All things are not lawful for me, therefore I will not be brought under the power of any."

7:1 (KJV) "Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for a man not to touch a woman."

7:2 "Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband."

7:1 (JST) "Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me, saying, It is good for a man not to touch a woman."

7:2 "Nevertheless, I say, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband."

7:28 (KJV) "But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh: but I spare you."

7:29 "But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none."

7:32 "But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord:"

7:33 "But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife."

7:28 (JST) "But if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Nevertheless, such shall have trouble in the flesh. For I spare you not."

7:29 "But I speak unto you who are called unto the ministry. For this I say, brethren, the time that remaineth is but short, that ye shall be sent forth unto the ministry. Even they who have wives, shall be as though they had none; for ye are called and chosen to do the Lord's work" (emphasis added).

7:32 "But I would, brethren, that ye magnify your calling. I would have you without carefulness. For he who is unmarried, careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord; therefore he prevaileth."

7:33 "But he who is married, careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife; therefore there is a difference, for he is hindered."

10:23 (KJV) "All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not."

10:24 "Let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth."

10:23 (JST) "All things are not lawful for me, for all things are not expedient; all things are not lawful, for all things edify not."

10:24 "Let not man seek therefore his own, but every man another's good."

11:20 (KJV) "When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's supper."

11:20 (JST) "When ye come together into one place, is it not to eat the Lord's supper?"

14:33 (KJV) "For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of the saints."

14:34 "Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law."

14:35 "And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church."

14:33 (JST) "For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of the saints."

14:34 "Let your women keep silence in the churches; for it is not permitted unto them to rule: but to be under obedience, as also saith the law."

14:35 "And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home; for it is a shame for women to rule in the church."

15:31 (KJV) "I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily."

15:31 (JST) "I protest unto you the resurrection of the dead; and this is my rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord daily, though I die."

15:40 (KJV) "There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestial is another."

15:40 (JST) "Also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestial, and bodies telestial; but the glory of the celestial, one; and the terrestial another; and the telestial, another."

2 Corinthians

In thirteen chapters, changes in nineteen verses; LDS Bible includes six of these: 5:13, 16; 6:1; 11:23, 29; 13:12.

5:13 (KJV) "For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God: or whether we be sober, it is for your cause."

5:13 (JST) "For we bear record that we are not beside ourselves; for whether we glory, it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for your sakes."

13:12 (KJV) "Greet one another with an holy kiss."

13:12 (JST) "Greet one another with a holy salutation."

Galatians

In six chapters, changes in twelve verses; LDS Bible includes five of these: 1:10; 2:4; 3:19-20, 24.

3:18 (KJV) "For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: but God gave it to Abraham by promise."

3:19 "Wherefore then serveth the law? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator."

3:20 "Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one."

3:18 (JST) "For if the inheritance is of the law, then it is no more of promise; but God gave it to Abraham by promise."

3:19 "Wherefore then, the law was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made in the law given to Moses, who was ordained by the hand of angels to be a mediator of this first covenant, (the law)."

3:20 "Now this mediator was not a mediator of the new covenant; but there is one mediator of the new covenant, who is Christ, as it is written in the law concerning the promises made to Abraham and his seed. Now Christ is the mediator of life; for this is the promise which God made unto Abraham."

Ephesians

In six chapters, changes in thirteen verses; LDS Bible includes one of these: 4:26.

4:26 (KJV) "Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath."

4:26 (JST) "Can ye be angry, and not sin? let not the sun go down upon your wrath."

Philippians

In four chapters, changes in fourteen verses; LDS Bible includes four of these: 1:28; 3:11, 19; 4:6.

3:11 (KJV) "If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead."

3:11 (JST) "If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the just."

Colossians

In four chapters, changes in six verses; LDS Bible includes four of these: 1:6; 2:2, 21-22.

2:21 (KJV) "(Touch not; taste not, handle not;"

2:22 "Which all are to perish with the using;) after the commandments and doctrines of men?"

2:23 "Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh."

2:21 (JST) "Which are after the doctrines and commandments of men, who teach you to touch not, taste not, handle not; all those things which are to perish with the using?"

2:22 "Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and neglecting the body as to the satisfying the flesh, not in any honor to God."

1 Thessalonians

In five chapters, changes in six verses; LDS Bible includes four of these: 1:1; 4:15, 17; 5:26.

2 Thessalonians

In three chapters, changes in seven verses; LDS Bible includes five of these: 1:1; 2:2, 3, 7-9.

2:7 (KJV) "For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way."

2:8 "And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming:"

2:9 "Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders."

2:7 (JST) "For the mystery of iniquity doth already work, and he it is who now worketh, and Christ suffereth him to work, until the time is fulfilled that he shall be taken out of the way."

2:8 "And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming."

2:9 "Yea, the Lord, even Jesus, whose coming is not until after there cometh a falling away, by the working of Satan with all power, and signs and lying wonders."

1 Timothy

In six chapters, changes in fourteen verses; LDS Bible includes seven of these: 2:4, 15; 3:15-16; 5:10; 6:15-16.

2:4 (KJV) "Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth."

2:4 (JST) "Who is willing to have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth which is in Christ Jesus, who is the Only Begotten Son of God, and ordained to be a Mediator between God and man; who is one God, and hath power over all men."

2 Timothy

In four chapters, changes in nine verses; LDS Bible includes two of these: 3:16; 4:2.

3:16 (KJV) "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness."

3:16 (JST) "And all Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness."

Titus

In three chapters, changes in two verses; LDS Bible includes both of these: 1:15; 2:11.

Philemon

In one chapter, changes in one verse; LDS Bible does not include this one.

Hebrews

In thirteen chapters, changes in fifty-one verses; LDS Bible includes thirty-one of these: 1:6-7; 4:3, 5, 12; 5:7; 6:1, 3-10; 7:3, 19-21, 25-26; 8:4; 9:15, 16, 26; 10:1, 10, 13; 11:1, 35, 40.)

4:3 (KJV) "For we which have believed do enter into rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the works were finished from the foundation of the world."

4:3 (JST) "For we who have believed do enter into rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, If they harden their hearts they shall not enter into my rest; also, I have sworn, If they will not harden their hearts, they shall enter into my rest; although the works of God were prepared, (or finished,) from the foundation of the world."

6:1 (KJV) "Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,"

6:2 "Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment."

6:3 "And this will we do, if God permit."

6:1 (JST) "Therefore not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God."

6:2 "Of the doctrine of baptisms, of laying on of hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment."

6:3 "And we will go on unto perfection if God permit."

7:1 (KJV) "For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him;"

7:2 "To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace;"

7:3 "Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually."

7:1 (JST) "For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him;"

7:2 "To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace;"

7:3 "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually."

8:4 (KJV) "For if he [the high priest sitting on the right hand of the Majesty in heaven] were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law."

8:4 (JST) "Therefore while he was on the earth, he offered for a sacrifice his own life for the sins of the people. Now every priest under the law, must needs offer gifts, or sacrifices, according to the law."

11:1 (KJV) "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen."

11:1 (JST) "Now faith is the assurance of things hope for, the evidence of things not seen."

11:40 (KJV) "God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect."

11:40 (JST) "God having provided some better things for them through their sufferings, for without sufferings they could not be made perfect."

Changes Not Included in the LDS Edition of the Bible

Following are a few of the changes that were not included as footnotes in the LDS edition of the Bible:

1 Corinthians

12:30 (KJV) "Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?"

12:31 "But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way."

12:30 (JST) "Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?"

12:31 "I say unto you, Nay; for I have shown unto you a more excellent way, therefore covet earnestly the best gifts."

Philippians

1:21(KJV) "For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain."

1:22(JST) "For me to live, is to do the will of Christ; and to die, is my gain."

1 Timothy

6:16 (KJV) "Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see."

6:16 (JST) "Whom no man hath seen, nor can see, unto whom no man can approach, only he who hath the light and the hope of immortality dwelling in him."

Hebrews

12:12 (KJV) "Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees."

12:12 (JST) "Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees."

Major Greek Contributions to the LDS Bible

The LDS edition of the Bible includes 564 footnotes offering alternative translations from the Greek ("GR") in the fourteen epistles of Paul. Some of the most important ones are listed here. Additional Greek contributions not included in the LDS Bible appear at the end of the following sections.

Romans (137 included in LDS Bible)

1:1 Paul "separated" [to be an apostle] = "set apart"

1:4 "And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead" = "appointed, decreed, set forth"

1:13 I was "let hitherto" = "hindered, restrained, prevented"

1:21 they became "vain in their imaginations" = "corrupt in their reasonings, deliberations"

3:4, 6, 31, and so on "God forbid!" = "May it not be!"

3:19 all the world may "become guilty before God" = "become liable to God for punishment"

4:3 Abraham "believed God" = "exercised faith in Jehovah"

5:11 "atonement" = "reconciliation, restoration to favor"

5:14 "the figure of him that was to come" = "type, pattern"

6:5 For if we have "been planted together" in the likeness of his death = "become united with him"

8:13 "mortify the deeds of the body" = "put to death, subdue"

8:29, 30 "For whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate" [^7] = "appointed beforehand, foreordained."

10:21 a "gainsaying" people = a "contradicting, opposing" people.

11:2 "Wot ye not" = "Know ye not"

11:25 "blindness in part is happened to Israel" = "callousness"

11:25 "For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of the mystery [^8] = "sacred secret"

11:30, 31 "believed" [^9] = "obeyed" (note the implication of this translation to Mark 9:23: "all things are possible to him that believeth")

12:4 "all members have not the same office" = all members have not the same "function, operation"

12:9 "Let love be without dissimulation" = "sincere, unfeigned, real"

12:16 "Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate" = "conform willingly with the humble"

13:4 the "minister" of God = "servant"

14:2 "who is weak, eateth herbs" = "vegetables"

14:17 "For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink" = "food"

15:9 "I will confess to thee among the Gentiles" = "profess openly, praise"

15:27 in "carnal" things = "material, temporal"

16:20 "The God of peace shall bruise Satan . . . shortly" = "break the power of, crush"

1 Corinthians (126 included in LDSBible)

1:25 "the weakness" of God is stronger than men = "a weak thing"

1:26 not many "noble" are called = not many of "noble birth" are called

3:9 "Ye are God's husbandry" = "cultivated field, farm"

3:19 "For the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God" = "cunning, villainy"

6:9-10 "Be not deceived . . . abusers of themselves with mankind . . . shall [not] inherit the kingdom of God" = "male homosexuals"

7:23 "Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men" = "slaves"

8:13 "If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth" = "cause my brother to stumble, falter"

15:9 "I . . . am not meet to be called an apostle" = "adequate, sufficient, competent"

15:19 "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable" = "to be pitied"

15:29 "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead" = "in behalf of, for the sake of"

16:13 "Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men" = "behave like men"

2 Corinthians (twenty included in LDS Bible)

8:1 "Brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of God" = "we make known (or declare) to you the grace of God"

11:8 "I robbed other churches, taking wages of them, to do you service" = I "despoiled other churches, having taken provisions for you"

13:1 "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" = "matter"

Galatians (thirty included in LDS Bible)

2:6 "God accepteth no man's person" = "God does not go by a man's outward appearance"

4:20 "I stand in doubt of you" = I "am perplexed about" you

Ephesians (five included in LDS Bible)

4:1 "Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called" = "calling"

Philippians (twenty-three included in LDS Bible)

1:7 "It is meet for me" = "just, right"

1:8 "in the bowels of Jesus Christ" = "affections, compassions"

1:23 "I am in a strait betwixt two" = I am "hard pressed to choose" between two

2:10 That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow of "things" in heaven, and "things" in earth, and "things" under the earth = "those"

3:2 "beware of the concision" = "look out for those who mutilate the flesh"

3:21 "Who shall change our vile body" = "humble, of low estate"

4:3 "yolkfellow" = "associate"

4:6 "Be careful for nothing" = "Don't be unduly concerned about anything"

Colossians (nine included in LDS Bible)

1:12 "which hath made us meet to be partakers" = "qualified us"

1:22 "holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight" = "open to no accusation before him"

3:15 let the peace of "God" rule in your hearts = "the Christ"

1 Thessalonians (twenty-five included in LDS Bible)

1:4 (transposition) "Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God" = "Knowing, brethren beloved of God, your election"

2:2 we were "shamefully entreated" = "insolently treated"

4:15 "we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep" = "precede, make progress over"

5:2 "For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the "Lord" = "quite well," "Jehovah"

2 Thessalonians (fifteen included in LDS Bible)

2:12 "That they all might be damned who believed not the truth" = "brought to account, trial"

1 Timothy (fifty-seven included in LDS Bible)

3:2 A bishop then must be "apt" to teach = "qualified" to teach

3:13 "they that have used the office of deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree" = "earn, acquire for themselves good standing rank"

4:8 "bodily exercise profiteth little" = "a little while"

5:12 "having damnation" = "judgment, condemnation"

6:4 "doting about questions" = "obsessed with questions"; "evil surmisings" = "wicked suspicions"

2 Timothy (twenty-eight included in LDS Bible)

2:12 "if we suffer, we shall also reign with him" = "endure, remain constant"

2:26 that they may "recover themselves" from the snare of the devil = "come back to their proper senses"

Titus (twenty-four included in LDS Bible)

1:9 "convince the gainsayers" = "those who deny, contradict"

1:11 "for filthy lucre's sake" = "for the sake of dishonest gain"

1:12 "slow bellies" = "lazy gluttons"

2:14 a "peculiar people" = a "people peculiarly his own"

2:15 "Let no man despise thee" = "disregard"

Philemon (five included in LDS Bible)

1:14 "without thy mind would I do nothing" = "assent, suggestion"

1:17 receive him "as myself" = "kindly the way you would me"

Hebrews (fifty-six included in LDS Bible)

1:1 "God . . . at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past" = "in many locations and various ways"

2:4 "divers miracles" = "various powerful works"

2:7 "Thou madest [man] a little lower than the angels" = "angels" (note: the Hebrew is "gods")

5:4 "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" = "Also a man takes this honor, not of his own accord, but only when he is called by God, just as Aaron was"

10:32 after ye were "illuminated" = "enlightened"

11:17 Abraham "offered up Isaac" = "as good as offered up Isaac"

12:2 "Jesus the author and finisher of our faith" = "one who completes, perfects"

Summary

President Brigham Young challenged us to read and ponder the scriptures so carefully that we will become as well acquainted with the major characters and their teachings as we are with the members of our households.

"Do you read the Scriptures, my brethren and sisters, as though you were writing them a thousand, two thousand, or five thousand years ago? Do you read them as though you stood in the place of the men who wrote them? If you do not feel thus, it is your privilege to do so, that you may be as familiar with the spirit and meaning of the written word of God as you are with your daily walk and conversation, or as you are with your workmen or with your households." [^10]

Paul is the dominant character in Acts 13 through 28, and he wrote the fourteen epistles that follow the book of Acts. These final chapters in Acts and these fourteen epistles occupy 150 pages in our current edition of the New Testament, over one-third of the total.

Read and study Paul until you feel you know him. Then you will be able to inspire and challenge others to do the same. I have felt Paul's presence at special times as I have stood in the places he visited: Damascus, on the street called Straight; Jerusalem, near St. Stephen's gate and where the Sanhedrin met; Caesarea, where Paul was imprisoned for months; Ephesus, in the great amphitheater; Athens, on Mars Hill; Corinth, at the agora; Rome, at various traditional sites.

I have never felt Paul's influence more strongly, however, than when I have read and studied his words. I close this chapter with words of tribute to Paul from Robert J. Matthews: "[Paul's] records that have come to us display a great love for the Savior. And no one of that day has given us a more extensive discussion of the mission of Jesus Christ in fulfilling the law of Moses and in being the savior of all nations and peoples. Paul is most eloquent when writing of the Savior's grace, mercy, and love for mankind.

"Paul was indeed a chosen vessel, a special man for a particular need, at a particular time, and in a particular place. Yet, with all his varied talents and education, the things that made him most useful to the Lord were his total, unwavering devotion and testimony. Without these, all his other skills would have been ineffective or, as in his early years, used for the wrong purposes.

"Paul was the right man in the right place at the right time. This was not a coincidence but the result of divine foreknowledge and selection—Jesus appointed him as a special witness, not only for the time of his own mortality, but also to leave an example and a written record for all future generations." [^11]

Notes

Excerpts from an address delivered in the mid-1970s on a Mediterranean cruise sponsored by the BYU Travel Study department and from a lecture at the CES Symposium on the New Testament, 15 August 1988.

One definition of predestinate in Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged is "destined, fates, or determined beforehand." The same volume lists as the first definition of predestination: "the act of predestinating or the state of being predestinated." A second definition is: "the theological doctrine that all events throughout eternity have been foreordained by divine decree or purpose." The word "predestine" is defined as "to destine, decree, determine, appoint or settle beforehand." Note that in both the Greek and the English the word foreordain can be used in place of the word predestinate.

"Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought: But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto his glory. . . . But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Corinthians 2:6-7, 9; quoting Isaiah 64:4).

---
Notas:
[^1] He was foreordained in the premortal existence to head the dispensation of the fulness of times. Hundreds of other terms and titles that apply to Jesus Christ would not be used by thoughtful Latter-day Saints to refer to Joseph Smith, including the following: "Beloved Son of God" (Matthew 3:17), "Great I Am" (Exodus 3:14; D&C 29:1), "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last" (Revelation 1:8, 11), "Jehovah" (Exodus 6:3; Psalms 83:18), "Redeemer" (Job 19:25), "Savior" (Matthew 1:21), "Lamb of God" (John 1:29), "Messiah" (Daniel 9:25-26), "King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven" (Moses 7:53), "God, Lord God, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" (Exodus 3:15), "Good and Great and True Shepherd" (John 10:11-14; Hebrews 13:20; Helaman 15:13), "Captain of Man's Salvation" (Hebrews 2:10), "Founder and Prince of Peace" (Mosiah 15:18; Isaiah 9:6), "Head and Chief Corner Stone" (Psalm 118:22; Ephesians 2:20), "Resurrection and the Life" (John 11:25), "First Born and First Begotten of the Dead" (Colossians 1:18; Revelation 1:5), "the First Fruits of them that slept" (1 Corinthians 15:20; 2 Nephi 2:8-9), "Father of Heaven" (1 Nephi 22:9) and "of Earth" (Helaman 14:12), and "King of kings, and Lord of lords" (1 Timothy 6:15; Revelation 17:14).
[^2] He set an example of obedience to God and of love for his fellowman. Gordon B. Hinckley, "Joseph the Seer," Ensign, May 1977, 65.
[^3] He was entrusted with the priesthood power and authority necessary to reestablish and build up the kingdom of God on the earth. Neal A. Maxwell, "The Prophet Joseph Smith: Spiritual Statesman," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 19 January 1975, 12.
[^4] He became a great prophet, seer, and revelator of the Lord. Richard L. Bushman, "The Teaching of Joseph Smith," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 18 January 1976, 1.
[^5] He survived the tests of ridicule and persecution. "Praise to the Man," in Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 27.
[^6] He has been assured of eternal life through his great faith and worthy life. Ezra Taft Benson, "Joseph Smith—Man of Destiny," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 3 December 1967, 3. See also History of the Church, 6:364.
[^7] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:289-90.
[^8] Neal A. Maxwell, "The Prophet Joseph Smith: Spiritual Statesman," 13.
[^9] Richard L. Bushman, "The Teaching of Joseph Smith," 10.
[^10] Jerry C. Roundy, "The Greatness of Joseph Smith and His Remarkable Visions," New Era, December 1973, 12.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 313.
