Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 35

Joseph Smith, the Prophet

It may seem strange to begin a tribute to Joseph Smith Jr. by emphasizing what he is not, but many biographies and articles about him have tended toward one extreme or the other. Those who have spoken of the "good" of Joseph Smith have appeared in the eyes of some critics to have virtually deified him. On the other hand, other critics feel that those who have spoken of the "bad" of Joseph Smith have depicted him as a tool of the devil or even worse.

When the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on September 21, 1823, he told the seventeen-year-old youth that his "name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people" (Joseph Smith—History 1:33). This statement has been fulfilled, as is quickly evident when the various publications about Joseph Smith are examined closely.

At the beginning of this tribute it might be well to point out that Joseph Smith is not Deity; nor is the opposite extreme, that Joseph Smith was a tool of the devil, even a possibility so far as this author is concerned.

Joseph Smith Is Not Jesus Christ

Latter-day Saints have never claimed that Joseph Smith is a member of the Godhead. He is not Jesus Christ. He is not the Firstborn Son of God in the spirit (see D&C 93:21). He is not the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. These sacred titles belong uniquely and forever to Jesus Christ, the divine Son of God. [^1]

Latter-day Saints do not worship Joseph Smith, as is indicated in this statement by President Gordon B. Hinckley: "We do not worship the Prophet. We worship God our Eternal Father, and the risen Lord Jesus Christ. But we acknowledge him [Joseph Smith], we proclaim him, we respect him, we reverence him as an instrument in the hands of the Almighty in restoring to the earth the ancient truths of the divine gospel, together with the priesthood through which the authority of God is exercised in the affairs of his church and for the blessing of his people." [^2]

Elder Neal A. Maxwell suggested that the word venerate might be appropriate for Joseph Smith: "The Prophet Joseph Smith, of course, was not a perfect man. There has been only one such—Jesus Christ. But Joseph Smith was a special witness for Jesus Christ. . . . We do not, as some occasionally charge, worship Joseph Smith, nor place him on a par with Jesus. But we do venerate him, remembering, hopefully that the highest and best form of veneration is emulation." [^3]

Dr. Richard L. Bushman wrote that Joseph Smith never indicated anything other than that he was a servant of Jesus Christ: "We never have to apologize for the place of Jesus Christ in Latter-day Saint theology. He heads the Church. He reveals His will to the Prophet. We depend upon Jesus Christ as the very rock and foundation of our lives and personal salvation, and look to Him as a model in every possible way. We worship no man; it is God we worship, and we worship Him through the Savior. Who would be more disappointed than Joseph Smith if ever these convictions faded in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints?

"At the same time, we honor Joseph Smith, and with good cause." [^4]

As powerful and as great as Joseph Smith was and is in the eyes of members of the Church, it is well to remember that his greatness was and is derived from his devoted discipleship to the Lord and Savior of us all, Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith is great precisely because he was one chosen of God and of Jesus Christ to serve under them for the blessing of mankind. Perhaps the greatest tribute that could be given to Joseph Smith is that he had such great faith and he lived such a worthy life that he was able during his lifetime to call upon the powers of heaven and receive answers; he was able to commune directly with Jesus Christ and with angels and representatives sent from the presence of God. Joseph Smith's greatness is derived directly from his faithful discipleship to the members of the Godhead.

Circumstances, Attributes, and Characteristics of Joseph Smith

The following circumstances, attributes, and characteristics explain the greatness of Joseph Smith:

Each of these will be considered in this chapter, with brief tributes from those who knew Joseph Smith personally or who have become acquainted with him through a careful study of his life.

Foreordained to Head the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! . . . Blessed to open the last dispensation, . . . Ever and ever the keys he will hold. [^5]

Because of his great faith and because he lived a worthy life that enabled him to commune with Jehovah, Joseph Smith was able to fulfill his foreordained calling. Concerning the foreordination of Joseph Smith, President Ezra Taft Benson stated:

"Joseph was truly foreordained to his great mission.

"To get a vision of the magnitude of the prophet's earthly mission we must view it in the light of eternity. He was among 'the noble and great ones' whom Abraham described as follows:

"'Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"'And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born' (Abraham 3:22-23).

"So it was with Joseph Smith. He too was there. He too sat in council with the noble and great ones. Occupying a prominent place of honor and distinction, he unquestionably helped in the planning and execution of the great work of the Lord to 'bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man,' the salvation of all our Father's children (Moses 1:39). His mission had had and was to have, impact on all who had come to earth; all who then dwelt on earth and the millions yet unborn.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith made this eternal fact clear in the words: 'Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council. It is the testimony that I want that I am God's servant, and this people His people.'" [^6]

Brigham Young also testified concerning the foreordination of the Prophet Joseph Smith: "It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he [Joseph Smith] should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. . . . [Joseph Smith] was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation." [^7]

Elder Neal A. Maxwell wrote of this special calling of Joseph Smith:

"Indeed, on the scale of impact, what has been written in the scriptures is unfoldingly true:

"'Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it' (D&C 135:3).

"It should not surprise us that it should be so, since he began the dispensation in which most of the people who ever lived will live, a dispensation in which there would be an explosion of knowledge and truth, as well as of people." [^8]

An Example of Obedience to God and Love for Fellowman

Because of his great faith and because he lived a worthy life that enabled him to commune with Jehovah, Joseph Smith learned early in life to be obedient to the commandments of God, and he demonstrated love for his fellowmen. Dr. Richard L. Bushman wrote of the obedience of Joseph Smith: "Joseph commented that 'as my life consisted of activity and unyielding exertions, I made this one rule: When the Lord commands do it.'" [^9]

Brother Jerry Roundy also noted this attribute of Joseph Smith: "It is hard to study the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith without remembering that he learned to serve the Lord fully, at all times, and at all costs." [^10]

Two statements by Joseph Smith allude to his feelings of concern and love for his fellowman:

"Sectarian priests cry out concerning me, and ask, 'Why is it this babbler gains so many followers, and retains them?' I answer, It is because I possess the principle of love." [^11]

"Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but 'ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race.'" [^12]

Entrusted with Priesthood Power and Authority to Build Up the Kingdom of God on the Earth

Great is his glory and endless his priesthood. Ever and ever the keys he will hold. Faithful and true, he will enter his kingdom, Crowned in the midst of the prophets of old. [^13]

Because of his great faith and because he lived a worthy life that enabled him to commune with Jehovah, Joseph Smith had priesthood power and authority bestowed upon him that enabled him to reestablish the kingdom of God upon the earth.

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley noted this important mission of Joseph Smith and quoted the words of William W. Phelps concerning these powers: "One is led to marvel at the energies of the man. The breadth of his vision, the intensity of his activity are explained only by his great sense of mission and the inspiration of heaven which quickened his understanding. He was a man possessed by a sense of destiny—and that destiny was nothing less than the building of the Kingdom of God in the earth." [^14]

Brother Robert J. Matthews mentioned some of the heavenly messengers who restored priesthood keys and authority to Joseph Smith: "The story of the restoration of the gospel is truly one of the most stimulating of all time. Many personalities from beyond the veil visited Joseph Smith as the gospel's restoration unfolded—among them were persons whose mortal lives are discussed in the Old Testament, including, said President John Taylor, 'Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well as those who lived on the Asiatic continent. He seemed to be as familiar with these people as we are with one another.' The Doctrine and Covenants has references to visits also by Moses, Elias, Elijah, and of 'divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time.'" [^15]

A Great Prophet, Seer, and Revelator

Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! Jesus anointed that Prophet and Seer. [^16]

Because of his great faith and because he lived a worthy life that enabled him to commune with Jehovah, Joseph Smith was called of God to be His prophet, seer, and revelator. Although in the minds of some, the terms prophet, seer, and revelator might seem to be synonymous, Ammon makes a distinction between the terms in his discussion with King Limhi: "And Ammon said that a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God. But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known" (Mosiah 8:16-17).

President Howard W. Hunter explained the calling of a prophet and begins by quoting Elder Widtsoe: "Dr. John A. Widtsoe defines a prophet as a teacher—one who expounds truth. 'He teaches the body of truth, the gospel, revealed by the Lord to man; and under inspiration explains it to the understanding of the people.' The word 'prophet' is often used to designate one who receives revelation and direction from the Lord. Many have thought that a prophet is essentially a foreteller of future events and happenings, but this is only one of the many functions of a prophet. He is a spokesman for the Lord." [^17]

President Harold B. Lee quoted the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the calling of a prophet: "The Prophet Joseph Smith explained something about the refining process through which he went. He said, 'A Prophet is not always a Prophet. He is a Prophet only when he's acting as such.' This is an illuminating statement and doubtless holds good in the cases of most ancient men of God. Very likely the ancient Prophet received his polishing in much the same way that Joseph Smith said he was polished." [^18]

Hyrum Smith left this testimony of his brother's calling as a prophet: "There were prophets before, but Joseph has the spirit and power of all the prophets." [^19]

Joseph Smith's calling as a seer was foretold by his ancestor Joseph who was sold into Egypt:

"Wherefore, Joseph [who was sold into Egypt] truly saw our day. And he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel. . . .

"For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins. Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers. And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work. And he shall be great like unto Moses" (2 Nephi 3:5-9).

President Marion G. Romney testified that Joseph Smith was that "choice seer": "Joseph Smith was this great seer. Next to the Savior Himself there has, in my judgment, never been a greater seer on the earth." [^20]

President Gordon B. Hinckley indicated that the seership of Joseph Smith enabled him to prepare himself and the kingdom of God for the future: "Joseph Smith, the prophet of God . . . was indeed a mighty seer, who saw this day and greater days yet to come as the work of the Lord moves over the earth." [^21]

Joseph Smith, the prophet and seer, was also a revelator of God's truths. The Lord promised Joseph Smith: "God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the world was until now" (D&C 121:26).

President Howard W. Hunter explained the role of a revelator: "A revelator makes known something presently unknown or which has been known previously by man and taken from his memory. Always the revelation deals with truth, and always it comes with the divine stamp of approval. Revelation is received in various ways, but it always presupposes that the revelator has so lived and conducted himself as to be in tune or harmony with the divine spirit of revelation, the spirit of truth, and therefore capable of receiving divine messages." [^22]

Survived Tests of Ridicule and Persecution

Because of his great faith and because he lived a worthy life that enabled him to commune with Jehovah, Joseph Smith was able to endure and overcome the tests of ridicule and persecution. Jesus Christ, the Savior of all mankind, suffered persecution above all others, which led to His eventual crucifixion. Few others who have lived upon the earth have approached the ridicule and persecution heaped upon the Master, but Joseph Smith was one whose persecution also led to martyrdom.

President Hugh B. Brown reflected on the possible reasons for the persecution of Joseph Smith:

"I've often wondered why those early American Christians persecuted Joseph Smith as they did. Many of the mobs that came against him were led by professed ministers of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Now why did they persecute him? Did he come to them and say, 'There is no Christ'? Did he say to them, 'I am the Christ'? He said none of these things. He said, 'Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ, the Son of God and His is the only Name under heaven whereby men must be saved.' That was his declaration. . . .

"I again ask why they persecute a man when he comes to them, professed Christians, and tells them that the one whom they claim to believe in is, in fact, the Christ? What they couldn't tolerate was his—to them—blasphemous statement, 'I have seen Him and I have heard Him.' Why should it be thought a thing incredible to any one who believes the Holy Bible that a man could see and hear and talk with God? Did not all the prophets make that claim?" [^23]

Historian Dean Jessee also wrote about the scorn and antagonism heaped upon Joseph Smith:

"Even though Joseph Smith was warned by a heavenly messenger at an early age that his name would be known for both good and evil among all nations, he was not quite prepared for the intensity of the scorn that was heaped upon him. It was a source of 'serious reflection' to him that one so obscure as he was, whose circumstances made him of 'no consequence in the world,' should attract such bitter opposition.

"But so it was. Few historical figures have confronted more antagonism during their lives than did Joseph Smith. Practically everything written about him in the public print of his time was colored by a spirit of malice. Yet much of this writing was contradictory in detail, though it may have agreed in tone. On the other hand, those contemporaries who knew him best wrote sympathetic and praiseworthy accounts of his life. Such widespread disagreement makes the Prophet an intriguing subject for historians' scrutiny. But the careful examination of original sources has to a great extent resolved the puzzles, shedding helpful light on the Prophet and his critics." [^24]

Summary Tributes to Joseph Smith

Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! . . . Kings shall extol him, and nations revere. [^25]

In 1892 Dr. Andrew White, United States foreign minister to Russia, called on Count Leo Tolstoy. In the course of their conversation Dr. Tolstoy said, "Dr. White, I wish you would tell me about your American religion."

Explaining that America had many religions and that each American was free to belong to the church of his choice, Dr. White said, "We have no state church in America."

"I know all of this, but I want to know about the American religion," Count Tolstoy said. "The Church to which I refer originated in America, and is commonly known as the Mormon Church. What can you tell me of the teachings of the Mormons?"

Dr. White admitted that he knew little of the Church, to which Count Tolstoy replied, "Dr. White, I am greatly surprised and disappointed that a man of your great learning and position should be so ignorant on this important subject. The Mormon people teach the American religion; their principles teach the people not only of Heaven and its attendant glories, but how to live so that their social and economic relations with each other are placed on a sound basis. If the people follow the teachings of this Church, nothing can stop their progress—it will be limitless. There have been great movements started in the past but they have died or been modified before they reach maturity. If Mormonism is able to endure, unmodified, until it reaches the third and fourth generation, it is destined to become the greatest power the world has ever known." [^26]

Brigham Young speaks of Joseph Smith's transcendent spiritual power in these words: "When I first heard him preach, he brought heaven and earth together; and all the priests of the day could not tell me anything correct about heaven, hell, God, angels, or devils: they were as blind as Egyptian darkness. When I saw Joseph Smith, he took heaven, figurately speaking, . . . and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God; and that is the beauty of his mission." [^27] "I feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet whom the Lord raised up and ordained, and to whom He gave keys and power to build up the kingdom of God on earth." [^28]

Perhaps the most widely quoted tribute to Joseph Smith is the one prepared by Elder John Taylor, who subsequently served as the third President of the Church in this dispensation: "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. . . . He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood" (D&C 135:3).

John Taylor also testified: "I was with him living, and with him when he died. . . . I have seen him under all these various circumstances, and I testify before God, angels and men that he was a good, honorable, virtuous man—and that his doctrines were good, scriptural, and wholesome—that his precepts were such as became a man of God—that his private and public character was unimpeachable—that he lived and died as a man of God, and a gentleman." [^29]

Notes

From an essay prepared for the book The Prophet Joseph, edited by Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988).

---
Notas:
[^1] He was foreordained in the premortal existence to head the dispensation of the fulness of times. Hundreds of other terms and titles that apply to Jesus Christ would not be used by thoughtful Latter-day Saints to refer to Joseph Smith, including the following: "Beloved Son of God" (Matthew 3:17), "Great I Am" (Exodus 3:14; D&C 29:1), "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last" (Revelation 1:8, 11), "Jehovah" (Exodus 6:3; Psalms 83:18), "Redeemer" (Job 19:25), "Savior" (Matthew 1:21), "Lamb of God" (John 1:29), "Messiah" (Daniel 9:25-26), "King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven" (Moses 7:53), "God, Lord God, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" (Exodus 3:15), "Good and Great and True Shepherd" (John 10:11-14; Hebrews 13:20; Helaman 15:13), "Captain of Man's Salvation" (Hebrews 2:10), "Founder and Prince of Peace" (Mosiah 15:18; Isaiah 9:6), "Head and Chief Corner Stone" (Psalm 118:22; Ephesians 2:20), "Resurrection and the Life" (John 11:25), "First Born and First Begotten of the Dead" (Colossians 1:18; Revelation 1:5), "the First Fruits of them that slept" (1 Corinthians 15:20; 2 Nephi 2:8-9), "Father of Heaven" (1 Nephi 22:9) and "of Earth" (Helaman 14:12), and "King of kings, and Lord of lords" (1 Timothy 6:15; Revelation 17:14).
[^2] He set an example of obedience to God and of love for his fellowman. Gordon B. Hinckley, "Joseph the Seer," Ensign, May 1977, 65.
[^3] He was entrusted with the priesthood power and authority necessary to reestablish and build up the kingdom of God on the earth. Neal A. Maxwell, "The Prophet Joseph Smith: Spiritual Statesman," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 19 January 1975, 12.
[^4] He became a great prophet, seer, and revelator of the Lord. Richard L. Bushman, "The Teaching of Joseph Smith," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 18 January 1976, 1.
[^5] He survived the tests of ridicule and persecution. "Praise to the Man," in Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 27.
[^6] He has been assured of eternal life through his great faith and worthy life. Ezra Taft Benson, "Joseph Smith—Man of Destiny," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 3 December 1967, 3. See also History of the Church, 6:364.
[^7] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:289-90.
[^8] Neal A. Maxwell, "The Prophet Joseph Smith: Spiritual Statesman," 13.
[^9] Richard L. Bushman, "The Teaching of Joseph Smith," 10.
[^10] Jerry C. Roundy, "The Greatness of Joseph Smith and His Remarkable Visions," New Era, December 1973, 12.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 313.
[^12] Ibid., 174.
[^13] "Praise to the Man," in Hymns, no. 27.
[^14] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Joseph Smith from the Perspective of 150 Years," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 3 February 1980, 8.
[^15] Robert J. Matthews, "Modern Revelation, Window to the Old Testament," Ensign, October 1973, 23; see also Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 21:94; and D&C 128:21.
[^16] "Praise to the Man," in Hymns, no. 27.
[^17] Howard W. Hunter, "Joseph—the Seer," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 15 December 1960, 7; see also John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1943), 204.
[^18] Harold B. Lee, "Joseph Smith—His Mission Divine," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 4 December 1955, 132.
[^19] History of the Church, 6:346.
[^20] Marion G. Romney, "Joseph Smith the Seer, and Truth," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 15 January 1978, 3.
[^21] Hinckley, "Joseph the Seer," 65.
[^22] Hunter, "Joseph—the Seer," 8-9.
[^23] Hugh B. Brown, "Joseph among the Prophets," Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 7 December 1958, 175-76.
[^24] Dean C. Jessee, "Joseph Smith's Reputation," Ensign, September 1979, 57; see also History of the Church, 1:7, 11.
[^25] "Praise to the Man," in Hymns, no. 27.
[^26] Thomas J. Yates, "Count Tolstoi and the 'American Religion,'" Improvement Era, 42 (February 1939): 94.
[^27] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 5:332.
[^28] Ibid., 3:51.
[^29] B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930), 2:353.
