Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

The House of Israel

Chapter 36

Joseph Smith's Contributions to an Understanding of Israel

Background of Joseph Smith

I am convinced that Joseph Smith knew more about Israel than any other person of his century. A major branch of Jewish people refers to Theodor Herzl as the father of political Zionism—the person who inspired a branch of the house of Israel to gather back to Jerusalem. But over nineteen years before Theodor Herzl was even born, the Prophet Joseph Smith sent an apostle of the restored Church to the Holy Land to dedicate the land for the return of Judah. Yes, I am convinced without any shadow of a doubt that the Prophet Joseph Smith knew more about Israel than any man of his century.

I doubt there were any miraculous signs in the heavens that occurred on December 23, 1805, when Joseph Smith was born. Perhaps it is appropriate that there would be no special indication of the significance of the birth of this man. It seems to me that only at the birth of the Savior, the Creator of the world, should the heavens rejoice, a special star appear, and a day and a night and a day of light be given to the house of Israel. In heaven, however, I suspect that there were notes taken of the significance of Joseph Smith's birth. I am convinced that the Prophet had been preparing for millennia to come to earth to fulfill his great foreordained calling as the prophet of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Some 3,400 years before Joseph Smith was born upon the earth, Jehovah himself referred to the coming of this prophet of the last dispensation. When Lehi was giving a patriarchal blessing to his son Joseph, he explained why he named his son Joseph by saying essentially, "I have named you this because I am a descendant of Joseph who was carried captive into Egypt" (see 2 Nephi 3:1-4). Lehi also told his son Joseph that Joseph of old truly saw our day; then he records a dialogue that Joseph had with Jehovah:

"Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.

"And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work. . . .

"But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them.

"Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.

"And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord" (2 Nephi 3:7-8, 11-13).

I think that is a rather remarkable statement to be made concerning the Prophet Joseph Smith long before he was born, especially when you remember that the pre-earthly Jehovah is saying these words. Then Joseph who was sold into Egypt concluded with these prophetic words:

"Behold that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise; And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation" (2 Nephi 3:14-15).

I do not believe that Brigham Young exaggerated when he made this statement concerning the Prophet Joseph Smith: "It was decreed in the councils of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that [Joseph Smith] should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. [Joseph Smith] was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation." [^1]

I have also been intrigued that others, some not even of our faith, have also been impressed with the life and mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Josiah Quincy, mayor of Boston and a contemporary of the Prophet Joseph Smith, after he had visited Nauvoo and visited with the Prophet, wrote in his book of recollections concerning that visit: "It is by no means improbable that some future textbook for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet." [^2]

In addition to this statement of Josiah Quincy, a Russian sociologist who visited the United States after World War II also praised Joseph Smith. An account of his visit reads as follows: "As he boarded a ship at the pier in New York to return to his native land, newspaper correspondents crowded about him and among other questions asked, 'Who do you consider the greatest Americans?' They were astounded at his answer. He said, 'You have only had one great American—Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. He is the only man in your culture who has given to the world ideas which if followed will revolutionize the human race.'" [^3]

I do not know what kind of definition others would want to apply to the question, "Who is the greatest American?" It seems to me, however, that the greatest American of all time would be that person who has had the greatest impact on the largest number of people over the longest period of time. Some Americans have had tremendous impact on large numbers of people for a relatively short period of time, but when those persons have died, their influence has died with them. Some Americans have had great influence on small numbers of people over long periods of time. But if we look at the significance and importance of American leaders from the viewpoint of eternity, there has not been or ever will be an American citizen who will have a greater influence on a larger number of people over a longer period of time than the Prophet Joseph Smith. Therefore, I think Mr. Quincy and the Russian sociologist may well be right—that in time we will find that Joseph Smith is the greatest of all American citizens.

Sources of Joseph Smith's Understanding of Israel

We do not know how much the Prophet Joseph Smith knew about the gospel or about the house of Israel before the spring of 1820. In fact, the account we have of the First Vision in the Pearl of Great Price really does not help us very much. Joseph Smith tells us something about what the Savior said to him on that occasion concerning churches—that he should join none of them. The Savior said, "They draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me" (Joseph Smith—History 1:19). Inasmuch as that answered the essential question the Prophet Joseph Smith had on that occasion, that is the only answer we are given. I am sure the Prophet must have been given some other help concerning his foreordained destiny, but he tells us little concerning that episode. However, what he did say was significant, and the fact that he had this experience was most significant.

For a few moments (how long we do not know), Joseph Smith was privileged to see into eternity and to visit with the Father and the Son. Those who know the power of revelation and vision know that in five minutes a man gazing into heaven can learn more about heaven than a man who only wonders about it can learn in hundreds or thousands of years. Undoubtedly during that vision or subsequent visions the Prophet Joseph Smith was allowed to see not only the great history and destiny of Israel in the last days but also his role in that destiny. Probably, in regard to knowledge of Israel, Joseph Smith grew as did the Savior anciently as recorded in D&C 93:13, wherein we learn that the Lord grew "from grace to grace, until he received a fulness" (see also Luke 2:52).

Visits of the Angel Moroni

Another major event, however, tells us a great deal more about what Joseph Smith understood concerning Israel. On September 21, 1823, after the Prophet had retired to his bed, he tells of the appearance of the angel Moroni to him. We have an account of this in the Pearl of Great Price, and it is interesting to note that after indicating something about the Book of Mormon, Moroni then gave further information to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Prophet tells about it in these words: "After telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles" (Joseph Smith—History 1:36).

Joseph Smith gives us some of the changes made by the angel Moroni concerning the prophecies of Malachi. Then the Prophet continued, "In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled" (Joseph Smith—History 1:40). Now that is a rather remarkable statement in and of itself—particularly if you review the contents of the eleventh chapter of Isaiah. This chapter has probably generated more controversy than all of the other chapters of Isaiah concerning the gathering of Israel. In this chapter Isaiah prophesied: "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people. . . . And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim" (Isaiah 11:11-13).

Most theologians and biblical scholars maintain that this prophecy was fulfilled at the time the Babylonian captivity of ancient Israel was completed. At one time the people of "blood Israel" lived in "land Israel," and they were part of "covenant Israel" because they had entered into covenants with Heavenly Father. But after living under judges for about 300 years, they divided into two kingdoms—about 1,095 years b.c.e (before the Common Era or before the time of Christ). For about 120 years they had kings as part of the United Kingdom—Saul, David, and Solomon—but upon the death of Solomon they could not agree on who the new king should be, and they divided into two kingdoms. The northern kingdom consisted of about ten of the tribes, headed by Josephites—Ephraim particularly, with headquarters at Shechem in Samaria. The southern kingdom took upon itself the name of the Kingdom of Judah, and was headed by descendants of Judah, with headquarters in Jerusalem. In 722 b.c. Assyria came out of the north, captured the northern kingdom, and took many of the people captive into Assyria. The next year these people fled north out of Assyria and were never mentioned again in the Bible. Because about ten tribes were represented in that dispersion and because they were lost from the Bible, we still refer to them as the ten lost tribes.

Subsequently, our Heavenly Father inspired others of the house of Israel to leave the land of Israel—Lehi and his colony, Ishmael and his family, Zoram, and Mulek and his colony. Thus, the house of Israel started to be dispersed among the nations of the earth. Lehi and his colony specifically left because the Lord had warned that the Babylonians were going to destroy the city of Jerusalem and take the people of Judah into captivity. Surely enough, in the eleventh year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar and his Babylonian armies marched against Jerusalem, destroyed the city, and took many of the people as captives back into Babylonia. They remained there for about 70 years. Then Cyrus, king of Persia, conquered Babylonia and allowed the Jewish people to return to their land. They returned and, under their prophets, rebuilt their temple and lived there for over 500 years. But they were never an independent kingdom again, living under five major powers during that period of time.

Finally, when the Savior was born among them, they were a province in the Roman Empire. But he prophesied that even that status would soon cease. In the year 68 c.e., thirty-five years after the crucifixion of Christ and sixty-eight years after his birth—when Nero was emperor of Rome, and Titus and Vespasian were his great military leaders—the tenth and twelfth legions of Rome marched against Israel, destroyed the city of Jerusalem, tore down the temple so that not one stone remained upon another, slaughtered hundreds of thousands of people, and took many others captive, scattering them throughout the Roman Empire. Thus, "blood Israel" and "land Israel" were almost completely severed from each other. Within about one hundred years, the people had gone into apostasy, and "covenant Israel" was essentially banished from the earth, except for the remnant here in America that we read about in the Book of Mormon.

Now let us go back and read the words of Isaiah: "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people" (Isaiah 11:11). We, as Latter-day Saints, say that scripture refers to the latter days, but scholars and theologians have tended to say that it refers to the return from Babylonian captivity in about 537 b.c. But verse 13 indicates that "the envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim." This is rather interesting because scholars, in interpreting this passage of scripture as they do, have no explanation for the reference to Ephraim, who was not around at the time. The tribe of Joseph had either been dispersed or scattered by that time.

The angel Moroni told the Prophet Joseph Smith that the eleventh chapter of Isaiah "was about to be fulfilled," confirming that this prophecy was not fulfilled at the time of the Assyrians or Babylonians. It is being fulfilled in our lifetimes. Therefore, at that moment Joseph Smith, if he understood and comprehended the significance and the extent of that statement, probably knew more and understood more about Israel than anyone else on the earth during his time. But the angel Moroni said much more than that. The Prophet continues: "He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when 'they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people,' but soon would come" (Joseph Smith—History 1:40).

You see what an opportunity it would be to have an angel sent from God to tell you what the scriptures really mean, so that you are no longer left to wonder or speculate.

"He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in. He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here" (Joseph Smith—History 1:41).

Wentworth Letter

In 1835 when the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote the account we have in the Pearl of Great Price, he said he could not tell us more about the appearance of the angel Moroni at that time. However, seven years later in 1842, an editor in Chicago by the name of John Wentworth asked the Prophet to write a statement for his newspaper on the history of the Church. In response, Joseph Smith wrote what is referred to in Church history as the Wentworth Letter. In that letter he felt freer, evidently, to tell more about the appearance of the angel Moroni in 1823. In his diary, Joseph Smith wrote: "March 1, 1842.—At the request of Mr. John Wentworth, Editor and Proprietor of the Chicago Democrat, I have written the following sketch of the rise, progress, persecution, and faith of the Latter-day Saints."

Then he tells about the First Vision and other events. He wrote the following concerning the appearance of Moroni:

"On the evening on the 21st of September, a.d. 1823, while I was praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of Scripture, on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign. I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation.

"I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country and shown who they were, and from whence they came." [^4]

I submit that after that experience on September 21, 1823, the Prophet Joseph Smith understood more about Israel than any other person who was then living upon the earth, and he had as his tutor an angel who came directly from the presence of God to deliver that understanding to him.

I think another interesting account and date in the lifetime of the Prophet would be that of May 15, 1829, when the Aaronic Priesthood was restored to the earth. In ordaining Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, John the Baptist said that the power of the Aaronic Priesthood would not be taken from the earth until the sons of Levi "do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (D&C 13). The account of that appearance refers to prophecy—the fact that some of these things have been prophesied.

Explanation of Prophecy

The relevance, solidity, and importance of prophecy cannot be overstated. There are four absolute prerequisites to prophecy. First of all, the foreknowledge of our Heavenly Father. Unless Heavenly Father knows what is going to happen, how can he tell us what is going to happen? Our scriptures clearly indicate that God does know what is going to happen. In the Book of Mormon we read, "He [God] knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it" (2 Nephi 9:20). The Book of Mormon also states, "All things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" (2 Nephi 2:24). But notice this profound statement in the Doctrine and Covenants, "All things . . . past, present, and future, . . . are continually before the Lord" (130:7). So the first prerequisite of prophecy is the foreknowledge of God.

The second prerequisite is the principle of revelation—to have a worthy spokesman upon the earth. Even though our Heavenly Father may know what is going to happen in the future, if there is no means or power by which he can reveal his mind to man, we cannot have revelation or prophecy. And if there is no person on the earth who is willing and worthy to receive the mind and will of our Heavenly Father, we cannot have prophecy. But the scriptures indicate that there is a principle of revelation and that there have been times when there have been worthy prophets upon the earth. Amos said, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7). In the Book of Mormon we read, "For by the Spirit are all things made known unto the prophets" (1 Nephi 22:2). Then, of course, we Latter-day Saints have the Articles of Faith: "We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation" (7), and "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (9).

The third prerequisite of prophecy is that prophecy be not of private interpretation. In fact, Peter wrote in his second epistle: "Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Peter 1:20-21).

The fourth requirement comes from the law of witnesses: "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Corinthians 13:1).

Explanation of History

I would prefer to read the words of prophets as to what is going to happen than to read the words of historians as to what has happened. In other words, I would always take the words of the prophets over those of the historians. The Encyclopedia Britannica defines history as a recording of events that have happened; if that is the definition of history, then I will stand by the statement that prophecy is more sure than history. If we apply a more specific and a more narrow definition to history—that history is the actual event that happened—that is something else. In a sense, perhaps nothing could be more certain than that which has happened.

But let us look at some things we call history. Let us consider the American Revolutionary War for a moment. What do we know about the Revolutionary War? Absolutely nothing except for those things a teacher, parent, peer, or author has told us. And that "someone" has given us his interpretation of what happened. If you do not think it is important to know whose interpretation you are reading, then read some books in the local library on the American Revolutionary War written by British authors. When I was at Columbia University, I had to pass some doctoral exams on history, and for the first time I read some history books about the American Civil War written from what one of my friends from South Carolina referred to as "an unprejudiced Southern viewpoint."

History is always of private interpretation. Prophecy is never of private interpretation. Prophecy is given by the influence of God through the Holy Ghost to worthy men, and the only way it can be interpreted is by the influence of the Holy Ghost upon them (see 2 Peter 1:20-21). I am not trying to belittle history. I respect historians. So far as I know, they are honest, sincere people; therefore, when I say that the historian cannot be completely objective, I am not saying so in a derogatory sense. But historians cannot be completely objective. The historian is always prejudiced—he always makes prejudgments. He decides what he is going to tell you, what he is not going to tell you, what he is going to put in a chapter, and what he is going to put in a sentence. The historian is a different person than he would be if he had not learned about a particular event; therefore, the event has had an influence on him. The historian can never be completely objective because he always speaks from a prejudiced viewpoint. Perhaps that is why we do not have a good history of the Church. Who could write it? Certainly not a member of the Church because he is prejudiced—he has made some prejudgments. But certainly a nonmember of the Church could not write an objective history of the Church either because he is also prejudiced—he has made some prejudgments. So I have never been able to figure out who could write an objective history.

I do not believe a prophet can be completely objective either. But a prophet can be more objective than a historian, even if both are trying to be honest and sincere. The prophet can be more objective than the historian for this major reason: He is not a product of the event because the event has not yet happened. Therefore, I would rather take prophecy over history any day.

Prophecies in the Book of Mormon

I now refer to some specific prophecies of the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning prophecy and Israel. When we read prophecy, we are reading history in the future. Just as prophecy is sort of history in reverse, the prophecies I am going to refer to constitute the future history of the house of Israel, although references about it will be in the present.

In March 1830 the Book of Mormon was published. Its preface indicates that one purpose of the book is to show "unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations."

We have to assume that after 1830 Joseph Smith knew everything pertaining to the house of Israel that was in the Book of Mormon because under the power and influence of the Holy Ghost he translated that sacred record. I submit that those who know what is taught in the Book of Mormon concerning the great destiny of Israel in the last dispensation know more about Israel than 99 percent of the people who live on this earth.

When I was preparing material on this subject, I went to all the statements in the scriptures concerning Israel. These scriptures indicate three aspects to the gathering of Israel, just as there were three aspects to the scattering—the lost tribes, the dispersed of Israel, and Judah. Some peoples of the world understand one of these aspects, but I honestly do not know anyone except the Latter-day Saints who understand all three of these aspects. All of these deal with Israel, and we have to assume that during his lifetime Joseph Smith knew of all of these statements concerning Israel.

The Book of Mormon makes hundreds, perhaps thousands, of references to Israel. I refer to only a few of them to indicate the scope of the understanding of the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the gathering of Israel:

"Nevertheless, when that day cometh, saith the prophet, that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers. Yea, then will he remember the isles of the sea; yea, and all the people who are of the house of Israel, will I gather in, saith the Lord, according to the words of the prophet Zenos, from the four quarters of the earth. Yea, and all the earth shall see the salvation of the Lord, saith the prophet; every nation, kindred, tongue and people shall be blessed" (1 Nephi 19:15-17).

In a second reference to Israel, Nephi prophesies, "And the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state" (2 Nephi 25:17).

The first time these people were restored, according to the scholars, would have been when they were brought out of Egypt; the second time was when they were brought out of Babylonia. But Latter-day Saints say no. When the prophecies were made, the people of Israel were already in the land of Israel, so the first time after that period would have been when they came out of Babylonia, and the second time would be in the last days. Therefore, it is important in reading prophecy to put it in the proper perspective with history. Now let us finish the second scriptural reference:

"And the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state. Wherefore, he will proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder among the children of men. Wherefore, he shall bring forth his words unto them . . . for the purpose of convincing them of the true Messiah, who was rejected by them; and unto the convincing of them that they need not look forward any more for a Messiah to come . . . for there is save one Messiah spoken of by the prophets, and that Messiah is he who should be rejected of the Jews" (2 Nephi 25:17-18).

A third reference tells us: "And it shall come to pass that the Jews which are scattered also shall begin to believe in Christ; and they shall begin to gather in upon the face of the land; . . . The Lord God shall commence his work among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, to bring about the restoration of his people upon the earth" (2 Nephi 30:7-8).

After Mormon had abridged the records to the book of 3 Nephi and had seen how all the prophecies of the prophets had been fulfilled for hundreds of years, he could not help but reminisce concerning the implications. Although the following remarkable quotation is from 3 Nephi, the author of these words was the prophet Mormon:

"Surely he hath blessed the house of Jacob, and hath been merciful unto the seed of Joseph. And insomuch as the children of Lehi have kept his commandments he hath blessed them and prospered them according to his word. Yea, and surely shall he again bring a remnant of the seed of Joseph to the knowledge of the Lord their God. And as surely as the Lord liveth, will he gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth.

"And as he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with the house of Jacob be fulfilled in his own due time, unto the restoring all the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenanted with them. And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen" (3 Nephi 5:21-26).

If the Prophet Joseph Smith had done no more than read and understand the Book of Mormon, by the time he got to 3 Nephi, chapter 5, he would have known more about Israel in the last days than any of his contemporaries. A few chapters later, we have these profound and prophetic words of the Savior himself:

"And then will I gather them in from the four quarters of the earth; and then will I fulfil the covenant which the Father hath made unto all the people of the house of Israel" (3 Nephi 16:5).

"The Father . . . sent me to bless you . . . this because ye are the children of the covenant—

. . . then fulfilleth the Father the covenant which he made with Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed— . . .

"And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father.

"And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them; And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name" (3 Nephi 20:26-27, 29-31).

In 1830 a quotation published in the Book of Mormon from the resurrected Jesus Christ said, in effect, that in time the blood of Judah would be gathered back to the land of Jerusalem. The Book of Mormon also contains a prophecy stating: "The time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them; And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name" (3 Nephi 20:30-31).

We all know of the fulfillment of the first part of that prophecy. In November 1947 the General Assembly of the United Nations decided that on May 15, 1948, the modern state of Israel would be established. I have often wondered if there was any connection between that date and the date the Aaronic Priesthood was restored: May 15, 1829. The restoration of this priesthood was the beginning of the restoration of power on the earth to gather Israel together again in this dispensation.

It is going to be very interesting to see how the second part of the prophecy is going to be fulfilled: "the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them." Many Latter-day Saints ask, "When are we going to open a mission in Israel? When are we going to send missionaries there?" To date, the modern country of Israel now has a law prohibiting proselytizing by missionaries, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints abides by that law. Note that the law does not prohibit missionaries per se; rather, it prohibits the proselytizing of persons, or the attempt to have them change their religious beliefs. Thus, other Christian groups presently have "missionaries" in Israel running schools, orphanages, hospitals, and other facilities. Also, since 1968 Brigham Young University, an official arm of our Church, has had students and faculty in Israel participating in semester-abroad programs, has received permission and built the Brigham Young University Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies, and has sponsored many tours of Israel. However, all of the participants in all of these programs are required by BYU to sign a statement agreeing not to proselytize others while they are in Israel; otherwise, they will be released from their respective program and returned home immediately.

Again, it will be interesting to see how the prophecy will be fulfilled: "the time cometh, when the fulness of [the] gospel shall be preached unto them."

The very day the Church was organized, April 6, 1830, a revelation was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in which the Lord said: "For thus saith the Lord God: Him [Joseph Smith] have I inspired to move the cause of Zion in mighty power for good, and his diligence I know, and his prayers I have heard. Yea, his weeping for Zion I have seen, and I will cause that he shall mourn for her no longer; for his days of rejoicing are come unto the remission of his sins, and the manifestations of my blessings upon his works" (D&C 21:7-8).

Seaton Letter

Shortly thereafter the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote a letter to N. E. Seaton, the editor of a newspaper in Rochester, New York. Joseph Smith commented in the letter that it was written "by commandment of God." [^5] Here are some of the statements Joseph Smith made to Mr. Seaton:

"Trusting in that God who has said that these things are hid from the wise and prudent and revealed unto babes, I step forth into the field to tell you what the Lord is doing, and what you must do. . . . The time has at last arrived when the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has set His hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people, . . . and establish that covenant with them, which was promised when their sins should be taken away" [^6] (see Isaiah 11; Romans 11:25-27; Jeremiah 31:31-33).

This next point is very important. Many students of the Bible may be surprised at this, and some who teach the Bible may have to change their teaching a little bit. Notice the next words of the Prophet Joseph Smith: "This covenant has never been established with the house of Israel, nor with the house of Judah, for it requires two parties to make a covenant, and those two parties must be agreed, or no covenant can be made. Christ, in the days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, . . . and no covenant was made with them at that time." [^7]

Even in some of my teaching I have talked about the covenant the Lord made with the Jewish people. Actually, the covenant he made was with Abraham, and by the time we get to the time of Christ, at least 400 years had passed since the people had apostatized and rejected the covenant. Therefore, the covenant was taken away from them. The Prophet Joseph Smith continues:

"Thus after this chosen family had rejected Christ . . . the Gentiles received the covenant, and were grafted in from whence the chosen family were broken off: but the Gentiles have not continued in the goodness of God, but have departed from the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, and have broken the covenant in which their fathers were established. . . .

"And now what remains to be done . . . ? I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people, high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and people, professors of religion and non-professors, in order that they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to a fulness. . . . Repent of all your sins, and be baptized in water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and receive the ordinance of the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power. . . .

"The Book of Mormon is a record of the forefathers of our western tribes of Indians . . . [who] are descendants from that Joseph which was sold into Egypt, and that the land of America is a promised land unto them, . . . with the requisitions of the new covenant. . . . The city of Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will be built upon the land of America. . . . But Judah shall obtain deliverance at Jerusalem. . . . The Good Shepherd will . . . lead them out from all nations where they have been scattered in a cloudy and dark day, to Zion, and to Jerusalem." [^8]

We see that the Prophet Joseph Smith fully understood there were to be two major gatherings in the last days: (1) the gathering of the dispersed of Israel to become part of "covenant Israel" (the Church) and to gather here to Zion and (2) a gathering of Judah back to the land of Jerusalem. Both groups have been given the responsibility of preparing temples in their holy cities so that the Lord, whose right it is to rule upon the earth, can come and rule as King of kings and Lord of lords. He will then have two great capital cities—one in Jerusalem, Israel, from which the word of the Lord will go forth and from whence Christ will rule as Lord of lords, and one in Jackson County, Missouri, in Zion, from which the law will go forth and from whence he will rule as King of kings.

Letter to the Elders of the Church

In September 1835, Joseph Smith wrote a letter to the elders of the Church in which he said:

"I received, by a heavenly vision, a commandment in June following, to take my journey to the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and there designate the very spot which was to be the central place for the commencement of the gathering together of those who embrace the fullness of the everlasting Gospel. Accordingly I undertook the journey, with certain ones of my brethren, and after a long and tedious journey, suffering many privations and hardships, arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, and after viewing the country, seeking diligently at the hand of God, He manifested Himself unto us, and designated, to me and others, the very spot upon which He designed to commence the work of the gathering, and the upbuilding of an 'holy city,' which should be called Zion— . . .

" . . . Now we learn from the Book of Mormon the very identical continent and spot of land upon which the New Jerusalem is to stand, and it must be caught up according to the vision of John upon the isle of Patmos.

"Now many will feel disposed to say, that this New Jerusalem spoken of, is the Jerusalem that was built by the Jews on the eastern continent. But you will see, from Revelation xxi: 2, there was a New Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, adorned as a bride for her husband; that after this, the Revelator was caught away in the Spirit, to a great and high mountain, and saw the great and holy city descending out of heaven from God. Now there are two cities spoken of here. . . . There is a New Jerusalem to be established on this continent, and also Jerusalem shall be rebuilt on the eastern continent." [^9]

These concepts are not even understood today by more than one out of a thousand. Again, Joseph Smith was far ahead of his times in his understanding of Israel.

Discussion with the High Council

In January 1836 the Prophet spoke to the high council in Kirtland as follows:

"One of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of Israel (of whom the Lamanites constitute a part) that happy time when Jacob shall go up to the house of the Lord, to worship Him in spirit and in truth, to live in holiness; when the Lord will restore His judges as at first . . . ; when it shall no longer be said, . . . the Lord lives that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither He has driven them. That day is one, all important to all men. . . .

"In speaking of the gathering, we mean to be understood as speaking of it according to scripture, the gathering of the elect of the Lord out of every nation on earth, and bringing them to the place of the Lord of Hosts, when the city of righteousness shall be built, and where the people shall be of one heart and one mind, . . . where even upon the bells of the horses shall be written 'Holiness to the Lord.'

"The Book of Mormon has made known who Israel is, upon this continent." [^10]

In section 110 of the Doctrine and Covenants, we find a record of some of the great events that are occurring in this dispensation. On April 3, 1836, shortly after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, when Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had retired to one end of the temple, a glorious vision burst upon them and the Savior appeared to them and accepted the temple. Moses, as a resurrected being, also appeared to them and restored the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four corners of the earth. Elias appeared to them and restored the keys of the gospel of the dispensation of Abraham. Elijah appeared to them and restored the keys of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, and the sealing powers of the priesthood. Another purpose of the calling of Elijah is made clear in Doctrine and Covenants: "And again, the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto the Jews; lest I come and smite the whole earth with a curse" (D&C 98:17).

Thus, the great gathering of the dispersed of Israel began. No formal missions were established in the Church before 1836 because Joseph Smith did not have the keys for the gathering of Israel until after April 3, 1836. The first mission in this dispensation was established in July 1837, and it was established in the British Isles because the Lord told Joseph Smith that that land was rich with the blood of Israel. Within two years the Prophet sent nine of the apostles to England, and within a short time, during the period of the exodus of members of the Church from Nauvoo, there were more members of the Church in the British Isles than in the United States. Literally, that land was rich with the blood of Israel.

It is interesting to remember that it was the Romans who scattered the Israelites in about a.d. 68-71. If we examine a map of the Roman Empire of the first century a.d., we see that the farthermost part of the Roman Empire from Jerusalem was the British Isles. The Romans wanted to scatter these people as far away from Jerusalem as they could so that they could not rise up in rebellion and try to get back to Jerusalem. Evidently many of the blood of Israel were scattered to the British Isles at that time.

Shortly after Joseph Smith received the keys to gather Israel again, he called Orson Hyde and John Page to go to the Holy Land and dedicate that land for the return of Judah. In a letter the Prophet wrote to them on May 14, 1840, he said: "I am happy in being informed by your letter that your mission swells 'larger and larger.' It is a great and important mission, and one that is worthy those intelligences who surround the throne of Jehovah to be engaged in. Although it appears great at present, yet you have but just begun to realize the greatness, the extent and glory of the same. If there is anything calculated to interest the mind of the Saints, to awaken in them the finest sensibilities, and arouse them to enterprise and exertion, surely it is the great and precious promises made by our heavenly Father to the children of Abraham; and those engaged in seeking the outcasts of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah, cannot fail to enjoy the Spirit of the Lord and have the choicest blessings of heaven rest upon them in copious effusion.

"Brethren, you are in the pathway to eternal fame, and immortal glory; and inasmuch as you feel interested for the covenant people of the Lord, the God of their fathers shall bless you. Do not be discouraged on account of the greatness of the work; only be humble and faithful, and then you can say, 'What art thou, O great mountain! before Zerubbabel shalt thou be brought down.' He who scattered Israel has promised to gather them; therefore inasmuch as you are to be instrumental in this great work, He will endow you with power, wisdom, might and intelligence, and every qualification necessary; while your minds will expand wider and wider, until you can circumscribe the earth and the heavens, reach forth into eternity, and contemplate the mighty acts of Jehovah in all their variety and glory." [^11]

Despite that divine calling, Hiram Page did not make it to Jerusalem. It was left to Orson Hyde, therefore, to dedicate that land for the return of Judah, which he did in October 1841.

Theodor Herzl, the great father of political Zionism, was born in 1860. Nineteen years earlier, an apostle of our Church had already dedicated that land for the return of Judah. If Orson Hyde had had 20-20 spiritual vision and could have perceived every Jewish person in those lands, according to the historians, he could not have seen more than 5,000. Yet during the lifetime of many Latter-day Saints born since 1948, those people have been gathering back by thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, and even millions. Over 10 million of "blood Israel" have gathered as part of "covenant Israel," while six million of "blood Israel" have gathered back to "land Israel." Now all that remains to be done is to bring the two of them together; then the great millennial reign of Christ can begin upon the earth.

Times and Seasons Editorial

The May 2, 1842, editorial in the Times and Seasons reads: "The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day glory, 'the dispensation of the fulness of times, when God will gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that are upon the earth,' 'even in one,' when the Saints of God will be gathered in one from every nation, and kindred, and people, and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one." [^12]

One of the last great public discourses of the Prophet Joseph Smith on the subject of Israel was at the April conference in 1843. In two or three sentences he sketched out the prophetic future of the return of Judah: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance." [^13]

Teachings from the Doctrine and Covenants

Some sections of the Doctrine and Covenants also pertain to this subject:

"And Israel shall be saved in mine own due time; and by the keys which I have given shall they be led, and no more be confounded at all" (D&C 35:25).

"And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations; But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. . . . And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?" (D&C 45:24-25, 51).

"Q. What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of Revelation?

"A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers" (D&C 77:15).

"And again, the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto the Jews; lest I come and smite the whole earth with a curse, and all flesh be consumed before me" (D&C 98:17).

"And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house. . . . And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain, shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever" (D&C 133:13, 35).

"And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided" (D&C 133:24).

Proclamation of 1845

I now refer to some statements that many people have not thought to ascribe to the Prophet Joseph Smith because they were not published until after his death. These statements are from a letter called "Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to all the Kings of the World, to the President of the United States of America, to the Governors of the Several States, and to the Rulers and People of All Nations." But, as indicated in Messages of the First Presidency, it is believed that "this proclamation could be the one that Joseph Smith was commanded in a revelation given January 19, 1841 to issue (D&C 124:1-11). The similarity between the wording of D&C 124:3 and the heading of this Proclamation seems too close not to have a connection." [^14] Therefore, even though this message was not issued until April 6, 1845, many Latter-day Saint scholars subscribe to the possibility that the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote this epistle. I quote only fragments of this epistle:

"Know Ye:—

"That the kingdom of God has come: as has been predicted by ancient prophets, and prayed for in all ages. . . .

"Being established in these last days for the restoration of all things spoken of by the prophets since the world began; and in order to prepare the way for the coming of the Son of Man. . . .

"In order to meet this great event there must needs be a preparation.

"Therefore we send unto you with authority from on high, and command you all to repent and humble yourselves as little children, before the majesty of the Holy One; and come unto Jesus with a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and be baptized in his name, for the remission of sins . . . and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. . . .

"We testify that the foregoing doctrine is the doctrine or gospel of Jesus Christ. . . .

"We also bear testimony that the 'Indians' (so called) of North and South America are a remnant of the tribes of Israel; as is now made manifest by the discovery and revelation of their ancient oracles and records.

"And that they are about to be gathered, civilized, and made one nation in this glorious land.

"They will also come to the knowledge of their forefathers, and of the fulness of the gospel; and they will embrace it, and become a righteous branch of the house of Israel.

"And we further testify that the Lord has appointed a holy city and temple to be built on this continent. . . .

"And we further testify, that the Jews among all nations are hereby commanded, in the name of the Messiah, to prepare, to return to Jerusalem in Palestine; and to rebuild that city and temple unto the Lord:

"And also to organize and establish their own political government, under their own rulers, judges, and governors in that country.

"For be it known unto them that we now hold the keys of the priesthood and kingdom which is soon to be restored unto them. . . .

"There is also another consideration of vast importance to all the rulers and people of the world, in regard to this matter. It is this: As this work progresses in its onward course, and becomes more and more an object of political and religious interest and excitement, no king, ruler, or subject, no community or individual, will stand neutral. All will at length be influenced by one spirit or the other; and will take sides either for or against the kingdom of God, and the fulfilment of the prophets, in the great restoration and return of his long dispersed covenant people. . . .

"To such an extreme will this great division finally extend, that the nations of the old world will combine to oppose these things by military force. They will send a great army to Palestine, against the Jews; and they will besiege their city, and will reduce the inhabitants of Jerusalem to the greatest extreme of distress and misery.

"Then will commence a struggle in which the fate of nations and empires will be suspended on a single battle.

"In this battle the governors and people of Judah distinguish themselves for their bravery and warlike achievements. The weak among them will be like David, and the strong among them will be like God: or like the angel of the Lord.

"In that day the Lord will pour upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon the Messiah whom they have pierced.

"For lo! he will descend from heaven, as the defender of the Jews: and to complete their victory. His feet will stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which shall cleave in sunder at his presence, and remove one half to the north, and the other to the south; thus forming a great valley where the mountain now stands. . . .

"In that day all who are in the siege, both against Judea and against Jerusalem, shall be cut in pieces; though all the people of the earth should be gathered together against it. . . .

"The Jews as a nation become holy from that day forward; and their city and sanctuary becomes holy. There also the Messiah establishes his throne, and seat of government.

"Jerusalem then becomes the seat of empire, and the great centre and capital of the old world. . . .

"While these great events are rolling on the wheels of time, and being fulfilled in the old world, the Western Continent will present a scene of grandeur, greatness, and glory, far surpassing the scene just described.

"The Lord will make her . . . who was cast afar off, a strong nation; and will reign over them in Mount Zion from that time forth and for ever.

"Or, in other words, He will assemble the Natives, the remnants of Joseph in America; and make of them a great, and strong, and powerful nation: and he will civilize and enlighten them, and will establish a holy city, and temple, and seat of government among them, which shall be called Zion.

"And there shall be his tabernacle, his sanctuary, his throne, and seat of government for the whole continent of North and South America for ever.

"In short, it will be to the western hemisphere what Jerusalem will be to the eastern. . . .

"The despised and degraded son of the forest, who has wandered in dejection and sorrow, and suffered reproach, shall then drop his disguise, and stand forth in manly dignity, and exclaim to the Gentiles who have envied and sold him: 'I am Joseph: does my father yet live?' Or, in other words: I am a descendant of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt. You have hated me, and sold me, and thought I was dead. But lo! I live, and am heir to the inheritance, titles, honors, priesthood, sceptre, crown, throne, and eternal life and dignity of my fathers, who live for evermore. . . .

"Americans! This mighty and strange work has been commenced in your midst, and must roll on in fulfilment.

"You are now invited, and earnestly intreated, to investigate it thoroughly, and to aid and participate in its accomplishment. . . .

"The Lord has spoken, and who can disannul it? He has uttered his voice, and who can gainsay it? He has stretched out his arm, and who can turn it back? . . .

"We say, then, in life or in death, in bonds or free, that the great God has spoken in this age.—And we know it.

"He has given us the Holy Priesthood and Apostleship, and the keys of the kingdom of God, to bring about the restoration of all things as promised by the holy prophets of old.—And we know it.

"He has revealed the origin and the Records of the aboriginal tribes of America, and their future destiny.—And we know it.

"He has revealed the fulness of the gospel, with its gifts, blessings, and ordinances.—And we know it.

"He has commanded us to bear witness of it, first to the Gentiles, and then to the remnants of Israel and the Jews.—And we know it.

"He has commanded us to gather together his Saints on this Continent, and build up holy cities and sanctuaries.—And we know it.

"He has said, that the Gentiles should come into the same gospel and covenant; and be numbered with the house of Israel; and be a blessed people upon this good land for ever, if they would repent and embrace it.—And we know it.

"He has also said that, if they do not repent, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and cease to fight against Zion, and also put away all murder, lying, pride, priestcraft, whoredom, and secret abomination, they shall soon perish from the earth, and be cast down to hell.—And we know it.

"He has said, that the time is at hand for the Jews to be gathered to Jerusalem.—And we know it.

"He has said, that the Ten Tribes of Israel should also be revealed in the North country, together with their oracles and records, preparatory to their return, and to their union with Judah, no more to be separated.—And we know it.

"He has said, that when these preparations were made, both in this country and in Jerusalem, and the gospel in all its fulness preached to all nations for a witness and testimony, He will come, and all the Saints with him, to reign on the earth one thousand years.—And we know it.

"He has said that he will not come in his glory and destroy the wicked, till these warnings were given and these preparations were made for his reception.—And we know it. . . .

"But be ye sure of this, that whether we live or die, the words of the testimony of this proclamation which we now send unto you, shall all be fulfilled.

"Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of his revealed word shall fail to be fulfilled." [^15]

In light of the above insightful observations, whether by the Prophet Joseph Smith himself or by those tutored by him, I ask: How can any honest, sincere person read these words and study the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith and not conclude that he did indeed understand Israel better than any man of his century?

Concluding Testimonies

Joseph Smith and his associate Sidney Rigdon have given the world the following testimony of Jesus Christ:

"After the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father" (D&C 76:22-23).

If I were to paraphrase that scripture and apply it to the Prophet Joseph Smith, I would say: This is the testimony, last of all, that I give of him, That he is indeed the prophet of God chosen to lead the gathering of Israel in the last days, in the dispensation of the fulness of times; that he was indeed foreordained to be born of the house of Israel to help restore Israel to her rightful place in the last days; and that he, Joseph Smith the Prophet, has been faithful to his foreordained calling.

Notes

From an address delivered at the Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons, Logan, Utah, 16 January 1977.

---
Notas:
[^1] Messages of the First Presidency, 6:194.
[^2] Information and Suggestions for Patriarchs (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, n.d.), 4; quoted by permission.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957-66), 3:63; emphasis added.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith, "How One May Become of the House of Israel," Improvement Era, 26 (October 1923): 1149.
[^5] Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 600-601; some of the emphasis shown can be found in the original.
[^6] Journal of Discourses, 2:268-69; emphasis added.
[^7] See Journal of Discourses, 2:268.
[^8] Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 4:39; emphasis added.
[^9] Journal of Discourses, 2:269; emphasis added.
[^10] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:246; emphasis added.
[^11] Doctrines of Salvation, 2:250-51; italics in original removed.
[^12] Ibid., 231.
[^13] History of the Church, 5:337.
[^14] Messages of the First Presidency, 1:252.
[^15] Ibid., 1:252-54, 257-61, 263-64; emphasis in original.
