Daniel H. Ludlow, Selected Writings of Daniel H. Ludlow: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 38

The Destiny of the House of Israel

Following a habit developed in high school and college when I participated in debate tournaments, I have gone to the dictionary and to concordances of the scriptures to make certain I understand the full ramifications of the terms destiny and house of Israel.

Destiny

Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged helped me with the word destiny. It contains five different definitions of the word, the basic meaning of which is "that to which any person or thing is destined." Some of the definitions and explanations of the word destiny are as follows:

"1a predetermined state: condition foreordained by divine will or by human will: unavoidable lot.

"1b culminating condition or end indicated as probable, inevitable, or having been reached.

"2a the predetermined course of events often conceived as a resistless power or agency: the foreordained future whether in general or of an individual.

"2b continuing activity and functional behavior that tend to determine eventual status especially as to progress or decadence—usually used in plural.

"3 a real or imaginary power or agency conceived as predetermining the course of events and choice of alternatives."

When I looked up the meaning of the basic word destiny, I was surprised to note that it comes from the Latin and the French "de + -stinare; akin to stare to stand." Its fundamental meaning is "to direct and impel inescapably on a fixed course."

I say surprised, for I remembered a similar experience some years ago when I was in Perth, Australia, and heard that the Brethren had announced that henceforth the Book of Mormon would have a subtitle: "Another Testament of Jesus Christ." I went to the national library in Perth to look up the word testament. There, in the largest dictionary of the English language that I could find, I noted that the word testament came into English from the Latin and the French from "a prehistoric Italic compound whose first and second constituents respectively are akin to Latin tres three and to Latin stare to stand."

I had never before associated the word destiny with the word testament, yet as indicated, both come from the same basic root, stare, meaning "to stand." By the time I had concluded pondering on the possible meanings of the word destiny, I realized that a discussion of the destiny of the house of Israel would cover much more than the prophetic future of the house of Israel—a term many would associate with the word destiny. I also need to include something of the historical past and of present conditions associated with the house of Israel.

House of Israel

My attention then centered on the other major term in the title of this discussion: house of Israel. This time I used two sources: The Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, by James Strong, and An Exhaustive Concordance of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price, compiled by R. Gary Shapiro.

The Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, according to its subtitle, shows "every word of the text of the common English Version of the canonical books, and every occurrence of each word in regular order." [^1] According to a reference in another book, "Dr. James Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the King James translation was first issued in 1894 after a hundred men had worked on it for thirty years." [^2]

An Exhaustive Concordance of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price, according to its preface, "lists alphabetically all words exactly as they appear in the sacred text," and offers this note: "with the use of today's computer technology . . . the work was completed in four years." [^3]

According to the concordances, the term "House of Israel" appears in the scriptures 280 times. In the Old Testament, it occurs 146 times: Exodus—2 (16:31; 40:38); Leviticus—5 (10:6; 17:3, 8, 10; 22:18); Numbers—1 (20:29); Joshua—1 (21:45); Ruth—1 (4:11); 1 Samuel—2 (7:2, 3); 2 Samuel—5 (1:12; 6:5, 15; 12:8; 16:3); 1 Kings—2 (12:21; 20:31); Psalms—3 (98:3; 115:12; 135:19); Isaiah—4 (5:7; 14:2; 46:3; 63:7); Jeremiah—20 (2:4, 26; 3:18, 20; 5:11, 15; 9:26; 10:1; 11:10, 17; 13:11; 18:6 [twice]; 23:8; 31:27, 31, 33; 33:14, 17; 48:13); Ezekiel—83 (3:1, 4, 5, 7 [twice], 17; 4:3, 4, 5; 5:4; 6:11; 8:6, 10, 11, 12; 9:9; 11:5, 15; 12:6, 9, 10, 24, 27; 13:5, 9; 14:4, 5, 6, 7, 11; 17:2; 18:6, 15, 25, 29 [twice], 30, 31; 20:13, 27, 30, 31, 39, 40, 44; 22:18; 24:21; 28:24, 25; 29:6, 16, 21; 33:7, 10, 11, 20; 34:30; 35:15; 36:10, 17, 21, 22 [twice], 32, 37; 37:11, 16; 39:12, 22, 23, 25, 29; 40:4; 43:7, 10; 44:6 [twice], 12, 22; 45:6, 8, 17 [twice]; Hosea—5 (1:4, 6; 5:1; 6:10; 11:12); Amos—8 (5:1, 3, 4, 25; 6:1, 14; 7:10; 9:9); Micah—3 (1:5; 3:1, 9); Zechariah—1 (8:13).

In the New Testament, it occurs six times: Matthew—2 (10:6; 15:24); Acts—2 (2:36; 7:42); Hebrews—2 (8:8, 10).

In the Book of Mormon, it occurs 122 times: Title Page—2 (first paragraph; second paragraph); 1 Nephi—39 (10:12, 14 [twice]; 11:35; 12:9; 13:23 [twice], 33, 34; 14:2 [twice], 5, 8, 17, 26; 15:12 [three times], 14, 16, 17, 18, 20; 19:10, 11, 16, 19, 24 [twice]; 21:1 [twice], 12, 15; 22:3, 6, 7, 9, 11, 14); 2 Nephi—23 (3:5, 9, 13, 24; 6:5 [three times]; 7:2, 4; 9:1, 53; 10:18, 22; 15:7; 24:2; 25:4; 28:2; 29:1, 2, 12, 14 [twice]; 33:13); Jacob—5 (5:1, 2, 3; 6:1, 4); 3 Nephi—36 (10:4, 5 [twice], 6, 7; 15:15; 16:5, 7, 8 [twice], 9 [twice], 11, 12 [twice], 13, 14, 15 [twice]; 17:14; 20:10, 12, 21, 25, 27; 21:1, 4, 6, 7, 20, 23; 23:2; 29:3, 8, 9; 30:2); Mormon—11 (3:17; 4:12; 5:10, 11, 14, 20; 7:1, 2; 8:21 [twice]; 9:37); Ether—5 (4:14, 15; 13:5 [twice], 10); Moroni—1 (10:31).

In the Doctrine and Covenants, it occurs six times: 14:10; 18:6; 29:12; 39:11; 42:39; 138:25. The term does not appear in the Pearl of Great Price.

By comparison, all other major terms referring to the greater house of Israel—"tribes of Israel," "tribes of the children of Israel," and "tribes of the house of Israel"—are used a total of only seventy times in the scriptures.

The other major terms are used sixty times in the Old Testament: Genesis—2 (49:16, 28); Exodus—3 (24:4; 28:21; 39:14); Numbers—4 (31:4; 32:28; 36:3, 9); Deuteronomy—2 (29:21; 33:5); Joshua—9 (3:12; 4:5, 8; 12:7; 14:1; 19:51; 21:1; 22:14; 24:1); Judges—7 (18:1; 20:2, 10, 12; 21:5, 8, 15); 1 Samuel—4 (2:28; 9:21; 10:20; 15:17); 2 Samuel—7 (5:1; 7:7; 15:2, 10; 19:9; 20:14; 24:2); 1 Kings—3 (8:16; 11:32; 14:21); 2 Kings—1 (21:7); 1 Chronicles—3 (27:16, 22; 29:6); 2 Chronicles—4 (6:5; 11:16; 12:13; 33:7); Ezra—1 (6:17); Psalms—1 (78:55); Ezekiel—7 (37:19; 47:13, 21, 22; 48:19, 29, 31); Hosea—1 (5:9); Zechariah—1 (9:1).

They are used four times in the New Testament: Matthew—1 (19:28); Luke—1 (22:30); Revelation—2 (7:4; 21:12).

They are used eight times in the Book of Mormon: "Tribes of Israel"—6 (1 Nephi 12:9; 2 Nephi 29:13 [twice]; 3 Nephi 17:4; 28:29; Mormon 3:18); "Tribes of the house of Israel"—2 (2 Nephi 29:12; 3 Nephi 15:15).

"Tribes of Israel" is used five times in the Doctrine and Covenants: 77:9 [twice], 11, 14; 133:34. "Ten Tribes" appears once in the Pearl of Great Price: Articles of Faith 1:10.

Truth

The Book of Mormon offers this definition of truth: "The Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13). The Doctrine and Covenants provides a more complete definition: "And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24).

Let us examine some of the "truths" pertaining to the house of Israel, primarily those in the Bible and the Book of Mormon and those that have been clarified in the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith and of later prophets, seers, and revelators.

In presenting these statements I am well aware of the admonition of Peter: "Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Peter 1:20-21).

I am also aware that the Lord has declared in several places that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word and truth shall be established: "At the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established" (Deuteronomy 19:15). "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Corinthians 13:1). "Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God?" (2 Nephi 29:8). "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (D&C 6:28).

In fact, the Lord declared that at least three scriptural witnesses would testify of his work:

"For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it. . . .

"And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever" (2 Nephi 29:12, 14).

The Truths of the House of Israel "as They Were" and "as They Are"

We rely primarily on the teachings of the Old Testament concerning the origin and early history of the house of Israel. The first time the word Israel appears in the Old Testament (and, I assume, the first time it is used upon the earth) is in connection with the man otherwise known as Jacob—the son of Isaac and the grandson of Abraham.

A messenger of God told Jacob, "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed" (Genesis 32:28). Later, "God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel" (Genesis 35:10).

Israel becomes the family title of the family of Jacob. This family also becomes known collectively as the house of Israel. Because Jacob (or Israel) had twelve sons, his descendants are known as the twelve tribes of Israel, the tribes of Israel, or Israelites.

Usually the term house of Israel in the Old Testament can be read as though it were worded family of Israel or descendants of Israel, or even as house of Jacob or descendants of Jacob. For example, in Isaiah's writing we see the term house of Israel used four times, while the term house of Jacob is used nine times, both terms clearly referring to the descendants of Jacob.

However, during the Old Testament period of the divided kingdom, the term house of Israel is used occasionally as though it were worded kingdom of Israel—usually used in conjunction with the terms house of Judah or kingdom of Judah. The Lord announces in Jeremiah 5:11 that "the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me," and in Jeremiah 11:10 that "the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers."

In the Book of Mormon, however, the term house of Israel is used consistently to refer to the family or the descendants of Israel (Jacob). The term house of Jacob also appears fifteen times in the Book of Mormon, usually in reference to the descendants of Lehi as a "remnant" of the house of Jacob. The term house of Judah does not appear a single time in the Book of Mormon. This would be consistent with the fact that the period of the divided kingdom had ended in 722 b.c. with the capture of the kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians, 122 years before the opening of the Book of Mormon.

The family designation for the descendants of Judah—Jew—is also used extensively in both the Bible and the Book of Mormon. It first appears as a plural (Jews) in 2 Kings 16:6 and in the Book of Mormon in 1 Nephi 1:2. The words Jew and Jews appear 403 times in the scriptures: 92 times in the Old Testament, 197 times in the New Testament, 89 times in the Book of Mormon, 22 times in the Doctrine and Covenants, and 3 times in the Pearl of Great Price.

The faithful members of Lehi's descendants knew a great deal about the origin and early history of the house of Israel. In discussing the plates of brass obtained from Laban, Nephi notes that "they did contain the five books of Moses, which gave an account of the creation of the world, . . . and also a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah" (1 Nephi 5:11-12).

Evidently by the time of Lehi, the meaning of the word Jew had been expanded to include those who were citizens of the kingdom of Judah, as well as those who were literal descendants of Judah, the fourth son of Jacob.

As Nephi says, "I have charity for the Jew—I say Jew, because I mean them from whence I came" (2 Nephi 33:8). "And the things which shall be written out of the book shall be of great worth unto the children of men, and especially unto our seed, which is a remnant of the house of Israel" (2 Nephi 28:2).

It is my firm conviction that when the Prophet Joseph Smith was martyred on June 27, 1844, he understood more about the destiny of the house of Israel—including its origin, history, and prophesied future—than any person then living upon the earth, with the possible exceptions of translated beings such as John the Beloved, the three Nephite disciples, and other "holy men" of God "that [we] know not of" (D&C 49:8).

The remainder of this chapter will consist primarily of the writings and teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the destiny of the house of Israel as revealed in his (1) visions and visitations of divine persons and messengers, (2) translation of the Book of Mormon, (3) inspired translation of the Bible, (4) revelations on the subject, including those in the Doctrine and Covenants, (5) revealing of truths in the books of Abraham and Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, and (6) other diverse and sundry manners.

For purposes of ready identification, each item has been given its own subhead—but the order in which they are given is not meant to suggest that the events have happened or will happen in the same sequence as listed here:

Israel's Number Foreordained

Joseph Smith knew that the number of the house of Israel had been foreordained from before the foundations of the earth.

God's Special Promises

Joseph Smith knew that God, who cannot and does not lie, has throughout the centuries made special promises to individuals, groups, and nations of people, predicated on their obedience to certain laws and principles. These covenants are binding upon the Lord:

A Covenant People

Joseph Smith knew that God had entered into sacred covenants with our father Abraham and that these promises had been reaffirmed through Isaac and through Jacob and his descendants. Therefore, the people of the house of Israel are a covenant people.

Promised Lands

Joseph Smith knew that God's covenant with ancient Israel, then living in the land of Israel, provided that they would remain in their promised lands so long as they were obedient to their part of the covenant. An example of these promises (given through Moses and Joshua) is found in Deuteronomy 28:1-14:

Israel's Captivity

Joseph Smith knew that when the people of the ancient house of Israel were disobedient to their promises, they were taken captive: the kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians 722 years before the prophesied birth of the Messiah, and the kingdom of Judah by the Babylonians approximately 600 b.c. These dispersions and other calamities (warned of by Moses and Joshua) would come upon them because of their disobedience, as recorded in Deuteronomy 28:15-67:

The Olive Tree

Joseph Smith knew that the house of Israel would be likened to an olive tree, as explained in the allegory of Zenos in the fifth chapter of Jacob, and that many branches of the house of Israel would be scattered throughout the earth, even to the nethermost parts of the vineyard.

Judah's Captivity and Return

Joseph Smith knew that when another major portion of the house of Israel (then known as the kingdom of Judah) was disobedient, those people would be taken into captivity by the Babylonians, but that after a time they would be allowed to return to their promised lands of inheritance in the land of Israel before the Messiah's appearance to them.

"Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised, to go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. And all they that were about them strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with precious things, beside all that was willingly offered" (Ezra 1:1-6; see also 2 Chronicles 36:22-23).

The Scattering to America

Joseph Smith knew that one of the major branches of the house of Israel to be scattered consisted of the descendants of Lehi, Zoram, Ishmael, Zarahemla, and Mulek, who were led to their promised lands of inheritance in the lands of the everlasting hills, which were shaped as the great wings of a bird, even the lands of North America and South America.

The Descendants of Lehi

Joseph Smith knew that the descendants of Lehi in the Book of Mormon were descendants of Jacob (Israel) through the loins of Joseph.

Covenants in the Scriptures

Joseph Smith knew that the scriptures—both the Bible and the Book of Mormon—contained many of the covenants with the house of Israel.

The Law of Moses

Joseph Smith knew that the law of Moses was given to the house of Israel in ancient times to prepare them for the coming of Jesus Christ.

A Purpose of the Book of Mormon

Joseph Smith knew that one of the major purposes for the writing and coming forth of the Book of Mormon was to convince the Gentiles and the house of Israel that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Jehovah, the God of Israel

Joseph Smith knew that the God who made these promises to ancient covenant Israel was Jehovah, who later came to earth as the promised Messiah.

"And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob. I am the Lord God Almighty; the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?" (Exodus 6:3, JST).

Jehovah and Jesus Christ

Joseph Smith knew that at least a portion of the people of the house of Israel anciently knew that Jehovah in the Old Testament was the very same personage who later became known by the name-title of Jesus Christ in the New Testament. Even many years before the physical birth of the Messiah upon the earth, at least favored groups within the house of Israel knew that:

The Rejection of Christ

Despite all these prophecies, Joseph Smith knew that the Jews—a major portion of the house of Israel among whom the Messiah would live—would reject Jesus Christ, and their leaders would agree to his death.

The Crucifixion of Christ

Joseph Smith knew that when the Messiah came to the earth, he would live in the lands of his ancestors among his kindred "friends," but that he would be rejected of them and even be crucified in their midst.

The Resurrected Lord Appears to the Branches of Israel

Joseph Smith knew that after Jesus Christ was resurrected from the dead, he would not only appear to representatives of the Jews in the land of Israel but also to other branches of the house of Israel, including those in the Americas and even to the lost tribes of Israel. The resurrected Jesus Christ spoke to the righteous Lehites in the Americas who survived the destruction associated with his crucifixion:

The Scattering of the Jews after Christ

Joseph Smith knew that, as a result of their rejection of Jesus Christ and subsequent disobedience and rebellion, the descendants of the kingdom of Judah, then known as Jews, would be separated again from the lands of their inheritance and would be sifted like corn among the nations of the earth. This scattering was accomplished by the Romans in the first century following the birth of the Messiah.

Apostasy by the Chosen People

Joseph Smith knew that there would be an apostasy from the covenants of God by the chosen people, followed by a period of darkness known as the Dark Ages, during which there would be a dearth of spiritual truth upon the earth and the heavens would be even as brass.

A Time of Restoration

Joseph Smith knew, for the prophets of the Old Testament and the apostles of the New Testament had so declared, that a time of restitution or restoration would occur, when the iron ceiling of heaven would be shattered and the rock of revelation coming directly from the "Rock of Israel" (2 Samuel 23:3) would again return to the earth.

A Restoration of Covenants

Joseph Smith knew that, as part of this restoration or restitution in the latter days, the covenants of the Lord would once again be made available to the various scattered segments of the house of Israel.

A Portion of Lehi's Descendants Accept the Gospel

Joseph Smith knew that in the last days at least a portion of the descendants of Lehi, known as a remnant of the Jews, would accept the gospel and become part of covenant Israel once again.

The Jews Return to Their Land

Joseph Smith knew that after many generations the portion of the house of Israel then known as the house of Judah (the Jews) would return again the second time to the lands of their inheritance.

Enemies Seek to Destroy the Jews

Joseph Smith knew that at the time of the second return of the Jews to their promised land, major powers and forces on the earth would seek their destruction and try to prevent their return. However, the Lord would preserve them as a people, and would enable them to reclaim their lands.

Israel Will Have a Second Chance to Become God's Covenant People

Joseph Smith knew that, although the Jews had rejected the covenants of the gospel at the first coming of the Messiah, in the last days they would have another chance to become a covenant people of the Lord, together with other branches of the house of Israel.

"Christ, in the days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, and in consequence thereof, they were broken off, and no covenant was made with them at that time. But their unbelief has not rendered the promise of God of none effect: no, for there was another day . . . [when] His people, Israel, should be a willing people;—and He would write His law in their hearts, and print it in their thoughts; their sins and their iniquities He would remember no more.

"Thus after this chosen family had rejected Christ and His proposals, the heralds of salvation said to them, 'Lo, we turn unto the Gentiles;' and the Gentiles received the covenant, and were grafted in from whence the chosen family were broken off: but the Gentiles have not continued in the goodness of God, but have departed from the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, and have broken the covenant in which their fathers were established (See Isaiah xxiv: 5); and have become high-minded, and have not feared; therefore, but few of them will be gathered with the chosen family. . . .

"And now what remains to be done, under circumstances like these? I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people, high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and people, professors of religion and non-professors, in order that they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to a fulness and escape the judgments of God, which are almost ready to burst upon the nations of the earth. Repent of all your sins, and be baptized in water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and receive the ordinance of the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power, that ye may receive the Holy Spirit of God; and this is according to the Holy Scriptures." [^4]

"The time has at last arrived when the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob has set His hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people, . . . and establish that covenant with them, which was promised when their sins should be taken away. See Isaiah xi, Romans xi: 25, 26, and 27, and also Jeremiah xxxi: 31, 32, and 33." [^5]

Joseph Smith Would Be an Instrument in the Restoration

Joseph Smith knew that he would be an instrument in the hands of the Lord in helping to restore ancient and yet new and everlasting covenants, including the ordinances of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

"I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country and shown who they were, and from whence they came." [^6]

Joseph Smith Received Priesthood Keys

Joseph Smith and his associate Oliver Cowdery received from John the Baptist and later from Peter, James, and John the keys of the priesthood necessary to establish the kingdom of God upon the earth and to administer the earlier covenants and ordinances of the gospel.

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (D&C 13).

Joseph Smith Received Keys to Fulfill God's Promises to Israel

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received from Moses, Elias, and Elijah those keys of the priesthood necessary to fulfill the promises of the Lord to the descendants of his ancient covenant people. These appearances were in fulfillment of prophecies in Malachi 4:4-6, 3 Nephi 24 and 25, D&C 133:64, and Joseph Smith—History 1:36-39.

Joseph Smith Exercised Priesthood Keys in Behalf of God's Kingdom

Under the inspiration of the Lord, Joseph Smith exercised these keys in behalf of the kingdom of God upon the earth.

A Mission to the Blood of Israel

In 1837 the first formally organized mission of the Church was established in the British Isles, the exact region into which many of the blood of Israel had been scattered by the Romans. The hearts of the prophets of the dispensation of the fulness of times started to be turned toward the Jews and toward all the descendants of the house of Israel.

"Therefore, . . . seek diligently to turn the hearts of the children to their fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children; And again, the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto the Jews; lest I come and smite the whole earth with a curse, and all flesh be consumed before me" (D&C 98:16-17).

Dedicating the Land of Israel

In 1841 Joseph Smith set apart two apostles, Orson Hyde and John E. Page, to go to the ancient covenant land of Israel and dedicate that land for the return of the Jews.

"Brethren, you are in the pathway to eternal fame, and immortal glory; and inasmuch as you feel interested for the covenant people of the Lord, the God of their fathers shall bless you. Do not be discouraged on account of the greatness of the work; only be humble and faithful. . . . He who scattered Israel has promised to gather them; therefore inasmuch as you are to be instrumental in this great work, He will endow you with power, wisdom, might and intelligence, and every qualification necessary; while your minds will expand wider and wider, until you can circumscribe the earth and the heavens, reach forth into eternity, and contemplate the mighty acts of Jehovah in all their variety and glory." [^8]

Temple Work Begins

By 1846 the temple in Nauvoo, Illinois, had been completed to a point where sacred sections could be dedicated wherein sacred covenants could be administered. Truly, the blood of Israel started to be gathered again into covenant Israel. The hearts of the fathers turned toward the children, and the hearts of the children toward the fathers. Joseph Smith said:

"The Bible says, 'I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to the fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse' (Malachi 4:4-6).

"Now, the word turn here should be translated bind, or seal. But what is the object of this important mission? or how is it to be fulfilled? The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion." [^10]

The Nation of Israel Established

By 1948 an independent nation called Israel had been established under the auspices of the United Nations (which included membership of most of the major countries on the earth), and the blood of a special section of the house of Israel returned with fervor to the lands of ancient covenant Israel.

The Truths of the House of Israel "As They Will Be"

What of the future?

Most of the concepts discussed to this point have been concerned with the origin and history of the house of Israel, but what of the prophesied destiny of the house of Israel? The things I list now will be just as certain and definite as the items listed as part of the present and historical past. As the Lord said through Isaiah, "Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me, Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure" (Isaiah 46:9-10).

Nations Will War against Judah

The descendants of Judah of the house of Israel will continue to return to their lands of inheritance. This endeavor will continue to so excite and concern other nations that they will fight against Judah:

Missionary and Temple Work around the Earth

The descendants of Ephraim (and of Joseph) will continue to carry the "good news" of the gospel throughout the earth, and will build holy houses to the Lord where conditions and need merit.

"The Book of Mormon has made known who Israel is, upon this continent." [^11]

The Gospel Taken to Israel

Eventually—and this is clearly in the future—the message of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ will be taken to the blood of the house of Israel living in the land of Israel.

The Two Prophets in Jerusalem

As part of this preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the blood of Israel in Judah, two prophets will be sent to Jerusalem.

"A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers" (D&C 77:15).

A Temple in Jerusalem

As part of the preparation and sanctifying of the land, a temple will be built in Jerusalem.

"It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc. One of the ordinances of the house of the Lord is baptism for the dead. God decreed before the foundation of the world that that ordinance should be administered in a font prepared for that purpose in the house of the Lord." [^15]

Water Will Flow from the Temple

Water will issue forth from under the temple (house of the Lord) and flow into the Dead Sea; its waters will be healed and will contain "the fish of the great sea."

"Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side. And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles.

"Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the waters were to the loins. Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over.

"And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river. Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.

"Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed. And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh.

"And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many. But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt.

"And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine" (Ezekiel 47:1-12).

A King Named David

A leader named David, a descendant of the loins of ancient David, will become a king, a shepherd, and a prince in Israel. This leader is mentioned in Jeremiah 23:38; 30:3-9; Ezekiel 34:23-24, 28; 37:24-25; Isaiah 55:3-4; Hosea 3:4-5; Zechariah 3:8-9; 6:11-13.

The Messiah Will Appear to Those in Israel

And then, as a confirming sign to the blood of Israel living in the land of Israel, their Messiah will appear to them, declaring that he is indeed the Messiah, even Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and a "nation" (the descendants of the house of Israel then living in Israel) will "be born at once" (converted to the Lord and to his gospel).

Christ Will Lead the Armies of Israel

Jesus Christ will then lead the armies of Israel to victory over the combined armies of the nations of the earth.

The Two World Capitals

Then comes the completion of the destiny of the house of Israel leading up to the great millennial reign of Jesus Christ upon the earth as King of kings and Lord of lords. In preparation for this great day, two world capitals must be prepared as prophesied—one in "Zion" and one in Jerusalem.

"Now we learn from the Book of Mormon the very identical continent and spot of land upon which the New Jerusalem is to stand, and it must be caught up according to the vision of John upon the isle of Patmos.

" . . . Now many will feel disposed to say, that this New Jerusalem spoken of, is the Jerusalem that was built by the Jews on the eastern continent. But you will see, from Revelations xxi: 2, there was a New Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, adorned as a bride for her husband; that after this, the Revelator was caught away in the Spirit, to a great and high mountain, and saw the great and holy city descending out of heaven from God. Now there are two cities spoken of here. . . . [T]here is a New Jerusalem to be established on this continent, and also Jerusalem shall be rebuilt on the eastern continent." [^21]

The Messiah and His Apostles Will Judge Israel

Eventually the resurrected Messiah and his apostles will judge "the whole house of Israel" (D&C 29:12).

Summary

Reflecting upon these teachings, President Wilford Woodruff stated:

"The Lord has decreed that the Jews should be gathered from all the Gentile nations where they have been driven, into their own land, in fulfillment of the words of Moses their law-giver. And this is the will of your great Elohim, O house of Judah, and whenever you shall be called upon to perform this work, the God of Israel will help you. You have a great future and destiny before you and you cannot avoid fulfilling it; you are the royal chosen seed, and the God of your father's house has kept you distinct as a nation. . . . You may not wait until you believe on Jesus of Nazareth, but when you meet with Shiloh your king, you will know him; your destiny is marked out, you cannot avoid it. . . . [O house of Judah,] it is true that after you return and gather your nation home, and rebuild your City and Temple, that the Gentiles may gather together their armies to go against you to battle, to take you a prey and to take you as a spoil, which they will do, for the words of your prophets must be fulfilled; but when this affliction comes, the living God, that led Moses through the wilderness, will deliver you, and your Shiloh will come and stand in your midst and will fight your battles; and you will know him, and the afflictions of the Jews will be at an end, while the destruction of the Gentiles will be so great that it will take the whole house of Israel who are gathered about Jerusalem, seven months to bury the dead of their enemies, and the weapons of war will last them seven years for fuel, so that they need not go to any forest for wood. These are tremendous sayings—who can bear them? Nevertheless they are true, and will be fulfilled, according to the sayings of Ezekiel, Zechariah, and other prophets. Though the heavens and the earth pass away, not one jot or tittle will fall unfulfilled."2 [^23]

Feeling the spirit of this great work of the last days, the prophet Joseph Smith exclaimed: "The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day glory, 'the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God will gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that are upon the earth,' 'even in one,' when the Saints of God will be gathered in one from every nation, and kindred, and people, and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one, the wicked will also be gathered together to be destroyed, as spoken of by the prophets; the Spirit of God will also dwell with His people, and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations, and all things whether in heaven or on earth will be in one, even in Christ. The heavenly Priesthood will unite with the earthly, to bring about those great purposes; and whilst we are thus united in the one common cause, to roll forth the kingdom of God, the heavenly Priesthood are not idle spectators, the Spirit of God will be showered down from above, and it will dwell in our midst. The blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have manifested; the all but insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the glory and blessing which they will realize; a work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past; that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets; a work that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the salvation of the human family." [^24]

"Brethren," the Prophet added a short time later, "shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory!" (D&C 128:22).

That we may do our small part in the cause of teaching and advancing this great work is the prayer that I would ask for each of us.

Notes

From Nurturing Faith through the Book of Mormon: The 24th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995), 25-88.

---
Notas:
[^1] "And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:26). "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10). "And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do; Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?" (Genesis 18:17-18). "The Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth"(v. 1). "Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day long: and there shall be no might in thine hand. The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed. . . . The Lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone. And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the Lord shall lead thee. . . . Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but . . . they shall go into captivity. . . . And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the Lord thy God. . . . And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other. . . . And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind: And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life: In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see" (vv. 32-33, 36-37, 41, 62, 64-67). "Yea, even my father spake . . . concerning the house of Israel, that they should be compared like unto an olive-tree, whose branches should be broken off and should be scattered upon all the face of the earth" (1 Nephi 10:12). "Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth hath the Lord God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people? The Lord his God be with him, and let him go up" (2 Chronicles 36:22-23; see also Ezra 1:1-6). "The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren" (Genesis 49:26). "My father, Lehi, . . . found upon the plates of brass a genealogy of his fathers; wherefore he knew that he was a descendant of Joseph; yea, even that Joseph who was the son of Jacob, who was sold into Egypt" (1 Nephi 5:14). "Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions" (Ezekiel 37:16). "Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him" (2 Nephi 11:4). On the title page of the Book of Mormon we read: "It is an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites—Written to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile—Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation— . . . Which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." "And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them" (Exodus 6:3). The angel Gabriel would announce the coming birth of the Messiah to a virgin living in Nazareth who was the foreordained mother of the Son of God, even a virgin who was fairer than any other virgin. Nephi wrote in his vision, "I beheld the city of Nazareth; and in the city of Nazareth I beheld a virgin . . . most beautiful and fair above all other virgins." And the angel declared to Nephi, "The virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh" (1 Nephi 11:13, 15, 18). As Jacob (the son of Lehi) prophesied hundreds of years before the birth of the Messiah, the Jews would be a "stiffnecked people" who would despise "the words of plainness" and would seek "for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark," they would "reject the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation" (Jacob 4:14-15). "When the day cometh that the Only Begotten of the Father, yea, even the Father of heaven and of earth, shall manifest himself unto them in the flesh, behold, they will reject him, because of their iniquities, and the hardness of their hearts, and the stiffness of their necks" (2 Nephi 25:12). "And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me" (3 Nephi 15:21, 24). "For behold, the Lord has shown me that those who were at Jerusalem, from whence we came, have been slain and carried away captive" (2 Nephi 6:8). "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it" (Amos 8:11-12). "And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:20-21). "Wherefore, our father hath not spoken of our seed alone, but also of all the house of Israel, pointing to the covenant which should be fulfilled in the latter days; which covenant the Lord made to our father Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed" (1 Nephi 15:18). "Wherefore, Joseph truly saw our day. And he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel; not the Messiah, but a branch which was to be broken off, nevertheless, to be remembered in the covenants of the Lord that the Messiah should be made manifest unto them in the latter days, in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light—yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom" (2 Nephi 3:5). "And after they have been scattered, and the Lord God hath scourged them by other nations for the space of many generations, yea, even down from generation to generation until they shall be persuaded to believe in Christ, the Son of God, and the atonement, which is infinite for all mankind—and when that day shall come that they shall believe in Christ, and worship the Father in his name, with pure hearts and clean hands, and look not forward any more for another Messiah, then, at that time, the day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should believe these things" (2 Nephi 25:16). "The Messiah will set himself again the second time to recover them; wherefore, he will manifest himself unto them in power and great glory, unto the destruction of their enemies" (2 Nephi 6:14). "I spake unto them concerning the restoration of the Jews in the latter days. And I did rehearse unto them the words of Isaiah, who spake concerning the restoration of the Jews, or of the house of Israel" (1 Nephi 15:19-20). "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people" (Hebrews 8:8-10). "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse" (Malachi 4:5-6). "Daniel answered in the presence of the king, . . . There is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these; As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass. . . . Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth" (Daniel 2:27-29, 34-35). "I am happy in being informed by your letter that your mission swells 'larger and larger,'" the Prophet wrote concerning the importance of their mission. "It is a great and important mission, and one that is worthy those intelligences who surround the throne of Jehovah to be engaged in. Although it appears great at present, yet you have but just begun to realize the greatness, the extent and glory of the same. If there is anything calculated to interest the mind of the Saints, to awaken in them the finest sensibilities, and arouse them to enterprise and exertion, surely it is the great and precious promises made by our heavenly Father to the children of Abraham; and those engaged in seeking the outcasts of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah, cannot fail to enjoy the Spirit of the Lord and have the choicest blessings of heaven rest upon them in copious effusions. "And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever" (2 Nephi 29:14). "Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city" (Zechariah 14:1-2). "Send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations, first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews" (D&C 133:8). We read these prophetic words of the resurrected Jesus Christ himself: "And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father. And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them; And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name. Then shall their watchmen lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye. Then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance. Then shall they break forth into joy—Sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Father hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. The Father hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of the Father; and the Father and I are one" (3 Nephi 20:29-35). "For it [the court which is without the temple] is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. . . . These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth. And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them" (Revelation 11:2-3, 6-12). "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country; And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness. Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built" (Zechariah 8:7-9). "Afterward he [the Lord] brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar. "Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land: And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all: Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever" (Ezekiel 37:21-25). "Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children" (Isaiah 66:8). "Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. . . . And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one" (Zechariah 14:3, 9). "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2:2-3). "For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written" (2 Nephi 29:11). James Strong, The Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible (Nashville: Abingdon, 1894).
[^2] "When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel" (Deuteronomy 32:8). "The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever" (Isaiah 40:8). "For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth" (Deuteronomy 7:6). "Blessed shalt thou be in the city, . . . and in the field" (v. 3). "Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and . . . in the field" (v. 16). "For behold, thus saith the Lord, I will liken thee, O house of Israel, like unto a tame olive-tree, which a man took and nourished in his vineyard; and it grew, and waxed old, and began to decay" (Jacob 5:3). "Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem. And whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the house of God that is in Jerusalem. "Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia: . . . All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye" (Isaiah 18:1, 3). "Behold, I say unto you, that the house of Israel was compared unto an olive-tree, by the Spirit of the Lord which was in our father; and behold are we not broken off from the house of Israel, and are we not a branch of the house of Israel?" (1 Nephi 15:12) "For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved" (1 Nephi 6:4). "And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled. For, for this end was the law given; wherefore the law hath become dead unto us, and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith; yet we keep the law because of the commandments. And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins" (2 Nephi 25:24-26). "And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me" (2 Nephi 33:10). "That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high over all the earth" (Psalm 83:18). The name of his mother would be Mary (Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10). Jacob also revealed that the Messiah would be born among the Jews, since it was needful that his life should be taken and since no other people would take the life of their Creator: "It must needs be expedient that Christ—for in the last night the angel spake unto me that this should be his name—should come among the Jews, among those who are the more wicked part of the world; and they shall crucify him—for thus it behooveth our God, and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God" (2 Nephi 10:3). "Nevertheless, the Lord has shown unto me that they should return again. And he also has shown unto me that the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, should manifest himself unto them in the flesh; and after he should manifest himself they should scourge him and crucify him, according to the words of the angel who spake it unto me" (2 Nephi 6:9). "And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep, which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem, neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been to minister. For they of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them. But I have received a commandment of the Father that I shall go unto them, and that they shall hear my voice, and shall be numbered among my sheep, that there may be one fold and one shepherd; therefore I go to show myself unto them" (3 Nephi 16:1-3). "But because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified. Wherefore, because of their iniquities, destructions, famines, pestilences, and bloodshed shall come upon them; and they who shall not be destroyed shall be scattered among all nations" (2 Nephi 10:5-6). "Thus saith the Lord . . . Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God" (Micah 3:5-7). "Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him" (Ephesians 1:9-10). "Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel. Wherefore, he will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel" (1 Nephi 22:11-12). "And behold how great the covenants of the Lord, and how great his condescensions unto the children of men; and because of his greatness, and his grace and mercy, he has promised unto us that our seed shall not utterly be destroyed, according to the flesh, but that he would preserve them; and in future generations they shall become a righteous branch unto the house of Israel" (2 Nephi 9:53). "Yea, then will he remember the isles of the sea; yea, and all the people who are of the house of Israel, will I gather in, saith the Lord, according to the words of the prophet Zenos, from the four quarters of the earth" (1 Nephi 19:16). "And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord. And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed" (1 Nephi 22:14). "The time has at last arrived," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "when the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has set His hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people, . . . and establish that covenant with them, which was promised when their sins should be taken away. See Isaiah xi, Romans xi: 25, 26, and 27, and also Jeremiah xxxi: 31, 32, and 33. This covenant has never been established with the house of Israel, nor with the house of Judah, for it requires two parties to make a covenant, and those two parties must be agreed, or no covenant can be made. "For thus saith the Lord God: Him [Joseph Smith] have I inspired to move the cause of Zion in mighty power for good, and his diligence I know, and his prayers I have heard. Yea, his weeping for Zion I have seen, and I will cause that he shall mourn for her no longer; for his days of rejoicing are come unto the remission of his sins, and the manifestations of my blessings upon his works" (D&C 21:7-8). "Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming" (D&C 2:1-3). "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever" (Daniel 2:44). "[I] dedicate and consecrate this land unto Thee, for the gathering together of Judah's scattered remnants, according to the predictions of the Holy Prophets," Orson Hyde said in his dedicatory prayer. " . . . Incline them to gather in upon this land according to Thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eyes." [^9] "And it shall come to pass that the Jews which are scattered also shall begin to believe in Christ; and they shall begin to gather in upon the face of the land; and as many as shall believe in Christ shall also become a delightsome people. And it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall commence his work among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, to bring about the restoration of his people upon the earth" (2 Nephi 30:7-8). "And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth. And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound" (D&C 45:26-27). "And if thou do this, I have prepared thee for a greater work. Thou shalt preach the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth in these last days, the covenant which I have sent forth to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel" (D&C 39:11). "Now these things are written unto the remnant of the house of Jacob; and they are written after this manner, because it is known of God that wickedness will not bring them forth unto them; and they are to be hid up unto the Lord that they may come forth in his own due time. And this is the commandment which I have received; and behold, they shall come forth according to the commandment of the Lord, when he shall see fit, in his wisdom. And behold, they [the writings in the Book of Mormon] shall go unto the unbelieving of the Jews; and for this intent shall they go—that they may be persuaded that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; that the Father may bring about, through his most Beloved, his great and eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of Israel, to the land of their inheritance, which the Lord their God hath given them, unto the fulfilling of his covenant" (Mormon 5:12-14). "Q. What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of Revelation? "For it is ordained that in Zion, and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptisms for your dead. And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?" (D&C 124:36-37). Joseph Smith Jr.: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance." [^16] Joseph Smith Jr.: "The throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." [^17] "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn" (Zechariah 12:10). Wilford Woodruff: "The Jews have got to gather to their own land in unbelief. . . . [A]nd when they have done this and rebuilt their city, the Gentiles, in fulfillment of the words of Ezekiel, Jeremiah and other prophets, will go up against Jerusalem to battle and to take a spoil and a prey; and then when they have taken one-half of Jerusalem captive and distressed the Jews for the last time on the earth, their Great Deliverer, Shiloh, will come." [^19] "Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him. For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion. And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people" (D&C 133:19-21). "I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed" (Daniel 7:13-14). An Exhaustive Concordance of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price, comp. Gary R. Shapiro (Salt Lake City: Hawkes Publishing, 1977), iv.
[^3] "Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle" (v. 4). "Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body [and] land [and] flocks" (v. 18). "Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the captivity, of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city" (Ezra 2:1). "And now, the words which I shall read are they which Isaiah spake concerning all the house of Israel; wherefore, they may be likened unto you, for ye are of the house of Israel. And there are many things which have been spoken by Isaiah which may be likened unto you, because ye are of the house of Israel" (2 Nephi 6:5). "And he said: Behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. And I, Nephi, beheld it; and he said unto me: The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; and it also containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets; and it is a record like unto the engravings which are upon the plates of brass, save there are not so many; nevertheless, they contain the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel" (1 Nephi 13:23). "Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation" (Isaiah 12:2). He would be born in Bethlehem in the inheritance of Judah (Micah 5:2). "And lo, he cometh unto his own, that salvation might come unto the children of men even through faith on his name; and even after all this they shall consider him a man, and say that he hath a devil, and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him" (Mosiah 3:9). "But now I go unto the Father, and also to show myself unto the lost tribes of Israel, for they are not lost unto the Father, for he knoweth whither he hath taken them" (3 Nephi 17:4). "And behold it shall come to pass that after the Messiah hath risen from the dead, and hath manifested himself unto his people, unto as many as will believe on his name, behold, Jerusalem shall be destroyed again; for wo unto them that fight against God and the people of his church. Wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered among all nations; yea, and also Babylon shall be destroyed; wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered by other nations" (2 Nephi 25:14-15). "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables" (2 Timothy 4:3-4). "Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid" (Isaiah 29:13-14). "But behold, there shall be many—at that day when I shall proceed to do a marvelous work among them, that I may remember my covenants which I have made unto the children of men, that I may set my hand again the second time to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel; And also, that I may remember the promises which I have made unto thee, Nephi, and also unto thy father, that I would remember your seed; and that the words of your seed should proceed forth out of my mouth unto your seed; and my words shall hiss forth unto the ends of the earth, for a standard unto my people, which are of the house of Israel" (2 Nephi 29:1-2). "And after the house of Israel should be scattered they should be gathered together again; or, in fine, after the Gentiles had received the fulness of the Gospel, the natural branches of the olive-tree, or the remnants of the house of Israel, should be grafted in, or come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, their Lord and their Redeemer" (1 Nephi 10:14). "And now, my beloved brethren, I have read these things [Isaiah 50-52:2] that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel—That he has spoken unto the Jews by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise" (2 Nephi 9:1-2). "For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land; and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. And the people shall take them and bring them to their place; yea, from far unto the ends of the earth; and they shall return to their lands of promise. And the house of Israel shall possess them . . . and they shall take them captives unto whom they were captives; and they shall rule over their oppressors" (2 Nephi 24:1-2; see also Isaiah 14:1-2). "But behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance" (2 Nephi 10:7). "On the evening of the 21st of September, a.d. 1823, while I was praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of Scripture," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign. I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation. "After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed. After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors" (D&C 110:11-16). "And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all" (Ezekiel 37:22). Wilford Woodruff: "O house of Judah, . . . it is true that after you return and gather your nation home, and rebuild your City and Temple, that the Gentiles may gather together their armies to go against you to battle, to take you a prey and to take you as a spoil, which they will do, for the words of your prophets must be fulfilled."11 "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come" (Matthew 24:14). "Come unto me, O ye house of Israel, and it shall be made manifest unto you how great things the Father hath laid up for you, from the foundation of the world; and it hath not come unto you, because of unbelief. Behold, when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation of the world from you—yea, when ye shall call upon the Father in my name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye know that the Father hath remembered the covenant which he made unto your fathers, O house of Israel" (Ether 4:14-15). LeGrand Richards: "No doubt these prophets will be called and ordained and sent by the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, for the Lord's house is a house of order, and true prophets are never self sent—they must be called and sent of God." [^13] Joseph Smith Jr.: "What was the object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world? The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose." [^14] Said Elder Orson Hyde in his dedicatory prayer: "Let them know that it is Thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom unto Israel—raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute her people a distinct nation and government, with David Thy servant, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king." [^18] "And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends" (Zechariah 13:6). "And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem" (3 Nephi 21:23). An Exhaustive Concordance of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price, iii, iv.
[^4] "Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store" (v. 5). "Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store" (v. 17). "And behold, they shall go unto the unbelieving of the Jews; and for this intent shall they go—that they may be persuaded that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; that the Father may bring about, through his most Beloved, his great and eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of Israel, to the land of their inheritance, which the Lord their God hath given them, unto the fulfilling of his covenant" (Mormon 5:14). "Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength" (Isaiah 26:4). A new star would announce his birth (Helaman 14:5; 3 Nephi 1:21). "For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth" (Amos 9:9). "And as surely as the Lord liveth, will he gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth. And as he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with the house of Jacob be fulfilled in his own due time, unto the restoring all the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenanted with them. And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen" (3 Nephi 5:24-26). "And at that day shall the remnant of our seed know that they are of the house of Israel, and that they are the covenant people of the Lord; and then shall they know and come to the knowledge of their forefathers, and also to the knowledge of the gospel of their Redeemer, which was ministered unto their fathers by him; wherefore, they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer and the very points of his doctrine, that they may know how to come unto him and be saved. . . . Yea; they shall be remembered again among the house of Israel; they shall be grafted in, being a natural branch of the olive-tree, into the true olive-tree" (1 Nephi 15:14, 16). "But behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they [descendants of those at Jerusalem at the time of the crucifixion] shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance. And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance" (2 Nephi 10:7-8). "For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors" (Isaiah 14:1-2; see also 2 Nephi 24:1-2). "And how merciful is our God unto us, for he remembereth the house of Israel, both roots and branches; and he stretches forth his hands unto them all the day long; and they are a stiffnecked and a gainsaying people; but as many as will not harden their hearts shall be saved in the kingdom of God" (Jacob 6:4). "And there shall rise up one mighty among them, who shall do much good, both in word and in deed, being an instrument in the hands of God, with exceeding faith, to work mighty wonders, and do that thing which is great in the sight of God, unto the bringing to pass much restoration unto the house of Israel, and unto the seed of thy brethren" (2 Nephi 3:24). "Wherefore, I must bring forth the fulness of my gospel from the Gentiles unto the house of Israel" (D&C 14:10). Wilford Woodruff: "When the Gentiles reject the Gospel it will be taken from them, and go to the house of Israel, to that long suffering people that are now scattered abroad through all the nations upon the earth, and they will re-build Jerusalem their ancient city, and make it more glorious than at the beginning, and they will have a leader in Israel with them, a man that is full of the power of God and the gift of the Holy Ghost; but they are held now from this work, only because the fulness of the Gentiles has not yet come in." [^12] Joseph Smith Jr.: "It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. Jesus did everything to gather the people, and they would not be gathered, and He therefore poured out curses upon them. Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles. "And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king" (D&C 45:51-53). "And he spake also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come—after it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of Israel" (Ether 13:5). History of the Church, 1:313-14.
[^5] "Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and . . . goest out" (v. 6). "Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and . . . goest out" (v. 19). The Messiah would be born six hundred years after the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah. Nephi wrote that his father left Jerusalem "in the . . . first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah" (1 Nephi 1:4), and that "even six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews—even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world. . . . or this Redeemer of the world" (1 Nephi 10:4-5). In 2 Nephi 25:19 he adds the confirming witness: "For according to the words of the prophets, the Messiah cometh in six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem; and according to the words of the prophets, and also the word of the angel of God, his name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God." Nephi also testified that "the Son of God was the Messiah who should come" (1 Nephi 10:17). "And again: Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Israel. Listen, O isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far" (1 Nephi 21:1; compare Isaiah 49:1). "For behold, the Lord God has led away from time to time from the house of Israel, according to his will and pleasure. And now behold, the Lord remembereth all them who have been broken off, wherefore he remembereth us also" (2 Nephi 10:22). "In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers" (Jeremiah 3:18). "Behold, they shall surely gather together against thee, not by me; whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. . . . No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper" (3 Nephi 22:15, 17). "And then will I gather them in from the four quarters of the earth; and then will I fulfill the covenant which the Father hath made unto all the people of the house of Israel" (3 Nephi 16:5). "It was decreed in the councils of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that [Joseph Smith] should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God," said President Brigham Young. "The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. [Joseph Smith] was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation." [^7] "And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy. Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows. And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain, shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever" (D&C 133:33-35). "And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel" (Ether 13:10). Ibid., 1:313.
[^6] "The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways" (v. 7). "The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them" (v. 25). The Messiah would come forth out of Egypt (Hosea 11:1) to dwell in the inheritance lands of Zebulon and Naphtali (Isaiah 9:1-2), where those who were sitting in darkness would see a great light. "Wherefore, the things of which I have read are things pertaining to things both temporal and spiritual; for it appears that the house of Israel, sooner or later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations" (1 Nephi 22:3). "For it is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel" (3 Nephi 21:4). "Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; But, The Lord liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land" (Jeremiah 23:7-8). "Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem. And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it. . . . In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem. The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah. In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem" (Zechariah 12:2-3, 6-9). "And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things—it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel" (3 Nephi 21:7). Joseph Smith Jr.: "In speaking of the gathering, we mean to be understood as speaking of it according to scripture, the gathering of the elect of the Lord out of every nation on earth, and bringing them to the place of the Lord of Hosts, when the city of righteousness shall be built, and where the people shall be of one heart and one mind, . . . where even upon the bells of the horses shall be written 'Holiness to the Lord.' Joseph Smith Jr.: "The Book of Mormon is a record of the forefathers of our western tribes of Indians; . . . [who] are descendents from that Joseph who was sold into Egypt. . . . [T]he land of America is a promised land unto them, and unto it all the tribes of Israel will come, with as many of the Gentiles as shall comply with the requisitions of the new covenant. . . . The city of Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will be built upon the land of America. . . . But Judah shall obtain deliverance at Jerusalem. . . . These are testimonies that the Good Shepherd will put forth His own sheep, and lead them out from all nations where they have been scattered in a cloudy and dark day, to Zion, and to Jerusalem." [^20] Ibid., 4:536-37.
[^8] "The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land, . . . and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not borrow" (v. 12). "The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish. And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron. The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed" (vv. 22-24). His name-titles would include "the Christ" (Matthew 16:16), the "Messiah" (1 Nephi 10:4), "Immanuel" (Isaiah 7:14), "the Son of the Highest" (Luke 1:32), "the Son of Man" (Moses 6:57), "the Son of David" (Matthew 1:1), "the Only Begotten of the Father . . . in the flesh" (2 Nephi 25:12), "the Lamb of God . . . the Son of the Eternal Father" (1 Nephi 11:21), "the messenger of the covenant" (Malachi 3:1), the "Savior" and "Redeemer" (Mormon 3:14; Isaiah 41:14), and "Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace" (Isaiah 9:6). "He [Moroni] quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled" (Joseph Smith—History 1:40). "And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled" (Moroni 10:31). Joseph Fielding Smith: "Jerusalem of old, after the Jews have been cleansed and sanctified from all their sin, shall become a holy city where the Lord shall dwell and from whence he shall send forth his word unto all people. Likewise, on this continent, the city of Zion, New Jerusalem—shall be built, and from it the law of God shall also go forth [D&C 45:66-67; 84:2]. There will be no conflict, for each city shall be headquarters for the Redeemer of the world, and from each he shall send forth his proclamations as occasion may require. Jerusalem shall be the gathering place of Judah and his fellows of the house of Israel, and Zion shall be the gathering place of Ephraim and his fellows, upon whose heads shall be conferred 'the richer blessings'" (see D&C 133:34). [^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 163.
[^10] "And thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I command thee this day, to the right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them" (v. 14). "The Lord shall bring thee . . . unto a nation . . . and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone" (v. 36). "And the Lord shall scatter thee . . . and there thou shalt serve other gods, . . . even wood and stone" (v. 64). "And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded" (Ezekiel 36:10). "Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord God" (Ezekiel 34:30). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 330.
[^11] "And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee. And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again" (Zechariah 2:11-12). "Trusting in that God who has said that these things are hid from the wise and prudent and revealed unto babes," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "I step forth into the field to tell you what the Lord is doing, and what you must do. . . . Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), 509.
[^15] History of the Church, 5:423.
[^21] History of the Church, 1:315.
[^23] Joseph Fielding Smith, "Zion and Jerusalem," Improvement Era, 22 (July 1919): 815-16.
[^24] Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 509-10; emphasis added.
