When my wife was pregnant with our third child, she was diagnosed with a condition that made it difficult for her to walk. This and other complications put her on bed rest for most of her pregnancy.

The birth was challenging, and she spent eight days in the hospital. Even after she returned home, her condition persisted. Doctors soon discovered more problems. Our family had to adjust and find our new normal.

Consequently, I took most of the night-shift hours with our newborn. I was working full time, and it was a challenge to be awakened continually during the night. To keep from getting frustrated, I started reading the histories of my pioneer ancestors while I was awake. I had some familiarity with them, but as I read stories of my great-grandparents and those before them, I was surprised how relatable their lives became.

As I discovered more about my family, I found their faith to be inspiring. The joy I felt was almost instant. Staying up no longer felt like a burden. In fact, I had to force myself to get my sleep when our daughter had settled.

I developed a deep appreciation for those who came before me. My heart had truly turned to my fathers (see Doctrine and Covenants 110:14–15; Malachi 4:6). I could see God’s guiding hand in their lives, and I could feel their love for Him.

My perspective on life evolved as I saw a bigger picture than I had before. As I read about the difficult circumstances my ancestors endured, their perseverance comforted me in my own situation.

Many times since then I have felt the influence of those who came before me in personal ways that have inspired me. Experiencing such a profound impact, I have found ways to find, compile, and share more history with my family so they could experience the same blessings.

My desire to go to the temple has increased. I feel a need to honor my ancestors’ faithful legacy. I want to give them the opportunity to make covenants with our Savior. As I have taken the names of these kindred dead to the temple, my covenant relationship with the Savior has been strengthened, and I have felt His refining influence in my life.
