Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

AMONG THE GREATS

Noah, who built the ark, was one of God's greatest servants, chosen before he was born as were others of the prophets. He was no eccentric, as many have supposed. Neither was he a mythical figure created only in legend. Noah was real. The flood was real. And so was the ark, as were the various species of life saved in the ark. It was all factual, fully documented in scripture, and was the doing of the Almighty.

Let no one downgrade the life and mission of this great prophet. Noah was so near perfect in his day that he literally walked and talked with God.

This telestial planet of ours was destined to pass through three great crises. Two were related to the Savior: one to his second coming, the other to the time when the earth will be celestialized. But the third—which was first in order of events—was the flood in which Noah was the central figure. His choice for this strategic position is itself a measure of the greatness of this man and of the confidence placed in him by the Almighty.

Noah cried repentance to a wicked world, warning all men that they must change their ways or die in a deluge. They paid no heed. The prophecy was fulfilled, the ark was built, the flood came, and the earth was cleansed of its filth. After the waters receded, the world was made ready for a new generation of human beings to be propagated through Noah and his sons.

Few men in any age were as great as Noah. In many respects he was like Adam, the first man. Both had served as ministering angels in the presence of God even after their mortal experience. Adam was Michael, the archangel, but Noah was Gabriel, one of those nearest to God. Of all the hosts of heaven, he was chosen to open the Christian era by announcing to Mary that she would become the mother of the Savior, Jesus Christ. He even designated the name by which the Redeemer should be known here on earth, saying He would be the Son of God.

The Prophet Joseph Smith properly identified Adam as Michael and Noah as Gabriel. It was revealed to him that Adam stands next to the Savior in the priesthood line, and that Noah stands next to Adam, placing him in third position from the Lord. (History of the Church 3:386.)

What a mighty figure Noah—Gabriel—must have been in his premortal life! What a prophet in mortality!

We all had a premortal life, living as spirits in the presence of God, our Eternal Father. As the Apostle Paul taught on Mars Hill, we are the offspring of God, His spirit children, and as Jesus taught, God is our Father. Being His children, we lived with Him before the earth was made. This planet was created to provide a home for us while we are in this mortal life, which we call our second estate. If we are successful here, the Lord has promised that we shall return to His presence and literally become like Him in eternity. Such is our potential destiny.

Michael, the chief of the angels, was chosen to begin the human race. Only a tried and trusted personage would be given such a responsibility. The task of sending all mankind to a life on earth required a correct beginning. Nothing less would do. The selection of our ultimate progenitor, therefore, was all important. So Michael was assigned. As the archangel, he crushed the rebellion of Lucifer, and while leading the armies of heaven, he drove Satan and his followers from the presence of our Heavenly Father.

Our Prophets have also told us that Michael assisted in the creation of this earth. It was therefore most fitting that he should be selected to serve as the first man and that we should become his posterity.

A task not unlike that assigned to Adam was given to Gabriel, who became Noah in mortality. Through His foreknowledge, the Lord knew the path that many of His children would follow on earth. He knew, too, which of the great premortal spirits would serve as his prophets to stabilize matters, teach His truth, and warn the wayward.

At critical periods in world history the Lord has always sent chosen servants with specific missions. These have included such men as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph of Egypt, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Jeremiah, Isaiah, Lehi, Nephi, Alma, and others of His great ones. Joseph Smith was chosen in this same manner to become God's prophet for the restoration of the gospel. There is nothing haphazard about our coming to earth. A spirit of great stature was required to begin the race, and the Lord provided him in the person of Michael, who became Adam.

In his foreknowledge, God knew that a second such individual would also be required, for he foresaw that most of Adam's children would reject the gospel and rebel as Satan would tell them, "Believe it not." Thus they would become carnal and sensual in those early years of the earth's history. The Lord knew that their wickedness would pollute the earth, and yet this same earth was intended as a home for the rest of God's children. Must they be born into a world of corruption?

The Savior had been appointed as our Redeemer in the primeval council in heaven. (See Moses 4:1-4; Abr. 3:27-28.) He, too, must be born here to accomplish His great atonement.

So the earth could not be utterly destroyed in being rid of its wicked inhabitants. It had only to be cleansed so that a righteous group could begin life here anew. The Lord decreed that his cleansing would be by water, a worldwide deluge. Therefore, from among his premortal spirit children, God chose another great individual—His third in line, Gabriel—to resume the propagation of mankind following the flood.

Such a one as Gabriel was needed because in mortality he would be more than a progenitor. He would be a champion of righteousness, a mighty prophet, a bulwark against the wickedness that would precede the flood. And he would be the prototype for the rest of humanity still awaiting birth after the cleansing of the earth by water.

Thus Gabriel was chosen to become Noah, a preacher of righteousness, the builder of the ark, the progenitor of the new beginning of mankind.
