Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

GABRIEL'S MINISTRY

The angel Gabriel is spoken of in both Old and New Testaments of the Bible. To ancient prophets he was a firm reality, for he visited them. Certainly he was an important figure in the greatest event that ever happened, the mission of Christ.

It was he who opened the Christian era by heralding the forthcoming birth of the Savior of the World! In addition, he announced the rise of John the Baptist, who would prepare the way of the Lord. Centuries earlier he had visited the prophet Daniel and, as part of that miraculous event, had spoken of the Messiah, who was the Savior, Jesus Christ, the Son of God. (Dan. 8:16-27; 9:16) He declared that Jerusalem would yet be built up to the name of the Messiah. He also assisted in the interpretation of the vision of Belshazzar.

Jews, Christians, and Arabs alike believe in the visitations of Gabriel. All Bible translations describe them and endorse them. However, only the Latter-day Saints, of all the peoples in the world, know that Gabriel became Noah of the flood.

Obviously, Gabriel's appearances to Daniel in Old Testament times and to Mary the mother of Jesus came long after the flood. He was not a resurrected person then, of course, because the resurrection came only after Christ himself had risen from the grave, for Jesus it was who broke the bands of death.

Gabriel's announcement of the forthcoming birth of the Lord occurred in this way:

"And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.

"And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

"And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.

"And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

"Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?

"And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

"And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren. For with God nothing shall be impossible." (Luke 1:26-37.)

Apparently the same angel appeared to Joseph, Mary's espoused husband, for Matthew says:

"Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.

"But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins." (Matt. 1:18-21.)

An angel—possibly Gabriel still—appeared to Joseph, Mary's husband, after the birth of the child Jesus, and counseled him to take his family to Egypt to escape the wrath of King Herod. The passage reads: "And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him." (Matt. 2:13.)

The angel appeared again, as we read:

"But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young child's life. And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel." (Matt. 2:19-21.)

It is interesting that in these visitations the angel spoke to Joseph as the head of this little family, though Joseph was only the foster father of the child.

With respect to John the Baptist, we have this record of the appearance of Gabriel:

"And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense. And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.

"But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John. And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb. And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

"And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.

"And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God: and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad tidings. And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season." (Luke 1:11-20.)

So Gabriel came as a ministering angel. He had served his mortal life as Noah, even as Michael had served his mortal life as Adam. Noah obviously had resumed his position as Gabriel just as Adam had resumed his position as Michael the Archangel in the eternal worlds.

Both of these personages came to the Prophet Joseph Smith as ministers of God. In D&C 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants, we read of the coming of both:

"And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:21.)

It is interesting to note the expression "All declaring their dispensations, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory and the power of their priesthood."

Peter the apostle had predicted that before the second coming of the Savior, there would be a restoration of all things that God had spoken by the mouths of all his holy prophets from the beginning of the world. (Acts 3:21.)

The visitations referred to in the Doctrine and Covenants indicate how it was done. There were other visitations also, including those of Moroni; John the Baptist; Peter, James, and John; Elijah; Moses; and Elias.

But the point we make here particularly is that both Michael (Adam) and Gabriel (Noah) came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and conferred keys upon him as other such visitors did. The Prophet indicated that Michael restored the keys of the First Presidency that he himself (Michael) held, and that he had obtained in the creation. (History of the Church 3:385-86.)

The keys restored by Noah would relate to the dispensation that he headed, but the detail has not been revealed.

The Arabs have their own religious views of Gabriel; these are set forth in the Koran. In Surah II, verses 97 and 98, we read:

"Who is an enemy to Gabriel! For he it is who hath revealed this Scripture to thy heart by Allah's leave, confirming that which was revealed before it, and a guidance and glad tidings to believers; who is an enemy of Allah, and His angels and His messengers, and Gabriel and Michael! Then, lo! Allah Himself is an enemy to the disbelievers."

In the footnote to Surah II, verse 87, we read: "`The holy Spirit' is a term for the angel of Revelation, Gabriel, on whom be peace."

Although the Koran in no way connects Gabriel with Noah, it gives reference to both Noah and the flood. For example, Surah III, verse 33, reads: "Lo! Allah preferred Adam and Noah and the Family of Abraham and the Family of Imran above all His creatures."

Referring to the children of Israel as descendants of Noah and his family, Surah XVII, verse 3, talks of "the seed of those whom We carried in the ship along with Noah."

The Koran says that the people called Noah a madman, adding, "When the water rose, we carried you upon the ship that we might make it a memorial for you." (Surah LI:9.)
