Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE CHOSEN SERVANTS

It is inspirational to observe how the Lord chooses and deploys His servants like Noah throughout the centuries for His own divine purposes. Both religious and civic leaders have been thus chosen.

One outstanding such example is that of Cyrus the Great, founder of the Persian empire. Note this comment from the New Analytical Bible and Dictionary of the Bible:

"In 538 B.C. he [Cyrus] conquered Babylon. Isaiah names him twice as the divine instrument for the release of the Jews from their Babylonian Exile. (Isa. 44:28; 45:1) Daniel describes the revelry of Belshazzar and his lords the last night of the empire. (Dan. 5:30-31.) Herodotus states that Cyrus captured Babylon by turning the waters of the Euphrates into an excavation and entered the city by the dry bed of that river, that while the people indulged in a great revelry the gates had been left open.

"Two years after the fall of Babylon, 536 B.C., Cyrus issued a proclamation permitting the Jews to return to their own land. He restored the sacred vessels of the Temple that were carried to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar. (Ez. 1:1-11; 5:13-14; 6:3.) A large company of Jews responded to this proclamation and returned to Jerusalem under the leadership of Zerubbabel." (Chicago: John A. Dickson Publishing Co., 1941, p. 94.)

Nephi's vision concerning America shows how Christopher Columbus was chosen to discover this continent, leading to its colonization. (See 1 Ne. 13:12-20.) The coming of the early colonists to America was shown to Nephi in the same vision, as was the Revolutionary War. He even saw the outcome of the war. Were not George Washington and other patriots divinely chosen?

Since America, the choice land of the Lord, was dedicated to freedom, as it was, would not the Lord raise up the men on whom He would depend to bring about that freedom? He revealed that He did so as He discussed the writing of the Constitution of the United States: "And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 101:80.)

So America was dedicated to freedom in no uncertain terms, and the Lord provided the means by which that freedom was to be maintained. But He gave a stern warning in doing so:

"And the Lord would not suffer that they should stop beyond the sea in the wilderness, but he would that they should come forth even unto the land of promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people.

"And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them.

"And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

"For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off.

"And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written." (Ether 2:7-12.)

Inasmuch as liberty was to be the keynote of life in America, could God tolerate slavery on this land? Did He not, then, raise up the great liberator of the slaves, Abraham Lincoln, to cleanse America of this curse? Was not Lincoln a man of God? Was anyone in his day, even in the religious ministry, any more humble or believing than he?

One of the most significant examples of God's planning is shown in the life of Joseph who was sold into Egypt. In his day Palestine did not provide the conditions in which Jacob's family could become a great nation, so the Lord sent them to Egypt, where the land was fertile, where there was a benign government, and where they could grow and prosper. How was it brought about? It was through Joseph's going to Egypt as a slave, but later becoming governor of the nation. It was an act of God. Joseph explained this to his brethren when he made himself known to them as they came for corn. Says the scripture:

"And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life.

"For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest. And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance. So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and the Lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.

"Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not; and thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast: and there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty." (Gen. 45:4-11.)

The prophet Jeremiah was chosen before he was born. (Jer. 1:5.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that "every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before the world was. I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (History of the Church 6:364.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith stated an interesting idea when discussing the premortal activities of our great prophets: "It is true that Adam helped to form the earth. He labored with our Savior Jesus Christ. I have a strong view or conviction that there were others also who assisted them. Perhaps Noah and Enoch; and why not Joseph Smith and those appointed to be rulers before the earth was formed? We know that Jesus our Savior was a Spirit when this great work was done. He did all of these mighty works before he tabernacled in the flesh." (Bruce R. McConkie, comp., Doctrines of Salvation 1 [Bookcraft, 1954]: 74-75. Italics in original.)

Obviously our pre-earth life is closely related to our station in mortality. This could apply to all of us, not alone to prophets and kings. Clearly, it related to Noah and his mission with respect to the flood. Noah was Gabriel, the angel-messenger of God. He was second to Adam (Michael) in the eternal world, and he was second to Adam in this world—the second progenitor of man.
