Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE DIVINE PATIENCE

There was a long preliminary to the flood and Noah's ministry. Wickedness had been in the earth for generations, during all of which time the Lord had sought earnestly to bring mankind to repentance.

Leading directly to the flood and the work of Noah was the mission of Enoch, also one of the truly great ones, who was sent to earth for a specific purpose. In his day there was a great division among the people. The righteous apparently lived in a land called Canaan, where Enoch was raised. His fathers were "preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied, and called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men."

As Enoch journeyed in the land, "the Spirit of God descended out of heaven, and abode upon him.

"And he heard a voice from heaven, saying: Enoch, my son, prophesy unto this people, and say unto them—Repent, for thus saith the Lord: I am angry with this people, and my fierce anger is kindled against them; for their hearts have waxed hard, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes cannot see afar off; and for these many generations, ever since the day that I created them, have they gone astray, and have denied me, and have sought their own counsels in the dark; and in their own abominations have they devised murder, and have not kept the commandments, which I gave unto their father, Adam.

"Wherefore, they have foresworn themselves, and by their oaths, they have brought upon themselves death; and a hell I have prepared for them, if they repent not."

Enoch bowed before the Lord and said, "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?" (Moses 6:23-31.)

Here then is another prophet called in his boyhood, just as Samuel was appointed as a child, and just as Joseph Smith was chosen when he was a boy of but fourteen. Why were these servants thus selected in their childhood? Because God knew them in their premortal life and wanted them while they were unspoiled by worldliness. He could then train them for their special work. As He said to Jeremiah, He could also have said to these three: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." (Jer. 1:5.)

Is not God unchangeable? Is He a respecter of persons? He chooses His earthly servants from among those who had served him well in premortality, a most normal procedure.

The Lord comforted Enoch and said: "Go forth and do as I have commanded thee, and no man shall pierce thee. Open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance, for all flesh is in my hands, and I will do as seemeth me good.

Say unto this people: Choose ye this day, to serve the Lord God who made you. Behold my Spirit is upon you, wherefore all thy words will I justify; and the mountains shall flee before you, and the rivers shall turn from their course; and thou shalt abide in me, and I in you; therefore walk with me."

As part of his preparation, the Lord gave to Enoch a vision of the world and things to come; and based on this vision, Enoch preached details of the gospel to the people. Many came to hear him from far and near, saying, "A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his people." (Moses 6:32-36.)

Enoch declared: "The Lord which spake with me, the same is the God of heaven, and he is my God, and your God, and ye are my brethren, and why counsel ye yourselves, and deny the God of heaven?

"The heavens he made; the earth is his footstool; and the foundation thereof is his. Behold, he laid it, an host of men hath he brought in upon the face thereof. And death hath come upon our fathers; nevertheless we know them, and cannot deny, and even the first of all we know, even Adam. For a book of remembrance we have written among us, according to the pattern given by the finger of God; and it is given in our own language.

"And as Enoch spake forth the words of God, the people trembled, and could not stand in his presence." (Moses 6:43-47.)

The Lord commanded Enoch to ascend a high mountain. Enoch recorded this experience: "I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face."

The wicked and the righteous of that day were arrayed in battle. As the wicked attacked the people of God, "so great was the faith of Enoch, that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness; and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him.

"There also came up a land out of the depth of the sea, and so great was the fear of the enemies of the people of God, that they fled and stood afar off and went upon the land which came up out of the depth of the sea.

"And the giants of the land, also, stood afar off; and there went forth a curse upon all people that fought against God; and from that time forth there were wars and bloodshed among them; but the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness.

"The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people. And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and did flourish."

Now comes the first mention of the city of Zion, or the city of Enoch: "And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them."

Enoch continued his preaching amid great miracles. "And it came to pass in his days, that he built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion. And it came to pass that Enoch talked with the Lord; and he said unto the Lord: Surely Zion shall dwell in safety forever. But the Lord said unto Enoch: Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed."

So righteous were the people of Enoch's city that "Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven." (Moses 7.)

Thus there came a separation between the righteous and the wicked. But the Lord left some of His leaders on the earth looking toward the time of the flood. He would continue to appeal to the rebellious to the very last, for He would leave them no excuse.

Of that day President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

"Enoch saw in vision the kingdoms of the world and all their inhabitants down even to the end of time. The Lord told him of Noah and the flood and how he would destroy the people of the earth for their iniquity. Of these rebellious ones who rejected the truth and paid no heed to the preachings of Noah and the ancient prophets, the Lord said: `I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren.

"`But behold, their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers; Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom, and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer? But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them. And That which I have chosen hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment. (Moses 7:36-39.)'"

President Smith then says: "From this we learn that the Lord has prepared a prison for the souls of all those who rejected the testimony of the antediluvian prophets, where they were to remain in torment until the time when Jesus should atone for their sins and return to the Father." (Bruce R. McConkie, comp., Doctrines of Salvation 2 [Bookcraft, 1955]: 156-57. Italics in original.)

It is interesting that the city of Enoch will return to the earth. Of this President Smith has said: "In the day of regeneration, when all things are made new, there will be three great cities that will be holy. One will be the Jerusalem of old which shall be rebuilt according to the prophecy of Ezekiel. One will be the city of Zion, or of Enoch, which was taken from the earth when Enoch was translated and which will be restored; and the city Zion, or New Jerusalem, which is to be built by the seed of Joseph on this the American continent."

Then President Smith quotes this scripture:

"And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

"And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;

"And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. (Moses 7:62-64.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr., comp., Answers to Gospel Questions 2 [Deseret Book, 1958]: 105-6.)

Is it harder to accept the flood as a fact than to believe these scriptures regarding the city of Enoch? What a miracle it was when this whole city, with its entire population, was taken into heaven, actually physically lifted off this earth! And what a miracle it will be when that city and all of its inhabitants return!

Which is the greater miracle: covering the earth with water, or the removal of the city of Enoch to heaven and back again?
