Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

A CHILD OF PROMISE

Noah was a child of promise. The Lord covenanted with Enoch that Noah would come of his (Enoch's) lineage. Methuselah also predicted that Noah would come of his (Methuselah's) family and that all the children of the earth subsequently would be born through Noah and thus be of Methuselah's lineage. He gloried in this and took credit to himself. Says the scripture:

"And all the days of Enoch were four hundred and thirty years. And it came to pass that Methuselah, the son of Enoch, was not taken, that the covenants of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to Enoch; for he truly covenanted with Enoch that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins. And it came to pass that Methuselah prophesied that from his loins should spring all the kingdoms of the earth (through Noah), and he took glory unto himself." (Moses 8:1-3.)

In the days of Methuselah a severe famine swept the land, and many died.

Lamech, who was the son of Methuselah, became the father of Noah: "And he called his name Noah, saying: This son shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed." (Moses 8:9.)

Roman Catholic scholars translate the parallel passages in Genesis like this: "When Lamech was a hundred and eighty-two years old he became the father of a son. He gave him the name of Noah because, he said, `Here is one who will give us, in the midst of our toil and the laboring of our hands, a consolation derived from the ground that Yahweh cursed.'" (The Jerusalem Bible [Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1970], Gen. 5:28-29.)

Nothing is known of the childhood of Noah except that when he was ten years old he was ordained to the priesthood under the hands of Methuselah, indicating that he was a faithful child. (D&C 107:52.)

No mention is made of the marriage of Noah. He was 450 years old when Japheth was born. Whether there were any other children during those centuries is not mentioned, although it seems most improbable that there were not.

Forty-two years after Japheth, Shem was born of Japheth's mother. When Noah was 500 years old, Ham was born. "And Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God." (Moses 8:13-15.)

The daughters of Noah's sons, however, were wicked and "sold themselves" to the apostates, the scriptures say.

It should be noted here that Ham, who often is spoken of as an errant one, was fully faithful, and as other references show, he walked with God, as did Noah and the other sons. When Noah and these three sons, and the wives of all four, entered the ark, nothing is said about any children going in with them. Evidently none of their posterity was worthy of being saved from the flood.

Under their divine commission, Noah and his sons preached repentance to the people to the very end, but without results. The Lord, dismayed at the depth of sin in the world, said to Noah: "My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for he shall know that all flesh shall die; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years; and if men do not repent, I will send in the floods upon them." (Moses 8:17.)

In his preaching, Noah "taught the things of God, even as it was in the beginning." (Moses 8:16) Evidently he knew the church history of his day. He was the tenth generation from Adam, but the generations overlapped, since everyone apparently lived hundreds of years. No doubt Methuselah, the oldest man, who lived nearly a thousand years, especially kept the memory of the human race and the church well in mind.

There was also revelation, for Noah gave prophecies to the people in his warnings of impending doom. When the Lord said that His Spirit would not always strive with man, he set the conditions of the flood: if the people did not repent in 120 years, the water would come upon them.

There was great contrast between the labors of Enoch and Noah and the results they obtained. Enoch was given tremendous power to do miracles. He could even move mountains. A land arose out of the sea in his day. He rebuked giants, fought off enemies, and converted an entire city to such a point of perfection that it was taken into heaven. Not so with Noah; his mission was different. He would continue with the divine warnings, but he had been chosen especially to survive the flood and begin the human race anew. In his day no longer was it necessary for great miracles to be performed to persuade the people. Matters had gone beyond that point. No record is made of any miracles performed by Noah or his sons. They merely preached to maintain the Lord's warning and to give to any who would receive it the opportunity to repent. But primarily they were assigned to build the ark and make ready for the cleansing of the earth. Then they must repopulate the world after the flood receded.
