Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE FOREWARNINGS

Ample forewarning was given by the Lord concerning the destructive flood that would be sent if the people failed to repent. Actually it was given over a period of four generations, and they were generations of hundreds of years each.

Modern scripture joins with the Bible in describing the long-suffering and patience of the Lord as he tried in every way to bring his children back from their waywardness. Those who doubt that there was a flood must admit that it is mentioned repeatedly in holy writ. To doubt the flood is to question the scriptures that tell of it.

Jesus Christ was the God of the Old Testament. It was He who spoke to the prophets. He gave instruction to Moses. What we call the Book of Moses was given by revelation to Moses, and was similarly given by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith. And that book discusses Noah and the flood in great detail.

Neither of these prophets lived at the time of the flood. Their information could come only by revelation. Both communed with Christ Himself.

When Jesus was on earth and foretold the time of his second coming, he did not hesitate to verify the account of Noah and the flood. He actually described conditions at the time of his coming in terms of Noah's day. He said: "But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark." (Matt. 24:37-38.)

Luke's version is certainly to the point: "And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all." (Luke 17:26-27.)

Is there any misunderstanding those words?

Isaiah also bore testimony to the facts in the matter. Was it not Jesus who said, "Great are the words of Isaiah"? (3 Ne. 23:1.) That prophet said: "For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee." (Isa. 54:9.)

And the Apostle Paul was not silent either. He declared: "By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith." (Heb. 11:7.)

This is a great assertion of the fact of Noah's mission. Paul was lecturing on faith, and he cited as outstanding examples the works of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He told also of those who died for the faith, of those who conquered Jericho, of those "who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens.

"Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented." (Heb. 11:33-37.)

One of Paul's prime examples was Noah, for by faith in this same God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Noah "prepared the ark to the saving of his house."

This chapter in Hebrews lends special certainty to the facts of our religion, to the existence of God, and to the willingness of many even to die for the faith. If we believe scripture at all, we certainly believe in the Apostle Paul and his inspired writings. Will we not believe what he says about Noah and the ark? To reject the words of Paul is to defy him and his work.

When the Lord spoke to Enoch, He predicted the flood in no uncertain terms:

"And the fire of mine indignation is kindled against them; and in my hot displeasure will I send in the floods upon them, for my fierce anger is kindled against them. Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also. Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren.

"But behold, their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers; Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer? But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods, and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them." (Moses 7:34-38.)

One of the most interesting passages relating to the flood occurs in the book of Ether in the Book of Mormon. Moroni, who abridged the writings of Ether, tells the story of the brother of Jared, who conversed with the Lord at the time of the tower of Babel, following the flood. The Book of Mormon account is evidence of the fact of Noah's ministry, the salvation of the family of Jared, their developing into a numerous people, and their being spared the confusion of their language at the tower. The Jaredites were brought to the land that was "choice above all other lands," the land of America. Note that it was after the flood that the land was designated as "choice above all other lands." The book of Ether states:

"And now I, Moroni, proceed to finish my record concerning the destruction of the people of whom I have been writing. For behold, they rejected all the words of Ether; for he truly told them of all things, from the beginning of man; and that after the waters had receded from off the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell upon the face thereof; and that it was the place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord.

"Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ, and he spake concerning a New Jerusalem upon this land. And he spake also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come—after it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of Israel—and that a New Jerusalem should be built upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph, for which things there has been a type.

"For as Joseph brought his father down into the land of Egypt, even so he died there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should perish not, even as he was merciful unto the father of Joseph that he should perish not.

"Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come when the earth shall pass away." (Ether 13:1-8.)

It is remarkable! After the flood had receded from the face of the land, it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord. Indeed, this is something to ponder on. Is this not proof that the flood was a reality, and that out of that flood came America? Out of that flood came the "chosen land of the Lord." Shall we acknowledge it? It is one of the great facts concerning our dispensation!

From the days of Noah, America was dedicated to one great purpose: "Wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell upon the face thereof." (Ether 13:2.)

The land must have been choice prior to the flood also, for it was the home of God's ancient people, the Garden of Eden. In the creation it was pronounced "good" and "very good." The Garden of Eden, we know from the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, is in the region of Jackson County, Missouri.

Could it be that in the flood the Lord cleansed that land of its wickedness because even then it was choice in His sight? Did he determine that the area of the Garden of Eden should suffer no more corruption? Has the decree carried over from then to now, that people who live in America must serve God or be swept off the land?

It is still the same land, the same region. The command is still the same: the Almighty will sweep off any nation that occupies the land and refuses to serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ.

Could the same requirement have applied before the flood as well as afterward? Was it from what is now America that the ark was floated? It landed halfway around the world on Mt. Ararat, in what is today eastern Turkey, leaving the choicest of all lands far behind.
