Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE SCRIPTURAL PROOF

People who question whether there ever was a flood or an ark, or even whether Noah lived, come face to face with direct revelation. Modern scripture sustains the flood story. Modern scripture affirms the existence of Noah, the wickedness of the people of his day, and the determination of the Lord to wash the earth clean with a deluge.

Consider the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. It was revelation from God to Moses in Moses' day, and it was repeated as revelation from God to Joseph Smith in our day, in June 1830. To reject Noah and the flood, then, would be a rejection of the revealed word of God!

Note how the Book of Moses begins: "The words of God, which he spake unto Moses at a time when Moses was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain.

"And he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence.

"And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?

"And, behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease.

"Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth."

Then comes the divine call to Moses: "And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all." (Moses 1:3-6.)

Now begins the vision of Moses as he and the Almighty discussed creation:

"And now, behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son; for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee.

"And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered. . . .

"And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me. And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:7-8, 31-33.)

Do we accept God as the Creator? Do we believe that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God? The Lord here affirms it!

Part of the divine affirmation regarding Creation and His Only Begotten Son is the text of the revelation that follows, establishing the fact of the existence of Enoch and his city; of Methuselah, the oldest man; and of Methuselah's grandson, Noah.

To reject Noah, are we also to reject Enoch and his city? God made a covenant with Enoch that Noah would be born in his (Enoch's) lineage. Do we reject that account? Was not Enoch one of the greatest prophets? Does not modern revelation declare that he and his city will return to earth incident to the second coming of Christ? Then was not Enoch a real person? Did he not walk and talk with God? Then did he not covenant with God, and was that covenant not divinely accepted? Was the covenant not a fact?

The covenant bound the Lord to send Noah into the family of Enoch, as Enoch's great-grandson. (Moses 8:2.) Not only was Enoch promised that Noah would be one of his descendants, but also the Lord told him about the flood. Then can we doubt it?

The Lord gave mighty visions to Enoch, including a view of the wicked who would die in the flood. The sacred record reads: "But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them." (Moses 7:38.) Then did the wicked not die in the flood? Could they have done so if there was no flood?

Notice the reference in that verse to the prison house to which these wicked ones would be taken following their drowning: Where is another reference to this same prison?

One of our best-known Bible passages tells of Christ's visit to these identical spirits while His body lay in the tomb following His crucifixion:

"For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Pet. 3:18-20.)

In that connection Peter also said: "For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.)

The doctrine of salvation for the dead thus becomes a testimony to the reality of Noah and the flood.

Enoch was shown more: "And Enoch also saw Noah, and his family; that the posterity of all the sons of Noah should be saved with a temporal salvation; wherefore Enoch saw that Noah built an ark; and that the Lord smiled upon it, and held it in his own hand; but upon the residue of the wicked the floods came and swallowed them up." (Moses 7:42-43.)

So the Lord showed Enoch both Noah and his ark. Can we deny that it affirms the earlier declaration of the Lord, who said to Enoch, "Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency; and unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood; and the fire of mine indignation is kindled against them; and in my hot displeasure will I send in the floods upon them, for my fierce anger is kindled against them." (Moses 7:32-34.)

"And it came to pass that Enoch continued his cry unto the Lord, saying: I ask thee, O Lord, in the name of thine Only Begotten, even Jesus Christ, that thou wilt have mercy upon Noah and his seed, that the earth might never more be covered by the floods.

"And the Lord could not withhold; and he covenanted with Enoch, and sware unto him with an oath, that he would stay the floods; that he would call upon the children of Noah; and he sent forth an unalterable decree, that a remnant of his seed should always be found among all nations, while the earth should stand;

"And the Lord said: Blessed is he through whose seed Messiah shall come; for he saith—I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven, which is broad as eternity; whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by me shall never fall; wherefore, blessed are they of whom I have spoken, for they shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy." (Moses 7:50-53.)

The Lord in His mercy—in His great desire to save His children—agreed to stay the floods for 120 years to give Noah further opportunity to bring man to repentance.

"And it came to pass that Noah prophesied, and taught the things of God, even as it was in the beginning.

"And the Lord said unto Noah: My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for he shall know that all flesh shall die; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years; and if men do not repent, I will send in the floods upon them.

"And it came to pass that Noah called upon the children of men that they should repent; but they hearkened not unto his words. And it repented Noah, and his heart was pained that the Lord had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at the heart.

"And the Lord said: I will destroy man whom I have created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth Noah that I have created them, and that I have made them; and he hath called upon me; for they have sought his life.

"And thus Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God, as did also his three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

"The earth was corrupt before God, and it was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth." (Moses 8:16-17, 20, 25-30.)

And so the floods came. This is modern revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, comparable to the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. The reality of Noah is fully affirmed in other scripture also. Note what is said about his priesthood:

"Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah; and from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers; and from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man—Which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years." (D&C 84:14-17.)

Note that Methuselah ordained him: "Noah was ten years old when he was ordained under the hand of Methuselah." (D&C 107:52.)

When the Savior comes, He will gather His redeemed about Him, and one of them will be Noah. Then did Noah live? And did he minister for the Lord? Through Joseph Smith we have this assurance:

"And now the year of my redeemed is come; and they shall mention the loving kindness of their Lord, and all that he has bestowed upon them according to his goodness, and according to his loving kindness, forever and ever.

"In all their afflictions he was afflicted. And the angel of his presence saved them; and in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed them, and bore them, and carried them all the days of old; yea, and Enoch also, and they who were with him; the prophets who were before him; and Noah also, and they who were before him; and Moses also, and they who were before him; and from Moses to Elijah, and from Elijah to John, who were with Christ in his resurrection, and the holy apostles, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, shall be in the presence of the Lamb.

"And the graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount Zion, and upon the holy city, the New Jerusalem; and they shall sing the song of the Lamb, day and night forever and ever." (D&C 133:52-56.)
