Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE FLOOD CAME

As predicted, the floods came, the ark was launched, and Noah and his wife, his sons and their wives—but none of their children—floated in safety.

Many have tried to explain that there was not enough water on earth to make the flood; others say that the mountains could not possibly have been covered. Some say the flood was strictly a local tragedy covering only a small area of the earth.

We do not argue with scientists or scholars over their defensive views. We tell the story of scripture, and scripture is the word of God, verified by modern revelation over and over again.

Since the King James Version of the Bible is so readily available, and the story of the flood is told there so clearly, as a matter of interest we quote from other translations. The Jerusalem Bible records some of the facts in a slightly different manner. In the sixth and seventh chapters of Genesis in that version of the Bible we read:

"Yahweh saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and that the thoughts in his heart fashioned nothing but wickedness all day long. Yahweh regretted having made man on the earth, and his heart grieved. `I will rid the earth's face of man, my own creations,' Yahweh said, `and of animals also, reptiles too, and the birds of heaven; for I regret having made them.' But Noah had found favour with Yahweh.

"This is the story of Noah:

"Noah was a good man, a man of integrity among his contemporaries, and he walked with God. Noah became the father of three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth. The earth grew corrupt in God's sight, and filled with violence. God contemplated the earth; it was corrupt, for corrupt were the ways of all flesh on the earth.

"God said to Noah, `The end has come for all things of flesh; I have decided this, because the earth is full of violence of man's making, and I will efface them from the earth. Make yourself an ark out of resinous wood. Make it with reeds and line it with pitch inside and out. This is how to make it: the length of the ark is to be three hundred cubits, its breadth fifty cubits, and its height thirty cubits. Make a roof for the ark . . . put the door of the ark high up in the side, and make a first, second and third deck.

"`For my part I mean to bring a flood, and send the waters over the earth, to destroy all flesh on it, every living creature under heaven; everything on earth shall perish. But I will establish my Covenant with you, and you must go on board the ark, yourself, your sons, your wife, and your sons' wives along with you. From all living creatures, from all flesh, you must take two of each kind aboard the ark, to save their lives with yours; they must be a male and a female. Of every kind of bird, of every kind of animal and of every kind of reptile on the ground, two must go with you so that their lives may be saved. For your part provide yourself with eatables of all kinds, and lay in a store of them, to serve as food for yourself and them.' Noah did this; he did all that God had ordered him.

"Yahweh said to Noah, `Go aboard the ark, you and all your household, for you alone among this generation do I see as a good man in my judgment. Of all the clean animals you must take seven of each kind, both male and female; of the unclean animals you must take two, a male and its female (and of the birds of heaven also, seven of each kind, both male and female), to propagate their kind over the whole earth. For in seven days' time I mean to make it rain on the earth for forty days and nights, and I will rid the earth of every living thing that I made.' Noah did all that Yahweh ordered.

"Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters appeared on the earth.

"Noah with his sons, his wife, and his sons' wives boarded the ark to escape the waters of the flood. (Of the clean animals and the animals that are not clean, of the birds and all that crawls on the ground, two of each kind boarded the ark with Noah, a male and a female, according to the order God gave Noah.) Seven days later the waters of the flood appeared on the earth.

"In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, and on the seventeenth day of that month, that very day all the springs of the great deep broke through, and the sluices of heaven opened. It rained on the earth for forty days and forty nights.

"That very day Noah and his sons Shem, Ham and Japheth boarded the ark, with Noah's wife and the three wives of his sons, and with them wild beasts of every kind, cattle of every kind, reptiles of every kind that crawls on the earth, birds of every kind, all that flies, everything with wings. One pair of all that is flesh and has the breath of life boarded the ark with Noah; and so there went in a male and a female of every creature that is flesh, just as God had ordered him.

"And Yahweh closed the door behind Noah.

"The flood lasted forty days on the earth. The waters swelled, lifting the ark until it was raised above the earth. The waters rose and swelled greatly on the earth. After a hundred and fifty days the waters fell, and in the seventh month, the earth so that all the highest mountains under the whole of heaven were submerged. The waters rose fifteen cubits higher, submerging the mountains. And so all things of flesh perished that moved on the earth, birds, cattle, wild beasts, everything that swarms on the earth, and every man. Everything with the breath of life in its nostrils died, everything on dry land. Yahweh destroyed every living thing on the face of the earth, man and animals, reptiles, and the birds of heaven. He rid the earth of them, so that only Noah was left, and those with him in the ark. The waters rose on the earth for a hundred and fifty days."

No mention is made that human beings lived in all parts of the earth. Seemingly they lived in communities in one general area, as in the days of Enoch. But that is not to say that the whole planet was not covered with water in the flood. The record says the whole earth, "all under the whole of heaven," was submerged.
