Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

FACTS CONFIRMED

All Bible translations give essentially the same account of the flood and the manner by which it came about. It is interesting to note that the fountains of the earth gushed forth, adding to the floods. It was not rain alone, although the heavens "wept" for forty days.

The Knox Translation of the Bible reads: "God wiped out the whole world of earthly creatures, man and beast, creeping things and all that flies through the air, so that they vanished from the earth; only Noe and his companions in the Ark were left. And the waters held their own over the land for a hundred and fifty days."

The Revised Standard Version reads: "The waters prevailed and increased greatly upon the earth . . . and the waters prevailed so mightily upon the earth that all the high mountains under the whole heaven were covered. . . . And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, birds, cattle, beasts, all swarming creatures that swarm upon the earth, and every man. . . . He blotted out every living thing that was upon the face of the ground, man and animals and creeping things and birds of the air; they were blotted out from the earth. Only Noah was left, and those that were with him in the ark." (Gen. 7:18-23.)

The New World Translation expresses it this way: "And the waters overwhelmed the earth so greatly that all the tall mountains that were under the whole heaven came to be covered. Up to fifteen cubits the waters overwhelmed them and the mountains became covered." (Gen. 7:19-20.)

The Moffatt Translation says: "The fountains of the great abyss all burst, and the sluices of heaven were opened. . . . the waters swelled mightily on the earth, till every high mountain under heaven was covered—the waters swelling twenty-two feet higher, till the mountains were covered, and every living creature perished." (Gen. 7:12, 18-21.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith's translation states: "And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the face of the earth, and all the high hills, under the whole heavens were covered. Fifteen cubits and upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered." (JST, Gen. 8:41.)

The Jerusalem Bible reads: "But God had Noah in mind, and all the wild beasts and all the cattle that were with him in the ark. God sent a wind across the earth and the waters subsided. The springs of the deep and the sluices of heaven were stopped. Rain ceased to fall from heaven; the waters gradually ebbed from the earth. After a hundred and fifty days the waters fell, and in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of that month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat. The waters gradually fell until the tenth month when, on the first day of the tenth month, the mountain peaks appeared.

"At the end of forty days Noah opened the porthole he had made in the ark and he sent out the raven. This went off, and flew back and forth until the waters dried up from the earth. Then he sent out the dove, to see whether the waters were receding from the surface of the earth. The dove, finding nowhere to perch, returned to him in the ark, for there was water over the whole surface of the earth; putting out his hand he took hold of it and brought it back into the ark with him. After waiting seven more days, again he sent out the dove from the ark. In the evening, the dove came back to him and there it was with a new olive branch in its beak. So Noah realized that the waters were receding from the earth. After waiting seven more days he sent out the dove, and now it returned to him no more.

"It was in the six hundred and first year of Noah's life, in the first month and on the first of the month, that the water dried up from the earth. Noah lifted back the hatch of the ark and looked out. The surface of the ground was dry!

"In the second month and on the twenty-seventh day of the month the earth was dry." (Gen. 8:1-14.)

Note a dictionary comment:

"Noah left the ark on the twenty-seventh day of the second month (Gen. 8:14-19) so that the duration of the Deluge was twelve lunar months and ten days, or one solar year.

"As to the extent of the flood one opinion is that it was general, over the whole earth, another that it covered only those regions inhabited by man. The view that it was limited to a certain section is supported by the design of the flood, i.e., to destroy the race which must have been confined within a certain area. Noah could not have preached righteousness to people in all parts of the world, and it would have been necessary for the ark to contain a far greater number of animals than would have been possible by the dimensions given. It was `universal' only as it affected the whole race at that time.

"The many notices of the flood in Babylonian, Syrian, Armenian, Persian, Chinese and other traditions, clearly indicate that the facts had been carried down to the descendants of Ham, Shem, and Japheth, which could have been done for centuries by those who passed through the flood. Noah lived for three hundred and fifty years after the flood. (Gen. 9:28-29.)" (The New Analytical Bible and Dictionary of the Bible, p. 121.)

These, of course, are but the deductions of men, human wisdom attempting to explain the mysteries of God, an impossibility. We are in no sense bound by them.
