Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

DETAILED PREPARATION

The Lord was most specific in giving His preparatory instructions to Noah. Not only did He prescribe the rules for constructing the ark, but He also outlined with care what Noah was to do about the animals. He said:

"Thou shalt come into the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with them. And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every kind shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep alive with thee; they shall be male and female. Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind; two of every kind shalt thou take into the ark, to keep alive.

"And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather fruit of every kind unto thee in the ark, and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

"Thus did Noah, according to all that God commanded him. And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house, into the ark; for thee only have I seen righteous before me, in the generation. Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female; and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female; of fowls also of the air, by sevens, the male and his female; to keep seed alive upon the face of the earth." (JST, Gen. 8:24-31.)

Note that reference is made to the food Noah and his family would eat and also the food for the animals in the ark. Note also that of the clean beasts Noah took into the ark seven and seven, whereas of the unclean he took only two and two. This would permit him to offer burnt offerings to the Lord as soon as the flood subsided, without interfering with the procreation of life to replenish the earth.

The Lord also made a covenant with Noah before the flood came, saying: "With thee I will establish my covenant, even as I have sworn unto thy father, Enoch, that of thy posterity shall come all nations." (JST, Gen. 8:23; Moses 7:50-52.) This was divine assurance that indeed Noah would become the father of all human beings from then on.

For 150 days the ark floated, and finally it came to rest on Mount Ararat in what was formerly Armenia and is now Turkey.

Josephus, in his Antiquities, gives this sidelight:

"When the rain ceased, the water did but just begin to abate, after one hundred and fifty days (that is, on the seventeenth day of the seventh month) it then ceased to subside for a little while.

"After this the ark rested on the top of a certain mountain in Armenia; which, when Noah understood, he opened it; and seeing a small piece of land about it, he continued quiet, and conceived some cheerful hopes of deliverance; but a few days afterward, when the water was decreased to a greater degree, he sent out a raven, as desirous to learn whether any other part of the earth were left dry by the water, and whether he might go out of the ark with safety; but the raven, finding all the land still overflowed, returned to Noah again.

"And after seven days he sent out a dove, to know the state of the ground; which came back to him covered with mud, and bringing an olive branch. Hereby Noah learned that the earth was become clear of the flood.

"So after he had stayed seven more days, he sent the living creatures out of the ark; and both he and his family went out, when he also sacrificed to God, and feasted with his companions. However, the Armenians call this place The Place of Descent; for the ark being saved in that place, its remains are shewn there by the inhabitants to this day.

"Now all the writers of Barbarian histories make mention of this flood and of this ark; among whom is Berosus the Chaldean; for when he is describing the circumstances of the flood, he goes on thus:— `It is said there is still some part of this ship in Armenia, at the mountain of Cordyaeans; and that some people carry off pieces of the bitumen, which they take away, and use chiefly as amulets for the averting of mischiefs.' Hieronymus the Egyptian, also, who wrote the Phoenician Antiquities, and Mnaseas, and a great many more, make mention of the same. Nay, Nicolaus of Damascus, in his ninety-sixth book, hath a particular relation about them, where he speaks thus:— `There is a great mountain in Armenia, over Minyas, called Baris, upon which it is reported that many who fled at the time of the Deluge were saved; and that one who was carried in an ark came on shore upon the top of it; and that the remains of the timber were a great while preserved."
