Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

IT WAS A MIRACLE

Critics of the "flood story" raise many objections. Among them are:

And so they go on.

We must realize that we do not have the full account of the flood and the ark and its inhabitants. The few hundred words in the Bible on the entire life of Noah are sketchy at most. One thing we must remember is that God was at the helm—and He is a God of miracles!

Other things He has done on earth have seemed to be impossible when judged from the human point of view, and because of this, critics have condemned certain scriptural records, called them myths, and at best put them in the category of legend.

A few cases in point:

The taking of the city of Enoch, with all its people, into heaven is a miracle that few people, especially Bible critics, are willing to accept. Yet it was so. That entire city was taken into heaven. Enoch looked down upon the earth from his high vantage point and could see what was going on—this by the gift and power of God. That city will return to earth again—before the Millennium—as one event in connection with the second coming of Christ. And the people will come with it, and they will meet others here on earth and rejoice with them. (Moses 7:62-64.)

Do we believe it? Is this any less a miracle than the flood? Is it harder to believe? Yet it is all true. The scriptures verify the city of Enoch account over and over.

When the Savior identified himself to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he said: "I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me. I am the same which have taken the Zion of Enoch into mine own bosom; and verily, I say, even as many as have believed in my name, for I am Christ, and in mine own name, by the virtue of the blood which I have spilt, have I pleaded before the Father for them." (D&C 38:3-4.)

Incidents such as this and the flood are beyond the understanding of "the spirit of man." This is another case in point to illustrate what the Apostle Paul meant when he said:

"For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

"But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 2:11-14.)

One of the greatest undertakings of all time was the departure of the Twelve Tribes of Israel from Egypt, a multitude of people with all their flocks and herds. We emphasize the flocks and herds in this instance. Everyone must understand, and certainly western range people know full well, how slowly cattle and sheep move along a highway.

Tourists know about this, too. They have been caught on the public roads of western states and had to wait for seemingly interminable periods while the slow-moving animals went by, some of them stopping to graze by the roadside, others going off in different directions and having to be brought back by cowboys or herders' dogs.

In the book of Numbers it is reported that the Israelites had with them 337,000 head of sheep and 36,000 head of cattle. And yet they moved faster than Pharaoh's army! How could it be? Only by a miracle! Did not God go with them by day and by night? How were all these people—and all these animals—able to move so quickly? Who can explain it? God worked it out. It was a miracle.

In the Book of Mormon we read that when the people of Limhi fled by night from their Lamanite captors, they took their flocks and herds with them, as did the people of Moses. But the fast-moving armies of the Lamanites could not catch up to them. Wasn't that a miracle?

When Alma's followers fled from the wicked King Noah, what happened? They took their flocks and herds, but they still out-distanced the speeding soldiers pursuing them. "The Lord did strengthen them," the Book of Mormon says, "that the people of king Noah could not overtake them to destroy them. And they fled eight days' journey into the wilderness." (Mosiah 23:2-3.) How do we explain that? Again it was a miracle.

The flood of Noah's time was strictly God's affair. He arranged it, he turned loose the waters upon the earth, and when the time came, he recalled the waters so that the land was dry in an incredibly short time.

The eighth Article of Faith says that we believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly. All the translations tell the story of the flood in essentially the same manner. All the translations say that the waters went well over the tops of the highest mountains. All the translations declare without any reservation that the flood was universal and that it covered the whole earth. Shall we not believe the Bible account, especially since it is supported fully by modern revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith and by the Book of Mormon, which was translated from ancient records by the Prophet, using the Urim and Thummim?

If God moved mountains when Enoch commanded it, and if He held back the waters of the Red Sea to allow the Israelites to cross over, and if by the command of Joshua the Jordan River was stopped in its course, could not the Lord have helped the people of Moses, Limhi, and Alma to travel faster than a pursuing army? After all, He created the entire earth!

Didn't Elijah and Elisha stay the waters of the Jordan River in their time? Did they do it by their own power? Didn't Joshua "stop the sun" to lengthen out the day while he finished the battle? Did he do it by his own power? Could any mortal man have done such a thing?

Could the plagues Moses called down upon Pharaoh in his effort to free the Israelites have been other than miracles?

God's work has included mighty natural processes at various times in the history of the world. Noah's deluge was one of them. The flood had a far greater purpose than merely to wipe out Noah's neighbors. God baptized the earth! He would not baptize a portion of it any more than we would be satisfied with a partial immersion if we were baptizing some person. He baptized Adam by a miracle, when there was no one there to perform the ordinance. And now He baptized the earth by His own almighty power, for His own purposes, and the destruction of the wicked was only incidental thereto. And He will yet baptize it with fire, according to the baptismal pattern for us all. (Matt. 3:11; 3 Ne. 19:13.)

Why baptize the earth?

The earth is a living thing. Is there not great significance in the scriptural references to the earth? While Enoch and the Lord discussed the wickedness of men, "it came to pass that Enoch looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?

"And when Enoch heard the earth mourn, he wept, and cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth? Wilt thou not bless the children of Noah?

"And it came to pass that Enoch continued his cry unto the Lord, saying: I ask thee, O Lord, in the name of thine Only Begotten, even Jesus Christ, that thou wilt have mercy upon Noah and his seed, that the earth might never more be covered by the floods." (Moses 7:48-50.)

Note these words coming out of the bowels of the earth: "When will my Creator sanctify me that I may rest and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" Is that allegory? Would God deal in allegory in circumstances like these? Was not the voice real?

How are men cleansed of their sins? By baptism, and not only by water, but also by fire and the Holy Ghost. John the Baptist explained: "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." (Matt. 3:11.)

The Savior spoke of this to the Nephites when He said:

"I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings.

"And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost, even as the Lamanites, because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion, were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not.

"Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin. Therefore, whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of God. Behold, for such I have laid down my life, and taken it up again; therefore repent, and come unto me ye ends of the earth, and be saved." (3 Ne. 9:18-22.)

Should not the earth—a living thing—be similarly sanctified? It was baptized with water in the flood. Eventually it will be baptized with fire, thus becoming cleansed and sanctified, to be made into a celestial sphere as the eternal home for the righteous. The Lord has told us: "The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's." (D&C 130:8-9.)

When the Lord gave the revelation found in D&C 88 of the Doctrine and Convenants, He made this further explanation: "And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it." (D&C 88:25-26.)

Let us recognize the miracles of God. Let us see Him walk in his glory as He performs them.

Think of the natural upheavals that will precede and accompany the second coming of Christ. They will be God's miracles: Mountains will topple. Valleys will be raised. Seas will heave beyond their bounds. Earthquakes will cause the earth to reel as a drunkard. An overflowing scourge will come. Tempests will rage. The city of Enoch will return. And for the coming of the Ten Tribes from the land of the north, a highway will be cast up out of the sea.

Miracles? Doesn't God exercise His infinite strength to bring about His own purposes at His own time? With all His divine power, sufficient even to form the galaxies out in space, was He not able to eliminate the animal odors in the ark? If He could feed three million Israelites on manna and quail for forty years, would He not be able to provide food in the ark for 150 days? Who knows how many species of life there were in Noah's day? Who knows whether those now living existed then? Who knows if animal life was actually scattered over the whole earth then? Obviously human life was pretty much confined to a limited area. Was animal life also? It was after the flood that the scriptures say life was scattered over the whole earth. Who knows?

Who knows many things? Why not admit that we do not possess all knowledge, not even a detailed account of the deluge, and give God credit for having the intelligence to accomplish what He had in mind?

Since He had the power to create the earth in the first place, with all its oceans, underground lakes, fountains, and wells, in addition to the rain clouds in the skies, was He not able to control the elements and cause a flood if He wanted to? Is anything too hard for the Lord?

The flood was a miracle. The episode of the animals and other life taken aboard the ark was another miracle. The rise of the waters out of the depths of the earth and the downpour from the skies were God's doing. And so was the subsequent receding of the waters. The deluge covered the earth and the waters receded just as God planned it all. And it was truly a miracle.
