Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

WHEN IT WAS OVER

When the flood was over and the ground was dry, Noah and his sons offered sacrifices to the Lord. The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible says: "And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar; and gave thanks unto the Lord, and rejoiced in his heart." (Gen. 9:14.)

One may wonder about Noah offering beasts in sacrifice to the Lord immediately after his emergence from the ark. It will be remembered that although he took two by two of all unclean animals, he took seven and seven of the clean ones; thus he had sufficient to allow him to make the sacrifices and yet not interfere with the procreation needed to replenish the earth.

The Lord was pleased with the sacrifice. Noah said, "I will call on the name of the Lord, that he will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; and that he will not again smite any more every thing living, as he hath done, while the earth remaineth; and, that seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, may not cease with man.

"And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth. And the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hands are they delivered." (JST, Gen. 9:6-8.)

The Lord answered Noah's prayers. He made a covenant with him that there would be no more floods, and there would always be seed time and harvest. Then He gave him the rainbow in the sky as the sign of the covenant.

"And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I will establish my covenant with you, which I made upon your father Enoch, concerning your seed after you.

"And it shall come to pass, that every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, and of the cattle, and of the beast of the earth that is with you, which shall go out of the ark, shall not altogether perish; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of the flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. And I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto Enoch, concerning the remnants of your posterity.

"And God made a covenant with Noah, and said, This shall be the token of the covenant I make between me and you, and for every living creature with you, for perpetual generations; I will set my bow in the cloud; and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

"And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud; and I will remember my covenant, which I have made between me and you, for every living creature of all flesh. And the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.

"And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch; that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch which I have caught up unto myself.

"And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy; and the general assembly of the church of the firstborn shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy father Enoch. And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will establish my covenant unto thee, which I have made between me and thee, for every living creature of all flesh that shall be upon the earth.

"And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant which I have established between me and thee; for all flesh that shall be upon the earth." (JST, Gen. 9:15-25.)

It was a marvelous covenant, and a revelation of what is to happen in the latter days as well, even as was shown to Enoch when he and his city were taken into heaven.
