Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE SIN OF MURDER

The Lord gave many commandments to Noah and his sons, and one of the most important taught them how precious is human life. The Lord forbade the unnecessary destruction of any kind of life, although He gave animals, fish, and birds to Noah for food, in addition to grains, fruits, and vegetables. But He especially declared against the loss of human life. Murder must be punished with death! This was the divine decree.

The law came about as the Lord gave instruction regarding the use of meat for food. Said He; "Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things. But, the blood of all flesh which I have given you for meat, shall be shed upon the ground, which taketh life thereof, and the blood ye shall not eat. And surely, blood shall not be shed, only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at thy hands." (JST, Gen. 9:9-11.)

Other Bible translations are as much to the point. Says the Revised Standard Version: "Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you; and as I gave you the green plants, I give you everything." But the Lord made this prohibition: "Only you shall not eat the flesh with its life, that is, its blood." (Gen. 9:3-4.)

The New World Translation says: "Into your hand they are now given. Every moving animal that is alive may serve as food for you. As in the case of green vegetation, I do give it all to you. Only flesh with its soul—its blood—you must not eat." (Gen. 9:2-4.)

The Knox Translation: "This creation that lives and moves is to provide food for you; I make it all over to you, by the same title as the herbs that have growth. Only, you must not eat the flesh with the blood still in it." (Gen. 9:3-4.)

Then the Lord spoke of murder: Neither man nor beast may kill a human being; otherwise he—even the beast—will be held accountable.

Said the Lord in Joseph Smith's inspired version: "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for man shall not shed the blood of man. For a commandment I give, that every man's brother shall preserve the life of man, for in mine own image have I made man." (Gen. 9:12-13.)

The Revised Standard Version reads: "For your life-blood I will surely require a reckoning; of every beast I will require it and of man; of every man's brother I will require the life of man. Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed; for God made man in his own image." (Gen. 9:5-6.)

The Knox Version says: "The shedder of your own life blood shall be held to account for it, whether man or beast. Whoever takes the life of his brother-man shall answer for it to me. Man was made in God's image and whoever sheds man's blood must shed his own in return."

And this comes from the New World Translation: "Only flesh with its soul—its blood—you must not eat. And besides that, your blood of your souls shall I ask back. From the hand of every living creature shall I ask it back; and from the hand of man, from the hand of each one who is his brother, shall I ask back the soul of man. Anyone shedding man's blood, by man will his own blood be shed, for in God's image he made man." (Gen. 9:4-7.)

In the scriptures according to the Masoretic text we read: "Every moving thing that liveth shall be for food for you; as the green herb have I given you all. Only flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it; and at the hand of man, even at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man. Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God made He man." (Gen. 9:3-7.)

So in this instruction we have the following:

What great value the Lord puts upon human life! And why? Because man is made in the image of God. So sacred is that image—so vital is our relationship to God—so precious is life!
