Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

NOAH'S DESCENDANTS

Noah and his sons had children after the flood, and they in turn multiplied in the earth and became numerous. It is interesting to note the names of some of them. Among the descendants of Japheth are Gomer, Magog, Tubal, Meshech, Togarmah, and Tarshish. These names are particularly interesting because they appear in the predictions of Ezekiel with regard to the battle of Armegeddon, which will be fought before the coming of the Lord. They are carried down to the present day.

When Ezekiel talks about the battle leading up to Christ's appearance in Palestine at the "end of the world," he says:

"And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him, and say, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:

"And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great company with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords: Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield and helmet: Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the north quarters, and all his bands; and many people with thee.

"Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy company that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto thee." (Ezek. 38:1-7.)

These are people who anciently lived in the areas of the Black and Caspian seas and the Caucasus region, and many still live there today.

The Lord declared his opposition to these people in their invasion of Palestine; we read:

"Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel: and I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.

"Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured. Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God. And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that I am the Lord.

"So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord, the Holy One in Israel." (Ezek. 39:1-7.)

Canaan, of course, comes through Ham, and Noah's curse rests upon him:

"And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard: and he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.

"And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without. And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's nakedness.

"And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him. And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant." (Gen. 9:20-27.)

Another descendant of Noah was Nimrod, a grandson of Ham and son of Cush. We read that Nimrod "began to be a mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh." (Gen. 10:8-12.)

It was at Babel, of course, that the languages were confused.

This note gives some idea of the antiquity of Nineveh, which was recently excavated by archeologists; they found rich treasures there, including whole libraries of cuneiform records, one of the most valuable finds in the Middle East.

Eber, the ancestor of the Hebrews, was a descendant of Noah's son Shem, and of Eber was born Peleg, in whose days "the earth was divided." (Gen. 10:25.)

The phrase "the earth was divided" is also found in 1 Chr. 1:19. President Joseph Fielding Smith explains:

"Joseph Smith gave this inspired summary of latter-day events: `There shall be famine, and pestilence, and earthquake in divers places; and the prophets have declared that the valleys should rise; that the mountains should be laid low; that a great earthquake should be, the sun should become black as sack-cloth of hair, and the moon turned into blood; yea, the Eternal God hath declared that the great deep shall roll back into the north countries and that the land of Zion and the land of Jerusalem shall be joined together, as they were before they were divided in the days of Peleg. No wonder the mind starts at the sound of the last days!'

"Here the Prophet tells us that the dividing of the earth was in the days of Peleg. When Christ comes, it will be brought back again as it was before it was divided." (Doctrines of Salvation 1:84-85.)

President Smith also wrote:

"The Bible teaches us that in the beginning all the water was in one place. Therefore all the land must have been in one place. (Gen. 1:9.) There was not an Eastern and a Western Hemisphere at the time of Adam. . . .

"In the beginning the land surface was one vast continent; there came a time when it was divided, and other continents were formed and the Western Hemisphere came into existence, but that was long after the time of Adam. . . .

"If one should take a map showing the Western and the Eastern hemispheres, and study them, one would clearly see how today they might be fitted together. Well, that day will come, for, as the earth was divided, so shall it in the restoration be brought back to its original form again, with all the land surface in one place." (Answers to Gospel Questions 4:21-23.)

President Smith also refers to other changes mentioned in the following scriptures.

From Ezekiel: "For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel; so that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground." (Ezek. 38:19-20.)

From John the Revelator: "And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found." (Rev. 16:20.)

From the Doctrine and Covenants: "And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people; and it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys should not be found.

"He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." (D&C 133:21-24.)
