Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE JAREDITE BARGES

In a manner, the Jaredite barges were likened to Noah's ark. Although the barges were smaller and were suitable for underwater travel, there were some similarities of which the scriptures speak.

Where did the Jaredites come from, and what was their relationship to Noah and his descendants after the flood?

It will be remembered that "God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered." (Gen. 9:1-2.)

After giving the descent of the offspring of Noah, the scripture continues: "These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood." (Gen. 10:32.)

The record then says: "And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

"And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there. And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter. And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

"And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded. And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech.

"So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city. Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth." (Gen. 11:1-9.)

Here begins the story of Jared and his family, which is recorded in the Book of Mormon:

"And Kib was the son of Orihah, who was the son of Jared; which Jared came forth with his brother and their families, with some others and their families, from the great tower, at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people, and swore in his wrath that they should be scattered upon all the face of the earth; and according to the word of the Lord the people were scattered.

"And the brother of Jared being a large and mighty man, and a man highly favored of the Lord, Jared, his brother, said unto him: Cry unto the Lord, that he will not confound us that we may not understand our words.

"And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord, and the Lord had compassion upon Jared; therefore he did not confound the language of Jared; and Jared and his brother were not confounded.

"Then Jared said unto his brother: Cry again unto the Lord, and it may be that he will turn away his anger from them who are our friends, that he confound not their language.

"And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord, and the Lord had compassion upon their friends and their families also, that they were not confounded." (Ether 1:32-37.)

The brother of Jared then asked the Lord to reveal where He would like the family to go. The Lord replied: "Go to and gather together thy flocks, both male and female, of every kind; and also of the seed of the earth of every kind; and thy families; and also Jared thy brother and his family; and also thy friends and their families, and the friends of Jared and their families.

"And when thou hast done this thou shalt go at the head of them down into the valley which is northward. And there will I meet thee, and I will go before thee into a land which is choice above all the lands of the earth. And there will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth. And thus I will do unto thee because this long time ye have cried unto me." (Ether 1:41-43.)

The journey required the building of ships or barges.

"And the Lord said: Go to work and build, after the manner of barges which ye have hitherto built. And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did go to work, and also his brethren, and built barges after the manner which they had built, according to the instructions of the Lord. And they were small, and they were light upon the water, even like unto the lightness of a fowl upon the water.

"And they were built after a manner that they were exceeding tight, even that they would hold water like unto a dish; and the bottom thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the sides thereof were tight like unto a dish; and the ends thereof were peaked; and the top thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the length thereof was the length of a tree; and the door thereof, when it was shut, was tight like unto a dish." (Ether 2:16-17.)

The record now says: "And it came to pass that when they had prepared all manner of food, that thereby they might subsist upon the water, and also food for their flocks and herds, and whatsoever beast or animal or fowl that they should carry with them—and it came to pass that when they had done all these things they got aboard of their vessels or barges, and set forth into the sea, commending themselves unto the Lord their God." (Ether 6:4.)

The barges were as sturdy and water-tight as Noah's ark. "And it came to pass that when they were buried in the deep there was no water that could hurt them, their vessels being tight like unto a dish, and also they were tight like unto the ark of Noah; therefore when they were encompassed about by many waters they did cry unto the Lord, and he did bring them forth again upon the top of the waters." (Ether 6:7.)

Here was another overseas journey that included transportation of animals and people, a journey that took a year in which only a miracle could have kept the people and their cargo alive.

Think of the care of those animals for a year, of their food, ventilation inside the craft, and the health of both people and beasts. Only a miracle could have done it. And only a miracle did. It was in the same class as the voyage of the ark. It all comes back again to the matter of faith in the scriptures as against the rationale of the critics. Of course, the wisdom of God seems like foolishness to men who ridicule these accounts of miracles in transportation that literally defy all the logic of the scholars.

Acceptance of the exodus of Moses, the escapes of people in the Book of Mormon, the seemingly impossible conditions pertaining to the flood and the ark, and the account of the people of Jared—all this requires faith in the sacred word, remembering that the wisdom of man is foolishness to God and that the Almighty can do all things. He is not bound by the physical restrictions of human beings. Didn't He create the world in the first place?

It is part of our religion to believe the scriptures, which are plain and clear on these miraculous events. For each individual the question is, simply, which shall we believe—the word of God or the speculations of men?
