Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

TRADITIONS FROM ELSEWHERE

Traditions of the flood as they exist among both ancient and modern peoples are numerous. Nearly all of them have some grain of truth, although no doubt they have seen much change over the generations.

One authority gives this interesting information:

"The historicity of the Biblical Flood account is confirmed by the tradition existing in all places and at all times as to the occurrence of a similar catastrophe. F. von Schwarz (Sintfluth and Völkerwanderungen, pp. 8-18) enumerates sixty-three such Flood stories which are in his opinion independent of the Biblical account. R. Andree (Die Flutsagen ethnographisch betrachtet) discusses eighty-eight different Flood stories, and considers sixty-two of them as independent of the Chaldee and Hebrew tradition. Moreover, these stories extend through all the races of the earth excepting the African; these are excepted, not because it is certain that they do not possess any Flood traditions, but because their traditions have not as yet been sufficiently investigated.

"Lenormant pronounces the Flood story as the most universal tradition in the history of primitive man, and Franz Delitzsch was of opinion that we might as well consider the history of Alexander the Great a myth, as to call the Flood tradition a fable. It would, indeed, be a greater miracle than that of the Deluge itself, if the various and different conditions surrounding the several nations of the earth had produced among them a tradition substantially identical. Opposite causes would have produced the same effect." (The Catholic Encyclopedia 4:704.)

This same authority comments further on the flood:

"There are also certain scientific considerations which oppose the view that the Flood was geographically universal. Not that science opposes any difficulty insuperable to the power of God; but it draws attention to a number of most extraordinary, if not miraculous phenomena involved in the admission of a geographically universal Deluge.

"First, no such geological traces can be found as ought to have been left by a universal Deluge; for the catastrophe connected with the beginning of the ice-age, or the geological deluge, must not be connected with the Biblical.

"Secondly, the amount of water required by a universal Deluge, as described in the Bible, cannot be accounted for by the data furnished in the Biblical account. If the surface of the earth, in round numbers, amounts to 510,000,000 square kilometres, and if the elevation of the highest mountains reaches about 9000 metres, the water required by the Biblical Flood, if it be universal, amounts to about 4,600,000,000 cubic kilometres. Now, a forty days' rain, ten times more copious than the most violent rainfall known to us, will raise the level of the sea only about 800 metres; since the height to be attained is about 9000 metres, there is still a gap to be filled by unknown sources amounting to a height of more than 8000 metres, in order to raise the water to the level of the greatest mountains.

"Thirdly, if the Biblical Deluge was geographically universal, the sea water and the fresh water would mix to such an extent that neither the marine animals nor the fresh-water animals could have lived in the mixture without a miracle.

"Fourthly, there are serious difficulties connected with the animals in the ark, if the Flood was geographically universal: How were they brought to Noe from the remote regions of the earth in which they lived? How could eight persons take care of such an array of beasts? Where did they obtain the food necessary for all the animals? How could the arctic animals live with those of the torrid zone for a whole year and under the same roof?

"No Catholic commentator will repudiate an explanation merely for fear of having to admit a miracle; but no Catholic has a right to admit Biblical miracles which are not well attested either by Scripture or tradition." (Ibid. pp. 704-5.)

The experts go far afield when they refuse to acknowledge the hand of God in great natural events.

President Anthony W. Ivins, counselor to President Heber J. Grant in the First Presidency, was an authority on American Indians. He traveled widely among them, learned some of their languages, was the recipient of their full confidence, and was himself a great missionary among them. His labors and travels were particularly extensive in Mexico and Central America. Out of his vast contact with the natives there he wrote the following for Liahona, the Elders' Journal in 1910 concerning traditions of the flood known among those peoples.

"Mexican mythology relates that there was war in Heaven—that Zontemonque rebelled and led away a host of spirits and that because of his rebellion he was cast out with his followers; the Suchiquecal was tempted and disobeyed the command of the Creator by gathering roses from a tree and that because of sin Yztlacoliuhqui became blind and naked, and that misery and disgrace came to all of their descendants.

"The belief that the earth was once deluged with water and all of its inhabitants destroyed except a few who were miraculously preserved is almost universal.

"The Mexicans tell us that the earth was deluged with water, and that Coxcox and his wife Xochiquetzal made a boat from the trunk of a bald cypress in which they were saved. The Tarascos tell us that the earth was deluged with water and that Tezpi and his family were saved by embarking in a vessel which they had made. That when the waters receded a vulture was sent out, but it feasted on the bodies of those who had been drowned, and did not return. A humming-bird was sent out which returned with a green leaf in its beak and Tepzi knew that the dry land had appeared.

"The Pimas tell us that the earth was deluged with water and the Papogos say that Moctazuma was the only person to escape a great flood. The Californians relate that Taylor Peak is the point upon which their fathers took refuge and were saved when all other people were destroyed with water. The Thlinkeets say that many people were saved from a great deluge by taking refuge in a floating building, and that when the waters receded it struck upon a rock and was broken in twain. The Peruvians relate that for five days the sun was obscured during which time the windows of heaven were opened and the earth deluged; that a shepherd and his family with many animals took refuge on Mount Ancasmarca. As the water rose the mountain rose with it and floated. When the waters subsided the shepherd went forth and again peopled the earth.

"Among many of the Indians the rainbow is regarded as a sign that the earth will never again be submerged. The Peruvians say that the ends of the rainbow rest upon the waters of the sea and hold them down to their proper level.

"Connected with these flood myths is the general belief that after the waters subsided the people undertook the construction of a great tower which should be so high that the waters could never reach the top.

"The Mexicans say that after the deluge the people began to build an artificial mountain, but the anger of the gods was incurred and they slew many of the builders and the work stopped. The Californians tell us that after the deluge the people undertook the construction of a great tower in order that they might have a place of refuge in case the earth were again submerged.

"Such are some of the wonderful traditions preserved among the Indians, pointing to a Hebrew origin." (Liahona 8 [July 12, 1910]: 51-52.)
