Mark E. Petersen, Noah and the Flood ( 1982)

THE CHOICE BEFORE US

God gave man his free agency and made him lord over the whole earth. He gave him an inquiring mind with a great curiosity about life and physical conditions here on earth.

So man became an explorer, a researcher. He became determined to find out "what makes things tick." He wanted to know about origins and purposes. What is life? Where did we come from? Were we always human? Is there life after death? Is there really a divine Being, a Creator?

This driving urge for learning took him far beyond the earth. Space beckoned him. Men went to the moon and came back to tell the tale. Missiles were sent out to Saturn and beyond. Photographs of distant planets and galaxies were obtained as by a miracle.

His studies entered many fields. That is why we have so many inventions for our convenience today. We have new uses for electricity; we have computers, jet airplanes, and fast trains. We have robots to do heavy or tedious work. We travel beneath the surface of the sea in various kinds of underwater conveyances, including submarines for war and other vehicles to study the ocean floor. There seems to be no end to the curiosity and achievements of man. Archaeology and anthropology have produced fascinating facts and theories. Astronomy has opened our eyes to objects in space trillions of light years away. And all of this comes through the blessing of heaven.

The Lord has advised Latter-day Saints to keep up with the times, to improve their education and obtain more knowledge to make them more efficient in their work.

So it was that He urged the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Saints to seek knowledge "out of the best books." His command to acquire knowledge and to "teach one another" is a most interesting one. Leaving no restrictions, He said:

"Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

"Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms." (D&C 88:78-79.)

At another time he gave revelation in which he told his Saints to "study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people." (D&C 90:15.)

It is believed that the great discoveries and inventions of the present day are a result of the Spirit of God inspiring "all flesh," as reported by the prophet Joel. (Joel 2:28.)

Inventions have come as the Church has required them in its rapid growth. When fast travel was needed to service distant regions of the earth, jet planes were made available. When means were needed to handle the rapidly increasing membership records and whole libraries of names for temple and genealogical work, computers came. When there was a need for extensive coverage by the spoken word and by picture, radio and television and satellites came.

The Lord has inspired inventors of the world to produce their work not only for the good of mankind, but also and especially for the onward movement of His kingdom. Where the Church is, these enlightening processes are put to work for the extension of the Lord's kingdom.

Great as men are in their calculations and research, however, and wide as is their exploration with microscopes, telescopes, and the spade of the archaeologist, their deductions are not always correct. One of the admirable attributes of great scientific men is their willingness to discard old hypotheses when new truth is found. It is a mark of progress. There are still deductions and unproven theories that are subject to serious question. Particularly are these ideas questionable when they invade the Lord's domain, such as the Creation, the flood of Noah's day, life after death, and even the resurrection.

Latter-day Saints do seek knowledge. We strongly advocate study, research, and education; but we cannot agree with misguided conclusions that defy the scriptures and seem to refute revelation. Revelation is real! Revelation is sure!

The testimony of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that—God does live!

Jesus of Nazareth lives! He is the divine Son of God, and our Redeemer.

Creation came about by divine means as set forth in the holy scriptures.

There was a flood. It was a miracle that worldly men do not as yet understand.

There was an ark, and there was a mighty prophet named Noah.

God has spoken in our day, and through modern revelation we know many things that research cannot discover.

We know that God lives because our modern prophets have seen Him.

We know that Jesus Christ lives because our modern prophets have seen Him also and have communed with Him, face to face, as one man speaks to another.

We know that God created all things because he has revealed this fact to our modern prophet, Joseph Smith, Jr.

For the same reason, we know there was a flood.

And we know by modern revelation that Noah, builder of the ark, was a mighty being in the pre-earth world, second only to Adam, or Michael, and third in the priesthood line from the Lord Jesus Christ. He was Gabriel, who announced the forthcoming birth of the Savior of the world. Did he not then, in fact, introduce the Christian era?

And God—is He not a mighty miracle worker, far exceeding the feeble comprehension of man?
