Close your eyes and picture a temple. What color is it? How big is it? Are there spires? How many?

Each temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is unique. The Salt Lake Temple in Utah has gray granite walls and six spires. The Cardston Alberta Temple in Canada has natural stone walls and no spires. Even though one temple may look different from another, all are beautiful and all are built for the same purpose. Special ordinances that make it possible for us to return to Heavenly Father take place in temples. Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ can come to temples.

You are like the temple. You are different from everyone else, and you are a house for the Spirit of God (the Holy Ghost). The Apostle Paul said that our bodies are temples (see 1 Cor. 3:16–17).

Just as you treat the temple with respect, you should treat your body with respect. You can do this by obeying the Word of Wisdom (see D&C 89), by dressing modestly, and by following the counsel of President Gordon B. Hinckley to “be clean” (see “The Prophet’s Counsel: The Six B’s,” The Friend, June 2001, 8–9). One way to be clean is to read, listen to, and watch only “things that are pleasing to Heavenly Father” (see “My Gospel Standards,” The Friend, April 1999, 8–9).

If you are clean in mind and body, you can receive great blessings because “in the hearts of the righteous doth [the Lord] dwell” (Alma 34:36).

Find your way through the maze by choosing the YES path if the picture shows something that helps you treat your mind and body as a temple of God. Choose the NO path if it is something that would not be good for your mind and body.

1.  Invite members of the ward or branch to participate in a panel discussion on “My Body Is a Temple.” A week in advance, give the panel members the questions they will be asked. Sample questions: How much sleep should you get each night? Does it make a difference when you don’t get enough sleep? What is the value of good hygiene (bathing, dental care, hair care, washing hands before meals)? Why is it important to dress modestly? What can you do to help you make right choices? What counsel has President Gordon B. Hinckley given us about how we treat our bodies (see “The Prophet’s Counsel: The Six B’s,” The Friend, June 2001, 8–9)? Have the children take turns reading the questions. Have the panel members volunteer answers. Bear testimony of the blessings children can receive now and later as a result of treating their bodies with respect.

2.  Help the children understand the influence of visual media by showing how long an image can be retained in the mind, even if seen for just a short time. Display a picture of a landscape or of an individual person for only five seconds. Have the children close their eyes and visualize the picture. Ask specific questions about it, such as What color was the girl wearing? or How many trees are in the picture? Discuss the importance of wholesome movies, television shows, and video and computer games. Have each child draw a scene from his or her favorite scripture story. Have each child hold up his or her picture for only five seconds. When the picture is hidden again, ask the other children to describe it. Then have the artist tell the scripture story and show the picture again.
