Genesis, Chapters 1 to 11

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of the northern end of this river basin towers the superb J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief mountain known as Mount Ararat. But the Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The “mountains of Ararat,” mentioned in Gen. 8:4 as the domain. Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public place where Noah’s ark rested when the waters of

the Flood had subsided, are no particular peak, but

That part of the globe which comes within the view are the highlands of Kurdistan, which in ancient of the Old Testament is mostly the region, about times were called Urartu (Ararat). Between fifteen hundred miles square, lying in the Kurdistan on the north and the Persian Gulf on the southwestern part of Asia, the southeastern part of south, the highlands of Persia on the east and the Europe, and the northeastern part of Africa. This is great Syrian Desert on the west, occurred the earliest where the three continents of the Eastern drama of human history. Hemisphere come together. Roughly speaking it That drama was a tragedy. It became a tragedy includes Asia Minor, Mesopotamia, Syria, Palestine, because of man’s sin. The wonderful poem of Arabia, and Egypt, with a fringe of other lands and creation in Gen., ch. 1, has for the refrain of its six

stanzas, “God saw that it was good.” Best of all was

islands stretching beyond them.

The heart of all this territory is that little strip of man, the last and highest of God’s works — man, land, lying between the desert on the east and the made in “his own image,” after his likeness. On the Mediterranean Sea on the west, known as Syria and sixth “day,” when God made man, God said of his Palestine. It is some four hundred miles in length work, “Behold, it was very good.” More than that: varies from fifty to one hundred miles in width. It through the kindness of God man is put in a has been well called “the bridge of the world,” for “garden,” and is ordered to “dress it and to keep it.” like a bridge it joins the largest continent, Asia, to Ch. 2 : 15. Adam sees his superiority to the rest of the next largest, Africa. And as Palestine binds the the animal kingdom, over which he is given lands together, so the famous Suez Canal at its “dominion.” He is thus prepared to appreciate the southern end now binds the seas together. Today, woman as a helpmeet for him, so that the unit of therefore, as in all the past, this spot is the society may ever mean for him one man and one

woman with their children. Adam is also warned

crossroads of the nations.

against sin as having disobedience for its root and

Palestine has long been called the “Holy Land,” death as its result. because it is the scene of most of the Bible story. All this prepares us to understand the temptation, the Yet it would be a mistake to suppose that that Bible miserable fall of the woman and the man, their

does story is limited to Palestine. The book of Genesis terror, shame, and punishment. Ch. 3. And we are not introduce the reader to Canaan (as it calls not surprised to see the unfolding of sin in the life of

Palestine) until it has reached its twelfth chapter. their descendants, beginning with Cain’s murder of There is a sense in which the history of God’s Abel, and growing until God sweeps all away in a people begins with Abraham, and it was Abraham universal deluge. Chs. 4, 6.

who went at God’s bidding into the land of Canaan. God’s tender love for his foolish, rebellious The story of Abraham will be taken up in the second creatures “will not let them go.” At the gates of the lesson; but the Bible puts before the life of garden from which their sin has forever banished Abraham all the familiar story that lies in the first them, God already declares his purpose to “bruise” eleven chapters of Genesis and that forms the the head of that serpent, Rom. 16:20, who had

descendants. background for the figures of Abraham and his brought “sin into the world and death by sin,” Gen.

The location of this background is the basin of the 3:15. Through the “seed of the woman” — a “Son of

man” of some future day — sinful man can escape

Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. These two streams are the death he has brought upon himself. And from mentioned in Gen. 2:14 (the Tigris under the form Seth, the child “appointed instead of” murdered “Hiddekel”) as the third and fourth “heads” of the Abel, a line of men descends, who believe this “river that went out of Eden to water the garden” in promise of God. Ch. 5. In Enoch we find them which our first parents dwelt. The region is at the “walking with God,” v. 24, in a fellowship that southern end of what is now called Mesopotamia. At seemed lost when paradise was lost. In Lamech we find them hoping with each new generation that acquaintance with Terah’s son, Abraham, “the God’s curse will at length be removed. V. 29. And in friend of God.”

Noah we find them obedient to the positive Questions on Chapter 1 command of God, ch. 6:22, as Adam had been

disobedient.

In the Flood, Noah and his family of eight were the Testament, and where does it lie? only persons to survive. When they had come from 2. What special importance has Palestine because of the ark after the Flood, God gave them a promise its position?

that he would not again wipe out “all flesh.” 3. How much of the story in Genesis is told before Ch.9:11. But after it appeared that God’s judgments we are carried to Palestine? had not made them fear him, God was just as angry

with Noah’s descendants as he had been with the 4. Locate on a map the scene of those earliest events men before the Flood. Pride led them to build a in human history.

tower to be a rallying point for their worship of self. 5. Show how the first two chapters of Genesis But God showed them that men cannot long work prepare for the tragedy of sin and death that together with a sinful purpose as their common follows.

object; he broke up their unity in sin by confusing

their speech, ch. 11, and scattering them over the 6. How does the brighter side of hope and faith earth, ch. 10. This second disappointment had its appear from Adam to Noah?

brighter side in the line of men descended from 7. What effect did the Flood have on men’s sin and Noah through Shem, ch. 11:10, who also cherished their faith in God? God’s promises. And the last stroke of the writer’s

pen in these earliest chapters of the Bible introduces 8. Trace the descent of the man God chose to the reader to the family of Terah in that line of become “the father of the faithful”. Shem, and thus prepares the way for a closer
