Genesis, Chapters 12 to 50

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of ch. 49, and Moses delivered it in memorable poetic J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief form to the nation to retain and rehearse forever. Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Deut., ch. 32. Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public

domain

When Abraham, the son of Terah, entered Canaan

God’s purpose to save and bless all mankind was to with Sarah his wife and Lot his nephew and their be carried out in a wonderful way. He selected and great company of servants and followers, he was “called” one man to become the head and ancestor obeying the command of his God. He no sooner of a single nation. And in this man and the nation enters it than God gives him a promise that binds up descended from him, God purposed to bless the this land with him and his descendants. Gen.

13:14-17. Yet we must not suppose that Abraham

whole world.

settled down in this Promised Land in the way that

Abraham was that man, and Israel was that nation. the Pilgrim Fathers settled in the Old Colony. God made known his purpose in what the Bible calls Although Canaan is promised to the “seed” of the Promise, Gal. 3:17, the Blessing, v.14, of the Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as a possession, they did Covenant, v.17. Its terms are given many times over not themselves obtain a foothold in it. Apart from

in the book of Genesis, but the essence of it lies the field of the cave Machpelah, at Hebron in the (shechem) or already in the first word of God to Abraham, Gen. south, Gen., ch. 23, and a “shoulder” 12 :3, “In thee shall all the families of the earth be fragment of land near Shechem (“Jacob’s Well”), in

the center of Canaan, the patriarchs did not acquire a

blessed.”

To believe this promise was a work of faith. It was foot of the soil of what was to become “the Holy against all appearances and all probability. Yet this Land.” Abraham wandered about, even going down was just where the religious value of that promise to Egypt and back. Isaac was sometimes at Hebron lay for Abraham and for his children after him — in and sometimes at Beer-sheba on the extreme faith. They had to believe something on the basis southern verge of the land. Jacob spent much of his solely of their confidence in the One who had manhood in Mesopotamia, and of his old age in promised it. Or rather, they had to believe in that Egypt. For after divine Providence in a remarkable Person, the personal Jehovah, their God. They must manner had transplanted one of Jacob’s sons, absolutely trust him. To do so, they must “know Joseph, into new soil, Gen., ch. 37, his father and his him.” And that they might know him, he must reveal brothers were drawn after him, with the way for himself to them. That is why we read all through their long Egyptian residence providentially Genesis of God’s “appearing” or “speaking” to this prepared for them, Gen. 50:20. or the other patriarch. However he accomplished it, Side by side with the growth of a nation out of an God was always trying thus to make them better individual we find God’s choice of the direction acquainted with himself; for such knowledge was to which that growth should take. Not all, even of be the basis of their faith. Upon faith in him Abraham’s family, were to become part of the future depended their faith in his word, and upon faith in people of God. So Lot, Abraham’s nephew, his word depended their power to keep alive in the separates from him, and thereafter he and his world that true religion which was destined for all descendants, the Ammonites and the Moabites, go men and which we today share. Abraham’s God is their own way. As between Abraham’s sons,

Ishmael is cast out, and Isaac, Sarah’s son, is

our God.

Not Abraham’s great wealth in servants, Gen. 14:14, selected. And between Isaac’s two sons, Esau and and in flocks and herds, ch. 13:2, 6, but the promise Jacob, the choice falls on Jacob. All twelve of of God to bless, constituted the true “birthright” in Jacob’s sons are included in the purpose of God, and Abraham’s family. Ishmael, the child of doubt, for this reason the nation is called after Jacob, missed it; and Isaac, the child of faith, obtained it. though usually under his name “Israel,” which God Gal. 4:23. Esau “despised” it, because he was “a gave him after his experience of wrestling with “the profane [irreligious] person,” Heb. 12:16, and Jacob angel of the Lord” at the river Jabbok. Gen. 32:22. schemed to obtain it by purchase, Gen. 25:31, and Those sons of his are to become the heads of the by fraud, ch. 27:19. Jacob bequeathed it to his sons, future nation of the “twelve tribes”, Acts 26:7.

Even while Lot, Ishmael, and Esau are thus being long residence in Egypt meant for God’s people will cut off, the greatest care is taken to keep the descent be seen in another lesson.

of the future nation pure to the blood of Terah’s Questions on Chapter 2. house. Those three men all married alien wives: Lot

probably a woman of Sodom, Ishmael an Egyptian, 1. In what promise does God reveal to Abraham his and Esau two Hittite women. The mother of Isaac plan to bless the world?

was Sarah, the mother of Jacob was Rebekah, and 2. How was Abraham brought to believe in God’s the mothers of eight of the twelve sons of Jacob promise? What difference did it make whether he were Leah and Rachel; and all these women and his descendants believed it or not? belonged to that same house of Terah to which their

husbands belonged. Indeed, much of Genesis is 3. Did the patriarchs see that part of the promise taken up with the explanation of how Isaac and fulfilled which gave them possession of “the Jacob were kept from intermarrying with the peoples Holy Land”? Read carefully Gen. 15:13-16 and among whom they lived.

Heb. 11:9, 10, 14-16.

The last quarter of the book, which is occupied with 4. Make a “family tree” in the usual way, showing the story of Joseph and his brethren, is designed to those descendants of Terah who play any large link these “fathers” and their God with the God and part in the book of Genesis. Underscore in it the people of Moses. The same Jehovah who had once names of those men who were in the direct line shown his power over Pharaoh for the protection of of “the Promise.”

Abraham and Sarah, and who was later to show his 5. How were Isaac and Jacob kept from marrying power over another Pharaoh “who knew not outside their own family? Joseph,” showed his power also over the Pharaoh of

Joseph’s day, in exalting Joseph from the dungeon 6. Explain Joseph’s words, “Ye meant evil against to the post of highest honor and authority in Egypt, me; but God meant it for good, to bring to pass, and in delivering Jacob and his whole family from as it is this day, to save much people alive.” Gen. death through Joseph’s interposition. What their 50:20.
