Exodus, Chapter 1

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of Joseph,” Ex. 1:8, was so severe, prolonged, and J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief hopeless, v. 14, that it has become proverbial and Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The typical. Since every male child was to be put to domain Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 19221), now in the public death, v. 22, it is clear that the purpose of the

Egyptians was nothing less than complete

God says through his prophet Hosea, Hos. 11:1, extermination. “It is good for a man that he bear the children “When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and yoke in his youth”: if that be true, then the called my son out of Egypt.” See also Matt. 2:15. of Israel derived good from the school of discipline There was a loving, divine purpose in the Egyptian in which they grew up. True, as we read their later residence of God’s people. What was it? What did story, we feel that no people could be more fickle. this period mean in the career of Israel? Yet there is no other nation with which to compare

Most obviously, it meant growth. From the “seventy Israel. And it is very probable that no other nation souls,” Ex. 1:5, that went down into Egypt with would have been serious-minded enough even to Jacob, there sprang up there a populous folk, large receive and grasp the divine revelation and leading enough to take its place alongside the other nations of Moses’ and Joshua’s time. God, who had “seen of the world of that day. Observe the nature of the the affliction of his people,” who had “heard their land where this growth took place. Egypt was a cry” and sent Moses to them to organize their settled country, where the twelve developing tribes deliverance, wrote forever on this nation’s soul the could be united geographically and socially in a way message of salvation in a historical record. At the impossible in a country like Palestine. However start of their national life there stood the story, oppressed they were, they nevertheless were which they could never deny or forget, and which secluded from the dangers of raids from without and told them of God’s power and grace. of civil strife within — just such dangers as later Exodus, Chapters 5 to 15

almost wrecked the substantial edifice slowly All this lay in Israel’s experience in Egypt. The next erected by this period of growth in Egypt. lesson will tell of the character and work of the man Egypt meant also for Israel a time of waiting. All whom God chose to be leader. The means by which this growth was not accomplished in a short time. It Moses succeeded in the seemingly impossible task lasted four hundred and thirty years. Ex. 12:40, 41. of marching a great horde of slaves out from their Through this long period, which seems like a dark masters’ country, was the impression of God’s tunnel between the brightness of the patriarchs’ power on the minds of Pharaoh and his people. It times and that of Moses’ day, there was nothing for was a continued, combined, and cumulative God’s people to do but to wait. They were the heirs impression. Of course it could not be made without of God’s promise, but they must wait for the the use of supernatural means. We must not, fulfillment of that promise in God’s own time, wait therefore, be surprised to find the story in Exodus for a leader raised up by God, wait for the hour of bristling with miracles. To be sure, the “plagues” national destiny to strike. As Hosea, ch 11:1 can be shown to be largely natural to that land where expresses it, this “child” must wait for his Father’s they occurred. And the supreme event of the “call.” The Egyptian period left an indelible deliverance, the passage of Israel through the Red impression on the mind of Israel. It formed the gray Sea on dry ground, was due, according to the background on which God could lay the colors of his narrative itself, to a persistent wind, Ex. 14:21, such great deliverance. It is because God knew and as often lays bare the shallows of a bay, only to planned this that he so often introduces himself to release the waters again when its force is spent. his people, when he speaks to them, as “Jehovah thy Nevertheless, it is not possible to remove the “hand God. who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of God” from the account by thus pointing out some of the house of bondage.”

of the means God used to accomplish his special

In the third place, this Egyptian period meant for purposes. It was at the time, in the way, and in the Israel a time of chastisement. The oppression to order, in which Moses announced to Pharaoh the which the descendants of Jacob were exposed, when arrival of the plagues, that they actually appeared. “there arose a new king over Egypt, who knew not This was what had its ultimate effect on the king’s stubborn will. And when Israel was told to “go more and more complete fulfillment will be the forward,” with the waters right before them, and subject of the succeeding lessons.

when the Egyptians were saying, “They are Questions on Chapter 3 entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them

in,” Ex. 14:3 — it was just at that juncture that the 1. What advantages had Egypt over Palestine as the east wind did its work at God’s command; when place for Israel to grow from a family into a Israel was over safely, it went down. Such things do nation?

not “happen.” It made a profound impression on 2. What value was there for Israel in a negative time Israel, on Egypt, and on all the nations of that day; of waiting at the beginning of its history? all united in accepting it as the work of Israel’s God.

Ex. 15:11, 14-16; Josh. 2:10.

The important point for the nation was to know, man, of passing through a time of difficulty while when Moses and Aaron came to them in the name of developing. God, that it was their fathers’ God who had sent 4. Name the ten “plagues of Egypt” in their order. them. On account of this need, which both the How far can they be called “natural”?

people and their leaders felt, God proclaimed his 5. If the east wind drove back the Red Sea, what did divine name, Jehovah (more precisely, Yahweh, God have to do with Israel’s escape from the probably meaning “He is,” Ex. 3:14,15), to Moses, Egyptian army? and bade him pronounce the same to Israel, to assure

them that he was “the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and 6. Why should we not be surprised to find many of Jacob,” and thus what Moses came now to do for miracles grouped at this stage of Bible history?

them was just what had been promised to those 7. How did God identify himself in the minds of the fathers long before. The passover night was the people with the God of their fathers? What was fulfillment of God’s good word to Abraham. Ex. his personal name? 13:10, 11. How that word went on and on toward
