Exodus, Chapters 2 to 4

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. across the Red Sea Moses’ leadership had only Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible begun. He instituted an organization of the people History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster for ‘relieving himself of his heavy duties as judge. Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain He determined the line of march, and sustained the

spirits of the fighting men in their struggle against

One of the things Israel had to wait for through those the tribes of the desert who challenged Israel’s centuries in Egypt was a leader. When the time came passage.

God raised up such a leader for his people in Moses. But, above all, Moses became the “mediator” of the

The story of how Moses’ life was preserved in “covenant,” Heb 9:19-21, between the Hebrews and infancy, and of how he came to be brought up at the Jehovah their God at Mount Sinai. On the basis of court of Pharaoh with all its advantages for culture, the Ten Commandments, Ex. 20:2-17; Deut 5:6-21, is one of the most fascinating tales of childhood. Ex. that guide to God’s nature and will which formed 2:1-10. But not many who know this familiar tale the Hebrew constitution, the people agreed to

could go on with the biography of the man of forty worship and obey Jehovah alone, and Jehovah them his who fled from Pharaoh’s vengeance. Moses found promised to be their God, fulfilling to by personal contact with his “brethren,” the children promises made to their fathers. By solemn sacrifices, of Israel, that they were not yet ready for common according to the custom of the time, when the action, and would not easily acknowledge his right symbolism of altar and priesthood was well to lead them. After killing an Egyptian slave driver understood, this covenant was sealed.

11-15. there was nothing for Moses to do but to flee. Vs. Exodus, Chapter 25 to Numbers, Chapter 36

After long seclusion on the mount alone with God,

He spent the second forty years of his life, Acts Moses ordered the erection of a house of worship. It 7:23,30; Ex. 7:7, in the deserts about the eastern arm had to be portable, so as to accompany them in their of the Red Sea — the region known to the Hebrews wanderings and express visibly, wherever set up, the as Midian. There he married the daughter of the religious unity of the twelve tribes. Aaron and his Midianite priest Reuel. (Jethro was probably Reuel’s sons were consecrated to be the official priesthood title, meaning “his excellency.”) While herding his of this new shrine and were clothed and instructed sheep in the mountains called Horeb (Sinai), Moses accordingly. Minute details regulated all sacrifices, received at the burning bush that personal revelation and similar minute instructions enabled the priests to of the God of his fathers, which lay at the base of all decide questions of ceremonial cleanness and his future labors for God and his people. Ex. 3:1 to uncleanness in matters of food and health.

4:17. It was a commission to lead Israel out of their All these laws and regulations, mainly recorded in

fathers. bondage in Egypt into the land promised to their Leviticus, were given through Moses, either alone or

in association with his brother. It is not surprising to

Though very humble as to his fitness for such learn that there were those who challenged this leadership, Moses was assured of Jehovah’s exclusive leadership in every department of the presence and help. He was equipped with national life. We read of a willful disregard of divine extraordinary powers for convincing the proud orders even in the family of Aaron, with immediate Pharaoh that his demands were God’s demands; and fatal results. Lev. 10:1-7. Like punishment overtook he was given the aid of his brother Aaron, who had a those members of the tribe of Levi who showed readiness of speech which Moses at this time seems jealousy of the house of Aaron and those elements in to have lacked.

other tribes that claimed rights equal or superior to

Exodus, Chapters 16 to 24 those of Moses. Num., chs. 16, 17. It would be

strange indeed, if God who had vindicated his

How the two brothers achieved the seemingly servant Moses against Pharaoh, should let his own impossible task of winning out of Egypt, and of authority as represented by Moses be challenged uniting a spiritless and unorganized mass of slaves within the camp of Israel. He punished to save.

upon a desperate enterprise, is the narrative that fills Just as God took up the Sabbath and circumcision, the early chapters of Exodus. But with Israel safe old customs of the preceeding era, into the law of Israel, so also he spoke to this people through an The Book of Deuteronomy

elaborate system of feasts and pilgrimages, which But before he surrendered his power to another and bound up their whole year with the worship of God. his life to his Maker, the aged Moses rehearsed in Indeed, the principle of the seventh part of time as the ears of Israel the great principles of God’s law. sacred was extended to the seventh year, and even to He pleaded earnestly with them to accept it from the the fiftieth year (the year following the seventh heart, to adapt it to the changed conditions of their

Lev., ch. 25. seven), for beneficent social and economic uses. new settled life with its new temptations, and to

hand it down as their most precious heritage to their

When at length the nation, thus organized and children after them. This is the purpose and equipped, set forth from Sinai, Num. 10:11, they substance of the book of Deuteronomy, which gets required a leadership of a different kind — military its name from the fact that it is a “second leadership and practical statesmanship. They found lawgiving.” It is the Law of Sinai repeated, but in both in Moses. He it was who led them through all oratorical form, charged with the feeling and spirit the long wanderings in the peninsula of Sinai, of that “man of God,” whose name is forever linked bearing their murmurings and meeting their with the Law and with the God who gave it to recurrent difficulties with a patience that seems mankind.

almost divine, save for that one lapse which was to Questions on Chapter 4. cost him and Aaron their entrance into the Promised

Land. Num. 20:10-12.

At the border of the land, from the top of Pisgah in forty years in Midian help to prepare him for the long mountain wall of Moab, Moses at last leadership? looked down into that deep gorge of the Jordan 2. What was the constitution of the new Hebrew Valley at his feet, which separated him from the State established at Sinai? How was it ratified?

hills of Canaan. Beyond this river and the Dead Sea, 3. How was the tabernacle suited to the religious into which it empties, lay the land long ago needs of Israel during Moses’ lifetime? promised to the seed of Abraham. Moses had been

permitted to lead the people to its very gateway; but 4. Show how the Law of Moses takes up the old it remained for another, his younger helper, Joshua, principle of the Sabbath and applies it to the life to lead them through the gate into the house of rest. of Israel.

his last service to the nation?
