The Book of Joshua

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. excepted. One man, Achan, disobeyed the ban on Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible private spoils. His covetousness and deception, History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster revealed by Israel’s defeat in the expedition against Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain. Ai which followed the fall of Jericho, and detected

by the use of the sacred lot, was punished by the

execution of all who were privy to the crime.

On the death of Aaron his son, Eleazar, succeeded Better success attended the second attempt to take him as high priest. But when Moses died, it was not Ai. With these two cities reduced, Jericho at the a son who succeeded him in the political and moral bottom and Ai at the top of the valley leading up leadership of Israel, for that position was not from the Jordan floor to the central highland, Joshua hereditary. Joshua, a man of Ephraim, was divinely was in a position to attack anywhere without fear of designated for this work. He was fitted for the being outflanked. Middle, south, and north was the difficult undertaking by military experience, Ex. order commended by military considerations. 17:9-14, by personal acquaintance with Canaan, Accordingly those cities which, because in the Num. 13:8, 16; 14:6, 30, 38, and by long ‘and middle of the land, felt themselves the most intimate association with Moses, Ex 33:11; Num. immediately threatened,, took the first steps to avert 11:28; Deut. 34:9; Josh. 1:1. The book of Joshua, the menace. A group of five towns lying just north which records his career, divides naturally into two of Jerusalem, with Gibeon at their head, succeeded parts, first, the conquest, chs. l to 12, and second, the by a ruse in getting a treaty of peace from Joshua. settlement, chs. 13 to 22. Two further chapters, chs. The Gibeonites deceived Joshua by representing 23,24, contain Joshua’s valedictory address. themselves as having come from a great distance to

Before Moses’ death two and a half tribes had seek an alliance. Joshua’s pride was flattered and he already received their assignment of territory on the fell a victim to the trick. The consequences were east of the Jordan, out of lands conquered from the serious, for these Canaanites, though reduced to Amorite kings, Sihon and Og. But the fighting men vassalage, remained as aliens in the heart of the of these tribes agreed to accompany the other tribes land, and cut off the southern from the northern and share their struggle till all had obtained an tribes of Israel. inheritance. So when the great host passed over the A confederacy of the chief cities in the region south Jordan, not far from where it empties into the Dead of Gibeon, headed by the king of Jerusalem, Sea, the men of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh crossed determined to strike the first blow. But their with the rest. Jehovah, who at the Red Sea a campaign against the Gibeonites, now the allies of generation earlier had struck terror into the hearts of Israel, ended in a quick advance by Joshua and his all nations by his wonderful interposition to save complete subjugation of all these cities, the Israel and destroy its enemies, repeated here his humiliation and death of their kings, and the saving help, by stemming the swift current of the “devotion” of the inhabitants who fell into his hands.

western side. Jordan River, till all had passed over dry shod to the A similar campaign followed in the north, with the

city of Hazor at the head of the Canaanite forces. At

Once over, they found themselves face to face with the “waters of Merom,” a small lake a few miles Jericho, a city which commanded the passes into the north of the Sea of Galilee, a surprise attack by mountain country beyond. Spies previously Joshua deprived his enemies of their advantage in despatched to learn the weakness of Jericho had horsemen and chariots on the level ground they had reported the panic of its inhabitants and so prepared selected for battle, and resulted in the utter rout of the Hebrews to believe God’s word, when through the Canaanites and the general slaughter of every Joshua he announced a bloodless victory here at the soul that did not escape by flight from the “devoted” beginning of their conquest. Without a blow struck towns.

Jericho fell, and all its inhabitants were “devoted,” Thus from Mount Hermon on the north to the at Jehovah’s strict command. Even their wealth was wilderness of the wandering on the south, the whole to be “devoted,” that is, the cattle slain and the land had been swept over and reduced to impotence goods added to the treasury of the sanctuary. Only by the Hebrew invader. It was time to apportion it Rahab, who had saved the spies, and her family were now to the several tribes. This was accomplished under the direction of Joshua and Eleazar. Judah and end, he reassembled the people at the same spot, to Joseph, the two strongest tribes, were assigned, the remind them of that solemn covenant, and to leave one to the south and the other to the north of the with them his final charge of fidelity to their God main mountain mass. Levi’s inheritance was to be and his one central sanctuary.

“the Lord,” that is, the religious tithes, and his Questions on Chapter 5. dwelling was to be “among his brethren,” that is, in

designated towns throughout all the land. A 1. How was Joshua specially fitted to succeed commission of three representatives from each of Moses as leader of Israel?

the seven other western tribes divided the rest of the 2. Which tribes received their inheritance east of the conquered territory into seven fairly equal parts. Jordan? How did these show their sense of the These then were assigned to the seven tribes by lot unity of all Israel (a) at the beginning, and (b) at at the tabernacle at Shiloh. As for the eastern tribes, the close of the conquest? when they returned across the Jordan, they built an

altar at the ford, as a permanent “witness” to the 3. What justification can be urged for the stern unity of all the sons of Jacob, however the deep measures which Israel took with the Canaanites gorge of the Jordan might cut them off from one and their possessions? another.

At Shechem, where Abraham built his first altar in what relation did the capture of Jericho and Ai Canaan, Joshua had renewed the covenant between bear to it?

the people and their God as soon as he had secured 5. How did the men of Gibeon deceive Joshua, and control of Mount Ephraim, the middle highlands. He why? What lasting damage was caused by his had not only read the Law of Moses to all the people treaty with them? here, he also inscribed it on stones for the sake of

permanence and publicity. And now, when the 6. Locate on a map the inheritance of each of the conquest was complete and Joshua was nearing his tribes.
