The Books of Judges and Ruth

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. not remain faithful. They fell away in this time of Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible the Judges. History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster The Book of Judges, which tells the story of this Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

period, records a long list of names, each one

In Egypt, Israel had grown from a family into a folk. connected with some particular enemy of Israel, In the wilderness the folk had become a nation. In some tribe or group of tribes delivered, and some the conquest the nation had gotten its borne. But in definite of years during which the deliverer “judged” the period of the Judges which followed the the people. On this list the most conspicuous names conquest this steady advance seemed interrupted. are those of Deborah and of Gideon in the north, of What do we find at this time?

Jephthah east of the Jordan (Gilead), and of Samson

We find a loose confederacy of tribes, aware of their in the south. Most of the other judges are little more common origin, yet too jealous of local names and than names to us. Deborah stands out, not only rights to combine for a common end, too selfish to because she was a woman, but also for her help one another until the danger of one has become wonderful “song” preserved in the fifth chapter, a tragedy for all.

celebrating Barak’s victory over the Canaanites near

The nature of the land the Hebrews had occupied Mount Carmel. Gideon is memorable for his helped this divisive tendency. The great gash of the strategems and his persistence, and for his near Jordan Valley, its bed two or three thousand feet approach to a real kingship, which was offered to below the mountain country on either side, cut off him and his house after his victory, but which he the eastern minority from the western majority. In declined, saying, “Jehovah shall rule over you. Ch. the west a plain separated the foothills of the central 8:23. His son Abimelech was actually termed king in range from the seashore. This plain not only and around the city of Shechem for a few years, but contained enemies like the Philistines whom only a perished his sins. Ch. 9:6, 56. Jephthah’s career was united Israel could have conquered, but also quickly mainly concerned with the region east of the Jordan, altered the type of its Hebrew settlers. Right across but his admirable “apology” for Israel showed his the mountain belt from the sea to the Jordan sense of Hebrew solidarity. Samson’s picturesque stretched an almost unbroken plain (Esdraelon), story, with its petty loves and hates, its riddles and varying from sea level to the lower level of the its practical jokes, ended in the sacrificial death Jordan. This cut off the mountaineers to the north which in part redeems its meanness. But neither (Galilee) from those to the south (Ephraim). And a Samson nor any of his predecessors accomplished glance at any physical map will show how even in anything permanent. the mountain country deep, lateral valleys reach up Two words of caution belong to the study of this from either side so far toward the center that book and of these times. First, we must not suppose communication from north to south is only by a that one judge necessarily follows another in point series of violent grades, save along that narrow ridge of time because his story follows the other’s story in in the middle where runs the highroad between the book. Judges 10:7 shows that oppressions of Hebron, Jerusalem, Shechem, and Jezreel. different sections of the land by different enemies Under these conditions only some strong positive might be taking place at the same time, and suggest force could prevent the disintegration of the Hebrew that the figures assigned to each judge at the close of nation. Such a force the religion of Jehovah was his story cannot safely be added together to find the intended to be, and would have been, if the people total length of this period. And second, those figures had remained faithful to it. It had one high priest, themselves (nearly always forty or eighty) are to be descendant of Aaron, and associated therefore with taken as “round numbers,” rather than as precise all the memories of Moses and Sinai. It had a single data such as we look for today to make out a table of sanctuary, the seat of Ark and oracle, the center of chronology. In the same way the four hundred and pilgrimage three times a year. It had one law for all eighty years of I Kings 6:1 is evidently intended as Hebrews, a law far superior to the codes of all other twelve times forty years, to represent the whole time nations, and revealing the nature and will of a single from the Exodus to Solomon. For when we have moral and spiritual deity. All this provided the focus subtracted from the beginning of it one forty-year for a mighty nation, with a pure “theocracy,” that is, term for the wanderings, and from the end of it three a government by God himself. But the people did forty-year terms for Eli, I Sam. 4:18, Saul, Acts 13:21, and David, I Kings 2:11, then we have left charm the story claims special notice because of the eight forty-year terms for the Judges. Eight times light it throws on that Bethlehem family which was forty is three hundred and twenty. Those three soon to furnish the nation its great king, David. hundred and twenty years would then correspond

with the three hundred years mentioned by Jephthah Questions on Chapter 6. in Judges 11:26 as dividing Moses’ days from his 1. What influences made for the loss of Hebrew own. Under these circumstances we are wise to wait unity as soon as Joshua’s generation was dead? for further light from archaeology before fixing the 2. What forces remained to bind the tribes together? precise date of any one of these interesting persons. Why did not these forces suffice? There are three additions or appendices to the Book 3 How were the persons selected who ruled Israel of Judges. The first of them, including chs. 17, 18, in this period? Were they “judges” in the same tells how the Danites came to live in the extreme sense as our judges today? What besides? north, and the origin of the idolatrous sanctuary at 4. What three groups of tribes tended to draw that city of Dan which was reckoned as the northern together under common leaders? Tell the exploits limit of Canaan— “from Dan to Beer-sheba.” The of one distinguished judge belonging to each of second occupies the three remaining chapters of these groups. Judges, and records the civil war between Benjamin 5. With what reserve should we use the figures in and the other tribes on account of “the sin of this book to construct a chronology of the period? Gibeah,” Hos. 10:9. And the third appendix is the 6. Point out the relation of the book of Ruth to the story of Ruth the Moabitess which now makes a closing portion of the Book of Judges. What separate book in the Bible. Besides its inherent lends Ruth peculiar historical interest?
