The First Book of Samuel

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. word of Jehovah” conferred. They seem to have Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible lived together, I Sam. 19:20, in communities similar History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster to those two centuries later under Elijah and Elisha. Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

They used musical instruments in their devotions,

which were public as well as private. Ch. 10:5. They

Sometimes Eli and sometimes Samuel are called the were the center of patriotic zeal as well as of last of the Judges. But neither of these was a judge religious effort. In fact, the belief in Israel’s God in the same exclusive sense as Gideon or Samson. was so evidently the bond that bound Israel together, Eli was the high priest, but exercised the office of that for the common man patriotism and religion judge for his time. Samuel was a prophet, who also were in danger of being regarded as one and the “judged Israel” in the interval between Eli’s death same. thing.

and Saul’s accession. Both men mark the time of It is not surprising, therefore, that out of Samuel’s transition between the period of the Judges and the time and from the forces which Samuel set in monarchy. And the two names are most closely motion, there came two movements which changed linked, for it was under Eli’s instruction, at the the course of the nation’s history: an outward sanctuary in Shiloh, that Samuel grew up. movement for independence, and an inward The story of Hannah and her dedication of her little movement for monarchy. A revival of religion could son to God as a “Nazirite,” I Sam. 1:11; compare not fail to rouse the subjected Hebrews against their Num. 6:1-8, to dwell all his life at the house of God, oppressors, the Philistines. The reverses they I Sam. 1:28, has a peculiar charm for young and old. suffered in battle against their better armed and It gives a picture of personal piety in a rude age, and better led enemies put it into their minds to set up a thus serves to correct our idea of the times. king, “like all the nations.”

Beginning at a very early age, I Sam. 3:1 to 4:1, Samuel, as the national leader, was God’s agent in Samuel became the chosen and recognized selecting, consecrating, and establishing the first mouthpiece of Israel’s God.

king. He chose Saul, of the tribe of Benjamin, a man

That is the essential meaning of a prophet — one of heroic proportions though of modest demeanor. who speaks for God. Exodus 4:16 is instructive, for Ch. 9:2, 21. His choice met the popular approval, at it shows that as Aaron was to be “a mouth” to first with general and outward acquiescence, though Moses, while Moses was “as God” to Aaron, so the with much inward reserve and individual revolt; but prophet was God’s mouthpiece or spokesman. Of after his first successful campaign with universal course a prophet was often a person who also spoke loyalty. Ch. 10: 27; 11: 12-15.

before — one, that is, who predicted what should That first military effort of the new monarch was come to pass. And the fact that his words were against the Ammonites. But a greater test remained actually fulfilled became a proof of his divine in the menace of the Philistines, whose garrisons at commission, both in theory, Deut. 18:22, and in strategic points in the mountains of Israel served to practice, Isa. 44:26. But the bulk of the prophets’ keep the tribes in check. Under those circumstances messages were, like those of Samuel, addressed to Saul was cautious, for he had but a small force, their own time. They were preachers of inadequately armed, at his disposal. But the righteousness, warners against sin, the nation’s initiative, for which all Israel waited, was taken by conscience, and the Lord’s remembrancers. Saul’s son, Jonathan. Unknown to his father, It is the chief glory of Samuel that he was not only Jonathan, accompanied only by his armor-bearer, first in the long line of the Hebrew prophets — the but encouraged by an indication of God’s will and most remarkable succession of men the world has by the enemy’s slackness, ch. 14:12, attacked boldly ever seen — but also the founder of the prophetic a Philistine garrison that relied too much on the order. By the prophetic order we mean the prophets natural strength of its position. He began in this way as a group conscious of their solidarity, the identity a panic in the enemy’s ranks, and soon drew after of their principles and aim. Samuel gathered about him in pursuit of them not only Saul’s small army his dominating personality those persons who were but multitudes of Hebrews who in their hiding sympathetic with him in spirit, and who shared with places only waited such a signal to fall upon the him some of that power of testimony which “the hated oppressor. The victory of Michmash was overwhelming, the mountain country was cleared of David openly, after failing in repeated secret the Philistines, and an independent people began to attempts to make away with him. And the close of enjoy the reign of their first king.

Saul’s life is marred by his vindictive pursuit of his

Unhappily Saul did not prove himself so well rival, till death in battle with the Philistines at equipped for the in character and disposition as in Mount Gilboa brought the first king of Israel to a personal prowess. Jealousy, natural in a king whose miserable end and left the way open for David to claim to authority was so new and weak, was become his successor. heightened in Saul by a malady that induced fits of Questions on Chapter 7.

sullenness and rage. His humility and modesty of 1. Who shares with Samuel the leadership of Israel other days gave place to envy, vanity, cruelty. Even in the time of transition from the judges to the God’s express commands through the same prophet kings, and what relation did he bear to Samuel? whose divine commission Saul’s claim to the throne

rested were not heeded, for Samuel had to rebuke 2. What was a prophet, what is meant by the him for disobedience and only refrained from prophetic order, and what is Samuel’s particular publicly rejecting him at Saul’s abject entreaty. Ch. service and distinction among the prophets? 15:30.

Room was found in Saul’s heart for jealousy of the king, and how did Samuel as God’s popularity and success of David, ch. 18:8, the young representative regard this demand?

man of Bethlehem in Judah whom at first he had 4. Sketch the character of Saul. What was his loved and attached to his person, ch. 16:21. achievement for Israel? Wherein did he fail? Jonathan, though heir to his father’s throne and

aware that David had been designated as Jehovah’s 5. Compare Saul and Jonathan in ability and choice for king, ch. 20:15, 31, had nothing but character. affection for David his friend. But Saul pursued
