The Second Book of Samuel; I Kings, Chapters 1 to 11;

I Chronicles, Chapter 10 to II Chronicles, Chapter 9

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. driven the king, now an old man, into temporary Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible exile and had let loose civil war upon the land. History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster

Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain Solomon, designated by David to succeed him, did

not gain the throne without dispute, but the attempt

of Adonijah, another son, to seize the throne failed

One of Saul’s sons, Ish-bosheth, for a short time in spite of powerful support. The forty-year reign of after the death of his father and brothers in battle, Solomon was the golden age of Hebrew history — attempted to maintain his right to succeed Saul on the age to which all subsequent times looked back. the throne. But when Abner, his kinsman and the Rapid growth of commerce, construction, art, and head of the army, turned to David, son of Jesse, who literature reflected the inward condition of peace was already reigning at Hebron as king over Judah, and the outward ties with other lands of culture. But all the tribes followed him. Both Ish-bosheth and with art came idolatry; with construction came

ostentation and oppression; with commerce came

Abner soon perished.

With his new dignity David promptly acquired a luxury. The splendor of Jerusalem, wherein new capital, better suited than Hebron in location Solomon “made silver . . . to be as stones, and cedars and strength to be the nation’s center. He captured . . . as sycomore-trees,” I Kings 10:27, contained in

the fortress of Jebus, five miles north of Bethlehem, itself the seeds of dissolution. his old home, from its Canaanitish defenders, and However, there are two great types of literature enlarged, strengthened, and beautified it. Under its which found their characteristic expression in the ancient name of Jerusalem he made it both the days of David and Solomon and are always political and the religious capital of Israel. associated with their names — the psalm with

The Ark of the Covenant, which in Eli’s time had David, and the proverb (or, more broadly, been captured by the Philistines, had been returned “wisdom”) with Solomon. Kingdom, temple and by them, and for many years had rested in a private palace have long since passed away, but the Psalter house, was regarded as the very heart and symbol of and the books of Wisdom are imperishable

the national religion. David therefore brought it first monuments of the united monarchy. The Psalms to Jerusalem, and instead of uniting with it its

former housing, the old Mosaic tabernacle, he gave The Psalter is a collection of one hundred and fifty it a temporary home in a tent, intending to build a poems, of various length, meter, and style. As now splendid temple when he should have peace. But war arranged it is divided into five books, but there is continued through the days of David, and at God’s evidence that earlier collections and arrangements direction the erection of a temple, save for certain preceded the present. Among the earliest

successor. preparations, was left to Solomon, David’s productions, judged both by form and by matter, are

those psalms which bear the superscription “of

David was victorious in war. His success showed David,” though it would not be safe to assert that itself in the enlargement of Israel’s boundaries, the every such psalm came from David’s own pen or complete subjection — for the time — of all alien that none not so labeled- is not of Davidic origin. elements in the land, and the alliance with Hiram, Judged alike from the narrative in the book of king of Tyre, with the great building operations Samuel, and from the traditions scattered in other which this alliance made possible. A royal palace books as early as Amos, ch. (1:5, as late as formed the center of a court such as other sovereigns Chronicles, I Chron. 15:16 to 16:43; ch. 25, David maintained, and David’s court and even his family was both a skilled musician himself and an organizer were exposed to the same corrupting influences as of music for public worship. It is not surprising, power, wealth, jealousy, and faction have therefore, to find a body of religious poems ascribed everywhere introduced. Absalom, his favorite son, to him, which not only evidence his piety and good ill requited his father’s love and trust by organizing taste, but also, though individual in tone, are a revolt against him. It failed, but not until it had well-adapted to common at the sanctuary.

The psalms are poems. Their poetry is not simply his works and ways. The mysteries with which all one of substance, but also a poetry of form. Rime, men, today as well as in ancient times, must grapple our familiar device, is of course absent, but there is when they seek to harmonize their faith in a just and rhythm, although it is not measured in the same good God with such undeniable facts as prosperous strict way as in most of our poetry. The most striking sinners and suffering saints, led to the writing of and characteristic mark of Hebrew poetic form is the such books as Job (the meaning of a good man’s parallel structure: two companion lines serve adversities) and Ecclesiastes (the vanity of all that together to complete a single thought, as the second mere experience and observation of life afford). In either repeats, supplements, emphasizes, illustrates, the case of these Wisdom books, as in that of the or contrasts with the first.

Psalms, the oldest name— that of the royal founder

Proverbs; Job; Ecclesiastes — is not to be taken as the exclusive author.

Solomon, like David, made the beginnings; others

Poetry is also a term to which the book of Proverbs collected, edited, developed, and completed.

and most of the other productions of “Wisdom” are Questions on Chapter 8. entitled. While they are chiefly didactic (that is,

intended for instruction) instead of lyric (emotional 1. In what tribe and town did David first reign as self-expression), nevertheless the Wisdom books are king? How did he secure a new capital when he almost entirely written in rhythmic parallelism and became king of all Israel? How and why did he contain much matter unsuited to ordinary prose make this the religious capital also?

expression. In the Revised Version the manner of 2. What advantages and disadvantages did David’s printing shows to the English reader at a glance what continual wars, and his imitation of other kings’ parts are prose and what are poetry (compare, for courts, bring to him, his family, and his people? example, Job, ch. 2 with Job, ch. 3), though it must

be admitted that a hard and fast line cannot be drawn 3. What was David’s part in the development of between them. Compare Eccl., ch. 7 with Proverbs. religious poetry? How does Hebrew poetry differ

“The wise,” as a class of public teachers in the generally from English poetry in form? Name the nation (see Jer. 18:18), associated their beginnings books of the Old Testament written chiefly or with King Solomon (Prov. 24:23; 25:1), whose wholly in poetry. wisdom is testified to in the book of Kings, as well 4. Who built the first Temple? Who were “the wise” as his speaking of “proverbs,” that is, pithy sayings in Israel, whom did they venerate as their royal easy to remember and teach, mostly of moral import. patron, and what did they aim to accomplish by I Kings 4:29-34. But the profoundest theme of their writings? wisdom was the moral government of God as seen in
