I Kings, Chapter 12 to II Kings, Chapter 17

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. worship of the Tyrian Baal into Israel and even Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible persecuted all who adhered to the national religion. History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster This affiance with Tyre, and the marriage of Ahab’s Press, Philadelphia, 1931), now in the public domain daughter to a prince of Judah, secured Israel on the

north and the south, and left Ahab free to pursue his

With the death of Solomon came the lasting division father’s strong policy toward the peoples to the east, of the tribes into two kingdoms, a northern and a Moab and Syria. Upon Ahab’s death in battle southern, known as the Kingdom of Israel and the against Syria, Moab revolted, and the two sons of Kingdom of Judah. Rehoboam on his accession Ahab, in spite of help from the house of David in announced a policy of repression and even Jerusalem, were unable to stave off the ruin that oppression that alienated completely the loyalty of threatened the house of Omri. Jehu, supported by the Ephraim and the other northern tribes, which never army in which he was a popular leader, seized the attached to the house of David in the same way as throne, with the usual assassination of all akin to the the tribe of Judah was. Under a man of Ephraim, royal family. His inspiration to revolt had been due therefore, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who in earlier to Jehovah’s prophets, and his program was the years had challenged even Solomon’s title, the ten overthrow of Baal worship in favor of the old tribes revolted from Rehoboam and established a national religion. Though Jehu thoroughly destroyed

the followers of Jezebel’s foreign gods, he and his

separate state.

sons after him continued to foster the idolatrous

Rehoboam found himself too weak to prevent this shrines at Bethel and Dan, so that the verdict of the secession, and he and his descendants of David’s sacred writer upon them is unfavorable: they dynasty had to content themselves with the narrow “departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son boundaries of Judah. To be sure, in Jerusalem they of Nebat, where- with he made Israel to sin. possessed the authorized center of public worship Mesha, king of Moab, II Kings 3:4, lived long for the whole nation. It was to offset this advantage enough to see his oppressors, the kings of Omri’s that Jeroboam made Bethel, that spot associated in house, overthrown and the land of Israel reduced to the minds of the people with the patriarchs great weakness. (See article “Moabite Stone” in any themselves, his religious capital. And, influenced Bible dictionary.) Jehu’s son, Jehoahaz, witnessed perhaps by the Egyptian example of steer worship the deepest humiliation of Israel at the hands of (for he had long lived as a fugitive in Egypt in Syria. But it was not many years after Mesha’s Solomon’s reign), he made golden steers and placed boasting that affairs took a complete turn. Jehu’s them in the sanctuary at Bethel and in that at Dan in grandson, Jehoash, spurred by Elisha the prophet the extreme north. (See close of Chapter 6). To these even on his deathbed, began the recovery which places and under these visible symbols of brute attained its zenith in the reign of Jeroboam II, fourth force, Jeroboam summoned his people to worship king of Jehu’s line. Though little is told of this reign Jehovah. It was the old national religion but in the in the Book of Kings, it is clear that at no time since degraded form of an image worship forbidden by the Solomon’s reign had a king of Israel ruled over so

large a territory. It was the last burst of glory before

Mosaic Commandments.

A throne thus built on mere expediency could not total extinction. There is a history lying between the reigns of endure. Jeroboam’s son was murdered after a two Jeroboam I, founder of the Northern Kingdom, and years’ reign. Nor did this usurper succeed in holding of Jeroboam II, its last prosperous monarch, which the throne for his house any longer than Jeroboam’s has scarcely been referred to in this brief sketch of house had lasted. At length Omri, commander of the its kings. It is the history of Jehovah’s prophets. army, succeeded in founding a. dynasty that

furnished four kings. Ahab, son of Omri, who held Hosea; Amos; Jonah

the throne the longest of these four, is the king with Reference has already been made to the rise of the whom we become best acquainted of all the northern prophetic order as such, in the time of Samuel. monarchs. This is partly because of the relations (Chapter 7.) With each crisis in the affairs of the between Ahab and Elijah the prophet. Ahab’s name nation God raised up some notable messenger with a is also linked with that of his queen, the notorious word from him to the people or to the ruler. But all Jezebel, a princess of Tyre, who introduced the along the fire of devotion to God and country was repentance — these things form the substance of kept alive by humbler, unnamed men, who supplied their eloquent messages. Hosea is noteworthy for his a sound nucleus of believers even to this Northern striking parable of a patient husband and a faithless Kingdom with its idolatrous shrines and its usurping wife to illustrate God’s love and Israel’s infidelity. princes. I Kings 18:4; 19:18.

Amos, himself a herdsman from Judah sent north to

The greatest names are those of Elijah and Elisha. denounce a king and people not his own, is startling The earlier struggle to keep Israel true to Jehovah in the suddenness with which he turns the popular focuses in these two men, one the worthy successor religious ideas against those who harbor them. See, of the other. Their time marked perhaps the lowest for example, oh. 3:2, where Amos makes the unique ebb of true religion in all the history of God’s relation between Jehovah and Israel the reason, not Kingdom on earth. It is no wonder, therefore, that for Israel’s safety from Jehovah’s wrath, as the such stern, strong men were not only raised up to people thought, but for the absolute certainty of fight for the God of Moses and Samuel and David, Israel’s punishment for all its sins. These two but also endowed with exceptional powers, to work prophets, the last of the Northern Kingdom, had the wonders and signs for the encouragement of the melancholy duty of predicting the utter overthrow of faithful and the confounding of idolators and what the first Jeroboam had set up in rebellion and sinners. Such was the purpose of their notable sin two centuries before. miracles.

Questions on Chapter 9.

Elijah and Elisha wrote nothing. But in their spirit 1. When, why, and under whose lead did the ten rose up Hosea and Amos a century later — men who tribes break away from the house of David?

have left a record of their prophecies in the books 2. Outline the fortunes of the kings of Israel from that bear their names. Denunciation of sin, .Jeroboam I to Jeroboam II. especially in the higher classes, announcement of

impending punishment for that sin, and promise of a 3. Who were the outstanding prophets in the glorious, if distant, future of pardon, peace, and Northern Kingdom, and what was the substance prosperity through God’s grace and man’s sincere of their messages?
