I Kings, Chapter 12 to II Kings, Chapter 17;

II Chronicles, Chapters 10 to 28;

Obadiah; Joel; Micah; Isaiah (in part)

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. an aunt who hid him and his nurse from the cruel Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible queen mother. Six years later this child was History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster proclaimed king in the Temple courts by Jehoiada, Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain

the high priest. Athaliah was slain, and a new era

began in Judah with the destruction of Baal worship

The revolt of Jeroboam and the ten northern tribes and the repair of Jehovah’s Temple.

reduced the dominion ruled by Rehoboam, grandson Joash was too weak to do more than buy off the king of David, to narrow bounds. Before his disastrous of Syria when his army threatened Jerusalem, and he reign was over, Judah was still further humiliated by himself met his death in a conspiracy. The same fate an invasion under Shishak, a Pharaoh of the befell his son Amaziah, after a reign that promised twenty-second dynasty of Egypt, who despoiled well but was wrecked on the king’s ambition to Jerusalem of the treasures which Solomon had subdue the Northern Kingdom under him. Uzziah (or amassed. After the death of Rehoboam and the short Azariah) succeeded to the throne, though for half of reign of his son, Abijam, Judah was ruled his long reign he and his kingdom seem to have been successively by Asa and Jehoshaphat, each in a state of vassalage to Jeroboam II, the powerful succeeding his father peacefully and each reigning ruler of Israel. The latter part of Uzziah’s reign was long and, on the whole, prosperously. Another more prosperous, in spite of the king’s pitiable invasion from the south which

state-for he was stricken with leprosy and had to live

threatened to be as disastrous as that of Shishak, apart. It was on this account that he associated his under “Zerah the Ethiopian” was repelled by Asa. son Jotham with himself, and during the sixteen Internal reforms, both religious and civil, were years of Jotham’s reign — most of which was carried out by these vigorous rulers. included within the long nominal reign of Uzziah —

The natural rivalry and intermittent warfare between the Philistines, Ammonites, and Arabians were north and south, which had arisen through the defeated in warfare, while considerable building division under Rehoboam, ceased for a time after both in and out of the capital helped to prepare the Jehoshaphat entered into alliance with King Ahab little kingdom for the troublous days just ahead. and took Athaliah, Ahab’s daughter, as wife for his The mighty kingdom of Assyria, with its capital at son Joram. The kings of Samaria and Jerusalem Nineveh on the Tigris River, was the force which made common cause against Syria and Moab, and a God used to punish his faithless people. Lying temporary success seemed to crown the new policy. beyond the kingdoms of Syria, Israel’s nearest But prophets of Jehovah repeatedly warned the king neighbors on the north, Assyria was not at first felt who sat on David’s throne of the danger to the true to be the menace which in the end it proved to be. religion from such an alliance with Baal worshipers. Whenever Assyria was strong, Syria. was weak, and

It was not long before their warnings were justified the king in Samaria could breathe freely. But there by the facts. Athaliah, Joram’s queen, was the came a day when a king of unusual power ascended

daughter not only of Ahab but also of Jezebel and the throne at Nineveh, Tiglath-pileser (or Pul, as he and the fate brought with her to Jerusalem the fierce spirit and was also called, see II Kings 15:19, 29), heathen habits of her Tyrian mother. King Ahaziah of both Syria and Israel was sealed. her son lost his life through his close association Ahaz, the son of Jotham who had just died, saw in with King Jehoram of Israel, his uncle, for Jehu this Assyrian the means of delivering Judah out of made away with both kings at the same time, and the hands of Pekah, king of Israel, and Rezin, king with all the princes of Judah, kinsmen of Ahaziah, of Syria, who had joined forces to capture Jerusalem on whom he could lay his hands. The old tigress at and put a king of their own on the throne of David. Jerusalem, Athaliah, now turned upon her own flesh By a great present Ahaz bought the support of and blood, the children of Ahaziah, and murdered Tiglath-pileser, who sent an army to attack Judah’s them all so as to secure the power for herself. One foes. Syria was devastated, the inhabitants were grandson alone, the infant Joash, escaped, saved by carried away captive from all the eastern and northern parts of Israel (Gilead and Galilee), its outcome. With Syria and Samaria ruined, there Phoenicia and Philistia were overrun, and Ahaz, lay nothing between Jerusalem and the Assyrian. among other kings, went to Damascus in person to And it is in Hezekiah’s reign— the next after that of do homage to this irresistible conqueror. Ahaz — that the ruthless conqueror from Nineveh is

In the Northern Kingdom, reduced now to little more found overrunning Judah itself; How king, prophet, than the central highlands of Ephraim and and people met that crisis will begin the next lesson, Manasseh, Hoshea, a protégé of the Assyrian king, for it belongs to the period when the Southern reigned for a few years. But he and his foolish Kingdom is all that remained of the organized advisers, unable to read the signs of the times, Hebrew nation in Palestine. looked to Egypt for help and revolted. This time the Questions for Chapter 10.

end had come. Shalmaneser, now on the Assyrian 1. What were the relations between the kingdoms of throne, came against Samaria, and after a siege Judah and Israel in general? lasting almost three years, took and destroyed it. The

whole population was carried away, after the drastic 2. Who altered these relations for a time? How? policy of deportation practiced by Assyria, and an With what consequences for Judah’s politics and alien population was introduced to take their places. religion?

Thus ended the Northern Kingdom after lasting a 3. Who was Joash, and how did he come to the little over two centuries. And thus began that strange throne?

mixed people, known as the Samaritans, who settled

in the central part of the Holy Land.

The effect of Israel’s doom upon the minds of the contact with Assyria? Discuss Ahaz’s policy in king and people of Judah may be imagined. From the light of Isa. 7:1-9. the pages of Micah and Isaiah, contemporary 5. What were the stages in the downfall of the prophets in Judah, can be seen how God was Northern Kingdom? What became of the speaking to Judah through the ruin of Israel. Ahaz’s conquered people, and who replaced them? See policy of relying on human help from Assyria II Kings, ch. 17. instead of divine help from Jehovah was refuted by
