II Kings, Chapters 18 to 25 ; II Chronicles, Chapters 29 to 36;

Isaiah (in part); Nahum; Habakkuk; Zephaniah; Jeremiah;

Lamentations; Ezekiel, Chapters 1 to 32

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. pride and showed to these Chaldean ambassadors his Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible treasures, Isaiah announced to him that the final ruin History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster of Judah was to come in future days from this Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain source, and not from Nineveh as might then have

been anticipated.

Although outwardly Judah appeared to be the same Manasseh, Hezekiah’s successor, was indeed taken after the fall of the Northern Kingdom as before, it as a captive to Babylon for a time, but the captor was not so. A very different situation confronted was a king of Assyria. II Chron. 33:11. Manasseh Hezekiah from that which had confronted his father was thus punished for his great personal wickedness, Ahaz when he called on Assyria for help against for he is pictured as the worst of all the descendants Syria and Israel. Now there were no “buffer states” of David, an idolator and a cruel persecutor. Yet his between Assyria’s empire and little Judah. And it reign was long, and at its close he is said to have was only a score of years after Samaria fell when repented and turned to Jehovah. But this did not Jerusalem felt the full force of Assyria. Sennacherib, prevent his son Amon from following in his evil fourth in that remarkable list of the six kings1 ways. A revolt of the people within two years made Nineveh mistress of Asia, sent an army to who removed Amon, however, and set his young son, besiege Jerusalem, with a summons to Hezekiah to Josiah, upon the throne. Josiah’s reign is important

for the history of Judah.

surrender his capital.

A different spirit ruled this king. Isaiah, the same By putting together all that can be gleaned from great prophet who had counseled Ahaz to resist Kings, Chronicles, and the prophets, it can be seen Pekah and Rezin but had failed to move him to faith that Josiah gradually came more and more under the in Jehovah, found now in Ahaz’s son a vital faith in influence of the party in Judah that sought to purge the God of Israel in this far sorer crisis. In response the nation of its idolatry and bring it back, not to that faith Isaiah by God to assure king and people merely to the comparatively pure worship and life of of a great deliverance. The case, to all human Hezekiah’s and David’s days, but to an ideal seeming, was hopeless. But the resources at God’s observance of the ancient Law of Moses. The climax

disposal are boundless, and at one blow “the angel in the progressive reformation in Judah was reached ., when the king of Jehovah” reduced the proud Assyrian host to in Josiah’s eighteenth year, 622 B.C impotency and drove away in retreat. II Kings 19 and all the people entered into a “solemn league and Scribes who record the achievements of ancient :35. covenant” to obey the Law of Moses both as a monarchs are not accustomed to betray any of the religious obligation and as a social program. failures of their royal heroes. But between the lines The Law book which was found while workmen of Sennacherib’s records we can read confirmation were restoring the Temple passed through the hands of the Bible’s report of some great catastrophe to of Hilkiah, the high priest, who therefore committed

people in him. Assyrian arms. Jehovah rewarded the faith of his himself, together with the priests, to this reform.

And what the true prophets of Jehovah thought of it

The seventh century before Christ; which began just may be seen, for example, from Jer., ch. 11, which after this event, witnessed both the rise of Assyria to tells that this prophetic leader preached in the streets its greatest height, and its sudden fall before the of Jerusalem and through the cities of Judah, saying, Chaldeans, a people from the Persian Gulf, who “Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them.” succeeded in mastering ancient Babylon and in Josiah attempted to attach to Jerusalem all those winning for it a greater glory than it had ever known elements in the territory of the former kingdom of in former times. Even in Hezekiah’s reign these Israel which were in sympathy with Jehovah’s Law, Chaldeans, under their leader Merodach-baladan, and at Bethel itself he defiled the old idolatrous altar were already challenging the supremacy of Nineveh, and slew its priests. In fact, it was on northern and in doing so were seeking allies in the west. ground, at Megiddo, that Josiah met his tragic end When the king of Judah yielded to the dictates of and the new wave of patriotic enthusiasm was shattered, when, in battle against Pharaoh-necho and captured, blinded, and deported, and the whole city, a great Egyptian army, the king of Judah was killed. including houses, walls, gates, and even the Temple

Josiah’s four successors were weak and unworthy of — that famous Temple of Solomon which had stood David’s line. After Jehoahaz, the son whom the nearly four centuries — was totally destroyed, 587 people put on the throne to succeed Josiah, had been B.C. All that remained of the higher classes,

removed by Necho, Jehoiakim, another son, reigned together with the population of Jerusalem and the for eleven years. He owed his throne to the Pharaoh chief towns, were carried away to Babylonia, to and was at first tributary to him. But early in his begin that exile which had been threatened even in reign came the first of many campaigns of the the Law, and predicted by many of the prophets, as Chaldeans into Palestine, as Nebuchadnezzar, the extreme penalty for disobedience and idolatry. master of Asia, extended his power farther and 1 Tiglash-peleser, 745 - 727 BC ; Shalmaneser, 727 - 722; farther south after crushing the Egyptians at Sargon, 722 - 705; Sennacherib, 705 - 681; Esar-haddon, 680 -Carchemish in 605 B.C. Jehoiakim had to bow to 668; Ashurbanipal, 668 - 626. Nebuchadnezzar’s yoke and seems to have lost his

life in a fruitless attempt to shake it off. A great Questions on Chapter 11 number of the leaders of Judah, nobles, priests,

soldiers, and craftsmen, were deported, together 1. How did the fall of Samaria affect the Kingdom with Jehoiachin, the young son of Jehoiakim, who of Judah?

had worn the crown but three months, 598 mc. 2. How did Hezekiah meet the threats of For eleven years more, however, the remnant of Sennacherib? What was the outcome?

Judah maintained a feeble state under Zedekiah, a 3. Which king carried through a reformation of third son of Josiah and the last of David’s line to religion? What was the basis of the covenant he mount the throne. In spite of his solemn oath to the imposed on Judah? How did he meet his end? king of Babylon and in the face of the express

warnings from Jehovah through his prophets 4. Describe the relations of the Chaldeans to Judah Jeremiah and Ezekiel, this weak and faithless king in the time of Hezekiah, of Jehoiakim, of revolted from Babylon, put his trust in the Egyptian Zedekiah?

army, and prepared to stand a siege. But Jerusalem’s 5. When did Jerusalem fall? Did it fall unexpectedly end had now come, as Samaria’s had come before, and without warning? and through a breach in the northern wall the

Chaldean army entered; the king fled and was
