Ezekiel, Chapters 33 to 48; Daniel; Ezra, Chapters 1, 2

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. This was in 562, and many Jewish hearts must Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible already have begun to beat with fresh hope, as the History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster old loyalty to David’s house flamed up, and the Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain. promises of a restoration recorded in the old Law

and the Prophets were echoed by the prophet of the

When the northern tribes were carried away by Exile, Ezekiel. This man, himself a priest by birth, Assyria they lost their identity in the mass of the had been carried to Babylon at the same time as nations. Only individuals from among them attached Jehoiachin, and through all those years of doom had themselves to the organized nucleus of Judah. From there preached to his countrymen, first to the portion that time the one tribe of Judah stood out so exiled with him while Jerusalem still stood, but after prominently as representative of the whole nation, 587 to the whole people united in a common that “Jew” (that is, man of Judah) has been catastrophe. His voice had even reached to equivalent to Hebrew. Paul says that he was of the Jerusalem, as he joined Jeremiah in reminding King tribe of Benjamin; the aged prophetess Anna is said Zedekiah of his oath to Nebuchadnezzar. With the to have been of the tribe of Asher, Luke 2 36, and all elevation of Jehoiachin and the stirring of the the priests were of course of the tribe of Levi; yet national hopes, Ezekiel became the prophet of hope. long before New Testament times all such Israelites He pictures the breath of Jehovah stirring to life the were commonly referred to as “Jews.” dry bones in the valley of death. Ezek., ch. 37. And

Judah did not lose its identity among the nations he warns the optimistic people that only as God when Jerusalem fell. The Jews who were not takes away from them their old stony heart and gives deported, among them the prophet Jeremiah, were them a heart of flesh, and sprinkles clean water upon put under the government of a certain Jewish noble, them to cleanse them from their pollution through Gedaliah, who ruled the land from Mizpah as idolatry, can they be fit to form the new community representative of the great king. Many fugitives wherein God shall indeed reign. Ch. 36:25, 26. What returned to live under his sway when they found that such a community might outwardly and visibly it was beneficent. But Gedaliah was soon murdered resemble, Ezekiel pictures in a long, detailed, by a prince of David’s house, whom the king of descriptive vision wherewith his book closes. Chs. Ammon had set on to do this mischief and then 40 to 48.

received and protected. The other Jewish leaders Another outstanding Jew of the Exile was a man of feared to remain within reach of the king of Babylon an entirely different type. Daniel, a noble youth after this insult to him, and against the warnings of carried away from Judah to Babylon at the first clash Jeremiah they all went down to Egypt. That removal of Nebuchadnezzar’s armies with the Jews, 605 ended all organized Jewish life in Palestine for B.C., and brought up at the court, succeeded through nearly half a century.

interpreting a dream of the king in attracting his

In Babylon, however, an event occurred long before notice and winning his favor, much as Joseph had that time had elapsed, which marked the political done in ancient Egypt. Dan., ch. 2. From his position recognition of Judah’s separate identity as a nation. of political power, Daniel was able, doubtless, to That event was the release of Jehoiachin from prison minister to the interests of his brethren, the Jewish by the new king of Babylon, Evil-merodach, exiles. Possibly it is to him that Jehoiachin owed his successor of Nebuchadnezzar. Jehoiachin, it will be astonishing reversal of fortune. At any rate remembered, was the unfortunate prince of David’s Belshazzar, the last ruler of the Chaldean state, still line who held the throne only three months after his maintained Daniel in power, in spite of the very father Jehoiakim’s death and was then deported to solemn warning of ruin to that state which Daniel Babylon in 598. From that time on, through all the fearlessly pronounced. Ch. 5. When the Persians remainder of Nebuchadnezzar’s long reign, he had succeeded the Chaldeans as masters of Babylon, this been imprisoned in Babylon. But now he was not Jewish statesman still held his high post, and only released, but given a pension from the royal retained it in spite of the bitter enmity of officials treasury for the rest of his life and a standing who used his Jewish faith as a handle against him. superior to all the other captive princes in Babylon. Ch. 6. In fact, there is no better way to understand

the favor accorded the Jews by Cyrus, the Persian

conqueror, and the edicts preserved in Ezra 1:2 - 4;

6:3-5, than by supposing that Daniel, who had the named. But not so the believing Jew. It was above king’s ear, brought to his attention the earlier all else the sacred house of his God that he wanted prophecies of Jeremiah and of other spokesmen for to see restored,, so that the prescribed sacrifices of Jehovah, God of the Jews.

the Law might be resumed, the nation’s sin might

Certainly, however the affair was managed, it turned thus be atoned for, and God might once more visibly out entirely to the Jews’ liking. All who were willing dwell among his people. All else was in order to this to return to Palestine were permitted and encouraged one great end. The origin of Judaism, which lies in to go. They were assisted by the gifts of their the movements of this time, cannot be understood brethren who could not, or would not, leave unless this supreme motive is clearly grasped. How Babylon. They bore back with them the old vessels Judaism developed under the new conditions will be for the service of the sanctuary which the subject of the next lesson. Nebuchadnezzar had carried off. And, best of all, Questions on Chapter 12

they took with them royal authority to erect the 1. What is meant by “a Jew”? Temple of Jehovah on its ancient site, at the expense

of the king of Persia, that is, out of taxes and tribute 2. How did government of Hebrews by a Hebrew he remitted. At their head went a prince of the old come to an end in Palestine for the first time royal house, and a high priest who was grandson of since Saul’s day?

that high priest whom Nebuchadnezzar had executed 3. What was the first political event to arouse the half a century before. Their number totaled exiled Jews from their depression? forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty, with

enough slaves in addition to make the entire 4. Compare Ezekiel and Daniel in their personality, company number nearly fifty thousand. position, and audience.

Their purpose was threefold: to reoccupy the Holy 5. When Cyrus captured Babylon in 539, what did Land, to rebuild Jerusalem, and to erect a temple he do for the Jews, and how came he to do it?

where Solomon’s Temple had stood. We should be 6. How many Jews returned to Palestine under likely to rate the importance of these three objects in Cyrus, and what was their uppermost motive? the same order as that in which they have just been
