Ezra, Chapters 3 to 10; Esther; Nehemiah; Haggai; Zechariah; Malachi

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. The curtain falls again abruptly at the end of Ezra’s Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible memoirs, and rises as abruptly on Nehemiah’s History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster memoirs at the beginning of the book which bears Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain. his name. But there is every reason to believe that

the letters exchanged between the Samaritans and

For two centuries Judea, like the rest of western the Persian court, preserved in the fourth chapter of Asia, was under the domination of the Persians, Ezra, belong to this interval of thirteen years whose great royal names, Cyrus, Darius, Xerxes, between the two books of Ezra and Nehemiah. For Artaxerxes, are familiar to every student of history. this alone can explain two riddles: first, who are “the The Old Testament spans one of those two centuries men that came up from thee unto Jerusalem,” Ezra of Persian rule, 539—430, while for the other 4:12, if they are not Ezra and his company, ch. 7? century, 430—332, we are dependent for the little And second, what else could explain the desolate we know about the Jews upon some documents condition of Jerusalem and Nehemiah’s emotion on recently discovered in Egypt, an occasional notice in learning of it, Neh. 1:3, if not the mischief wrought classical historians, and the brief narrative of by the Jews’ enemies when “they went in haste to Josephus, the Jewish historian of the first Christian Jerusalem,” armed with a royal injunction, and

“made them to cease by force and power”? Ezra

century.

4:23.

Even in the century covered by the books of the Some persons are inclined to date the prophet Bible there are long stretches of silence separating Malachi at just this time also, shortly before periods that are fairly reported. First comes the time Nehemiah’s arrival. But it is probably better to place of Zerubbabel and Jeshua, the leaders, civil and the ministry of this last of the Old Testament religious, under whom the Jews returned and erected prophets at the end of Nehemiah’s administration. the Temple. This story carries us, though with a Nehemiah’s points of contact with Malachi are most seventeen-year gap in its midst, from 538, the year numerous in his last chapter, ch. 13, in which he after Cyrus took Babylon, to 515, the sixth year of writes of his later visit to Jerusalem. Compare Neh. Darius the Great, and is recorded in the first six 13 :6 with ch. 1:1.

chapters of the book of Ezra. To help us in In Cyrus’ reign the great Return was followed understanding this time we have also the prophecies immediately by the erection of an altar and the of Haggai and Zechariah, though the last six resumption of sacrifice. Preparations for rebuilding chapters of Zechariah belong to another age. the Temple, however, and even the laying of the After the completion of the new Temple the curtain corner stone, proved a vain beginning, as the falls on Judea and, save for a single verse, Ezra 4:6, Samaritans, jealous of the newcomers and angered we hear no more of it for fifty-seven years. by their own rebuff as fellow worshipers with the However, the interesting story of Esther belongs in Jews, succeeded in hindering the prosecution of the these years, for the Ahasuerus of the Bible is the work for many years. Ezra 3:l to 4:5.

Xerxes of Greek history — that vain, fickle, and It was not until the second year of Darius’ reign, voluptuous monarch who was beaten at Salamis and 520, nearly two decades later, that the little Plataea. The Jews must have been a part of the vast community, spurred out of their selfishness and host with which he crossed from Asia to Europe. But lethargy by Haggai and Zechariah, arose and the drama unfolded in the book of Esther was played completed the new Temple, in the face of local far from Palestine, at Susa, the Persian capital. opposition but with royal support. Ch. 4:24 to 6:15.

With the seventh year of the next reign — that of Fifty-seven years later, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes I — the curtain rises again on Judea, as Artaxerxes, 458, came Ezra with some fifteen we accompany thither the little band of Jews whom hundred men, large treasures, and sweeping Ezra, the priestly “scribe,” brought back with him privileges confirmed by a royal edict, the text of from Babylonia to Jerusalem. This account is found which he has preserved in the seventh chapter of his in the last four chapters of the book of Ezra, most of book. He was given the king’s support in

less than one year. it in the form of personal reminiscences covering introducing the Law of God as the law of the land,

binding upon all its inhabitants, whom he was to teach its contents and punish for infractions of it. 8 to 10. Elements in the little nation that joined with How Ezra used his exceptional powers in carrying his enemies to discredit and even to assassinate him out the reform he judged most needed — the were banished or curbed. The origin of the peculiar dissolution of mixed marriages between Jew and sect of the Samaritan is connected with Nehemiah Gentile forbidden by the Law — is told in detail in through his rigor in banishing a grandson of the high his own vivid language in chs. 9, 10. It helps us to priest who had married Sanballat’s daughter. This understand Malachi’s zeal in this same matter. Mal. disloyalty of the priesthood is also one of Malachi’s 2:11. And the difficulty of this reform appears also chief indictments against his nation, and the basis of from Nehemiah’s memoirs, since the same abuse his promise that a great reformer, an “Elijah,” persisted twenty-five years after Ezra fought it. Neh. should arise to prepare the sinful people for the 13:23-27.

coming of their God.

After the failure to fortify Jerusalem recorded in Questions on Chapter 13.

Ezra 4:8-23, Nehemiah, a Jew in high station and 1. How long after the Return was the Temple favor at Artaxerxes’ court, obtained from his king a finished? Who hindered? Who helped? personal letter, appointing him governor of Judea for

a limited time, with the special commission to 2. What are the scene and the date of the book of rebuild the walls and gates of Jerusalem. The same Esther?

bitter hostility which the Samaritans and other 3. Compare the return of the Jews to Jerusalem neighbors in Palestine throughout had shown toward under Ezra with that under Zerubbabel (a) in the returned Jews, reached its climax in the efforts date, (b) in numbers, (c) in purpose and result. of Sanballat and others in public and private station

to hinder Nehemiah’s purpose. But with great 4. Tell the story of Nehemiah: the occasion of his energy and bravery, and with a personal appeal and return, his enemies, his achievements. In what example that swept all into the common stream of did Ezra help him?

patriotic service, Nehemiah built the ruined walls 5. Associate the ministry of the three prophets of and gates in fifty-two days, instituted social reforms, this period after the Exile with the leaders and ch. 5, and imposed a covenant on all the people to movements they respectively helped. obey the Law which Ezra read and expounded. Chs.
