This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. the ceremonial law, not only for sacrifices on a Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible national scale, like those of the day of atonement, History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster but also for each man to express outwardly his own Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain

penitence or devotion or gratitude or obligation to

It has often been said that while civilization owes its God by means of a personal sacrifice, publicly art and letters to Greece and its law and order to offered but privately planned and provided. And, on Rome, it owes its religion and ethics to Palestine. the other hand, the psalms and the prophets cannot This is true, within limits, provided we understand be understood, unless we realize the general that what Israel contributed was not the product of religious life of the nation that lies back of these its “native genius for religion,” but was due to the highly individual forms of expression. That was persistent grace of its God, who took this “fewest of why, when David thinking of himself could write, all peoples” and made of it the custodian of his “The Lord is my shepherd,” the whole people could revelation and the cradle of his redemption for the take that sentence and the psalm it begins for use in whole world. When, however, the Hebrew claimed public worship as the collective expression of preeminence through these two things, a saving God Israel’s trust in its God. and a righteous Law, it was no idle boast. So Moses The great fact of sin is responsible for the perversion eloquent asks in Deuteronomy: “What great nation of the true relation between these different varieties is there, that hath a god so nigh unto them, as of religious life. In theory, every symbolic object Jehovah our God is whensoever we call upon him? and action at tabernacle or Temple was merely the And what great nation is there, that hath statutes and outward expression of an inward idea or feeling or ordinances so righteous as all this law, which I set resolve. Every smoking sacrifice on the altar was

supposed to come from an offerer drawing near to

before you this day?” Deut. 4 : 7, 8.

Religion as developed in Israel had two sides, an God in the sincere belief “that he is, and that he is a inward and an outward. On its inward side it rewarder of them that seek after him.” Heb. 11:6. consisted of a faith in Jehovah cherished in the But in fact the offerer was in constant danger of hearts of the people, together with the sentiments of looking upon all the gifts and victims he brought as reverence and love, and the purposes of loyalty and so many bribes with which he might buy the favor of consecration, which grew out of that faith. On its an offended God, or, worse still, might obtain an outward side religion consisted of certain objects “indulgence” to do some evil deed he planned. This and ceremonies, adapted to express by act and is what Jeremiah means when he cries, “Will ye symbol the relation between God and his people. steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear

falsely ... and come and stand before me in this

But there is also another distinction often made in house, which is called by my name, and say, We are speaking of religion, the distinction’ between delivered; that ye may do all these abominations?” individual religion and national religion. Each Jer. 7:9,10. member of the Hebrew nation held a personal If the private worshiper was in danger of abusing the relation to his God. The Law of God addressed him worship of God in this way, how much more was the individually as it said to him, “Thou shalt not.” priest, the professional sacrificer, and celebrant, in And, on a still higher level, Moses summed up that danger of looking upon all his duties as a kind of Law for him in these memorable words, “Thou shalt authorized magic! “Do this external act, and that love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.” Yet the inward benefit will surely follow.” “Offer this lamb, entire body of Israel, as such, held a relation to God and cease to think about that black sin for which the which his spokesmen are continually trying to lamb is the official price.” Yes, even this: “Go and illustrate and enrich by all sorts of figures. God is do it again, but don’t forget to bring another lamb!” Israel’s “Rock,” “Possessor” or “Purchaser,” Is it any wonder that at length Malachi, after lashing “Redeemer,” “Father” — until Isaiah can even say to the priests of his late day for their laziness, the nation, “Thy Maker is thy husband,” and Hosea cynicism, and greed, cries out in Jehovah’s name, and Ezekiel can portray God’s dealings with Israel “Oh that there were one among you that would shut under the allegory of a marriage.

the doors [of the Temple], that ye might not kindle

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that all fire on mine altar in vain!” Mal. 1:10. the inward religion was individual and all the All along the course of Hebrew history we find outward religion national. There was provision in prophets and psalmists protesting against this sinful perversion of ceremonial religion. See for example I were allies of the true prophets, and external religion Sam. 15:22; Ps. 40:6-8; 50; Isa. 1:10-17; Micah as centering in the Temple was for the time a fitting 6:6-8.

expression of Israel’s personal and national faith. If

And yet it would be a mistake to say that the prophet it had not been so, then such psalms as Psalms 24,

stood for pure and spiritual religion, and the priest 42, 65, 84, 122 could never been written, preserved, for merely external, formal religion. Some of the and used.

greatest of the prophets, as Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Questions in Chapter 14.

Zechariah, were priests. And how far the prophets 1. What ground had Israel for “glorying”? See Rom. could become professional declaimers and deceivers 9: 4, 5.

may be seen, for example, from Micah 3:5-8.

The Hebrew prophets, notably Amos and Hosea, are 2. Give illustrations to show that individual as well sometime represented as the “inventors” of “ethical as national religion in Israel expressed itself monotheism,” that is, of religion as consisting in the externally, and that spiritual as well as worship of one God, who is the moral ideal of man ceremonial religion belonged to both the nation and demands moral living in man. But in fact, that is and the individual. precisely the basis of all genuine Old Testament 3. What sinful abuse of sacrifice were the prophets religion, from the very beginning. See Heb., ch. 11. constantly attacking? Did they thereby condemn And, particularly, that is the basis of the entire Law, Temple, altar, priesthood, and ceremonial law in even of the ceremonial law. For that Law must not themselves?

be judged by its sinful abuse, but by the principles of 4. Were all the prophets spiritually minded, or all righteousness, holiness, repentance, and fellowship the priests merely “professional”? Give instances that underlie every article in the sanctuary, every from history of alliances between prophets and sacrifice on the altar, every rite prescribed and priests.

observance commanded. At their best the priests
