This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. the monarchy would bring with it because of the Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible sinfulness of the men who should be king, he History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster nevertheless set up a throne that by its very nature Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. was unique. The king of Israel was in a peculiar

sense the representative of Jehovah. He ruled for

The Old Testament points forward. The whole God. He was his own “anointed,” set apart for the impression it leaves upon us is that of an unfinished exercise of supreme authority over God’s people on thing. Its history moves toward a goal outside of earth and entitled to their religious as well as itself. Its religion is a religion of expectation. All its patriotic devotion. See, for example, Psalms 21, 101.

institutions are typical, that is, they represent more After the failure of Saul to obey God’s instructions, than themselves, because they belong to a larger Samuel anointed, at God’s dictation and against his order of things which appears imperfectly in them. own human judgment, David the son of Jesse. This In the last lesson we saw how priest and prophet had man proved himself, not indeed sinless nor the ideal their own place in Israel. But both priest and prophet king, but a man after God’s heart, Acts 13:22, also typified a perfect priesthood and a perfect because his dominant purpose was to do God’s will. prophecy, to be realized under ideal conditions To David therefore was given the remarkable which were never present in those times. When, for promise contained in II Sam., oh. 7. In a word, this example, Aaron made atonement for the sins of the promise was an irrevocable, eternal “covenant,” nation once each year, as provided in Lev. ch. 16, he granting sovereignty to David’s “house” — that is, had to present first the blood of the bullock which his posterity considered, as a unit — over God’s was the sin offering for himself, before he presented Kingdom on earth.

the blood of the goat which was the sin offering for The story of how men came to understand better and the people. But ideally, in his position as mediator better vastness of this covenant, which Isaiah calls between God and the sinful people, he was a sinless “the sure mercies of David,” ch. 55:3, forms the man; the blood of the bullock and the pure, white subject of that special Old Testament study called garments he put on to indicate that he was sinless for “Messianic Prophecy.” In the psalms and in the the moment. Nothing could be clearer than that he prophecies we are able to trace a growing faith, that typified a perfect high priest for God’s people, who by an ideal king of David’s line Jehovah will finally should be really a sinless man — one who needed no work his long delayed will in and through Israel. mechanism of altar, victim, and dress to make him This Person is commonly called “the - Messiah,” pure from personal sin. See Heb. chs. 5 to 10, because “Messiah” means “Anointed.” Its Greek especially ch. 7:26-28.

equivalent is “the Christ.” While other persons also

Again Moses looks forward to the realization in the were anointed with oil when they assummed office, future of the ideal communication between God and kings were always so anointed and the idea belongs his people typified in the “A prophet,” says he, peculiarly to kingship. By the time our Lord “Jehovah thy God will raise up unto thee.” “From appeared, no other side of the work which this ideal, the midst of thee, like unto me.” Deut. 18:15-19. promised, longed-for Coming One was to do, was so This ideal prophet will perfectly hear and perfectly prominent as that of ruling for God as the King of transmit divine truth to men. It was on the basis of Israel. For this reason Jesus of Nazareth is known to this promise that many persons described our Lord all who believe in his claims as “the Christ,” and as “the prophet,” meaning thereby that perfect such believers are thence called “Christians.” This prophet promised by Moses. John 1:21, 25; 7:40. title of Christ connects Jesus with the line of David,

But there was another institution of Old Testament to which he actually belongs by descent, and it also times which more than prophet or priest was connects him with the promise of David, of which associated in the people’s minds with the ideal he was the heir and the fulfillment. future. This was kingship. God himself was We have thus seen that “the Coming One,” Luke theoretically King — sole King — of Israel. Isa. 7:19; John 11:27, the eyes of Israel were directed, 33:22. But at the entreaty of his sinful and harassed was to be prophet, priest, and king. In all these people he instructed Samuel to “make them a king.” offices and the various duties they involved he was And while Samuel warned them of the evils which to be the one chosen from among the people — a

man therefore, “servant of the servants of God.” Yet this is not all. Alongside these promises there was a in them God’s purpose to make this great Son of promise also that Jehovah himself would come to David a true “Immanuel,” Isa. 7:14 — a Person in dwell among his people. The Holy of Holies, with whom God actually is “with us.” God gave to him its Ark of the Presence and its Mercy seat for such names as ‘Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, revelation and atonement, was itself typical of an Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace,” because he ideal presence of God among men. And through should really be all that these names imply. Isa. 9:6. psalm and prophet we can trace this promise also. For the Child who was born in little Bethlehem, the Now it is terrible with its threat to sinners, and now “city of David,” was not merely one who should be it is glorious with its hope for the oppressed. At “ruler in Israel,”, but also one “whose goings forth length in Malachi we read in the clearest words, are from of old, from everlasting.” Micah 5:2.

“The Lord, whom seek, will suddenly come to his Questions on Chapter 15. temple.” Mal. 3:1, 5. Preceded by his “messenger”

to “prepare the way before him,” Israel’s divine 1. How did the priests and prophets in Israel point Lord himself is to come for judgment and salvation. forward to an ideal Priest and Prophet? See also Ps. 96:13; 98:9.

It was not made so plain to the men of ancient Israel Jehovah? In whose “house” was this office made just how these two lines of promise were to be eternal? In what Person has this promise been united, as it appears to us now in the light of later fulfilled?

facts. But we, who worship Jesus of Nazareth not 3. How was the promise that God himself should be only as “Son of David according to the flesh,” but as “the Coming One” consistent with the promise of divine Lord from heaven, “in two distinct natures a human Prophet, Priest, and King? Where is it and one person for ever,” can look back on those old indicated in the Old Testament that both prophecies of “men who spake from God, being promises might be fulfilled in one Person? moved by the Holy Spirit.” II Peter 1:21. We can see
