This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. surrounded by powerful neighbors, succeeded in Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible maintaining its independence. History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster

Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. At first the Maccabees had been animated by a

religious motive; the revolt had been due not to an

At the time when the Old Testament narrative interference with what may be called civil liberty, closes, the Jews were under the rule of Persia. The but to the desecration by Antiochus Epiphanes of the Persian control continued for about one hundred Temple and to the attempt at prohibiting the worship years more, and then gave way to the empire of of Jehovah. As time went on, however, the Alexander the Great. Alexander was king of Maccabean rulers became more worldly in their Macedonia, a country to the north of Greece; but the purposes and thus alienated the devout element language and culture of his court were Greek. After among their people. Hence the little kingdom Greece proper had been conquered by Alexander's became an easy prey to the next great world empire father, Philip, Alexander himself proceeded to the which appeared upon the scene. conquest of the East. The Persian Empire fell in 331 That empire was the empire of Rome. Originally a B.C., and with the other Persian possessions small city-state in Italy, Rome had gradually Jerusalem came into the hands of the conqueror. In extended her conquests until she came into conflict 323 B.C., when Alexander died, his vast empire, with Greece and with the Greek kingdoms of the which extended around the eastern end of the Eastern world. Weakened by many causes, the Mediterranean Sea and to the borders of India, at successors of Alexander soon succumbed, and once fell to pieces. But the kingdoms into which the among them the monarchs of Syria. Judea could not, empire was divided were to a large extent Greek resist the new conqueror. In 63 B.C., the famous kingdoms. Short-lived, therefore, as Alexander's Roman general, Pompey, entered Jerusalem, and empire was, it had the permanent effect of spreading Jewish independence was at an end.

the Greek language and Greek civilization over the The Roman control was exerted in Palestine for a Eastern world. It became thus as will be seen, one of time through subservient high priests, until in 37

for the gospel. the most important factors in the divine preparation B.C. Herod the Great was made king. Herod was not

a real Jew, but an Idumaean; and at, heart he had

After the death of Alexander, the country of Judea little or no attachment to the Jews' religion. But he became a bone of contention between two of the was wise enough not to offend Jewish feeling in the kingdoms into which Alexander's empire was outrageous way that. had proved so disastrous to divided-the Greek kingdom of Syria and the Greek Antiochus Epiphanes. Throughout his reign Herod kingdom of Egypt. At last, however, the Syrian was of course thoroughly subservient to the Romans; kingdom, with its capital at Antioch, near the though a king, he was strictly a vassal king. Herod northeastern corner of the Mediterranean Sea, reigned from 37 B.C. to 4 B.C. His kingdom gained the upper hand. Judea became part of the embraced not only Judea, but all Palestine. It was

near the end of Herod's reign that our Saviour was

territory of the Syrian monarchs.

In the reign of Antiochus IV of Syria, called born. Thus the reckoning of the Christian era, which Antiochus Epiphanes, 175-164 B.C., the Jews began was instituted many centuries after Christ, is at least a war for independence. Antiochus Epiphanes had four years too low; Jesus was born a little earlier

desecrated the Temple at Jerusalem by setting up an than 4 B.C. When Pompey conquered Jerusalem in 63 B.C., image of a heathen god in the Holy of Holies. The Rome was still a republic. But before many years result was the glorious revolt of the Jews under had elapsed Julius Ceasar assumed the supreme Mattathias and his sons-the family of the power, and the ancient Roman liberties were gone. Maccabees. The Maccabean uprising, of which a After the assassination of Caesar in 44 B.C., there stirring account has been preserved in the First Book was a long period of civil war. Finally Augustus was of the Maccabees, an apocryphal book attached to triumphant, and the Roman Empire began. In the the Old Testament, certainly constitutes one of the long reign of Augustus, 27 B.C. to A.D. 14, our most glorious chapters in the history of liberty. The Saviour was born. uprising was successful, and for about one hundred

years the little country of the Jews, though The political events which have just been outlined In the third place, the dispersion of the Jews did not take place by chance. They were all parts of provided the early missionaries everywhere with a the plan of God which prepared for the coming of starting point for their labors. As a result not only of the Lord. When Jesus finally came, the world was captivity, but also of voluntary emigration, the Jews prepared for his coming. In the first place, the in the first century were scattered abroad throughout Roman Empire provided that peace and unity which the cities of the world very much as they are was needed for the spread of the gospel. War scattered today. But there was one important interrupts communication between nations. But difference. Today the Jewish synagogues are when the apostles went forth from Jerusalem to attended only by Jews. In those days they were spread the good news of Christ to the world, there attended also by men of other races. Thus when Paul was no war to interrupt their course. Nation was and the other Christian missionaries exercised their bound to nation tinder the strong hand of Rome. privilege of speaking in the, synagogues, they were Travel was comparatively safe and easy, and despite speaking not only to Jews but also to a picked occasional persecution the earliest missionaries audience of Gentiles. usually enjoyed the protection of Roman law. In the

second place, the Greek language provided a Questions on Chapter 1.

medium of communication. When the Romans 1. Name in order the foreign powers which conquered the Eastern world, they did not endeavor possessed the country of the Jews, beginning to substitute their own language for the language with Old Testament times and continuing down which already prevailed. Such an attempt would to the present (lay. only have produced confusion. Indeed, the Romans

themselves adopted the Greek language as a 2. What was the importance of the Maccabean convenient medium of communication. Greek thus uprising in the. preparation for the coming of the became a world language. The original, local Lord? What would have happened if Antiochus languages of the various countries continued to be Epiphanes had been successful?

used (Aramaic, for example, was used in Palestine), 3. What was the importance of the Roman Empire but Greek was a common medium. Thus when the

apostles went forth to the evangelization of the for the spread of the gospel? of the Greek world, there were no barriers of language to check language? of the dispersion of the Jews? their course.
