This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name

Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible was Joseph, of the house ,of David; and the virgin's History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster name was Mary." It was a far more wonderful Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain. promise than that which had come to Zacharias, not

only because of the greater glory of the promised

Son, but also because of the mystery of his birth.

John 1: 1-18

The child was to have no human father, but was to

When the Son of God came to earth for our be given by the power of the Holy Spirit. But this salvation, the world was ready for his coming. The time, despite the strangeness of the promise, there whole course of history had been made to lead up to was no unbelief, as in the case of Zacharias. him. And he was well worthy of being thus the goal "Behold, the handmaid of the Lord," said Mary; "be of history. For the One who came was none other it unto me according to thy word." And then Mary than the eternal Son of God, the Word who was went to Judea to visit her kinswoman Elisabeth, the with. God and who was God. He had existed from wife of Zacharias; and while in Judea she gave all eternity; he had been the instrument in creating glorious expression to her thanksgiving in the hymn the world. He was himself truly God, the same in which is called, from the first word of it in the Latin substance with the Father, and equal in power and translation, the "Magnificat"

glory. Yet the One who was so great humbled "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath himself to be born as a man and finally to suffer and rejoiced in God my Saviour." Then Mary returned to die. His coming was a voluntary act, an act of the her own home in Nazareth. Father in giving him for the sins of the world, and

his own act which he performed because he loved Matthew 1 : 18 - 25

us. It was an act of infinite condescension. The Son But another announcement of the Saviour's birth was of God humbled himself to lead a true human life; made to Joseph, who was betrothed to Mary. Matt. he took upon himself our nature. He was born, he

grew in wisdom and stature, he suffered, he died." 1:18-25. Joseph was to have the high privilege of He was always God, but he became also man. Who caring for the child that was to be born. "Fear not to can measure the depth of such condescending love? take unto thee Mary thy wife," said the angel to

What, then, was the manner of his coming? The Joseph in a dream, "for that which is conceived in story is told, in beautiful narrative, in the first two her is of the Holy Spirit." And here again, there was

no unbelief and no disobedience. Joseph "did as the

chapters of Matthew and Luke.

angel of the Lord commanded him, and took unto

him his wife."

Luke 1 : 5 - 25, 57 - 80

First, the birth of John the Baptist, the forerunner, Luke 2 : 1 - 7

was announced by the angel Gabriel to Zacharias, a Joseph and Mary lived in Nazareth, a town of the devout priest, as he was ministering in the Temple. northern part of Palestine, which was called Galilee. Luke 1:5-25. Zacharias was old; he had given up But the promised Child was to belong to the house hope of children. The promise seemed to him too of David, and it was fitting that he should be born at wonderful to be true; he doubted the angel's word. Bethlehem, a little town five miles south of But the punishment which was inflicted upon him Jerusalem where David himself had been born. To for his doubt was temporary merely, and the cause him to be born at Bethlehem, God made use of bitterness of it was swallowed up in joy for the child an event of world politics. Luke 2:1-7. A decree had that was born. The tongue of Zacharias, which had gone out from the emperor, Augustus, that the whole been dumb on account of his sin, was loosed, and he empire should be enrolled. This enrollment or uttered a wonderful song of praise. Vs. 57-80. census seems to have been carried out in the

kingdom of Herod the Great by the Jewish method

Luke 1: 26 - 56

which took account of family relationships. So,

But before John was born, in fulfillment of the although at the time Joseph and Mary were living at angel's promise, there was a promise of a greater Nazareth, they went up to the home of Joseph's than John. Luke 1 : 26-56. "The angel Gabriel was ancestors, to Bethlehem, to be enrolled. And at sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Bethlehem the Saviour was born. There was no room in the lodging place. The Child was laid, frankincense and myrrh. The Lord bad come to therefore, in a manger that was intended for the suffer for the sins of the world, and the last great feeding of cattle.

suffering on the cross was anticipated by the

persecution which came in the early days. Matt. 2

Luke 2 : 8 - 20

:13-18. The suspicions of Herod, the jealous king,

But humble as were the surroundings of the newborn had been aroused by the questions of the Wise Men. King, his birth was not without manifestations of He sent to Bethlehem to put a possible rival out of glory. Luke 2:8-20. Shepherds, keeping watch in the the way. But it was too late.'

fields by night, heard a multitude of the heavenly 'The king's rage was vented upon the innocent host praising God and saying, "Glory to God in the children of the little town, but God had cared for the highest, and on earth peace among men in whom he infant Saviour. The Lord was finally to die for the is well pleased. "The shepherds went then to see the sins of the world. But meanwhile many words of sign which had been made known to them. It was a wisdom and grace were to fall from his lips; his hour strange sign indeed-Christ the Lord, the promised was not yet come. Joseph was warned of God in a

manger. King, wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a dream, and took the young Child and his mother

away to Egypt, out of the way of harm, until Herod

Luke 2 : 21 - 38; Matthew 2 : 1 - 12 the Great was dead. Then they returned to Nazareth,

where the Child was to spend long, quiet years of

Forty days after the birth of Jesus, Joseph and Mary preparation for his work.

made the offering according to the Old Testament Questions on Chapter 2. law, and presented the Child, as the first-born, to the

Lord in the Temple at Jerusalem. Luke 2:21-38. 1. What life had our Saviour lived before he came Then they must have returned to Bethlehem, for it to earth? Did he cease to be God while he was on was at Bethlehem that gifts were presented by Wise earth?

Men from the East. Matt. 2: 1-12. The Wise Men 2. Why did he come? had been guided to Bethlehem partly by a wonderful

star which they had first seen in their own country, 3. Who was his forerunner? What sort of persons

scribes. and partly by questions which were answered by the were the parents of the forerunner?

Matthew 2 : 13 - 23

But the life of the infant Saviour was not all to be a 5. What was the character of his mother? hearing of angels' songs and a reception of gold and
