This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. Herod Antipas, with the title of "tetrarch," continued Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible to rule until A.D. 39; Philip until about A.D. 33. The History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster public ministry of Jesus extended from A.D. 26 or Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. 27 to A.D. 29 or 30. During most of that time he was

in the territory of Herod Antipas and of Pontius

Pilate, though occasionally he entered the territory

Luke 2 : 40 - 50

of Philip.

The New Testament tells very little about the Matthew 3 : 1 - 12, and Parallels

boyhood and early manhood of our Saviour. One The beginning of Jesus' public ministry was incident, however, is narrated. Luke 2:41-50. Joseph prepared for by the work of John the Baptist. Matt. and Mary, we are told, were in the habit of going up 3:1-12, and parallels. John was the last and greatest from Galilee to Jerusalem every year in the spring at prophet of the old dispensation, who came just the feast of the Passover. When Jesus was twelve before the dawn of the new age. For centuries years old, he went up with them. But when they left prophecy had been silent. But at last a prophet came Jerusalem on the return, Jesus remained behind in in the spirit and power of Elijah to prepare the heart the Temple, to study the Old Testament; and when of the people for the promised Messiah. Joseph and Mary found him, he replied to their

inquiries, "Knew ye not that I must be about my Even in dress and in manner of life, John was like a Father's business?" The incident shows the presence prophet of the olden time. His food was locusts and even in the human consciousness of the boy Jesus of wild honey; he was clothed with a rough a knowledge of the great mission that he was called camel's-hair garment; and his preaching was carried to fulfill and of his special relation to God. on in the deserts. The substance of his message is

summed up in the words, "Repent ye; for the

Luke 2 : 51, 52

kingdom of heaven is at hand." Matt. 3:2.

But the consciousness of these great things did not The phrase, "kingdom of heaven," or "kingdom of prevent our Saviour from performing the humble God," was evidently familiar to the hearers of John, tasks of daily life and from being obedient to his and the meaning of the phrase, up to a certain point, human parents. Luke 2 :51, 52. Jesus became a is perfectly clear. As the kingdom of Caesar is the carpenter, and since Joseph also was a carpenter, no place where Caesar bears rule, so the Kingdom of doubt Jesus learned the trade in early youth. Mark God is the place, or the condition, where God bears 6:3; Matt. 13:55. For many years, till he was about rule. In one sense, the whole universe is the thirty years old, the Saviour of the world labored at Kingdom of God, for nothing happens apart from the carpenter's bench, and lived as an obedient son God's will. But evidently John was using the phrase in a humble home at Nazareth. Luke 3:23. in some narrower sense; he meant by the Kingdom At last, however, the time came for the beginning of of God the condition where God's will is wrought his public ministry. Before that ministry is studied, it out to completion, where the sinful disobedience may be well to cast a glance at the condition of the which prevails in the world is banished and God is country into which Jesus now came forward. truly King.

When Herod the Great died in 4 B.C., his dominions The Jews expected an age which should be under the were divided among his three sons. Archelaus perfect control of God. But they were surprised by received Judea, the southern part of Palestine, with what John the Baptist said about the requirements Jerusalem as its chief city; Herod Antipas, the for entrance into that age. They had supposed that "Herod" who is mentioned in the Gospels in all Jews would have the blessing of the Kingdom, connection with Jesus' public ministry, received but John told them that only the righteous would be Galilee and a district to the east of the Jordan River allowed to enter in. It was a startling message, since called Perea; and Philip received a region lying to the hearers of John knew only too well that they did the east of Galilee and to the north of Perea. When not possess the righteousness which was required. Archelaus was banished in A.D. 6, his territory was Repentance, therefore, or cleansing from sin, was placed under the control of Roman officials called necessary. And the sign of cleansing was baptism. procurators. The procurator who was in office

during Jesus' public ministry was Pontius Pilate.

Matthew 3 : 13 to 4 : 11, and Parallels from heaven had designated Jesus as Son of God. "If

Among those who came to be baptized was Jesus of that be true," said the Tempter, "if thou art really Nazareth. Matt. 3 :13-15, and parallels. Jesus did not Son of God, use thy power to obtain creature need to be baptized for his own sake, for he had no comfort, test out thy power by casting thyself down sin to be washed away. But his baptism was part of from a pinnacle of the Temple, obtain the immediate what he was doing for his people. Just as on the enjoyment of thy power by doing obeisance to me." cross he received the punishment of sin, though The Devil quoted Scripture for his evil purpose. But there was no sin of his own, so in his baptism he Jesus did not need to repudiate the Scripture in order represented the sinful people whom he came to save. to refute him. The Holy Scriptures themselves

contained a sufficient answer to every suggestion of

When Jesus had been baptized, there was a the Evil One. The great victory was won. The wonderful event which was perceived not only by Kingdom of the Messiah was not to be a worldly him but also by John the Baptist. Matt. 3 :161 17, realm, and it was not to be won by worldly means. and parallels. The Holy Spirit descended upon him The path to the Messiah's throne led by the way of in the form of a dove, and there was a voice from the cross. And that path our Saviour was willing to heaven which said, "This is my beloved Son, in tread for our sakes. whom I am well pleased." This event marks the Questions on Chapter 3.

beginning of Jesus' public ministry as Messiah. He 1. What is known about the boyhood and youth of had been the Messiah already, and he had already Jesus?

possessed the Holy Spirit; but now the power of the

the promised One. Spirit impelled him to come forward definitely as 2. Describe the physical features and the political

divisions of Palestine at the time of our Lord.

At the very beginning, however, there was Where was Jesus born, where did he spend his temptation to be overcome. Matt. 4:1-11, and youth, and where was he baptized?

parallels. Jesus was led up from the deep Jordan 3. What was the meaning of John's baptism? Why Valley, where the baptism had taken place, into the was Jesus baptized? wilderness on the heights. And there he was

tempted. The temptation was based upon the holy 4. What was the meaning of each of the three experience which he had just received. The voice temptations, and how did Jesus overcome them?
