This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J.

Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible John 2 : 12 - 22 History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster

Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

After a brief sojourn at Capernaum, on the shores of

the Sea of Galilee, where he was afterwards to carry

on a large part of his ministry, Jesus went southward

John 1 : 19 - 34

to Jerusalem at passover time. At Jerusalem his first

After the temptation Jesus descended again into the recorded act was an act of stern rebuke. John 2:13-Jordan Valley, where the baptism had taken place. 22. The Temple area was filled with the tables of There he received the testimony of John the Baptist. those who sold the sheep and oxen and doves which John 1:19-34. John had come not to perform a work were intended for sacrifice; the sacred precincts of of his own, but to be a witness to the greater One God's house had been made a place of business. who was to follow. He put aside, therefore, all There was no hesitation on the part of Jesus; he thoughts of personal ambition, declared plainly that made a scourge of cords and drove the traffickers he was not the Christ, and rejoiced when his out. It is a mistake to suppose that the wonderful disciples left him in order to follow the One. whom gentleness of our Saviour or his gracious he had come to announce. John had had revealed to participation in innocent joys was any indication of him, moreover, not merely the fact that Jesus was weakness. Though always merciful to the penitent, the Saviour, but also something of the way in which Jesus could be indignant against blatant sinners; and the salvation was to be wrought. Jesus was to die, the righteous anger of the Saviour was a terrible like a sacrificial lamb, for the sins of others. thing.

"Behold, the Lamb of God," said John to his John 2 : 23 - 25 disciples, "that taketh away the sin of the world!"

At Jerusalem Jesus won adherents because of the

John 1 : 35 - 51

miracles which he wrought. But he was able to

Two pairs of brothers, in those early days, left John distinguish true devotion from that which was false. to follow the Saviour. John 1:35-42. One pair He "knew all men, ...and needed not that any one consisted of Andrew and Peter; the other, no doubt, should bear witness concerning man; for he himself consisted of the two sons of Zebedee, James and knew what was in man." John 2:24, 25.

John, although John, who wrote the Gospel in which John 3 : 1 - 15 this narrative is contained, has never mentioned his

own name in his book. Two other men, besides these One example of this knowledge was afforded by the four, came to Jesus on the following day-Philip and case of Nicodemus, John 3:1-15; Jesus knew what Nathanael. Vs.43-51.

Nicodemus lacked. Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews,

came to Jesus by night, to discuss the substance of

John 2 : 1 - 11

what Jesus had been saying. But our Lord would not

After the meeting with these six disciples, our Lord waste time with things that lay on the surface. He ascended again from the valley of the Jordan to the went straight to the heart of the matter, and said to higher country of Galilee. And there, in the village Nicodemus, "Ye must be born anew." V. 7. None of of Cana, he wrought the first of his miracles. John the learning, none of the worldly influence of 2:1-11. He was a guest at a wedding feast, and when Nicodemus would avail; true life could come only the wine ran out he supplied the lack by turning by a new birth, which all, rich and poor, learned and water into wine. Thereby he not only manifested his ignorant, must receive, and receive, not by their own power, but also indicated the manner of his ministry. efforts, but by the mysterious power of the Spirit of He was not to be an austere person like John the God. Jesus spoke, too, on that memorable night, of Baptist, living far from the habitations of men. On the sacrificial death which he himself was to die for the contrary, his ministry was, for those whom he the sins of men. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in came to win, a ministry of joy. He entered not the wilderness," he said, "even so must the Son of merely into the sorrows, but also into the joys of man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth may in men; the One who was to die for the sins of the him have eternal life." world was also willing to grace a marriage feast!

woman came to draw water at the well. For that

woman it was a memorable hour. Jesus was willing

John 3 : 22 - 30

to labor, and that in the midst of his weariness- for

Then Jesus left Jerusalem' the capital, and carried one sinful soul, as well as for all the multitudes that on, through his disciples, a -ministry of baptism in had crowded around him in Judea. The woman was the country districts of Judea. John 3:22-30. He was of sinful life, and she could not hide her sin from thus engaging in a work which before had belonged Jesus But Jesus searched out her sin, not in order to peculiarly to John the Baptist. Some of John's condemn her, but in order to bring to her the disciples were perhaps inclined to be envious. But message of salvation. Attracted, then, by what the there was no envy in the heart of John himself. He woman had said, a number of the Samaritans came had come not for his own sake but to be a witness to to Jesus and recognized him as the Messiah and as Jesus as Messiah. And now he rejoiced in the the Saviour of the world. growing prominence of Jesus. "The friend of the Questions on Chapter 4.

bridegroom," he said about himself, "rejoices at the 1. Give an account of the testimony of John the voice of the bridegroom. He must increase, but I Baptist to Jesus. How did John know that Jesus

John 4 : 1 - 42 must decrease." Vs. 29, 30, in substance. was the Messiah? 2. What happened at Cana? Who, besides Jesus, was When this early Judean ministry was over, Jesus a guest at the feast?

went back to Galilee. On the way he passed through 3. Give an outline of all the journeys of Jesus up to Samaria. John 4:1-42. The inhabitants of Samaria his passage through Samaria. were not of pure Jewish race, and although they

accepted the five books of Moses and looked for the 4. Give an account, fuller than the outline given, of coming of a Messiah, they did not accept all of the the early Judean ministry. What did Jesus say Old Testament. They were despised by the Jews. But when he was asked to give a sign? even for the Samaritans, and for the most degraded

among them, the Saviour had a message of hope. 5. What is the meaning of the "new birth"? Is it still Wearied by his journey, our Lord was sitting by necessary today if a man is to be saved? How Jacob's well near the city of Sychar. When his does it come? disciples had gone into the city to buy food, a
