This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. central highlands is the deep valley of the Jordan Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible River. The Jordan rises in the extreme north of History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster Palestine, one of its sources being on the slopes of Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. the lofty Mount Hermon; then flows southward to

the lake called "the waters of Merom"' then, issuing

After passing through Samaria, Jesus arrived in from that lake it flows, after a short course, into the Galilee, and it was in Galilee that a large part of his Lake of Gennesaret, or Sea of Galilee, which is ministry was carried on. The Galilaean ministry is about twelve miles long; then, issuing from the Lake narrated for the most part by the first three Gospels, of Gennesaret, it flows southward, through a very which are called Synoptic Gospels, whereas the deep valley to the Dead Sea, which has no outlet and Gospel According to John deals more particularly is extremely salt. During most of its course the

Jordan Valley lies far below the level of the sea,

with the work in Judea.

being on account of this peculiarity absolutely

unique among the river valleys of the world. The

Luke 4 : 16 - 30

Dead Sea is 1292 feet (394 metres), and the Lake of

After the healing of a nobleman's son, when Jesus Gennesaret 682 feet (208 metres) below sea level. It was at Cana of Galilee, our Lord began his was on the shores of the Lake of Gennesaret that a preaching in the Galilaean synagogues. Early in this large part of our Lord's ministry was carried on. period he went to Nazareth, the place where he had Centuries of misrule have now ruined the country, been brought up. Luke 4 :16-30. But the people of but in those days Galilee supported a large Nazareth could not believe that the carpenter's Son population. The shores of the lake, particularly, were whom they had known was really chosen by God to lined with villages and towns. The work of our Lord fulfill the glorious prophecies of Isaiah. When was thus carried on amid "life's throng and press," rebuked by Jesus they even desired to kill him. Thus though from time to time he sought out the desert did they illustrate, to their own eternal loss, the places for rest and prayer.

own country." words of Jesus that "No prophet is acceptable in his Matthew 4 : 18 - 22, and Parallels

Leaving Nazareth, our Lord went down and dwelt at At the beginning of the ministry on the shores of the Capernaum, making that city apparently the center Lake of Galilee Jesus called the two pairs of of his work. But before the details of the Galilaean brothers - Simon Peter and Andrew, and James and ministry are studied, it will be well to cast a hurried John. Matt. 4 :18-22, and parallels. They had known glance at the geographical features of the country Jesus before, and had devoted themselves to his where Jesus' ministry was carried on. service. But now they were commanded to show

their devotion by leaving their ordinary occupation

The political divisions of Palestine have already and becoming Jesus' permanent followers.

been mentioned Galilee in the north, under the Mark 1 : 21 - 39, and Parallels tetrarch, Herod Antipas; Samaria and Judea to the

south, under the Roman procurator, Pontius Pilate. The Gospels give a vivid picture of a Sabbath which But the physical features of the country do not Jesus spent at Capernaum. near the beginning of his correspond at all to the political divisions. Galilaean ministry. Mark 1:21-34, and parallels. As Physically the country is divided into four narrow usual, he went into the synagogue. Our Lord knew strips, each about one hundred and fifty miles long, how to find God's handiwork in the flowers of the running from north to south. The westernmost strip field; but he was not like those who think that the is the coastal plain, along the Mediterranean Sea, worship of God through nature is any substitute for into which Jesus hardly went; then comes the low the public worship of the Church. In the synagogue hill country, the "shephela"; then the highlands, the people were astonished at Jesus' teaching: "He upon which Jerusalem is situated, reaching an taught them as having authority, and not as the altitude of some 2500 feet (760 metres) above sea scribes." But they were also astonished at his power; level. These central highlands of Palestine are he commanded even the unclean spirits and they broken by the plain of Esdraelon, in southern obeyed him. He was not merely a teacher, but also a Galilee. A little to the north of this plain, in a hill healer; he brought not merely guidance, but also country, lies the town of Nazareth. East of the active help. After the synagogue service, Jesus went into the They had found the Healer at last. But bodily house of Simon and Andrew with James and John. healing was not the first gift which Jesus bestowed. In the house he healed Simon's wife's mother who "Son," said Jesus, "thy sins are forgiven." It was a was sick of a fever. Others had heard of the strange physician indeed who could forgive sins. wonderful power of Jesus, and desired to be healed. The scribes said that the word of Jesus was But in order not to break the Sabbath, they waited blasphemy. And so it was, unless Jesus himself were until sunset, when the Jewish Sabbath was over. At God. As a proof of his divine power, the Lord said sunset they brought to Jesus those who were sick also to the paralytic, "Arise, and take up thy bed, and and those who were possessed with demons, and walk." And so the man went away from the presence Jesus put forth his divine power to heal. of the great Healer, whole in body and in mind.

It had been a crowded, busy day. Our Lord must Questions on Chapter 5.

have been weary as night at last came. But even in 1. Describe the political and the physical divisions such busy days, he took time to seek the source of of Palestine. In what parts of the country was our all strength. A great while before the dawn he went Lord's ministry carried on? Where was Nazareth? out into a desert place and there prayed. Mark Capernaum? Point out these places on a map. 1:35-39, and parallels.

Matthew 9 : 1 - 8, and Parallels

where had they followed Jesus before? What was

After a tour in the Galilaean synagogues, with both their occupation?

preaching and healing, our Lord returned to 3. Give an account of the Sabbath in Capernaum that Capernaum. There, as is told in one of the vivid is described in the Gospels. What great divisions narratives of the Gospels, Jesus healed a paralytic. of Jesus' work were illustrated on that day? Matt. 9:1-8, and parallels. The sick man could not be

brought in by the door of the house because of the 4. Describe the healing of the paralytic. What can be crowds. But he and his friends were not to be learned from this incident about the nature of denied. The four friends who bore his couch lowered Jesus' person? Why were the scribes offended? him through the roof into the place where Jesus was.
