This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. But for the present the opposition of the Pharisees Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible was held in check by the favor which our Lord had History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster among the people. Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

This favor was due partly to the teaching of Jesus

and partly to his miracles. He interpreted the

During the first part of the Galilaean ministry, our Scriptures in a fresh, original way; "He taught as one Lord had the favor of the people. Great crowds having authority and not as their scribes." And he followed him so that he could scarcely enter into a had power to heal every manner of disease and to house. On one occasion he embarked in a little boat cast out demons. It was no wonder that the crowds and put forth a short distance into the lake, so as to followed so wonderful a teacher.

be able to speak to the throng on the shore. Matthew 4:17

This popularity, it is true, was not universal. The The Galilaean teaching of Jesus began with the common people heard Jesus gladly, but the official proclamation of the Kingdom of God. The message teachers were hostile. These teachers, who are called sounded at first somewhat like the message of John scribes, belonged for the most part to the sect of the the Baptist. Quite like John, Jesus came forward Pharisees. At the time of Christ there were two chief with the summons, "Repent ye; for the kingdom of parties among the Jews-the Pharisees and the heaven is at hand." But the new teacher differed Sadducees. The Sadducees were a worldly from John in the more complete account which he aristocracy, in possession of the high-priestly offices gave of the nature of the Kingdom, and especially in at Jerusalem, favored by the Romans, and satisfied the central place in the Kingdom which he assigned with the existing political order. The Pharisees, on to himself. the other hand, were a strict Jewish party, insisted

on a strict interpretation of the Mosaic Law, and Matthew, Chapters 5 to 7

added to the Law a great mass of oral "tradition," The nature of the Kingdom of God is set forth in the which ostensibly consisted of interpretation of the

Law, but really meant an enormous and oppressive great discourse of our Lord which is commonly addition to it. The Pharisees were opposed to Jesus called the Sermon on the Mount Matt., chs. 5 to 7. for at least two reasons. In the first place, they were Having gone up from the shores of the Sea of envious of his success in teaching, which Galilee to the heights which surround the lake, our endangered their own position. In the second place, Lord taught his disciples what was to be the life of they were opposed to the contents of his teaching; he those who should have a part in the Kingdom of rejected their interpretation of the Law, and rebuked God. In one sense, the Kingdom lay altogether in the them for paying such attention to the detailed rules future; it would be ushered in with full power only which were set forth in their tradition as to forget the at the end of the world. But in another sense, it was weightier matters of justice and mercy. present already wherever there were those who were

The conflict of Jesus with the Pharisees was truly submitting their lives to Jesus. precipitated particularly by the attitude of Jesus The Sermon on the Mount contains certain features toward the Sabbath. The Sabbath controversy was which are fundamental in all of Jesus' teaching.

carried on partly in Galilee and partly, John, ch. 5, In the first place, God is presented, in the Sermon on during a visit of Jesus to Jerusalem. The Pharisees the Mount, as "Father." The fatherhood of God, in had developed for the preservation of the Sabbath an the teaching of Jesus, is sometimes misunderstood. elaborate set of rules which went far beyond what Jesus did not mean that God is Father of all men. was set forth in the Old Testament. They were God stands indeed to all men in a relation which is offended, therefore, when Jesus refused to rebuke analogous to that of a father to his children; he cares his disciples for plucking the ears of wheat on the for all, he makes his sun to rise upon all. Matt. 5:45. Sabbath Day, and when he himself insisted on using But in the teaching of Jesus and in the whole New the Sabbath to perform works of mercy like the Testament the lofty term, "Father," is reserved for a healing of the man that had a withered hand. still more intimate relationship. So in the Sermon on

the Mount the great world without is sharply

distinguished from the company of Jesus' disciples;

it is only the latter who can say, "Our Father which rules of the Pharisees, but how is it possible for art in heaven."

sinful men to attain purity of heart? The

There was nothing narrow in such teaching; for righteousness of the Kingdom of heaven exceeds by although in Jesus' teaching the intimate relation of far the "righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees." sonship toward God was offered only to those who How can such righteousness be attained? should be of the household of faith, yet the door of The answer to this question was partly understood the household of faith was open wide to all who even by the, first hearers of the Sermon on the would be willing to come in. Indeed Jesus himself Mount. The disciples of Jesus knew even then that died on the cross with the purpose of opening that Jesus alone could give them entrance into the door. Our Saviour did far more than teach men that Kingdom; they trusted in him already not merely as they were already children of God; he came to make teacher but also as Saviour. But the answer to the them children of God by his saving work. question is far plainer to us; for we know the cross.

In the second place, the Sermon on the Mount tells The atoning death of Christ it was that gave men the what kind of life is led by those who should have kind of righteousness required for entrance into the entered into the Kingdom and been made the Kingdom of God, for it gave them the righteousness children of God. That life is far more than obedience of Christ himself. The significance of the cross was to a set of external rules; the purity which Jesus spoken of by our Lord even during his earthly demanded is a purity of the heart. The life in the ministry, but the full explanation of it was left to the Kingdom is also far removed from all pretense; the apostles. The saving work of Jesus could be fully children of God engage in prayer and good works explained only after it had been done. not to be seen by men but to be seen by God. Questions on Chapter 6.

Finally, the life in the Kingdom is a life of perfect 1. What is the meaning of "the kingdom of God," in trust; all anxious thought for the morrow is Jesus' teaching? banished, since God will care for his children.

One difficulty arises in the reading of the Sermon on 2. Who were the Sadducees? Who were the the Mount. How can such an ideal be attained? It Pharisees, and why were they opposed to Jesus? might be possible to obey a set of rules, like the 3. Give an outline of the Sermon on the Mount.
