This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. The ministry of Jesus did not consist merely of Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible teaching. Along with the teaching there went History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster wonderful manifestations of divine power. These Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. manifestations of divine power were of various

kinds. Many of them were miracles of healing; Jesus

The teaching of Jesus was carried on in various had power to make the lame to walk, the dumb to ways. Sometimes there were extended discourses speak, the deaf to hear. He also had power to cast like the Sermon on the Mount. On the other hand, out demons. At the presence of the Son of God, much of the most precious teaching of our Lord is Satan and his ministers had put forth all their contained in brief sayings which were uttered in baneful power. But the demons were obliged to flee answer to some objection or in view of some special at Jesus' word. situation. One other form of teaching requires Matthew 8:23-27, and Parallels

special attention-namely, the parables. Not all of the miracles, however, were miracles of Mark 4:1-34, and Parallels

healing. Some of the most notable of them were of a

A parable is a narrative taken from ordinary life, but different kind. But all of them were manifestations intended to teach some spiritual lesson. It differs of Jesus' divine power. When, on the lake, in the from an allegory in that the application is not to be midst of the frightened disciples, our Lord said to carried out in such detail. Ordinarily a parable the winds and the waves, "Peace, be still,." the Ruler teaches simply one lesson; there is only one point of of all nature was revealed. The particular form of similarity between the literal meaning of the parable Jesus' miracles depended upon his own inscrutable and the deeper spiritual truth. Thus when our Lord will; but all of the miracles revealed him as the compared God's answer to prayer with the answer Master of the world. He who had made the world in which an unjust judge gives to an importunate the beginning could still put forth the same creative widow, the details in the two cases are not intended power. A miracle, as distinguished from the ordinary to be similar; God is very different from the unjust course of nature, is a manifestation of the creative, judge. But there is one point of similarity as distinguished from the providential, power of-importunity does have its effect in both cases. God.

The distinction between a parable and an allegory is Matthew 14:13-21, and Parallels

not an absolute distinction, and sometimes the two Among the miracles of Jesus the feeding of the five shade into each other. Thus the parable of the thousand seems to have been particularly important. Wicked Husbandmen, which Jesus uttered nearly at Its importance is indicated by the fact that it is the close of his earthly ministry, partakes largely of narrated in all four of the Gospels. Matt. 14:13-21, the nature of allegory. The details to a considerable and parallels. Even the Gospel of John, which is extent are significant-the wicked husbandmen concerned for the most part with what happened in represent the Jews and their leaders, the servants Judea, here runs parallel with the Synoptic Gospels who were first sent represent the prophets, the son and narrates an event which happened in Galilee.

who was sent last represents Jesus himself. But This event marks the climax of the popularity of our many of Jesus' parables are parables pure and Lord and at the same time the beginning of his simple; they are not intended to be pressed in detail, rejection. Even before this time he had been rejected but teach, each of them, some one lesson. by some; his popularity had been by no means The purpose of Jesus in using parables was twofold. universal. He had been opposed by the scribes and In the first place the parables were not clear to those Pharisees; he had not been understood even by the who did not wish to learn. In accordance with a members of his own household; and he had been principle of the divine justice, willful closing of the rejected twice at the town where he had been eyes to the truth brought an increase of darkness. brought up. But for the most part he had enjoyed the But in the second place, to those who were willing favor of the people.

to receive the truth, the parables were made At the time of the feeding of the five thousand, this gloriously plain; the figurative form of the teaching popular favor had reached its height. Jesus had only served to drive the meaning home. withdrawn from the crowds into a lonely place across the lake from Capernaum. But such was his who would feed upon him by accepting his saving popularity that he could not escape. The people work. John 6 :22-71.

followed him even when he tried to be alone; they It seemed to the Jews to be a hard saying. How had had no thought of food or of lodging for the could the Jesus whose family they knew be the bread night, so eager had they been to listen to his which had come down from heaven? Many even of teaching. When evening came, therefore, they were those who had formerly followed Jesus were in want. But our Lord had pity on them because they offended at this "hard saying." The popularity of were like sheep without a shepherd. By a gracious Jesus at this time began to wane. manifestation of his divine power he made the five

loaves and two fishes suffice for all the multitude. But there were some disciples who remained. Jesus

Matthew 14:22-34, and Parallels had chosen twelve men, whom he called apostles.

He had had them as his companions, and already he

After the feeding of the five thousand Jesus found at had sent them out on a mission to teach and to heal. last the solitude which he had sought; he went up Turning now to them, he asked, "Would ye also go into the mountain to pray. The multitudes were away?" Then Peter, speaking for the others, showed making their way around the lake by the shore; the the difference between true disciples and those who disciples had taken the only boat and were rowing are offended at every hard saying. "Lord," he said, hard against the wind. But about three o'clock at "to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of night our Lord came to the disciples walking upon eternal life."

the water. It is no wonder that they bowed before Questions on Chapter 7. him and said, "Of a truth thou art the Son of God."

John 6: 22-71

allegory?

Meanwhile the multitude had gone on foot around 2. Why did Jesus use parables? Mention some of the the lake to Capernaum. When they found Jesus there parables recorded in the Gospels. before them they were astonished. But their

astonishment, unfortunately, was not of the kind that 3. What is a miracle? Why did Jesus work miracles?

leads to true and abiding faith. They had valued the 4. What is the particular importance of the feeding earthly bread which Jesus had given them, but were

not willing to receive the spiritual bread. Jesus of the five thousand?

himself, he told them, was the Bread of life who had 5. Why were the people offended by the discourse come down from heaven; only those could truly live on the Bread of life?
