This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. left John at the Jordan in order to follow Jesus; it Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible had been proclaimed by Jesus himself in his History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster conversations with Nicodemus and with the Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. Samaritan woman; it had been recognized even by

the unclean spirits.

The waning of Jesus' popularity was by no means But although Jesus had been proclaimed ,is Messiah sudden. Even after the discourse on the Bread of before, the confession of -Peter was by no means a life, we frequently find the multitudes around him. matter of course. Although the disciples had already But in general, from that time on our Lord seems to accepted Jesus as the Messiah it required have withdrawn from the crowds more frequently considerable faith and devotion to continue to accept than before, in order to devote himself to the him, for Jesus was not the kind of Messiah whom instruction of his intimate disciples. the Jews had been expecting. They had been

expecting a Messiah who, as anointed king of Israel,

Matthew 15:21-39, and Parallels would deliver God's people from the Roman

At this time our Lord withdrew into Phoenicia, oppressors, and make Jerusalem the center of the

whole world.

northwest of Palestine. In Phoenicia he healed the Such expectations seemed to be set at nought by the daughter of a Syrophoenician woman. It was a Prophet of Nazareth. No kingly pomp surrounded foretaste of the rich streams of mercy which after him; he mingled freely with the common people; he Pentecost were to flow out into the whole world. lived in the utmost humility, having not even a place After a brief stay in Phoenicia, Jesus returned to to lay his head. Political Messiahship he definitely Galilee, where he engaged again in controversy with refused. When, after the feeding of the five the Pharisees and again, by his divine power, fed a thousand, the people were about to come and make great multitude. This second time four thousand men him a king-that is, the Messianic king-he left them were fed. There were also miracles of healing, and and withdrew into the mountain. John 6 :15. It is no in general the essential characteristics of the wonder that they were disappointed. All their Galilaean ministry were continued. enthusiasm seemed to be ruthlessly quenched. Jesus

Matthew 16:13-20, and Parallels would have absolutely nothing to do with the kind of

Messiahship which they offered.

But before long Jesus departed again from Galilee, By this attitude of Jesus not only the multitudes and finally went with his disciples to the regions of were discouraged. Even the members of Jesus' Caesarea Philippi, northeast of Galilee. Near household failed to understand, and the very Caesarea Philippi occurred the great confession of forerunner of Jesus, John the Baptist himself, was Peter, which is one of the most important incidents assailed, momentarily at least, by doubts. of the Gospel record. Matt. 16 :13-20, and parallels. Conceivably the twelve apostles also might have "Who," Jesus asked of his disciples, "do men say been discouraged. But their faith remained firm. that I am? And they told him, saying, Elijah; but Despite all disappointments, despite the refusal of others, One of the prophets. And he asked them, But our Lord to accept what were supposed to be who say ye that I am? Peter answereth and saith unto prerogatives of Messiahship, Peter was able still to him, Thou art the Christ." Mark 8:27-29. say, at Caesarea Philippi, "Thou art the Christ."

In this confession Peter recognized that Jesus was But in what sense was Jesus the Christ? He was not the "Messiah," the "Anointed One," or according to an earthly king who would lead the armies of Israel the Greek translation of the same word, "the Christ." out to battle against the Romans. He was not that It was by no means the first recognition of the fact. sort of Messiah. What then was he? What was Jesus' The Messiahship of Jesus had been revealed to own conception of Messiahship?

Joseph and Mary and Zacharias and Elisabeth even In order to answer that question fully, it would be before Jesus was born; it had been revealed to the necessary to return to the study of the Old shepherds and the Wise Men who greeted the infant Testament. Jesus accepted to the full the Old Saviour; it had been revealed to John the Baptist; it Testament promises about the Messiah; what he had been revealed to the little group of disciples who rejected was merely a false interpretation of them. Even those promises of the Old Testament which not as a political king, but as a heavenly, make the Messiah a king of David's line were supernatural person. The title, therefore, was fulfilled in Jesus. He was actually of David's line, admirably fitted to designate the lofty character of and he was born in David's city. He was also the the Messiah's person, without the dangerous political King of Israel.

associations which had gathered around certain

Only his kingship was exercised in ways different other titles. from those which the people generally were Indeed for a time, in the early Galilaean ministry, expecting. And there were other features of the Old our Lord seems to have kept his Messiahship Testament promises which Jesus also fulfilled. Jesus somewhat in the background. Public proclamation of was not only Son of David; he was also Son of Man. his Messiahship would have aroused false, worldly The title "Son of Man," which was Jesus' own hopes of political upheaval. Before proclaiming Messianic designation of himself, does not denote himself again as Messiah, our Lord needed to make merely the humanity of Jesus in distinction from his clear by his teaching and by his example what kind deity. On the contrary, it is plainly taken from the of Messiah he was; before finally setting up his stupendous scene in Dan. 7:13, where "one like unto Kingdom he needed to show that that Kingdom was a son of man" is represented as coming with the not of this world. But he was Messiah and King clouds of heaven, and as being in the presence of from the beginning, and even at the beginning his God. It indicates, therefore, not the human weakness Messiahship had been made known.

and Judge. of Jesus, but his exalted position as supreme Ruler Questions on Chapter 8.

It is not surprising that for a time at least during his 1. Mention some of the titles which are used to earthly ministry Jesus used this title of the Messiah designate Jesus as Messiah, and explain their rather than the other titles, for the title Son of Man meaning. Was the title "Son of Man" ever used was without the political associations which Jesus with reference to Jesus by anyone except Jesus desired to avoid. It had been employed, not so much himself?

by the masses of the people, as by the circles which 2. What was the significance of Peter's confession?

read the books which are called the "Apocalypses." 3. Why did Jesus become less popular than he was In these books, on the basis of Daniel and other Old at first?

Testament prophecies, the Messiah was represented
