This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. They were talking not- of the glories of Jesus' Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible Kingdom, but of the "departure" which he was about History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster to accomplish at Jerusalem. Luke 9:31. The Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. "departure" included not only the resurrection and

the ascension, but also the crucifixion. Even the

shining light of the transfiguration was intended to

Peter's confession at Caesarea Philippi was a point to the cross.

triumph of faith, for which Jesus pronounced Peter Matthew 17:14-20, and Parallels blessed. Through a revelation from God, Peter had

been made able to endure the disappointment After the glorious experience on the mountain, our involved in Jesus' refusal of kingly honors. But Lord came at once into contact with the another trial of faith was soon to come. repulsiveness of human misery, Matt.17 :14-20, and

Matthew 16:21-28, and Parallels parallels. But he did not shrink from the sudden

transition. As he came down from the mountain, he

After Peter's acknowledgment of Jesus as Messiah, found at the, bottom a boy possessed of a demon, our Lord began to teach the disciples more of what who "fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming." It his Messiahship meant. Matt. 16:21-28, and was a depressing sight, very unlike the brightness of parallels. It meant, he said, not worldly honors, and the transfiguration. Even more discouraging, not merely a continuation of the humble life in moreover, than the condition of the boy himself was Galilee, but actual sufferings and death. This the powerlessness of the disciples. They had tried to teaching was more than Peter could endure. "Be it cast the demon out but had failed miserably, not far from thee, Lord," he said, "this shall never be because the power might not have been theirs, but unto thee." In such rebellion against God's will Jesus because of their unbelief. The father of the boy, too, recognized a repetition of the temptation which had was lacking in faith. "I believe," he said; "help thou come to him at the first, immediately after the voice mine unbelief." Jesus did help his unbelief, and the from heaven had proclaimed him to be the Messiah unbelief of the disciples. He rebuked the unclean the temptation to use his Messianic power for his spirit, and healed the boy.

own worldly glory. And now as well as then the At this period Jesus repeated on several occasions temptation was resolutely overcome. "Get thee the prophecy of his death. The tragedy on Calvary behind me, Satan," said Jesus: "thou art a stumbling did not overtake him unawares. He went deliberately block unto me: for thou mindest not the things of to his death for our sakes. God, but the things of men.

Jesus was thus ready to tread the path of suffering Matthew 18:1-6, and Parallels

which he had come into the world, for our sakes, to Even on such solemn days, when the shadow of the tread. And he called upon his true disciples to tread cross lay over the path, the disciples were unable to that path after him. Yet all the suffering was to be overcome the pettiness of their character. On the followed by a greater glory than Peter had ever very journey when Jesus had told them about his conceived; and almost immediately there was a approaching death, they had quarreled about the wonderful foretaste of that glory.

question as to which of them should be greatest in

Matthew 17:1-13, and Parallels the Kingdom of heaven. Thereby they had shown

how far they were from understanding the true

Six days after the scene at Caesarea Philippi, our nature of the Kingdom. If the Kingdom was finally Lord took Peter and James and John, his three most to be advanced under the leadership of such men, intimate disciples, with him up upon a high some mighty change would have to take place in mountain-no doubt somewhere on the slopes of the them. That change did take place afterwards, as we lofty Mount Hermon. There he was transfigured shall see, at Pentecost. But at present the pettiness before them, Matt. 17:1-13, and parallels; "his face and carnal-mindedness of the disciples added to the did shine as the sun, and his garments became white sorrows of our Lord. Despite the intimacy into as the light." With him appeared Moses and Elijah, which he entered with his earthly friends, he talking with him. And they were talking about what towered in lonely grandeur above them all. seems to be a strange subject at such a moment.

After the transfiguration and related events near Matthew 11:27, and Parallels

Caesarea Philippi, our Lord returned to Galilee. But It is particularly the Gospel of John which records apparently he did not resume permanently his the way in which Jesus set forth the nature of his Galilaean ministry. Soon we find him passing own person, but what is fully set forth in the Gospel through Samaria, and laboring in Judea and in that of John is really implied all through the Synoptic country east of the Jordan River which is called Gospels, and in Matt. 11 :27; Luke 10 :22 it is made Perea. This part of Jesus' ministry is recorded just as plain as it is in John. According to his own particularly in the Gospels According to Luke and teaching, Jesus stood in a relation toward God the According to John, although Matthew and Mark Father which is absolutely different from that in contain important information about the latter part of which other men stand toward God. In the plainest the period. The general character of the period is possible way, our Lord laid claim to true deity. "I fixed by the expectation of the cross. Jesus had set and my Father," he said, "are one." All the Gospels his face toward Jerusalem to accomplish the atoning present the true humanity of Jesus, the Gospel work which he had come into the world to perform. According to John, no less than the Synoptists. But Luke 10:1-24; John, Chapter 5

all the Gospels also set forth his deity. He was,

At the beginning of the period Jesus sent out seventy according to a true summary of the Gospel teaching, disciples, to prepare for his own coming into the "God and man, in two distinct natures, and one several cities and villages which he was intending to person for ever." visit. The Seventy were in possession of something Questions on Chapter 9.

of Jesus' power; they were able to report with joy 1. What trial of Peter's faith came just after his great that the demons were subjected to them. confession?

During the same period we find Jesus in Jerusalem 2. What was the meaning of the transfiguration? at the feast of tabernacles. Even during the period of

the Galilaean ministry Jesus had gone up to 3. What event took place just afterwards?

Jerusalem at least once, at the time of one of the 4. Give an account of Jesus' teaching at the time of Jewish feasts; and in connection with the healing of

a man at the pool of Bethesda he had then set forth the feast of tabernacles. John, chs. 7, 8. How was the true nature of his person and his relation to God this teaching received?

the Father. John, ch. 5. At the later period with 5. Give an account of the mission of the Seventy which we are now dealing, the same teaching was and compare it with the previous mission of the continued. Chs. 7, 8.

Twelve.
