This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. narrated in the Gospel According to John, but also Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible because it served to hasten the crisis in Jerusalem. History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster Both the Sadducees and the Pharisees were now Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. aroused. The movement instituted by Jesus had

reached alarming proportions. If allowed to continue

John, Chapter 9

it would be full of danger. The Romans, it was

During the latter part of Jesus’ ministry, with which feared, would regard it as rebellion and would Chapter 9 began to deal, Jesus spoke some of the utterly destroy the nation of the Jews. The diverse

parties among the Jewish leaders were becoming

most beautiful of his parables.

A number of them, such as the Good Samaritan and more and more united against the strange Prophet

the Prodigal Son, are recorded only by Luke. From from Galilee. John 11: 54 the same period the Gospel According to John

records some notable teaching of Jesus, in addition For a short time still the crisis was delayed. Our to that which was mentioned in the last lesson. Part Lord retired from Judea to a city called Ephraim, of this teaching was introduced by the healing of the near the wilderness. We also find him, in this period man born blind. John, ch. 9. This miracle, which had of his Life, again beyond the Jordan, in Perea. In this been performed on the Sabbath, had aroused the Perean residence is to be placed a portion of the special opposition of the Pharisees. In answer to teaching contained in the Synoptic Gospels, such as them, our Lord pointed out the difference between the teaching concerning divorce, Matt. 19 3—12, those leaders of the people who are like robbers and parallels, the words to the rich young ruler, vs. breaking into the sheepfold or at best like hirelings 16—30, and parallels, and the parable of the who flee at the first approach of danger, and the Laborers in the Vineyard. Matt. 20 1—16.

good shepherd who is willing to lay down his life for Luke 19: 2-16 the sheep. Such a shepherd was Jesus himself, and

his life was soon to be laid down.

Before long, however, Jesus went up to Jerusalem

for the last time. On the way, when he was passing

John 11:1-53

Finally, after various journeyings of Jesus in Judea through Jericho, in the Jordan Valley, he healed two and in Perea, there occurred in Bethany, a little blind men, and converted the tax collector village near Jerusalem, one of the most notable of Zacchaeus. The conversion of Zacchaeus was in our Lord’s miracles. John ii 1—44. At Bethany lived accord with Jesus’ custom all through his ministry. a certain Lazarus with his sisters Martha and Mary, The tax-gatherers were despised by the rest of the whom Jesus knew well. Lazarus fell ill during the Jews at the time of Christ. They had allied absence of Jesus across the Jordan in Perea; and the themselves with the Roman oppressors, and no illness resulted in his death. On the fourth day after doubt most of them were guilty of abominable Lazarus’ death, Jesus came to Bethany. Martha came extortion on their own account. By the Pharisees, to meet him; Mary remained mourning in the house, particularly, they were regarded as belonging to the until her sister brought word that Jesus bad arrived. very dregs of the people, with whom no true Then she, too, went to greet the Lord. When Jesus observer of the law could be intimate. But Jesus was saw her and her friends weeping for the one who had bound by no limits in his saving work. He did not died, he, too, wept with them. But he had power not condone sin — either the sin of the tax-gatherers or only to sympathize, but also to help. Going with the the sin of the Pharisees. But he was willing to save sisters to the tomb, he caused the stone to be from sin all who would believe. The whole, he said, removed, then prayed, and then called ‘with a loud need not a physician, but they that are sick. The Son voice, “Lazarus, come forth.” At the word of Jesus, of Man had come to “seek and to save that which the dead man came out of the tomb. Jesus was was lost.” Master over death and the grave.

John 11:55 to 12:1

It was not the first time that our Lord had raised the Toiling up the long ascent from Jericho, our Lord dead. He had raised the daughter of Jairus in Galilee arrived at last, six days before the passover, at the and the son of the widow of Nain. But the raising of village of Bethany, which is less than two miles Lazarus is especially important, not only because of from Jerusalem. During the remaining time before the wonderfully vivid way in which the incident is the crucifixion Jesus went every morning into the city and returned in the evening to lodge with his Matthew 21:1-11, and Parallels friends at Bethany.

On the day after the supper at Bethany, that is, on

Matthew 26:6-13, and Parallels

the day after the Jewish Sabbath, on the ninth day of

Soon after his arrival at Bethany, when Jesus was the Jewish spring month Nisan, our Lord entered reclining at table in the house of a certain Simon the into Jerusalem. Matt. 21: 1—11, and parallels. It leper, he was anointed by Mary the sister of Lazarus. was a triumphal entry; Jesus was received publicly Matt. 26 6—13; Mark 14 3—9; John 12 2—8. by the multitudes as the Messiah, the promised King anointing is not to be confused with a somewhat This of Israel. Even the manner of his entry was in similar event which had taken place some time accordance with prophecy; he came riding over the before, when Jesus had been anointed by a woman Mount of Olives and into the city mounted on an who had been a notorious sinner. Luke 7 36—50. ass, in accordance with Zech. 9:9. The promised The disciples murmured at the waste. The precious King of Israel at last had come. The multitudes ointment, they said, might have been sold for a great strewed palm branches in the way, and cried, sum, which could have been distributed to the poor. “Hosanna to the son of David.” Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, had a special Questions on Chapter 10

cause for dissatisfaction; in his case the mention of 1. Where was Perea? Jericho? Bethany? Ephraim? the poor was only a cloak for covetousness. Judas Find on a map the places mentioned in this kept the bag, and if the proceeds of the ointment had lesson.

been put into his keeping, he could have indulged

his thieving propensities. But all the murmuring, 2. Give an account of all the times when Jesus, whether it proceeded from more sordid motives or during his earthly ministry, raised the dead. In from a mere misunderstanding of the true spirit of what Gospels are these incidents narrated?

the woman’s act, was rebuked by our Lord. The 3. What is the special importance of the raising of woman, he said, had anointed his body beforehand Lazarus?

for the burial. The days just before the crucifixion

were no time for true disciples to murmur at an act 4. Give an account of some of those parables of which was prompted by overflowing love for the Jesus which are contained only in the Gospel Saviour who was so soon to die.

According to Luke.
