This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. Matt. 21 : 23—32, and parallels. He answered that Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible question by another question: “The baptism of John, History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster whence was it? from heaven or from men?” The Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. chief priests and elders could not say. They were not

really sincere seekers for divine authority. But Jesus

Despite the enthusiasm which the multitudes had was not content with having silenced them. He also shown at the time when Jesus entered into pointed out, positively, their sin in not receiving the Jerusalem, despite the shouts of those who cried, Word of God which had come through John. “Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord,” Matthew 21:33-46, and Parallels

Jesus knew that be was going to his death, and that Still more scathing was the rebuke which Jesus Jerusalem would turn against her King. “When he uttered through the parable of the Wicked drew nigh,” we are told in the According to Luke, Husbandmen. Matt. 21 : 33—46, and parallels. The “he saw the city and wept over it, saying, If thou wicked husbandmen had been put in charge of a hadst known in this day, even thou, the things which vineyard. But when the time came to render the fruit

Luke 19:41, 42. belong peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.” of the vineyard to the owner, they killed the servants

who were sent to them and finally the owner’s son.

On the Sunday of the triumphal entry it was already The chief priests and Pharisees needed no elaborate late when Jesus entered into the Temple area. He did explanation; they would probably in any case have nothing, therefore, that day, except look about him; applied the parable to themselves. But as a matter of and then he returned to Bethany with twelve fact Jesus made the application abundantly plain.

“The kingdom of God,” he said, “shall be taken

apostles. Mark 11:11.

Matthew 21:12-19, and Parallels away from you, and shall be given to a nation

bringing forth the fruits thereof.”

On Monday, however, the final conflict began. Matthew 22:1-14

Entering into the city, our Lord cast out of the Just as plainly directed against the wicked leaders of Temple those who bought and sold, just as he had the people, and against the rebellious nation itself, done at the beginning of his public ministry. The was the parable of the Marriage of the King’s Son. rebuke which he had administered several years Matt. 22 : 1—14. Those who were bidden to the before had had no permanent effect. But Jesus did feast refused to come in; but from the highways and not hesitate to rebuke again who made God’s house hedges the king’s house was filled. So the covenant a place of business. The rulers, of course, were people, the Jews, had rejected the divine invitation; incensed. But popular favor for a time put a check but the despised Gentiles would be received. upon their hate. On the way into the city, Jesus said

to a fig tree, which w bearing leaves only, “No man Matthew 22:15-40, and Parallels

eat fruit from thee henceforward for ever.” The The rulers would have liked to put Jesus to death at motives of our Lord’s act are not fully known to us; once; but they still feared the people. So they but at least he was able afterwards to point out adopted the underhand method of trying to catch through the case the fig tree the limitless power of him in his speech. First came the Pharisees and the faith. The disciples were exhorted to pray in faith. Herodians, the latter being the partisans of the But their prayers, Jesus said, must be in love; no Herodian dynasty, with their adroit question about unforgiving spirit should be left in their souls when giving tribute to Caesar, Matt. 22:15—22, and they prayed to heavenly Father for their own parallels; then the Sadducees, the worldly forgiveness. The next day, Tuesday, was a day of aristocracy who did not believe in the resurrection, teaching. Our Lord spent the day in the Temple, with their attempt to is the doctrine of the meeting the attacks of his enemies. And he had an resurrection ridiculous, vs. 23—33, and parallels; answer to every inquiry; the trick questions of his then an individual Pharisee with his question about enemies always redounded to their own rebuke. the greatest commandment in the law. Vs. 24—40, Matthew 21:23-32, and Parallels and parallels. Jesus had a wonderful, profound First our Lord was questioned as to the authority by answer for them all. But only the last inquirer to which he had cleansed the Temple the day before. have been at all willing to learn. “Thou art not far,”

Jesus said him, “from the kingdom of God.” Mark Matthew, Chapters 24, 25 12 : 34.

When Jesus, on the same day, had gone out of the

Matthew 22:41-46, and Parallels Temple and had ascended to the Mount of Olives, a

Then, after all the questions which had been put to hill which lay on the way to Bethany, he taught his him, our put one question in turn. “David himself,” disciples about the coming destruction of the he said in effect, “calls the Messiah Lord; how is the Temple and also about the end of the world. Matt., Messiah, then, David’s son?” In this way Jesus was ch. 24, and parallels. The time of the end of the presenting to the people a higher conception of world, he said, is unknown to all except God, and in Messiahship than that which they had been expectation of it men should always be watchful. accustomed to bold. The Messiah was indeed This duty of watchfulness he illustrated by the David’s Son, but he was not only David’s Son. Matt parables of the Ten Virgins, Matt. 25 : 1—13, and of

the Talents. Vs. 14—30. Then our Lord drew a great

22 : 41—46, and parallels.

picture of the last awful judgment of God, when the

Apparently on the same day, our Lord called wicked shall be separated from the good. Vs. attention to the poor widow who was casting her 31—46.

mite into the collection box. A gift, he said, is Questions on Chapter 11 measured in the estimation of God not by its

amount, but by the sacrifice which it means to the 1. Where was the Mount of Olives? Describe the giver. Mark 12 : 41—44, and parallels route between Bethany and the Temple in

Jerusalem.

Matthew, Chapter 23

Finally, on the same memorable Tuesday, our Lord 2. Compare the two occasions when Jesus cleansed denounced openly the formalism and hypocrisy of the Temple. the scribes and Pharisees. Matt., ch. 23. It was also 3. On what occasions during his ministry did Jesus perhaps on the same day that certain Greeks desired speak about John the Baptist?

to see Jesus, John 12 : 20, 21—a foretaste of that 4. Give a full account of the questions which were entrance of Gentiles into the Church which was to put to Jesus on the Tuesday of the last week, and come after the resurrection. We are not told exactly of the answers of Jesus. how Jesus received the Greeks, but the importance

of the moment was marked by a voice from heaven 5. What were the “woes” which Jesus pronounced which came as a divine confirmation of Jesus’ against the scribes and Pharisees? message.

seek him?
