This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. of commemoration. And on that last evening our Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible Lord changed the symbols in order to suit the new History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster dispensation when, since the Lamb of God had once Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

been offered up, other sacrifices should be no more.

Matthew 26:1-5, 14-16, and Parallels Matthew 26:20-35, and Parallels

On the Wednesday of the week before the Jesus gathered with his apostles for the feast in an crucifixion, the chief priests and elders of the Jews upper room. Matt. 26:20, and parallels. Then, took counsel how they might put Jesus to death. The lamentably enough, there was a strife among the difficulty was that if they arrested so popular a apostles as to who should be the greatest. Luke 22 teacher in the midst of the crowds who had come to :24-30. As a rebuke of all such inordinate ambitions Jerusalem for the approaching feast of the passover, our Lord gave an example of humility by washing there would be a tumult. At first, therefore, the the feet of his disciples. John 13:1-20. The traitor, enemies of Jesus thought that they might have to Judas Iscariot, then left the apostolic company, John wait until the passover was over. But they were 13:21-35, and parallels, and the Lord’s Supper was helped out of their difficulty by one of Jesus’ own instituted. I Cor. 11:23-25; Matt. 26:26-29, and friends. Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve apostles, parallels. Then the denial of Peter was foretold; proved to be a traitor. He received a promise of before the cock should crow twice Peter would deny thirty pieces of silver, and watched for a time when his Lord three times.

Jesus would be away from the crowds so that he John, Chapters 14 to 17 could be delivered quietly into the hands of his

enemies.

Then followed some of the most precious teaching

Matthew 26:17-19, and Parallels of Jesus - teaching which is preserved only in the Meanwhile, on Thursday, Jesus arranged for the Gospel According to John. Chs. 14 to 17. Our Lord

celebration of the passover in company with the spoke of the mission which he had come into the apostles. The passover feast commemorated the world to fulfill and of the mission which his apostles deliverance of Israel from Egypt, especially the were to fulfill through the power of the Holy Spirit. passing over of Israel’s first-born when the first-born The meaning of Jesus’ redeeming work could not sons of the Egyptians were slain. The feast was fully be explained until it had been accomplished. opened on the evening of Nisan 14, Nisan being a And it was to be explained by the Holy Spirit spring month, and the first month of the Jewish year. speaking through the apostles. According to Jewish reckoning, the evening of Matthew 26:36-46, and Parallels

Nisan 14 constituted the beginning of Nisan 15. After they had sung a hymn, our Lord went out with Starting from that time, the feast continued for seven the eleven to the Garden of Gethsemane, outside of days, no unleavened bread being used within that Jerusalem, on the slopes of the Mount of Olives. period. The first and most solemn act of the whole Matt. 26: 36—46, and parallels.

feast was the eating of the paschal lamb on the There he sought strength in prayer for the evening of Nisan 14.

This passover supper was celebrated by Jesus and approaching hour when was to bear the penalty of

the apostles on Thursday evening, Nisan 14. And the our sins. The disciples were no help to him in his feast was to be continued into the Christian era. The agony; Peter and James and John slept while he symbols were changed; bread and wine were to be prayed. But God the Father heard his prayer. used instead of the paschal lamb. But the Matthew 26:47 to 27:1

fundamental meaning of the feast remained the Soon the traitor came with the Temple guard, and same; both the passover and the Lord’s Supper had Jesus was arrested, Matt. 26 : 47—56, and parallels. reference to the atoning death of Christ. The paschal On the same evening there was an informal hearing lamb prefigured the Lamb of God who was to die for of the Prisoner in the house of Annas, the the sins of the world; the bread and wine also father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest. Matt. symbolized the body of Christ broken for us and the 26:57, 58, 69—75, and parallels.

blood of Christ poured out for the remission of our Meanwhile Peter and “another disciple,” who was sins. Thus what the passover symbolized by way of no doubt John the son of Zebedee, the writer of the prophecy is symbolized in the Lord’s Supper by way Fourth Gospel, had entered into the house. There Jesus enemies, John 19:4-16, our Lord was finally Peter denied his Lord.

taken out of the city to be crucified Luke 23:26-33,

The next morning there was a more formal meeting and parallels. of the Sanhedrin, the highest court of the Jews. Luke The Prisoner at first was compelled to bear the cross 22:66-71, and parallels. This meeting was intended on which be was to be put to death, but when his to confirm the results of the informal hearing in the strength gave way a certain Simon of Cyrene was house of Annas. But both meetings were little more pressed into service. A crowd of people from than a form. The court had really decided the Jerusalem followed the Prisoner, and especially a question beforehand; it had determined to bring number of women who lamented. At last the place Jesus by any means, lawful or otherwise, to his of execution was reached. It was called “Golgotha,” death. When faced by his enemies, our Lord or according to the Latin translation of the name, declared plainly that he was the Messiah, the Son of “Calvary.” There they crucified our Lord. Matt. 27: God. That answer was enough to satisfy the 33-56, and parallels.

accusers. Jesus was judged guilty of blasphemy. With him Were crucified two thieves, of whom one Matthew 27: 2-56, and Parallels repented at the last hour, and received salvation. A

But the Sanhedrin did not possess the power of life number of sayings which Jesus uttered on the cross and death. Before Jesus could be executed, are recorded in the Gospels. At the moment of death, therefore, the findings of the Sanhedrin had to be he cried, “It is finished.” John 19 : 30. The meaning confirmed by Pilate, the Roman procurator. And at of that saying is plain. The work for which our Lord first Pilate was recalcitrant to the Jews’ demands; he came into the world at last was done. The Lord of was not able to find in Jesus any cause o~ death. glory had died to wash away the sins of all believers. John 18 : 28—38, and parallels. In his perplexity, The just penalty of sin had been borne by the One Pilate sent the prisoner to be examined by Herod who knew no sin. Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee, who was at the time Questions on Chapter 12

in Jerusalem. Luke 23 : 6—12. But this hearing also 1. Summarize the teaching of Jesus on the last was without decisive result.

evening before the crucifixion.

At last Pilate yielded, against his better judgment, to 2. What happened in Gethsemane? the importunity of the Jewish leaders and the mad

shouts of the crowds, who had turned now against 3. Describe the trial of Jesus before the Sanhedrin the One whom formerly they had honored. Matt. and before Pilate.

27:15—30, and parallels. Pilate delivered Jesus up 4. Why did the Jewish leaders put Jesus to death? to the will of the Jews. Before the execution, Why did Jesus consent to die? however, the Prisoner was cruelly scourged and

mocked by the Roman soldiers. Then when a last 5. Give an account of the crucifixion of our Lord. effort of Pilate had failed to placate the wrath of
