This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. had rolled away the stone from the sepulcher, and Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible our Lord himself had risen. At the sight of the angel, History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster the soldiers of the guard, in their fear, “became as Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

dead men.” Matt. 28:2-4. All that they could do was

The death of Christ was the greatest event that to report the event to the chief priests who had sent

them. Vs.11-15

history has ever seen. By that event the grace of God Matthew 28:1, and Parallels; John 20:2; triumphed over sin, and a lost world was redeemed. Matthew 28:5-10, and Parallels Apart from Christ we all deserve eternal death. But

the Lord of glory, on Calvary, bore the guilt which Then the women arrived at the tomb, and found it belonged to us, and made us children of God. empty. Matt. 28:1, and parallels. One of them, Mary

So great an event was accomplished without flare of Magdalene, went back to tell Peter and John. John heavenly trumpets or blazing of heavenly light. To 20:2. The others remained at the tomb and there saw many, the death of Christ seemed to be merely the two angels who announced to them that Jesus was execution of a criminal. But there were not wanting risen from the dead. On their way back to the city some strange phenomena which marked the Jesus himself met them, and they fell down, grasped greatness of the event. From twelve o’clock on the his feet, and worshiped him Matt. 28:5-10, and day of the crucifixion there was darkness until three parallels.

o’clock, when Jesus died. Then the veil of the John 20:3-18

Temple was rent, there was an earthquake, and Meanwhile, at the message of Mary Magdalene, graves were opened. Thus was nature made to Peter and John ran to the tomb, found it empty, and recognize the suffering and the triumph of her Lord. believed that Jesus really was risen. John 20:3-10. After Jesus had died, his side was pierced by one of But Mary Magdalene, after they had gone, stood the soldiers whom Pilate had sent at the instance of weeping at the tomb; she supposed that some one the Jews in order that those who had been crucified had taken the body of her Lord away. Then Jesus should be killed and their bodies removed before the himself came to her, her sorrow was changed into Sabbath. From the body of Jesus there came out joy, and she joined her voice to that other women blood and water. The event was witnessed by John who told the disciples of the glad event. Vs. 11-18

John 19:31-42. the son of Zebedee, writer of the Fourth Gospel. I Corinthians 15:5; Luke 24:13-49; John 20:19-23

Thus far, Jesus himself had been seen only by the

Matthew 27:57-66

women. But now he appeared to Peter, I Cor. 15:5;

Then, in the late afternoon of the same day Joseph of Luke 24:34, and to two of the disciples who were Arimathea, a secret disciple of Jesus, removed our walking to the village of Emmaus. At first. the two Lord’s body from the cross and placed it in a new disciples did not know him; but they recognized him tomb. Mark 15:42-46, and parallels. Another secret at Emmaus when he broke the bread. Then, on the disciple, or half-disciple, Nicodemus, came also to evening of the same Sunday he appeared to the anoint the body. John 19:39. Certain women also apostles in Jerusalem. I Cor. 15:5; Luke 24:36-49; came to see where Jesus was laid. Luke 23: 55,56, John 20:19-23. All doubts were removed when he and parallels. The chief priests and Pharisees, on the them the wounds in his hands and his side, and other hand, obtained a guard from Pilate, to watch partook of food in their presence. Then he the tomb, lest the disciples of Jesus should steal the interpreted the Scriptures to them had done to the body of Jesus away and say that he had risen from two disciples on the walk to Emmaus, showing them the dead. Matt. 27:62-66.

that it was necessary that the Messiah should suffer.

Finally he breathed upon them, and said, “Receive

Matthew 28:2-4, 11-15

The next day was Saturday, the Old Testament ye the Holy Spirit.” John 20:24-29 Sabbath. The friends of Jesus rested on that day. But

very early on Sunday morn the women started to the Thomas, one of the apostles, who had been absent tomb bearing spices in order to anoint the body. But from this meeting with the risen Lord, refused to before they arrived, our Lord had already risen from believe at the mere word of the others. Jesus dealt the dead. There had been an earthquake, an angel very graciously with the doubting disciple. Again, one week later, he came to the apostles, the doors of commanded the apostles to wait in Jerusalem until the room being shut, and presented to Thomas his the Holy Spirit should come upon them. Then, said hands and his side. All doubts now melted away in Jesus, they were to be witnesses of him “both in the joy of meeting with the risen Lord. Thomas Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and unto answered and said unto him, “My Lord and my the uttermost part of the earth.” Acts 1:8. Finally, God.” John 20:24-29

forty days after the resurrection, Jesus led his

John 21:1-24; I Corinthians 15:6; Matthew 28: disciples out to the Mount of Olives, on the way to

Bethany, and there he was taken from them in a

16-20

cloud into heaven. The disciples were saddened and

The apostles then went back to Galilee in bewildered by the departure of their Lord. But their accordance with Jesus’ command, and in Galilee sadness was soon turned to joy. “Two men stood by also Jesus appeared to them. First he appeared to them in white apparel; who also said, Ye men of seven of the disciples on the shores of the Sea of Galilee, why stand ye looking into heaven? This Galilee. Among the seven was John the son of Jesus, who was received up from you into heaven, Zebedee, who has given an account of the event in shall so come in like manner as ye beheld him going his Gospel. John 21:1-24. Then there was a great into heaven.” Acts 1:10,11 The disciples went then appearance of Jesus on a mountain. At that time, into the city, where they were constantly in the apparently, not only the eleven apostles were Temple, praising God.

present, but also five hundred other disciples. I Cor Questions for Chapter 13. 15:6; Matt. 28:16-20. On the mountain Jesus

instituted the sacrament of baptism, and gave his 1. Describe the burial of Jesus. How long did his disciples the Great Commission to make disciples of body rest in tomb?

all nations. The execution of that commission has 2. Enumerate the persons who saw the empty tomb. sometimes been attended with discouragements. But

the risen Lord promised always to be with his 3. Enumerate, so far as the facts are known, the Church.

persons who Jesus after the resurrection.

I Corinthians 15:7; Acts 1: 1-11

After the appearances in Galilee, the apostles about the resurrection mentioned? returned to Jerusalem. It was no doubt in Jerusalem 5. What is the importance of the resurrection of that Jesus appeared to James, his own brother, I Cor Jesus for our Christian faith?

15:7, who during the earthly ministry had not 6. Describe the change which the resurrection believed on him. Other appearances also occurred produced in the early disciples of Jesus. there. At one or more of these appearances Jesus
