This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. rather upon the promise of Jesus which had been Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible made to them, that the hope of the world was based. History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster

Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain.. Acts, Chapter 2

The Christian Church is founded on the fact of the At last, at the feast of Pentecost, fifty days after the resurrection of Jesus; if that fact had not occurred passover, the promise of Jesus was fulfilled; the there would be no Church today. The disciples of Holy Spirit came upon the disciples to fit them for Jesus of Nazareth were evidently far inferior to him the evangelization of the world. Acts 2:1-13. They in spiritual discernment and in courage. Evidently were all together in one place; there was a sound as they could not hope to succeed if he had failed. And of a rushing, mighty wind; cloven tongues, like with his death what little strength they may have had tongues of fire, sat upon each one of them; they before was utterly destroyed. In the hour of his trial were filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak they had deserted him in cowardly flight. And when with other languages as the Spirit gave them he was taken from them by a shameful death, they utterance. When the crowd came together to see the were in despair. Never did a movement seem to be wonderful thing that had happened, Peter preached

the first sermon of the Christian Church. Vs. 14-36.

more hopelessly dead.

At the preaching of Peter three thousand persons

But then the surprising thing occurred. Those same were converted; the campaign of world conquest had weak, discouraged men began, in a few days, in begun. Vs. 37-42.

Jerusalem, the very scene . their disgrace, a spiritual The campaign from the beginning was a campaign movement the like of which the world has never of witnessing, in accordance with Jesus’ command. seen. What produced the wonderful change? What Acts 1:8. The Christian Church was to conquer the that transformed those weak, discouraged men into world, not by exhorting men to live a certain kind of the spiritual conquerors of the world? life, but by bringing them a piece of news. The Son The answer of those men themselves was plain. of God, said the Christian missionaries, died on the Their despair, they said, gave way to triumphant joy cross and then rose again. That was the good news because the Lord Jesus had risen from the dead, and that conquered the world. Christianity from the because they were convinced of his resurrection by beginning was a way of life, but it was a way of life the empty tomb and by the appearances of Jesus founded upon a piece of news, a way of life founded himself. No other real explanation has yet been upon historical facts. The meaning of the facts was discovered to account for the sudden transformation not revealed all at once, but it was revealed in part of the despair of the disciples into triumphant joy. from the very beginning, and throughout the

The very existence of the Christian Church itself, Apostolic Age the revelation came in greater and through the therefore, is the strongest testimony to the greater fullness, especially resurrection; for without the resurrection the Church instrumentality of Paul. could never have come into being.

The life of the Early Church in Jerusalem was in

some respects like that of the Jews. The disciples

Acts 1:12-26

After the ascension of Jesus, which was studied in continued to observe the Jewish fasts and feasts and the last lesson, the apostles returned to Jerusalem, were constantly in the Temple. But a new joy and obeyed the command of Jesus by waiting for the animated the company of believers. Their Lord was coming of the Holy Spirit. But the period of waiting indeed taken from them for a time, and they did not was not a period of idleness; it was spent, on the know when he would return, but meanwhile he was contrary, in praising God and in prayer. One definite present with them through his Spirit, and already he action was taken - the place of Judas, the traitor, had saved them from their sins. who had killed himself in his remorse, was filled by Even in external observances the believers were the choice of Matthias. Acts1:15-26. At that time, distinguishable from the rest of the Jews. Entrance certain women and a number of other disciples were into their company was marked by the sacrament of gathered together with the apostles, making a total baptism, which signified the washing away of sin; of about one hundred and twenty persons. It was and their continued fellowship with one another and upon that little company of praying disciples, or with the risen Lord found expression in the

sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, which commemorated the atoning death of Jesus. There salvation to men, they were unable to do more than were also meals. And those who had property warn the recalcitrant preachers. A notable miracle devoted it, in a purely voluntary way, to the needs of had been wrought, and they could not deny it. When their poorer brethren. The disciples attended Peter and John came again to the company of diligently, moreover, to the teaching of the apostles, believers, all the company united in a glorious and engaged constantly in prayer.

prayer of praise. The answer to the prayer was

plainly given. “The place was shaken wherein they

Acts, Chapter 3

were gathered together, and they were all filled with

The preaching of the apostles in Jerusalem was the Holy Spirit, and they spake the word of God with authenticated by miracles. One notable miracle is boldness.”

narrated in detail in the book of The Acts. Ch. 3. As Questions on Chapter 14 Peter and John were going up into the Temple at the

hour of prayer, they healed a lame beggar, who was 1. Show how the Christian Church is founded upon in the habit of sitting at the gate. The miracle was the fact of the resurrection.

the means of bringing to the people something better 2. Describe the choice of Matthias. than bodily healing; for when the crowd came

together in wonder at the healing of the lame man, 3. Who were gathered together in the “upper room” Peter proclaimed to them the good news of the in Jerusalem?

salvation which Jesus had wrought. 4. Describe the coming of the Spirit on the Day of Acts, Chapter 4

Pentecost.

The Sadducees, the ruling class, being incensed at 5. Was the speaking with other tongues on the Day such a proclamation, laid hands upon the two of Pentecost the same as the gift of tongues apostles, and brought them before the Sanhedrin. described in the First Epistle to the Corinthians? Acts 4:1-22. But even when Peter boldly announced If not, what was the difference?

to them that the name of that Jesus whom they had 6. Why were the Sadducees opposed to the put to death was the only name which could bring preaching of Peter and John?
