This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. death penalty was concerned. But the apostles Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible before they were released were scourged. The History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster suffering and shame did not prevent their preaching. Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

They rejoiced that they were counted worthy to

suffer dishonor for the name of Jesus.

Acts 5:1-11

The life of the early Jerusalem church was full of a Acts 6:1-6

holy joy. But even in those first glorious days the The early Jerusalem church was composed partly of Church had to battle against sin, and not all of those Aramaic-speaking Jews who had always lived in who desired to join themselves to the disciples were Palestine, and partly of Greek-speaking Jews who of true Christian life. One terrible judgment of God were connected with the Judaism of the Dispersion. was inflicted in order to preserve the purity of the The latter class murmured because their widows

were neglected in the daily ministrations. In order

Church. Acts 5:1-11.

A certain Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, had sold that the matter might be attended to without turning

the apostles aside from their work of teaching and

a possession, in accordance with the custom of those preaching, seven men were chosen to preside over early days, and had laid part of the price at the the distribution of help to the needy members of the apostles’ feet that it might be distributed to the church. Acts 6:1-6. But these seven were no mere poorer disciples. Part of the price was withheld, and “business men.” They were “full of the Spirit and of yet Ananias and his wife pretended to have given all. wisdom,” and at least two of them became Ananias was not required to sell his field, or to give prominent preaching of the gospel.

all of the price after he had sold it. His sin was the Acts 6:7 to 8:3 sin of deceit. He had lied to the Holy Spirit. Terrible

was the judgement of God; Ananias and Sapphira One of these two was Stephen, a “man full of faith

all who heard. were stricken down dead, and great fear came upon and of the Holy Spirit.” Stephen “wrought great

wonders and signs among the people,” and also

preached in the synagogues which were attended by

Acts 5:12-42

The apostles and the Church enjoyed the favor of the certain of the Greek-speaking Jews residing at people - a favor which was mingled with awe. Many Jerusalem. By his preaching he stirred up miracles were wrought by the apostles; multitudes of opposition. And the opposition was of a new kind.

Up to that time the objection to the Early Church

sick people were brought to be healed. had come, principally at least, from the Sadducees.

But the Sadducees made another attempt to put a But the Sadducees were a worldly aristocracy, out of stop to the dangerous movement. Acts 5:17-42. They touch with the masses of the people, and in their laid hands upon all the apostles, as they had laid efforts against the Church they had been checked hands upon two of them once before, and put them again and again by the popular favor which the all in prison. But in the night the apostles were disciples of Jesus enjoyed. released by an angel of the Lord, and at once, in Now, however, that popular favor began to wane. It obedience to the angel’s command, went and taught became evident that although the disciples continued boldly in the Temple. When they were arrested Peter to observe the Jewish fasts and feasts, their said simply, “We must obey God rather than men. preaching really meant the beginning of a new era. The Jesus whom you slew has been raised up by The people were not ready for such a change, and God as a Prince and a Saviour and we are witnesses especially the leaders of the people, the Pharisees, of these things and so is the Holy Spirit.” vs29-32, in who, since the crucifixion of Jesus, had shown no substance. It was a bold answer, and the Sanhedrin persecuting zeal, came out in active opposition.

was incensed. But Gamaliel, a Pharisee, one of the The result was at once evident. Stephen was most noted of the Jewish teachers, advocated a arrested, and was charged with revolutionary policy of watchful waiting. If the movement were of teaching about the Temple. The charge was false; God, he said, there was no use in fighting it; if it Stephen did not say that the Temple worship should were of men it would fail of itself as other Messianic then and there be abandoned by the disciples of movements had failed. The cautious policy Jesus. But he did proclaim the beginning of a new prevailed, so far as any attempt at inflicting the era, and the presence, in the person of one greater than Moses. So, after a great and bold speech of poor. This Philip, who is called “the evangelist,” to Stephen, he was hurried out of the city and stoned. distinguish him from the apostle of the same name, As Stephen was stoned, he called on Jesus, saying, went to Samaria, and preached to the Samaritans. It “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit,” and then kneeling was a step on the way towards a Gentile mission, but down he prayed for forgiveness of his enemies: the Samaritans themselves were not Gentiles but “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.” Acts 6:8 to half-Jews. When the apostles at Jerusalem heard of 8:3.

the work of Philip, they sent Peter and John from

Thus died the first Christian martyr. The Greek word among their own number, and through Peter and “martyr” means “witness.” Others had witnessed to John the Samaritans received special manifestation the saving work of Christ by their words; Stephen of the Holy Spirit. Acts 8:4-25. Then Philip went to

a desert road leading from Jerusalem to Gaza. There

now witnessed also by his death.

he preached the gospel to an Ethiopian treasurer,

When Stephen was stoned, the witnesses had laid who despite his employment in a foreign country “their garments at the feet of a young man named may have been of Jewish descent. Vs. 26-40. Yet the Saul.” Saul was to become the teacher of the faith preaching to him was another preparation for the which then he laid waste. But meanwhile he was a spread of the gospel into the Gentile world. leader in a great persecution.

The persecution scattered the disciples far and wide Questions for Chapter 15

from Jerusalem, though the apostles remained. But 1. What was the sin of Ananias and Sapphira? Was this scattering resulted only in the wider spread of the relief of the needy in the early Jerusalem the gospel. Everywhere they went the persecuted church what is now called communism or disciples proclaimed the faith for which they socialism? If not, why not? suffered. Thus the very rage of the enemies was an 2. What was the fundamental difference between instrument in God’s hand for bringing the good the two first imprisonments of apostles in news of salvation to the wide world.

Jerusalem, and the persecution which began with

the martyrdom of Stephen? Why was the latter

Acts 8:4-40

more serious?

Among those who were scattered abroad by the 3. Outline the speech of Stephen. persecution was Philip, one of the seven men who

had been appointed to care for the ministration to the 4. Describe the progress of the gospel in Samaria.
