This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. brought up in the strictest sect of the Pharisees. Thus Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible despite his birth in a Gentile city, Paul was not a History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster “liberal Jew”; he was not inclined to break down the Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

separation between Jews and Gentiles, or relax the

The work of the Early Church was at first carried on strict requirements of the Mosaic Law. On the only among the Jews. The Lord Jesus, it is true, had contrary, his zeal for the Law went beyond that of commanded the apostles to make disciples of all the many of his contemporaries. The fact is of enormous nations, but he had not made it perfectly plain when importance for the understanding of Paul’s gospel; the Gentile work should begin, or on what terms the for Paul’s gospel of justification by faith is based Gentiles should be received. Conceivably, therefore, not upon a lax interpretation of the law of God, but the early disciples might have thought it might be on a strict interpretation. Only, according to that the will of God that all Israel should first be gospel, Christ has paid the penalty of the law once evangelized before the gospel should be brought to for all on the cross. According to Paul, it is because the other nations; and conceivably also the men of the full penalty of the law has been paid and not at the other nations, when they finally should receive all because the law is to be taken lightly, that the the gospel, might be required to unite themselves Christian is free from the law.

with the people of Israel and keep the Mosaic Law. Acts 9:1-19, and Parallels

The guidance of the Holy Spirit was required, Early in life Paul went to Jerusalem, to receive therefore, before the gospel should be offered freely training under Gamaliel, the famous Pharisaic to Gentiles without requiring them to become Jews. teacher. And in Jerusalem, when he had still not But that guidance, in God’s good time, was plainly reached middle age, he engaged bitterly in and gloriously given.

persecution of the Church. He was filled with horror

One of the most important steps in the preparation at a blasphemous sect that proclaimed a crucified for the Gentile mission was the calling of a leader. malefactor to be the promised King of Israel, and And the leader whom God called was one upon that tended, perhaps, to break down the permanent whom human choice never would have rested; for significance of the law. It is a great mistake to the chosen leader was none other than Saul, the suppose that before he was converted Paul was

gradually getting nearer to Christianity. On contrary,

bitterest enemy of the Church.

Saul, whose Roman name was Paul, was born at he was if anything getting further away, and it was Tarsus, a centre of Greek culture, and the chief city while he was on a mad persecuting expedition that of Cilicia, the coast country in the southeastern part his conversion finally occurred. of Asia Minor, near the northeastern corner of the The conversion of Paul was different in one Mediterranean Sea. In Tarsus the family of Paul important respect from the conversion of ordinary belonged by no means to the humblest of the Christians. Ordinary Christians, like Paul, are population, for Paul’s father and then Paul himself converted by the Holy Spirit, who is the Spirit of possessed Roman citizenship, which in the Jesus. But in the case of ordinary Christians human provinces of the empire was a highly prized instruments are used - the preaching of the gospel, or privilege possessed only by a few. Thus by birth in a godly parents, or the like. In the case of Paul, on the Greek university city and by possession of Roman other hand, no such instrument was used, but the citizenship Paul was connected with the life of the Lord Jesus himself appeared to Paul and brought Gentile world. Such connection was not without him the gospel. Paul himself says in one of his importance for his future service as apostle to the Epistles that he saw the Lord. I Cor. 9:1; 15:8. It was

that fact which made Paul, unlike ordinary

Gentiles.

Far more important, however, was the Jewish Christians, but like Peter and the other apostles, an element in his preparation. Although Paul no doubt actual eyewitness to the resurrection of Christ. spoke Greek in childhood, he also in childhood A wonderful thing, moreover, was the way in which spoke Aramaic, the language of Palestine, and his Jesus appeared to Paul. He might naturally have family regarded themselves as being in spirit Jews of appeared to him in anger, to condemn him for the Palestine rather than of the Dispersion, persecution of the Church. Instead he appeared in Aramaic-speaking Jews rather than Greek-speaking love, to receive him into fellowship and to make him Jews, “Hebrews” rather than “Hellenists.” Both in the greatest of the apostles. That was grace - pure Tarsus and in Jerusalem, moreover, Paul was grace, pure undeserved favour. It is always a matter of pure grace when a man is saved by the Lord took him or how long it lasted, except that it lasted Jesus, but in the case of Paul, the persecutor, the less than three years. Nothing is said, in the New grace was wonderfully plain. Paul never forgot that Testament, moreover, about what Paul did in Arabia. grace of Christ; he never hated anything so much as But even if he engaged in missionary preaching, he the thought that a man can be saved by his own good also meditated on the great thing that God had done works, or his own character, or his own obedience to for him; and certainly he prayed.

God’s commands. The gospel of Paul is a Questions on Chapter 16 proclamation of the grace of God.

Paul saw the Lord on the road to Damascus, where 1. Where was Paul born? Find the place on a map. he bad been intending to persecute the Church. Acts What sort of city was it? 9:1-19, and parallels. As he was nearing the city, 2. What is known about Paul’s boyhood home, and suddenly at midday a bright light shone around him about his education? In what books of the New above the brightness of the sun. Those who Testament is the information given?

accompanied him remained speechless, seeing the 3. Why did Paul persecute the Church? light but not distinguishing the person, hearing a

sound, but not distinguishing the words. Paul, on the 4. Describe in detail what the book of The Acts says other hand, saw the Lord Jesus and listened to what about the conversion of Paul. Where does Paul Jesus said. Then, at the command of Jesus, he went mention the conversion in his Epistles?

into Damascus. For three days he was blind, then 5. How did the conversion of Paul differ from the received his sight through the ministrations of conversion of an ordinary Christian? In what Ananias, an otherwise unknown disciple, and was particulars was it like the conversion of an baptized. Then proceeded to labor for the Lord by ordinary Christian? whom he had been saved.

Soon, however, he went away for a time into Arabia. 6. What did Paul do after the conversion? Gal. 1 : 17. It is not known how far the journey
