This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. water, that these should not be baptized, who have Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible received the Holy Spirit as well as we?” So the History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster Gentiles were baptized. Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

A very important step had been taken. Cornelius, it

Saul of Tarsus was not only converted directly by is true, was a “God-fearer” - that is, he belonged to the Lord Jesus; he was also called just as directly by the class of Gentiles frequently mentioned in the Jesus to be an apostle, and especially an apostle to book of The Acts who worshiped the God of Israel the Gentiles. But other instruments were also used in and were friendly to the Jews. Nevertheless, he was

the beginning of the Gentile mission. Even Peter, still outside the covenant people, and under the old covenant whose work continued for a number of years dispensation he could not be received into afterwards to be chiefly among the Jews, was led by privileges until he united himself with the nation by the Holy Spirit to take a notable step in the offering submitting himself to the whole Mosaic Law. Yet of the gospel freely to the whole world. now such restrictions were removed by the plain

guidance of the Spirit of God. Evidently an entirely

Acts 9:31-43

new dispensation had begun.

During the period of peace which followed after the Acts 11:1-18

persecution at the time of the death of Stephen, Peter At Jerusalem Peter’s strange action in receiving went down to labor in the coastal plain of Palestine. Gentiles into the Church without requiring them to Acts 9:31-43. At Lydda he healed a lame man, become Jews gave rise to some discussion. Acts Aeneas; at Joppa, on the coast, he raised Dorcas 11:1-18. But the apostles had no difficulty in from the dead. And it was at Joppa that he received convincing the brethren of the necessity for what he the guidance of the Holy Spirit as to the reception of had done. The guidance of the Holy Spirit had been Gentiles into the Church. Ch. 10.

perfectly plain. When the heard what Peter said,

Acts, Chapter 10

“they held their peace, and glorified God. Then to

At midday Peter went up upon the flat housetop to the Gentiles also hath God granted repentance unto

pray. There he fell into a trance, and saw a vessel life.”

like a great sheet let down from heaven, and in it all The freedom of the Gentiles had not yet, however, kinds of animals which it was forbidden in the fully been revealed. For a time the case of Cornelius Mosaic Law to use for food. A voice came to him: seems to have been regarded as exceptional. The “Rise, Peter; kill and eat. But Peter said, Not so, Holy Spirit had plainly commanded Peter to receive Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is Cornelius and his friends without requiring them to common and unclean. And a voice came unto him be united to the people of Israel, but perhaps similar again the second time, What God hath cleansed, definite guidance was required before others could make not thou common. And this was done thrice: be received. The underlying reason for Gentile

heaven.” and straightway the vessel was received up into freedom, in other words, had not yet fully been

revealed. The revelation, however, was not long

The meaning of this vision was soon made plain. A delayed; it came especially through the Apostle Roman officer; Cornelius, a devout Gentile, living at Paul. But meanwhile Paul was being prepared for Caesarea, which was a seaport about thirty miles (48 his work. kilometres) north of Joppa, had been commanded in Acts 9: 19-30, and Parallels

a vision to send for Peter. The messengers of After the journey to Arabia, which was mentioned at Cornelius arrived at Peter’s house just after Peter’s the end of Chapter 16, Paul returned to Damascus, vision was over. The Holy Spirit commanded Peter and preached to the Jews, endeavouring to convince to go with them. Arriving at Caesarea, the apostle them that Jesus was really the Messiah. went into the house where Cornelius and his friends

were assembled, and there proclaimed to them the His preaching aroused opposition, and the Jews, gospel of the Lord Jesus. While he was still with the help of an officer of King Aretas of Arabia, speaking, the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who had tried to kill him. But the brethren lowered him were present, upon the Gentiles as well as upon the over the city wall in a basket, and so he escaped to Jews. Then said Peter, “Can any man forbid the Jerusalem, Acts 9:23-25; II Cor 11:31-33, where he desired to become acquainted with Peter. No doubt the important step of preaching the word of God to he then talked with Peter especially about the events the Gentiles. Before, they had spoken only to Jews; of the earthly ministry of Jesus and the appearances here they spoke also to the Gentiles. Gentiles were fo the risen Christ. He also engaged in preaching to received no longer merely in isolated cases like the the Greek-speaking Jews. But when these case of Cornelius, but in large numbers. To Greek-speaking Jews sought to kill him, the brethren investigate what had happened, Barnabas, an sent him away to Tarsus. He was unwilling to go, honorable member of the early Jerusalem church, being desirous of repairing the harm which he had Acts 4:36, 37, was sent from Jerusalem to Antioch. done to the church at Jerusalem; but a definite Barnabas at once recognized the hand of God, and command of the Lord Jesus sent him now forth to sent to Tarsus to seek Paul. He and Paul then the country of the Gentiles. Acts 9:26-30; 22:17-21; labored abundantly in the Antioch church. At Gal. 1:18-24. He labored in or near Tarsus, Antioch the disciples of Jesus were first called preaching the faith which formerly he had laid “Christians” - no doubt by the Gentile population of waste.

the city. The fact is not unimportant. It shows that

even outsiders had come to see that the Christian

Acts 11:19-26

Church was something distinct from Judaism. A

Meanwhile an important new step in the progress of distinct name had come to be required.

the gospel into the Gentile world was taken at Questions on Chapter 17 Antioch. Acts 11:19-26. Antioch, the capital of the

Roman province of Syria, was situated on the 1. Describe the conversion of Cornelius in detail. Orontes River, near the northeastern corner of the What was the importance of the event?

Mediterranean Sea. It was the third greatest city of 2. What was the meaning of Peter’s vision on the the empire, ranking immediately after Rome and housetop at Joppa? Alexandria. And among the great Gentile cities was

the first which was encountered on the march of the 3. What important step was taken at Antioch?

world. gospel out from Jerusalem to the conquest of the 4. Trace the part of Barnabas in furthering the work

of Paul.

At Antioch, certain unnamed Jews of Cyprus and 5. Show how every successive step in the offering Cyrene, who had been scattered from Jerusalem by of the gospel to the Gentiles was taken under the the persecution at the time of Stephen’s death, took guidance of the Holy Spirit.
