This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of J. 1 in the cities that Paul visited - at first he preached to Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief Bible both Jews and Gentiles in the synagogues, and then History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Westminster when the Jews drove him out he was obliged to Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public domain..

preach to the Gentiles only.

Acts 11:27 to 12:25

Being driven out of Pisidian Antioch by a

After a time of rapid growth in the Antioch church, a persecution instigated by the Jews, Paul and prophet, Agabus by name, came down from Barnabas went to Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe, Jerusalem and prophesied a famine. The disciples which, with Pisidian Antioch, were in the southern determined to send relief to their brethren in part of the great Roman province Galatia, but not in Jerusalem. This they did by the instrumentality of Galatia proper, which lay farther to the north. Then, Barnabas and Paul. Acts 11:27-30. turning back from Derbe, the missionaries revisited

Meanwhile the Jerusalem church had been suffering Lystra, Iconium, and Pisidian Antioch, strengthening renewed persecution under Herod Agrippa I, who, as the disciples and appointing elders; and then a vassal of Rome, ruled over all Palestine from A.D. returned to the church at Syrian Antioch from which 41 to 44. James the son of Zebedee, one of the the Holy Spirit had sent them forth. apostles, had been put to death, and Peter had The Epistle of James

Acts, ch. 12. escaped only by a wonderful interposition of God, During the progress of the Antioch church and of the

mission which had proceeded from it, the church at

Acts, Chapters 13, 14

Jerusalem had not been idle. At the head of it stood

After Barnabas and Paul had returned to Antioch James, the brother of Jesus, who was not one of the from their labor of love in Jerusalem, they were sent twelve apostles and apparently during the earthly out, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, upon a ministry of Jesus had not been a believer, but who mission to the Gentiles, which is called the first had witnessed an appearance of the risen Lord. missionary journey. Acts, chs. 13, 14. This James was apparently attached permanently to the missionary journey led first through the island of church at Jerusalem, while the Twelve engaged Cyprus, then, by way of Perga in Pamphylia to frequently in missionary work elsewhere. From this Psidian Antioch on the central plateau of Asia James there has been preserved in the New

Testament a letter, The Epistle of James, which is

Minor.

addressed “to the twelve tribes which are of the

At Psidian Antioch, as regularly in the cities that he Dispersion.” This letter was written at an early time, visited, Paul entered first into the synagogue. In perhaps at about the time of the first missionary accordance with the liberal Jewish custom of that journey of Paul. In the letter, James lays stress upon day, he was given opportunity to speak, as a visiting the high moral standard which ought to prevail in teacher. The congregation was composed not only of the Christian life, and he has sometimes been Jews but also of Gentiles who had become interested regarded as an advocate of “works.” But this in the God of Israel and in the lofty morality of the judgment should not be misunderstood. The “works” Old Testament without definitely uniting themselves of which James is speaking are not works which are with the people of Israel - the class of persons who to be put alongside of faith as one of the means by are called in the book of The Acts “they that feared which salvation is to be obtained; they are, on the God” or the like. These “God-fearers” constituted a contrary, works which proceed from faith and show picked audience; they were just the Gentiles who that faith is true faith. James does not, therefore, were most apt to be won by the new preaching, deny the doctrine of justification by faith alone. because in their case much of the preliminary Only he insists that true faith always results in good instruction had been given. But the Jews themselves, works. Paul meant exactly the same thing when he at Pisidian Antioch as well as elsewhere, were spoke of “faith working through love.” Gal. 5:6. jealous of the new mission to the Gentiles, which Paul and James use some what different language, was proving so much more

but they mean the same thing. Faith, according to

successful than their own. Paul and Barnabas, both of them, involves receiving the power of God, therefore, were obliged to give up the work in the which then results in a life of loving service. synagogue and address themselves directly to the

Gentile population. So it happened very frequently

Acts 15: 1-35; Galatians 2:1-10

God had worked for Paul among the Gentiles as

The wonderful success of the first missionary truly as he had worked for Peter among the Jews. journey of Paul and Barnabas caused great joy to the With regard to the propaganda of the Judaizers, the Antioch church. But the joy was soon marred by Jerusalem church, after speeches by James and Peter certain persons, commonly called “Judaizers,” who presenting the same view as the view of Paul, sent a came down to Antioch from Jerusalem and said that letter to the Gentile Christians in Antioch and Syria unless the Gentile converts kept the Law of Moses and Cilicia declaring them to be absolutely free from they could not be saved. The demand was directly the Mosaic Law as a means of salvation, and contrary to the great principle of justification by directing them to refrain, out of loving regard for the faith alone; it made salvation depend partly upon Jews in the several cities, from certain things in the human merit. The entire life of the Church was in Gentile manner of life which were most abhorrent to danger. But Paul, guided by a revelation from God, Jewish feeling. determined to comply with the wishes of the Such was the result of the “Apostolic Council,” brethren at Antioch by going up to Jerusalem with which took place at about AD 49. It was a great Barnabas and certain others, in order to confer with victory for the Gentile mission and for Paul, for it the leaders of the Jerusalem church. Paul did not established clearly the unity of all the apostles under need any authorization from those leaders, for he the guidance of the Holy Spirit. No wonder the had been commissioned directly by Christ; nor did church at Antioch rejoiced when the letter of the he need to learn from them anything about the Jerusalem church was read.

principles of the gospel, for the gospel had come to Questions on Chapter 18 him through direct revelation. But he did desire to

receive from the Jerusalem leaders, to whom the 1. Describe in detail the release of Peter from prison Judaizers falsely appealed, some such public in the closing days of the reign of Herod Agrippa pronouncement as would put the Judaizers clearly in I.

work. the wrong and so stop their ruination of the Church’s 2. Enumerate the visits of Paul to Jerusalem which

have been studied so far.

The conference resulted exactly as Paul desired. 3. What happened, on the first missionary journey, Acts 15:1-35; Gal 2:1-10. The Jerusalem leaders - at Paphos? at Perga? at Pisidian Antioch? at James, the brother of the Lord, Peter and John the Lystra?

son of Zebedee - recognized that they had absolutely

nothing to add to the gospel of Paul, because he. had 4. Describe the Apostolic Council in detail. What been commissioned by Christ as truly and as directly was the meaning of the letter which was sent out as the original Twelve. Joyfully therefore, they gave from the council? to Paul and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship.
