This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of Peter’s action, because of its inconsistency, J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief endangered the very life of the Church. Peter had Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The given up the keeping of the ceremonial law in order domain. Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public to hold table companionship with the Gentile

Christians. Then he had undertaken the keeping of

The Apostolic Council, which was studied in the last the ceremonial law again. Might not the Gentile lesson, was an important step in the progress of Christians be tempted to do the same thing, in order Christian liberty. By it the Judaizers were definitely to preserve their fellowship with the greatest of the repudiated, and salvation was based upon faith alone original apostles? But if the Gentile Christians apart from the works of the law. But many practical should begin to keep the ceremonial law, they could difficulties still remained to be solved. not fail to think that the keeping of the ceremonial

law was somehow necessary to salvation. And so the

fundamental principle of Christianity — the

Galatians 2:11-21

One such difficulty appeared at Antioch soon after principle of salvation by Christ apart alone from the council. Gal. 2 11—21. The council had human merit — would be given up. The danger was established the freedom of the Gentile Christians imminent. from the Mosaic Law, but it had not been God had raised up a man to fight the battle of the determined that the Jewish Christians should give up Church. Absolutely regardless of personal the Law. No doubt the Jewish Christians were considerations, devoted solely to the truth, the inwardly free from the Law; they depended for their Apostle Paul withstood Peter before the whole salvation not at all upon their obedience to God’s Church. It is exceedingly important to observe that commands as set forth in the Law of Moses, but Paul did not differ from Peter in principle; he simply and solely upon the saving work of Christ differed from him only in practice. He said to Peter accepted by faith. But so far as had yet been in effect, “You and I are quite agreed about the revealed, it might conceivably be the will of God principle of justification by faith alone; why, that they should still maintain their connection with therefore, do you belie your principles

Israel by observing the whole of the Law including by your conduct?” In the very act of condemning the even its ceremonial requirements. In order however, practice of Peter, therefore, Paul commends his that the ceremonial requirements of the Law might principles; about the principles of the gospel the two be observed, the Jews had always been accustomed chief apostles were fully agreed. Undoubtedly Peter to avoid table companionship with Gentiles. What was convinced by what Paul said; there was no should be done, therefore, in churches like the permanent disagreement, even about matters of church at Antioch, which were composed both of practice, between Peter and Paul. Thus did the Spirit Jewish Christian and of Gentile Christians? How of God guide and protect the Church. could the Jewish Christians in such churches

continue to observe the ceremonial law, and still Acts 15:36 to 18:22

brethren? hold table companionship with their Gentile Soon afterward Paul went forth from Antioch on his

“second missionary journey.” Acts 15:36 to 18:22.

This question faced the apostle Peter on a visit Journeying with Silas by the land route to Derbe and which he made to Antioch after the Apostolic to Lystra, where Timothy became his associate, he Council. At first he answered the question in the then apparently went to Iconium and Pisidian interests of Gentile freedom; he allowed the unity of Antioch and then northward into Galatia proper, that the church to take precedence over the devotion of is “Galatia” in the older and narrower sense of the Jewish Christians to the ceremonial law. He held term. Finally he went down to Troas, a seaport on table companionship, therefore, with the Gentile the Aegean Sea. At Troas he must been joined by Christians, and he did so out of true conviction with Luke, the author of The Acts, since the narrative in regard to the new Christian freedom. But when Acts here begins to be carried on by the use of the certain men came to Antioch from James, Peter was first person, “we,” instead of “they”, thus showing afraid to be seen transgressing the ceremonial law that the author was present.

and so began to withdraw himself from table Setting sail from Troas, the apostolic company soon companionship with his Gentile brethren. came to Philippi in Macedonia, where an important church was founded. At last Paul and Silas were The letter which Paul wrote at such a time is very imprisoned, and although they were released through naturally a simple, warm expression of gratitude to divine interposition and by the second thought of the God.

city authorities, they were requested by the At the same time, in the letter, Paul comforts the authorities to leave the city.

Thessalonians in view of the death of certain of their

Arriving at Thessalonica, Paul preached in the number, gives instruction about the second coming synagogue, and founded an important church, of Christ, and urges the converts to live a diligent chiefly composed of Gentiles. But after a stay and orderly life.

shorter than had been intended, persecution The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians was written instigated by the Jews drove Paul out of the city. He very soon after the former Epistle. It reiterates the went then to Athens, where he preached not merely teaching of I Thessalonians, with correction of a in the synagogue but also directly to the Gentile misunderstanding which had crept into the church passers-by in the market place.

with regard to the second coming of Christ.

At Corinth, the capital of the Roman province Questions on Chapter 19 Achaia, embracing Greece proper, large numbers of

converts were won, and Paul spent about two years 1. What practical question arose at Antioch after the in the city. Not long after the beginning of this Apostolic Council?

Epistles. Corinthian residence, he wrote the two Thessalonian 2. How did Paul show the agreement in principle

between himself and Peter?

Thessalonians The First and Second Epistles to the 3. What was the inconsistency of Peter’s action? Did

Paul necessarily condemn Jewish Christians who

The First Epistle to the Thessalonians was written continued to observe the ceremonial law? What just after Paul had received his first news from the principle was at stake at Antioch? What does Thessalonian church. He had been obliged to leave Paul in his Epistles say about Peter after this Thessalonica before he had intended. Would his time? Was there any permanent disagreement?

work in that city be permanent? Would the converts 4. Why did Paul separate from Barnabas at the remain faithful to Christ? These were serious beginning of the second missionary journey? questions. The Thessalonian converts were living in What does Paul say afterwards about Barnabas? the midst of a corrupt paganism, and Paul had not Was there any permanent disagreement between had time to instruct them fully in the things of Paul and Barnabas or between Paul and Mark? Christ. Every human probability was against the

maintenance of their Christian life. But at last Paul 5. Describe what happened at Troas, Philippi, received his first news from Thessalonica. And the Thessalonica, Berea, Athens, Corinth.

news was good news. God was watching over his 6. What was the occasion for the writing of I children; the great wonder had been wrought; a true Thessalonians? of II Thessalonians? Christian church had been founded at Thessalonica.
