The Epistle to the Galatians

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of agreed, apparently, that faith in Christ is necessary J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief to salvation. But they maintained that something else Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The is also necessary to salvation — namely, union with domain. Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public the nation of Israel and the keeping of the Mosaic

Law. The Judaizers, then, maintained that a man is

saved by faith and works; whereas Paul maintained

At Corinth, on the second missionary journey, the that a man is saved by faith alone. Jews made charges the Roman proconsul Gallio The Galatian Christians had been impressed by what against Paul. But Gallio dismissed the charges as the Judaizers had said. Already they had begun to concerning only the Jewish Law. It was an important observe some of the Jewish fasts and feasts. And decision. Judaism was tolerated in the Roman they were on the point of taking the decisive step of Empire, and if Christianity was regarded as a variety uniting themselves definitely with the people of of Judaism it would be tolerated too. Such was Israel and undertaking the observance of the Mosaic usually the practice of the Roman authorities in the Law. It was to keep them from taking that decisive very early days; the Roman authorities often step that Paul wrote the Epistle.

Jews. protected the Christian missionaries against the At first sight the question at issue might seem to

Finally leaving Corinth, Paul went by way of have little importance today. No one in the Church Ephesus, where he made only a brief stay, to nowadays is in danger of uniting himself with Israel Palestine and then back to Syrian Antioch. Acts or undertaking to keep the ceremonial law. If Paul

had treated the question in Galatia in a merely

15:23 to 21:15

practical way, his letter would be of no value to us.

After having spent some time at Syrian Antioch, he But as a matter of fact Paul did not treat the question started out on his third missionary journey. Acts in a merely practical way; he treated it as a question 18:23 to 21:15. First he went through Asia Minor to of principle. He saw clearly that what was really Ephesus, apparently passing through Galatia proper endangered by the propaganda of the Judaizers was on his way. At Ephesus he spent about three years. the great principle of grace; and the true question

was whether salvation is to be earned partly by what

The Epistle to the Galatians

man can do or whether it is an absolutely free gift of

It was probably during this Ephesian residence that God.

Paul wrote the Epistle to the Galatians; and probably That question is just as important in the modern “the churches of Galatia” to which the Epistle is Church as it was in Galatia in the first century. addressed were churches in Galatia proper in the There are many in the modern Church who maintain northern part of the great Roman province Galatia. that salvation is obtained by character, or by men’s Another view regards the Epistle as being addressed own obedience to the commands of Christ, or by to the well-known churches at Pisidian Antioch, men’s own acceptance of Christ’s ideal of life. Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe, which were in the These are the modern Judaizers. And the Epistle to southern part of the Roman province. When this the Galatians is directed against them just as much view is adopted, the writing of the Epistle is usually as it was directed against the Judaizers of long ago.

put at a somewhat earlier time in the life of Paul. Paul refuted the Judaizers by establishing the The occasion for the writing of the Epistle to the meaning of the cross of Christ. Salvation, he said, Galatians can easily be discovered on the basis of was obtained simply and solely by what Christ did the letter itself. After Paul had left Galatia, certain when he died for the sins of believers. The curse of other teachers had come into the country. These God’s law, said Paul, rests justly upon all men, for teachers were men of the Jewish race, and they are all men have sinned. That curse of the law brings the usually called “Judaizers.” What they taught can be penalty of death. But the Lord Jesus, the eternal Son established fairly well on the basis of Paul’s answer of God, took the penalty upon himself by dying to them. They agreed with Paul in believing that instead of us. We therefore go free.

Jesus was truly the Messiah, and that he had risen Such is the gospel of Jesus Christ as preached by from the dead. Apparently they had no objection to Paul, and as defended in the Epistle to the Galatians. Paul’s doctrine of the deity of Christ, and they That gospel, Paul said, is received by faith. Faith is when he speaks of “faith working through love”; for not a meritorious act; it simply means accepting love involves the fulfilment of the whole law.

what Christ has done. It cannot be mingled with an Such was the gospel of Paul as it is set forth in the appeal to human merit. Christ will do everything or Epistle to the Galatians. Paul had received it from nothing. Either accept as a free gift what Christ has the Lord Jesus Christ. Without it the Church is dead. done, or else earn salvation by perfect obedience. It need not be put in long words, but it must be The latter alternative is impossible because of sin; proclaimed without the slightest concession to

with God. the former, therefore, alone can make a man right human pride, if the Church is to be faithful to the

Saviour who died. We deserved eternal death; the

But acceptance of the saving work of Christ means Lord Jesus, because he loved us, died in our stead — more than salvation from guilt of sin; it means more there is the heart and core of Christianity.

than a fresh start in God’s favor. It means also Questions on Chapter 20. salvation from the power of sin. All men, according

to Paul, are dead in sin. Salvation, then, can come 1. Describe Paul’s first visit to Corinth.

only by a new creation, as Paul calls it, or, as it is 2. Where did Paul go at the beginning of the third called elsewhere in the New Testament, a new birth. missionary journey? That new creation is wrought by the saving work of

Christ, and applied by the Holy Spirit. And after the 3. What was the occasion for the writing of the new creation has been wrought, there is a new life Epistle to the Galatians”

on the basis of it. In the new life there is still a battle 4. What great principle is defended in the Epistle? against sin. But the Christian has received a new What is the meaning of the death of Christ? What power, the power of the Holy Spirit. And when he is the meaning of “justification by faith”? yields himself to that new power, he fulfills in its

deepest import the law of God. Only he fulfills it 5. Give an outline of the Epistle, showing the three not by obedience in his own strength to a law which great divisions.

is outside of him, but by yielding to a power which 6. Why does Paul give, in the first part of the God has placed in his heart. This new fulfillment of Epistle, a review of certain facts in his life? the law on the part of Christians is what Paul means
