The Epistles to Corinthians and to the Romans

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of principles which Paul used in dealing with them are J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief of permanent validity. The greatest principle was the Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The principle of love. It is in connection with the domain. Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public question of gifts of the Spirit that Paul wrote his

wonderful hymn about Christian love. Ch 13

Another Epistle, in addition to the Epistle to the Paganism of thought was creeping into the Galatians, was written by Paul at Ephesus on the Corinthian church in connection with the doctrine of third missionary journey. This was the First Epistle the resurrection. Paul dealt with this question by

appealing to the plain historical evidence for the

to the Corinthians.

The First Epistle to the Corinthians resurrection of Christ. That fact itself had not been

denied in Corinth. It was supported by the testimony

I Corinthians, the details of congregational life are not only of Paul himself, but also of Peter, of the more fully discussed than in any other of the apostles, and of five hundred brethren most of whom Epistles of Paul. Paul had received information were still alive. Paul had received the account of the about the Corinthian church partly through what was death, the burial, the resurrection, and the said by the “household of Chloe,” who had come to appearances of Jesus from Jerusalem and no doubt Ephesus from Corinth, and partly by a letter which from Peter during the fifteen days which the two the Corinthian church had written. The information apostles had spent together three years after Paul’s was not all of a favorable character. In Corinth, a conversion. In I Cor 15:1-7 Paul is reproducing the Christian church was in deadly battle with paganism account which the primitive Jerusalem church gave — paganism in thought and paganism in life. But of its own foundation. And in that account that battle was fought to a victorious conclusion, Christianity appears, not as an aspiration, not as through the guidance of an inspired apostle, and mere devotion to an ideal of life, not as inculcation through the Holy Spirit of God in the hearts of of a certain kind of conduct, but as “a piece of

information” about something that had actually

believers.

First Paul dealt in his letter with the parties in the happened — namely the atoning death and glorious Corinthian church. The Corinthian Christians were resurrection of Jesus our Lord. in the habit of saying, “I am of Paul; and I of The Second Epistle to the Corinthians

Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ,” I Cor The First Epistle to the Corinthians did not end all 1:12; they seem to have been more interested in the difficulties in the Corinthian church. On the particular form in which the gospel message was contrary, after the writing of that letter, certain delivered than in the message itself. Paul treated the miserable busybodies had sought to draw the subject in a grand and lofty way. The party spirit in Corinthian Christians away from their allegiance to Corinth was merely one manifestation of intellectual the apostle. A brief visit which Paul had made to pride. In reply, the apostle directed his readers to Corinth had not ended the trouble. At last Paul had the true wisdom. And if you would possess that left Ephesus in great distress. He had passed through

up your pride. wisdom, he said, give up your quarreling and give a terrible personal danger, when he had despaired of

life, but more trying still was the thought of Corinth.

Then there was gross sin to be dealt with, and a Finding no relief from his troubles he went to Troas certain lordly indifference to moral purity. In reply, and then across to Macedonia. There at length relief Paul pointed to the true moral implications of the came. Titus, Paul’s helper, arrived with good news gospel, and to the law of love which sometimes, as from Corinth; the church had returned to its in Paul’s own case, causes a Christian man to give allegiance. To give expression to his joy and up even privileges which might be his by right. thanksgiving, Paul wrote the Second Epistle to the

In Chs. 12 to 14 of the Epistle, Paul dealt with the Corinthians. In the Epistle he also dealt with the supernatural gifts of the Spirit, such as prophecy and matter of the collection for the poor at Jerusalem, speaking with tongues. These gifts were not and administered a last rebuke to the Corinthian continued after the Apostolic Age. But it is trouble makers. important for us to know about them, and the In I Corinthians it is the congregation that is in the dying for them on the cross; he paid the just penalty forefront of interest; in II Corinthians, on the other of our sins, and clothed us with his perfect hand, it is the apostle and his ministry. In this letter, righteousness. Ch. 3:21-31. This saving work of the Apostle Paul lays bare before his readers the Christ, and the faith by which it is accepted, were set very secrets of his heart, and reveals the glories of forth in the Old Testament Scriptures. Ch. 4. The the ministry which God had intrusted to him. That result of the salvation is peace with God, and an ministry was the ministry of reconciliation. God and assured hope that what God has begun through the men had been separated by the great gulf of sin, gift of Christ, he will bring to a final completion. which had brought men under God’s wrath and Ch. 5:1-11. Thus, as in Adam all died, by sharing in curse. Nothing that men could do could possibly the guilt of Adam’s sin, so in Christ all believers are bridge the gulf. But what was impossible with men made alive. Vs. 12-21.

was possible with God. By the redeeming work of But, Paul goes on, the freedom which is wrought by Christ the gulf had been closed; all had been made Christ does mean freedom to sin; on the contrary it

died. right again between God and those for whom Christ means freedom from the power of sin; it means a

new life which is led by the power of God. Ch. 6

The Epistle to the Romans

What the law could not do, because the power of sin

Arriving at Corinth Paul spent three months in that prevented men from keeping its commands, that city. During this time he wrote the Epistle to the Christ has accomplished. Ch. 7. Through Christ, Romans. Paul was intending to visit the city of believers have been made sons of God; there is to Rome. The church at Rome had not been founded by them “no condemnation”; and nothing in this world him; it was important, therefore, that in order to or the, next shall separate them from the love of prepare for his coming he should set forth plainly to Christ. Ch. 8. the Romans the gospel which he proclaimed. That is Toward the spread of this gospel, Paul goes on, the what he does in the Epistle to the Romans. In the whole course of history has been made to lead. The Epistle to the Romans, the way of salvation through strange dealings of God both with Jews and Gentiles Christ is set forth more fully than in any other book are part of one holy and mysterious plan. Chs. 9 to of the New Testament. In Galatians it is set forth in 11.

a polemic way, when Paul was in the midst of a In the last section of the Epistle, Paul shows how the deadly conflict against a religion of works; here it is glorious gospel which he has set forth results in holy set forth more calmly and more fully. living from day to day. Chs. 12 to 16.

In the first great division of the Epistle, Paul sets Questions on Chapter 21 forth the universal need of salvation. The need is

due to sin. All have sinned, and are under God’s just 1. What was the occasion for the writing of I wrath and curse. Rom. 1:18 to 3:20. But the Lord Corinthians? of II Corinthians? of Romans?

Jesus Christ bore that curse for all believers, by 2. Give outlines of these three Epistles.
