This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of Felix brought no decisive result, ch. 24, and Paul J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief was left in prison at Caesarea for two years until Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The Festus arrived as successor of Felix. Then, in order

domain. Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public to prevent being taken to Jerusalem for trial, Paul

exercised his right as a Roman citizen by appealing

to the court of the emperor. Ch. 25:1-12.

After the three months which Paul spent at Corinth Accordingly, after a hearing before Herod Agrippa on the third missionary journey, he went up to II, who had been made king of a realm northeast of Jerusalem in order to help bear the gifts which he Palestine by the Romans, v. 13; ch. 26:32, Paul was had collected in the Gentile churches for the poor of sent as a prisoner to Rome, chs. 27:1 to 28:16.

the Jerusalem church. He was accompanied by a On the journey lie was accompanied by Luke, who number of helpers, among them Luke, the writer of has given a detailed account of the voyage — an the Third Gospel and the book of The Acts. Luke account which is not only perhaps the chief source had remained behind at Philippi on the second of information about the seafaring of antiquity, but missionary journey, and now, several years later, he also affords a wonderful picture of the way Paul joined the apostle again. The portions of the journey acted in a time of peril. The ship was wrecked on the where Luke was actually present are narrated in The island of Malta, and it was not until the following Acts in great detail and with remarkable vividness. spring that the prisoner was brought to Rome. There When Paul came to Miletus on the coast of Asia he remained in prison for two years, chained to a Minor, he sent to Ephesus for the elders of the soldier guard, but permitted to dwell in his own Ephesian church, and when they came he held a hired house and to receive visits from his friends. notable farewell discourse. There was a touching Acts 28:6-31.

him so well. scene when he finally parted from those who loved During this first Roman imprisonment Paul wrote

four of his Epistles — to the Colossians and to

Acts 21:15 to 28:31

Philemon, to the Ephesians, and to the Philippians.

Despite prophecies of the imprisonment that awaited Colossians, Philemon, and Ephesians were all him Paul went bravely on to Jerusalem. There he written at the same time. Colossians and Ephesians was warmly received by James the brother of the were both sent by the same messenger, Tychicus, Lord and by the church. Acts 21:15-26. But the and this messenger was accompanied by Onesimus, non-Christian Jews falsely accused him of bringing who bore the Epistle to Philemon. Gentiles with him into the Temple. Vs. 27-40. There The Epistle to Philemon

was an onslaught against him, and he was rescued Onesimus was a slave who had run away from by the Roman chief captain, who took him into the Philemon, his master. He then had been converted Castle of Antonia which the Romans used to guard by Paul, and Paul was now sending him back to his the Temple area. On the steps of the castle he was master. The little letter which the apostle wrote on allowed to address the people, ch. 22:1-22, who this occasion gives a wonderful picture of the way in listened to him at first because he used the Aramaic which ordinary social relationships like that of language instead of Greek, but broke out against him master and servant may be made the means of again when he spoke of his mission to the Gentiles. expression of Christian love. Very beautiful also An appeal to his Roman citizenship saved Paul from was the relation between Philemon and the apostle scourging, Acts 22:23-29; and a hearing the next day through whom he had been converted.

before the sanhedrin, ch. 22:30 to 23:10, brought The Epistle to the Colossians only a quarrel between the Sadducees and the

Pharisees. That night Paul had a comforting vision The church at Colossae, to which the Epistle to the of Christ. V.11.

Colossians is addressed, had been founded not by

A plot of the Jews to waylay Paul and kill him was Paul but by one of his helpers, Epaphras. A certain frustrated by Paul’s sister’s son, who told the chief type of false teaching had been brought into the captain. The chief captain sent the prisoner with an church by those who laid stress upon angels in a way escort down to Caesarea where the procurator Felix that was harmful to the exclusive position of Christ. had his residence. Acts 23:12-35. Hearings before In reply, Paul sets forth in the Epistle the majesty of Jesus, who existed from all eternity and was the inform his Philippian brethren about the situation at instrument of God the Father in the creation of the Rome. His trial is approaching; whether it results in world. This was no new teaching; it is always his death or in his release, he is content. But as a presupposed in the earlier Epistles of Paul, and matter of fact he expects to see the Philippians about it there was no debate. But in the Epistles to again.

the Colossians, in view of the error that was Moreover, Paul holds up in the letter the example of creeping through false speculation, Paul took Christ, which was manifested in the great act of

he had presupposed. occasion to set forth fully what in the former letters loving condescension by which he came into the

world and endured for our sakes the accursed death

The Epistle to the Ephesians

on the cross. That humiliation of Christ, Paul says,

The Epistle to the Ephesians is probably a circular was followed by exaltation; God has now given to letter addressed to a group of churches of which Jesus the name that is above every name. Ephesus was the center. In this letter the personal At the conclusion of the two years in prison in element is less prominent than in the other Pauline Rome, Paul was released, probably in A.D. 63. This Epistles; Paul allows his mind to roam freely over fact is attested not by the book of The Acts, of the grand reaches of the divine economy. The which the narrative closes at the end of the two Church is here especially in view. She is represented years at Rome, but by the Pastoral Epistles of Paul as the bride of Christ, and as the culmination of an and also by an Epistle of Clement of Rome which eternal and gracious plan of God.

was written at about A.D. 95. Clement says that Paul

went to Spain. This he probably did immediately

The Epistle to the Philippians

after his release. He then went to the East again, for

The Epistle to the Philippians was probably written it was in the East that I Timothy and Titus were later than the other Epistles of the first captivity. The written.

immediate occasion for the writing of the letter was Questions on Chapter 22. the arrival of a gift from the Philippian church, on

account of which Paul desires to express his joy. 1. Outline the events in the life of Paul which Paul had always stood in a peculiarly cordial occurred between the departure from Corinth and relation to his Philippian converts; he had been the end of the first Roman imprisonment.

willing, therefore, to receive gifts from them, 2. What was the occasion for the writing of although in other churches he had preferred to make Colossians? of Philemon? of Ephesians? of himself independent by laboring at his trade. But the Philippians? letter is not concerned only or even chiefly with the

gifts of the Philippian church. Paul desired also to 3. Give outlines of these Epistles.
