The Pastoral Epistles

This following selection has been extracted from a joint work of Jews in A.D. 62, according to Josephus the Jewish J. Gresham Machen and James Oscar Boyd entitled "A Brief historian, or a few years later according to another Bible History: A Survey of the Old and New Testaments" (The account. In A.D. 66 the Jews rose in revolt against domain. Westminster Press, Philadelphia, 1922), now in the public the Romans. In the war that followed there was a

terrible siege of Jerusalem. Before the siege the

It was observed in the last lesson that Paul was Christians in the city had fled to Pella, east of the released, from his first Roman imprisonment, and Jordan. Jerusalem was captured by the Romans in went then to Spain and then to the East. At the time A.D. 70, and the Temple destroyed. when I Timothy was written he has just left Timothy From that time on, the Church in Palestine ceased to behind at Ephesus when he himself has gone into be of great relative importance; the gospel had Macedonia, and now writes the letter with passed for the most part to the Gentiles. A number instructions for Timothy as to the way of conducting of the apostles remained for many years, I ever, to the affairs of the church. Similarly, the Epistle to guide and instruct the Church, and important books Titus was written to guide Titus in his work on the of the New Testament were written in this period

either by the apostles themselves or by those who

island of Crete.

After this last period of activity in the East, Paul was stood under their direction. imprisoned again at Rome. During this second The Epistle to the Hebrews

Roman imprisonment he wrote II Timothy, to Even before the destruction of the Temple, the encourage Timothy and instruct him, and to give to original disciples had begun to labor far and wide him and to the Church a farewell message just among the Gentiles. It was perhaps during this early

soon. before his own death, which he was expecting very period that the Epistle to the Hebrews was written.

The name of the author is unknown, but the book is

The two Epistles to Timothy and the Epistle to truly apostolic — that is, it was written either by an Titus, which are called the Pastoral Epistles, are apostle or by one who wrote under the direction of similar to one another in important respects. They all the apostles. The Epistle is intended to celebrate the lay stress upon soundness of teaching and upon the all-sufficiency of Christ as the great High Priest, organization of the Church. In the closing years of who has made atonement by his own blood, as his life Paul provided for the permanence of his distinguished from the Old Testament types that work; the period of origination was over and the were intended to point forward to him.

period of conservation had begun. It was not God’s The First Epistle of Peter

will that every Christian generation should have Some years before the destruction of Jerusalem, the revealed to it anew the whole of the gospel. What is apostle Peter left Palestine. In the course of his true in one age is true in all ages. It was a salutary missionary journeys he went to Rome, and it was thing, therefore, that the Pastoral Epistles provided perhaps from Rome that he wrote the First Epistle of for the preservation of the faith which was once for Peter, the word “Babylon” in I Peter 5:13 being all delivered the saints.

Soon after the writing of II Timothy, Paul was perhaps a figurative designation of Rome as the beheaded at Rome. This event, which is attested in “Babylon” of that age. The Epistle was addressed to altogether credible Christian tradition outside of the Christians in Asia Minor, and was intended to New Testament, took place within the reign of the encourage the readers to Christian fortitude in the Emperor Nero — that is, before A.D. 68. At the time midst of persecution. The gospel proclaimed in the of the great fire at Rome in A.D. 64 Nero had Epistle is the one great apostolic gospel of Christ’s persecuted the Christians, as is narrated by Tacitus, redeeming work which was also proclaimed by Paul.

the Roman historian. But at that time Paul probably The Second Epistle of Peter; The Epistle of Jude

escaped by being out of the city; his execution The Second Epistle of Peter was written by the probably did not occur until several years later. apostle to warn his readers against false teaching At about the time of the death of Paul disastrous and urge them to be faithful to the authority of the events were taking place in Palestine. James the apostles and of the Scriptures. Closely related to II brother of the Lord had been put to death by the Peter is the Epistle of Jude, which was written by The Book of Revelation

one of the brothers of Jesus. The apostle Peter, in The book of Revelation is based upon a revelation accordance with a thoroughly credible Christian which the apostle John had received during a tradition, finally suffered a martyr’s death at Rome. banishment to the island of Patmos, off the coast of The apostle John, the son of Zebedee, became the Asia Minor, not far from Ephesus. Probably the head of the Church in Asia Minor, where, at book itself was written on the same island. The book Ephesus, he lived until nearly the end of the first contains letters to seven churches of western Asia century. During this period he wrote five books of Minor which are intended to encourage or warn the New Testament.

them in accordance with the needs of every

The Gospel According to John was written to individual congregation. The whole book is a supplement the other three Gospels which had long tremendous prophecy, which strengthens the faith of been in use. It contains much of the most precious the Church in the midst of persecutions and trials by and most profound teaching of our Lord, as it had revealing the plan of God, especially as it concerns been stored up in the memory of the “beloved the second coming of our Lord and the end of the disciple”; and it presents the glory of the Word of world. Details of future events, especially times and God as that glory had appeared on earth to an seasons, are not intended to be revealed, but rather

great principles both of good and of evil, which

eyewitness.

manifest themselves in various ways in the

The Epistles of John

subsequent history of the Church. The prophecy,

The First Epistle of John was written in order to however, will receive its highest and final combat certain errors which were creeping into the fulfillment only when Lord shall come again, and Church in Asia Minor and in order to present to the bring in the final reign of righteousness and the readers the true Christian life of love, founded upon blessedness of those whom he has redeemed. the Son of God who had come in the flesh, and Questions on Chapter 23

of God. begun by the new birth which makes a man a child 1. When, where, and why were the three Pastoral

Epistles written?

The Second Epistle of John is a very brief letter 2. Outline the life of Paul after his release from the written to warn an individual church of the same first Roman imprisonment? kind of error as is combated in I John. 3. What is known about the latter part of the life of

The Third Epistle is addressed to an individual Peter?. 4. What was the occasion for the writing of I Peter? Christian named Gaius, who is praised for his of II Peter? of Jude? What are the characteristics hospitality to visiting missionaries, which was the of these Letters? more praiseworthy because it was in contrast to the 5. What is known about the latter part of the life of inhospitality of a certain Diotrephes. The little letter John?

sheds a flood of light upon the details of 6. What were the date and the purpose of the Gospel

Age. congregational life in the last period of the Apostolic According John; of the Epistles of John; of the

book of Revelation.
