Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

ELDER JOSEPH ANDERSON

Biographical Sketch

Elder Joseph Anderson, named an Assistant to the Council of The Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, April 6, 1970, had been secretary to the First Presidency of the Church since 1923.

Elder Anderson continues with his secretarial assignments, serving as clerk of the general conferences of the Church twice each year, recording conference speeches and proceedings and keeping minutes and attending meetings of the First Presidency and the Council of Twelve.

Elder Anderson was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, on November 20, 1889. He was graduated from Weber Academy, now Weber State College, at the age of 15.

He was a missionary for the Church in Switzerland and Germany from 1911 to 1914. After a brief business career in Salt Lake City, he became secretary to late Church President Heber J. Grant. Since then he has traveled throughout the world with the presidents of the Church on their various assignments.

For twenty-five years, Elder Anderson was a member of the Bonneville Stake High Council in Salt Lake City. Prior to that he was a member of the bishopric of the Thirty-Third Ward and Sunday School superintendent.

For many years he has been director, member of the executive committee, and secretary-treasurer of the Deseret Book Company in Salt Lake City.

He married Norma Peterson in the Salt Lake Temple on Nov. 11, 1915. They have a son and two daughters.

SbHd1 Heber $10,000"

There is another story I would like to tell you that President Grant often told. Whenever the Church needed someone to collect funds for some important purpose, they called on Brother Grant. At the time, of course, he was an apostle. And he was a great financier and a wonderful man for contributing to funds and for collecting funds. On one occasion, it so happened that one of the banks in Salt Lake was in trouble, and it looked like it might fail. Some of the Brethren were interested in the bank as directors, and if it had failed, it would have been quite an embarrassment to them. And the President of the Church called on Brother Grant to go out and collect funds that they might put into the bank to save it from disaster.

Now some people questioned the wisdom of that, but at any rate Brother Grant went forward on his mission. And one of the places he visited was Provo where he called on Jesse Knight and Reed Smoot. He asked Reed Smoot for $2,000, and he asked Jesse for $5,000. They were both men of means, Brother Knight particularly, as some of you well know.

Jesse wasn't altogether sold on the idea. He said, "No, I don't think that an apostle of the Lord ought to be going out gathering funds for that purpose. I don't think that that's a worthy cause to go out and make collections for."

And Brother Smoot said, "I'll give you $1,000, but I won't give you $2,000."

Brother Grant said, "Brother Smoot, you have offered $1,000. I'll not take it, but you go home tonight and get down on your knees and pray to the Lord and ask him to give you enlargement of the heart and give me $2,000."

Jesse said, "Brother Grant, why didn't you ask me to pray?"

"Oh," Brother Grant said, "why should I ask you to pray? You didn't offer me anything. No use of asking the Lord to give you enlargement of the heart."

Brother Knight had told him, "You can come here as often as you want, and there is a bed and breakfast for you at my home, but I'm not going to contribute to that." And he was a very generous contributor normally.

He said, "I'll tell you what I will do. I will go home tonight, and I will pray to the Lord about that. And if I get the inspiration to give you that $5,000, I'll do it."

"Well," Brother Grant said, "I might as well have the check in my pocket now. I am sure if you pray about it I'll get it."

And so, two or three days later there came through the mail two checks—one from Jesse M. Knight for $10,000, and one from Brother Smoot for $2,000.

When Brother Grant saw Jesse a few days later, he said, "What happened? I didn't ask you for $10,000. I only asked for $5,000."

Brother Knight said, "I'll tell you this, Brother Grant. When you come to me again with a mission from the President of the Church to raise funds, I'm going to pay without any question." He said, "You're much more liberal than the Lord is. I went home as I promised to do, and I told the Lord that Heber was asking me for this contribution, and I wanted to know how he felt about it. I got down on my knees, and it just kept going through my mind like a tune: 'Give Heber $10,000.' And I got into bed and that tune kept going through my mind: 'Give Heber $10,000. Give Heber $10,000.' I got down on my knees again and said, 'Lord, Heber didn't ask me for $10,000. He only asked for $5,000.' The tune kept going through my mind. 'Give Heber $10,000. Give Heber $10,000.' And so, in order to satisfy the situation and have peace of mind, I told the Lord, 'Alright, I'll give him $10,000.'"

And so, that is what happened. This is one of the experiences of many, many that President Grant used to tell that were very interesting to me.

(Brigham Young University, Speeches of the Year, "Prophets of the Living God," July 29, 1969, pp. 6-7.)

SbHd1 True Servant of God"

My acquaintance with President McKay dates back to the time before he was an apostle, when I attended the Weber Academy in Ogden. He was the principal of that school, and I a student, a country boy in short trousers. He was in my opinion the greatest teacher I have ever known. The students, girls and boys, all loved him. He was my ideal at that time, and he still is.

I recall with appreciation and satisfaction my acquaintance with him as a boy, much of the time riding horseback from Roy to Ogden over the sand ridge to get to school. I was late in starting to school because my folks were poor farmers and I had to work in the canning factory in the early fall to get means to support me in school. I recall how timid and embarrassed I was when Brother McKay called on me to come up before the class and diagram sentences and otherwise participate.

Never shall I forget him as an English teacher and particularly when we studied "The Lady of the Lake," by Scott, and "The Princess" by Tennyson. These things made such an impression on me that sixty years later, when Sister Anderson and I were in Europe on a visit, I insisted on visiting the Trossacks, the Lady of the Lake country in Scotland.

His loving, impressive personality; those eyes that look through you and search your very soul; his teachings and his example have won the hearts of millions of people—not only members of the Church but nonmembers alike. People of high and low rank who meet him—presidents of our nation and leaders of other countries over the years, men of the cloth in various churches, dignitaries, businessmen, press representatives, statesmen and politicians—all have been entranced by his great personality, his gentlemanliness, his honesty, his faith and devotion, his sense of humor, his scholarship, and his spirituality. In spite of the ailments and difficulties he has had to contend with, he never complains. His life has been and is one of service and devotion to his Church and his fellowmen. He is a true servant of God; the Lord loves him, and one cannot come into his presence without having a deep love for him and without feeling the warmth of his spirit. You cannot meet with him where matters of great importance are under consideration without recognizing his prophetic calling and his inspirational guidance.

(Speeches of the Year, "Prophets of the Living God," July 29, 1969, p. 9-10.)
