Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Brother Grant, It's My Turn Next"

These men who stand at the head of the Church are men of destiny. It is my firm conviction that they were chosen for their work before they came here.

When President Grant was a child, playing on the floor of a building in which a Relief Society meeting was being held, Sister Eliza R. Snow spoke in tongues and Zina D. Young interpreted it. And she said that some time that little boy playing on the floor would be an apostle. Heber C. Kimball on one occasion placed Heber as a boy on a table and prophesied that some day he would be a greater man in the Church than was his father—and his father was a counselor to President Brigham Young.

Patriarch Rowberry in Tooele gave him a blessing when he was president of the Tooele Stake, and after he had concluded he said, "Heber, I dare not tell you what I saw when my hands were on your head." Brother Grant said it went through his mind as clearly as if a voice had said it: "Some day you will be the President of the Church." He said he never mentioned that to a soul until many years later when he became the President of the Church.

Patriarch Rowberry was a man who had the spirit of his patriarchal calling. I have always enjoyed this experience that President Grant told me on different occasions. Some of you may have read it.

In those days we had no automobiles, and the Brethren who went out to visit the stakes in the Church, the Brethren of the Twelve and General Authorities, sometimes spent weeks at a time visiting a stake and visiting the wards before they returned to headquarters.

On one occasion when Orson Pratt visited the Tooele Stake, at which time President Grant was the president of the stake and Brother Rowberry was the patriarch, Patriarch Rowberry, in meeting him at the train to take him down to Tooele, said to him, "Brother Pratt. I have had a rather remarkable dream. I can't understand it. I wish you would tell me the interpretation of it."

Brother Pratt said, "Tell me the dream and I will pray about it, and if I can get the interpretation before I go back to Salt Lake I'll tell you what it is."

Brother Rowberry said, "I dreamed that I was on a big ship on the ocean, and as we traveled along the way people began to fall off that ship one after another. And finally I fell off and fell into the water and made my way to the shore. And lo and behold, when I got there I met a man." (He didn't tell him his name because the man happened to be Orson Pratt himself.) He said, "I met a man, and he showed me around the place where we were, whatever it was, the spirit world, I suppose. And, oh, it was such a beautiful place. Brother Pratt," he said, "this man said to me, this guide, 'Is there any place you would like to see especially?'

"I said, 'Yes, I have always had a great love for the Prophet Joseph, and I would appreciate it if I might see his home.'"

And so he showed him the Prophet's home and other places.

Brother Pratt said, "I'll pray to the Lord about it, and if I get the interpretation I'll tell you."

As Brother Rowberry was taking him to the train after his visit in the stake and visiting the wards, Brother Pratt said to him, "By the way, Brother Rowberry, I have the interpretation of that dream for you." He said, "The ship that you saw was the world, and the people who fell off were people dying, and," he said, "if you'll make a record of those who fell off the ship, in the order that you saw them fall off, as nearly as you can, they will pass away in that particular order." And he said, "When your time comes and you meet the man whom you saw in your dream, he will tell you that the dream was of the Lord and so also was the interpretation."

Some time later while President Grant was president of the stake, Brother Rowberry came to him and said, "Brother Grant, you remember my dream. Well, I wrote down the names of those people in the order in which they fell off that ship and," he said, "they've done it. They have died just in that order."

Some time later a request came from the headquarters of the Church for the people in the stake to pray for Brother Pratt. He was very sick. They had a prayer circle room in the building where they met, and on the way up to the prayer circle room on Sunday morning Brother Rowberry said to Brother Grant, "Now, Brother Grant, you remember my dream?"

Brother Grant said, "Yes, I remember your dream."

He said, "It's all right to pray for Brother Pratt, but," he said, "it's his turn next."

Brother Pratt died on time; he didn't get well. Later, after Brother Grant became an apostle and was visiting out in Tooele, he met Brother Rowberry. Brother Rowberry reminded him of that dream and he said those people had passed away in just the order that they had been listed. And he said, "Brother Grant, it's my turn next. I just can't wait to get over on the other side to meet Brother Pratt and to meet the Prophet Joseph and your father." He said, "I'll tell them what a wonderful work you are doing as an apostle of the Lord."

The next time Brother Grant visited Grantsville, he visited Brother Rowberry's grave. That was one of the wonderful experiences that interested me, and these that I have repeated are just a few of the incidents in President Grant's life that indicated beyond a doubt that he was chosen before he came here.

(Speeches of the Year, "Prophets of the Living God," July 29, 1969, p. 4-6.)
