Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

ELDER MARVIN J. ASHTON

Biographical Sketch

Marvin J. Ashton, long prominent in youth leadership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was named a member of the Council of the Twelve in December, 1971. Previously, he was sustained as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve at the October 1969 general conference.

Prior to his new appointment he had served eleven years as an assistant general superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association—youth activity program of the Church—and twenty-one years as a general board member. He is presently serving as managing director of the Church's newly-formed Social Services Program, which includes adoption services, Indian student placement, youth guidance, drug and alcohol rehabilitation, and fellowshipping and rehabilitation of Latter-day Saints confined in prison. He also serves as a member of the Board of Trustees of the Church's Health Services Corporation. In addition, Elder Ashton supervises the Hong Kong, Philippines, Southeast Asia, and Taiwan missions.

He has directed much of his time and attention to youth leadership. He serves presently as a national committeeman of the Boy Scouts of America and is on the regional executive council and the executive committee of the Great Salt Lake Council. He holds the Silver Bear and Silver Antelope Scouting awards for outstanding service to boys and is an Eagle Scout. As an MIA executive he supervised Church-wide youth activities in music, dance, drama, speech, and athletics. For twenty-five years he supervised all-Church athletic programs.

Elder Ashton, as a Utah State senator, spearheaded legislation for improved juvenile detention facilities. In 1960 he was chairman of the leisure time division of the White House Youth Conference for the state of Utah. In addition, he serves on the Utah State Board of Alcoholism and Drugs and the board of directors of the Community Services Council.

He served a Church mission in Great Britain from 1937 to 1939 and was captain of the missionary basketball team which won the British National championship. He has traveled world-wide as a youth conference, fireside, and youth leadership director and speaker. In 1969 he was awarded the Homer 'Pug' Warner medal for outstanding service and example to youth.

Professionally, he serves as vice president of the Alta Lumber Company (a firm which he founded), president of Deseret Book Company, vice president of Dan's Food Stores, and vice president of Oneida Investment Company. He is a member of the executive committee of the Deseret Gymnasium, a member of the Salt Lake City Advisory Board of Zions First National Bank, and an official of several other business firms.

He was born in Salt Lake City May 6, 1915, a son of Marvin O. and Rae J. Ashton. He is a University of Utah graduate in business administration. Married in the Salt Lake Temple in 1940 to Norma Berntson, he is the father of four children. Mrs. Ashton is a member of the Relief Society General Board.
