Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

ELDER EZRA TAFT BENSON

Biographical Sketch

Member of the Council of the Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since October 1943, and United States Secretary of Agriculture during the Eisenhower administration, Elder Ezra Taft Benson has served the Church in many capacities.

From 1933 to 1937, he was a member of the stake presidency of the Boise Stake in Idaho. The following year the stake was divided, and he served as president of the Boise Stake for two years. He then moved to Washington, D.C., where he became the first president of the Washington Stake, comprising all members of the Church in and immediately adjacent to the nation's capitol, which position he occupied until called to serve in the Council of the Twelve.

Elder Benson is a great-grandson of Apostle Ezra T. Benson one of the original pioneers who entered the Salt Lake Valley with Brigham Young on July 24, 1847. His parents were among the early settlers of Southern Idaho, where in the small town of Whitney he was born August 4, 1899. As a young man he was active in Scouting, priesthood work, and in the Church auxiliary organizations. He attended the Oneida Stake Academy, Preston, Idaho and later Utah State University at Logan, Utah.

From 1921 to 1923, he served as a missionary in the British Isles. Following his return home, he continued his education at Brigham Young University at Provo, Utah, where he was graduated with honors and given a scholarship to Iowa State College at Ames, Iowa. At this institution he received his M.S. degree and was elected to the Honor Society of Agriculture. Later he did graduate work at the University of California.

From 1929 to 1930 he served as a county agricultural agent in his native Idaho and a year later was asked to head the newly organized department of agricultural economics and marketing at the University of Idaho.

He helped organize the Idaho Cooperative Council and served as its first secretary. In the spring of 1939 he received the distinct honor of being appointed executive secretary of the National Council of Farmers Cooperatives, a federation of 4,600 cooperative groups. Since then he has served on several advisory committees and national boards in the fields of agriculture and Scouting. He is a member of the National Executive Board of the Boy Scouts of America, a trustee of Brigham Young University, and a director of several commercial business firms, including C.P.C. International, which has plants in twenty-seven countries.

On January 15, 1946, he was appointed president of the European Mission of the Church with headquarters in London. The European members under local leadership had been carrying on during the war under distressing circumstances. Elder Benson was sent to attend to the spiritual affairs of the people, to reopen the missions so that active proselyting and organizational activities might be resumed, and to alleviate suffering among members by distributing food, clothing, bedding and other needed supplies sent to war-torn countries giving comfort and blessings to the people and organizing them to administer the necessary assistance. He was released from this calling on December 11, 1946.

President Dwight D. Eisenhower, recognizing Elder Benson's outstanding ability as well as his years of experience in agricultural affairs, appointed him to his cabinet as Secretary of Agriculture in 1952. He returned to fully active Church responsibility in 1961.

In the division of responsibilities among members of the Council of the Twelve, Elder Benson supervises the Intermountain and Indian missions.

He is married to Flora Smith Amussen and is the father of six children—two sons and four daughters.
