Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Radio Tubes" [^1]

Some time ago I heard a story told by President Harold B. Lee that I think very vividly depicts the condition which we must achieve. Brother Lee was serving as a stake president at the time he had this experience. He had a very serious and difficult case come before him wherein a man was accused of adultery but refused to admit that he had committed the act. However, he was tried for his membership, and the court found him guilty. He was excommunicated. Shortly thereafter this man's brother came to President Lee and said, "I have prayed to the Lord and I know that my brother is innocent. And so you have excommunicated an innocent man." President Lee said, "Brother, could we talk about this a little bit. I wonder if you would mind answering a few questions for me?" He said he would be willing to answer any questions.

Brother Lee proceeded to conduct an interview with him. He asked, "Do you drink coffee?"

And this brother said, "Yes, I drink coffee."

He asked, "Do you smoke?"

The man replied, "Yes, when someone gives me a cigar, I'll smoke a cigar."

"You drink tea?"

"Yes, iced tea."

"Drink alcohol?"

"Well," he said, "I have been known to take a drink."

"Do you fast?"

He answered, "No, my health won't allow it."

"Do you read the scriptures?"

He said, "No, I have problems reading the scriptures because my eyes are bad."

"Do you pay tithing?"

"No, and I am not going to pay tithing as long as that man is bishop of my ward."

"Do you hold family prayer?"

"No, our time is a little bit tight. We don't have time for family prayer."

President Lee said, "Well, brother, I have a beautiful instrument sitting in my home. It is called a radio. It is full of electronic devices called tubes, and when those tubes are strong and good, I can pick up a signal from the other side of the world and separate those signals. I can hear the voice clearly from halfway around the world. But," he said, "when those tubes become a little weak, when they begin not to function properly, then I have trouble separating the signal; I get a lot of static. There is one tube in that set called a rectifier. When the tube goes out, the set is dead. It then receives no signals at all. Now," he said, "in each one of us there are also some tubes. There is the Word of Wisdom Tube, there is the tithing tube, there is a scripture tube. When any of these tubes becomes weak, the signals get garbled. There is also a master tube in every one of us called the moral cleanliness tube. When that tube goes out, we have total darkness. There were fifteen men in this stake, last evening, who had fasted and prayed unto the Lord. They live the commandments as well as any fifteen men in this stake. They were unanimous in their decision that your brother was guilty. Now, you, who are living none of these commandments by your own admission, say you got a different answer when you prayed to the Lord. Whom do you suppose you may have been listening to?" And this brother said, "Well, I might have gotten my information from the wrong source."

---
Notas:
[^1] President Rector related this story essentially as President Lee told it; however, every detail may not be totally accurate.
