Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Your Decisions Will Make You"

Now sometimes there are problems that you face that really aren't significant enough for the Lord to bother with. You think, "Well, I don't understand that. The Lord is supposed to answer all my prayers."

There is some good evidence in Section 61 of the Doctrine and Covenants that illustrates what I am talking about. This is where the Prophet and his party were traveling between Independence and St. Louis, Missouri, on the Missouri River. They had been given direction that a number of the party should go quickly on a mission. And as they were riding down the Missouri River one of the brethren saw, in open vision, the devil riding on the face of the water. That so startled them all that they stopped. They pulled over to shore in their boat and decided they had better talk this over. They talked about it among themselves, and they were in disagreement. One said, "Oh, the water is cursed, so let's don't go on the water, let's go on land."

Others said, "No, we are doing the work of the Lord, therefore he is going to protect us. It will be just as safe on the water as it will be on the land."

They couldn't agree and so they didn't do anything. They just sat there. They sat there all night. The next morning the Prophet prayed to the Lord and received an answer. It is a very interesting answer, part of which reads as follows:

"I, the Lord, was angry with you yesterday, but today mine anger is turned away.

"Wherefore, let those concerning whom I have spoken, that should take their journey in haste—again I say unto you, let them take their journey in haste.

"And it mattereth not unto me, after a little, if it so be that they fill their mission, whether they go by water or by land; . . . (D&C 61:20-22.)

In other words, "It doesn't make any difference to me how you go, but get going. Move out." And so it is important that you make a decision on your own sometimes.

I had a friend with whom I worked very closely as a counselor, who would sometimes come to me for decisions because that is what a counselor is for, to give counsel. It didn't mean he had to take my counsel, you understand. Many times he didn't and things prospered very well.

But he wanted guidance on the very smallest decisions; for example, should we hold our fast and testimony meeting at 9:00 or should we hold it at 9:15.

And I would say, "Well, 9:00 sounds all right to me."

He said, "Why do you say 9:00?"

I said, "Well, that's a good round number and everybody will be up by then and I don't really think it makes a whole lot of difference, so why don't you just have it at 9:00."

"But what about 9:15?"

I said, "Well, since you mention it, 9:15 may be better. You know how the Saints are at arriving at meetings on time. At least we'll have them all there by 9:15, so let's have it at 9:15."

And he said, "Do you really like 9:15?"

I said, "Well, I'm sure that the Spirit will be there by then, since we will have most of the people there."

He said, "You like 9:15. What about 9:00?"

So back and forth we would go, and finally I would say, "I don't think it makes any difference: 9:00 or 9:15, either one will be fine."

Sometimes we belabor the Lord on little insignificant things like this on which we are perfectly capable of making the decision. It really won't make any difference to him. He told them here he didn't care whether they went by water or by land—just go. Be sure and get the job done—but go.

If you live for it, you deserve and can have the guidance of the Spirit in making decisions. And that, of course, is the thing that is most important, because the Lord knows the end from the beginning; things that sometimes appear insignificant to you on the surface may not be. If you are in tune, the Spirit will tell you, for instance, whether or not you should accept a call to fill a stake mission when you had planned on going to night school—it may seem insignificant. A lot of such calls are turned down, yet this may be a very significant decision in your life because it could put you on a course that will lead you to exaltation.

The Lord knows why you are here. Many times you don't know. Consider the course we have talked about today, think about it, weigh, seek advice of people who have been through the experience, pray unto the Lord, be clear on your principles and don't depart from them, and then all those decisions that deal with honesty and virtue and other things of eternal import will be made for you in advance. Take advantage of your advance preparation. That is the easy way to do it. Keep yourself in condition so you can get the spirit of the Lord, the guidance of the Spirit in all that you do. Then your decisions will be good decisions. Your decisions will make you . . . .

(Speeches of the Year, "Decisions Make Us," July 15, 1969, pp. 12-14.)
