Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"It Is What's Inside That Really Counts"

I am sure as I look into your faces here—and this is an awesome sight for me, looking into the faces of all you tremendous, young Latter-day Saints and other friends—I approach you with fear and trembling, to say the least. But you are the best looking group in the world—I know that. Not so much because of the way you wear your hair or the clothes you wear or the way you dress, but it is what is inside that really counts. There is a cigarette ad or slogan like that, isn't there? "It's what's inside that counts." Well it is what's inside that really counts.

My grandmother was worried about my religious training at an early age, as most grandmothers are. So she took it upon herself to read me the Bible every time I went to visit her. As she read, she always added her own interpretations. She said, "Pretty is as pretty does. Beauty is only skin deep (she firmly believed that); it is what's inside that really makes you beautiful." The comic Andy Griffith has added, "but ugliness goes clean through to the bone."

It is what's inside that determines the way you are going to look. Abe Lincoln knew this. One time when a vacancy existed in his cabinet, he was encouraged to appoint a certain man to fill that vacancy by one of his other cabinet members. Abe demurred, he wasted time, he procrastinated; he did everything but appoint the man. And finally Stanton became outdone with him and said, "Mr. President, are you going to appoint this man or aren't you?" And Abe said, "No, I'm not going to appoint him." Stanton said, "Why not? He is a good man, isn't he?" Abe said, "I don't like his face." (Imagine Abe Lincoln not liking someone's face! Ever have a look at Abe's face? Abe was homely as all get-out, but he was beautiful because of what was inside of him.) And Stanton said, "You don't like his face! What kind of a reason is that for not appointing a man?" Abe said something I think pretty well depicted his attitude. He said, "Any man who is forty years old is responsible for what his face looks like." And that is true. By that age our countenances disclose the kind of person we really are inside. It is what's inside that really counts.

(Speeches of the Year, "Get Yourself in Condition to Serve," Oct. 1, 1968, pp. 2-3.)
