Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Charting a Course"

Victor Hugo once commented, and I quote: "When the disposal of time is surrendered to the chance of incidents—chaos will reign." And, young people, truer words were never spoken.

Let me tell you about a missionary who felt the need for charting a course. He wanted to put a little guarantee in his charted course, so this is what he did. He wrote down for himself his major objectives for the next five years. He called it his "five-year plan." On this five-year plan, I remember, he had such entries as an honorable release from his mission (which was then just starting). He had as an objective graduating with a particular grade-point average (which was quite high, I might add). Within that five-year period he hoped to be married in the House of the Lord (and he had a pretty good idea who it was going to be). I also remember he had a notation about continuing worthily in the Church while he was achieving all of these things—worthy with regard to tithing, the Word of Wisdom, attendance at sacrament meetings, being available to his bishop, being a home teacher or whatever else might need to be done which would be compatible with his busy schedule, and doing all those things that a good Latter-day Saint should do.

Now comes the important part. Having prepared this list, he made about five or six copies, with plenty of room at the bottom for additional signatures. Then he had witnesses to these objectives that he had set; he had his parents, his mission president and wife (we were greatly honored to do this), his bishop back home, and his athletic coach (whom he respected very highly), all signed as witnesses to these commitments that he had made for himself. He was the kind of boy that would not want to disappoint those whom he loved. He would want to do these things so he would not have to say to all of us, "I failed."

I can tell you now that this young man has accomplished his goals. He is ready now to take his place in the world. He feels prepared to meet whatever comes next, and, most important of all, he has already prepared a brand-new set of goals that is going to carry him for the next five years, during the struggling days of beginning his business. And I would like to state right here that I know he will make it because he has established sound goals and has the self-discipline to pursue them effectively.

(Speeches of the Year, "Organizing for Eternity," April 20, 1965, p. 4.)
