Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"You Are Going to Jump Up and Down"

Let me attempt to create a picture in your mind's eye.

Suppose you were standing on a beautiful green hill. Can you see the picture now? It is springtime. The grass is green; the trees are beautiful. The day is perfect. The temperature is just right. There is a gentle breeze blowing. You feel like the world is at your command. You are all alone on this hill. You see this beautiful, peaceful river as it winds around the hill. My, what a beautiful sight it is!

But as you turn around and look on the back side of the hill, you notice this beautiful, peaceful river drops over an abrupt waterfall and crashes onto some rocks at the bottom. Then all of a sudden you hear music. You hear voices. It sounds familiar. You look back, and right down there on that same river is a boat with about eight or ten of your friends. One is playing a guitar; all are singing together. They are truly enjoying life as they allow the current to take them downstream. You say, "My, isn't that delightful! How I would like to be with them!" There they are, just drifting, not knowing where the river is going to take them.

Then all of a sudden it dawns on you—the waterfall! The jagged rocks at the bottom! What are you going to do, young people? Will you just fold your arms and say, "Now, this should be interesting. Let's see what happens here." You are not going to do that, are you? You are going to jump up and down; you are going to shout; you are going to get excited about it.

That is exactly what we do. We do a little jumping up and down, and we get excited, because, young people, we know where the jagged rocks and pitfalls are. Our prophets have told and continue to tell us the things that we should do as well as the areas to avoid in order that we might get back into the presence of our Heavenly Father.

So as we who love you get excited, as we raise our voices, as we wave our arms, would you forgive us, please; and would you just know it is because we love you so much. We don't want you to get into any situation that would not be a blessing to you. We want to be with you when the greatest day of your life or our lives comes—when we feel that friendly arm on our shoulders and the kindly voice of someone who is over all, as He says, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant. . . . enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matthew 25:21.)

I bear you my testimony that this gospel is true. God lives, and Jesus is the Christ. We have guideposts to follow, and only by following these things that have been set down can we hope to gain the rewards that are there for us.

Speeches of the Year, "Do Your Standards Show?," October 19, 1965, pp. 10-11.)
