Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Be a Good Receiver"

To accomplish today's purpose, you and I must feel something. There needs to be an interaction between us. That interaction can best come about as we communicate effectively. For the next few minutes I would like to play the role of a transmitter in our two-way communication system. You will be the receiver. Like any transmitter, my power supply must be adequate and properly regulated. My vacuum tubes and intricate connections should all be in order; and provided that my antenna is capable of a good clear signal, there is an excellent chance of a satisfactory transmission going out.

Now my transmission is useless unless there are receivers that are plugged in, on frequency, and anxiously tuned in with listening ears and hearts, all ready to evaluate, analyze, and most important of all, to react to what is said. Only then can our time be best spent.

The world seems forever plagued with a lack of understanding between nations. Traditionally we humans have been without the ability to communicate well across international borders. Our very own nation within the past couple of years has been torn by vicious riots, partly because large and important factions of our citizenry are failing in their ability to communicate with one another. Oh, true enough, the transmissions have been loud and clear—but sometimes I wonder what has happened to the receivers. We only seem to listen to and hear that which we want to.

Perhaps saddest of all is the fact that family units, the basic and most important of all units in our social order, seem to be breaking up by the thousands each week—all because husbands and wives, parents and children, or next-door neighbors, find it difficult to establish a simple and clear line of communication between them.

The greatest need in the world today is for the gospel of Jesus Christ. The greatest challenge you and I have as the custodians of this truth is the ability to communicate better with a world that needs what we have.

Now for the sake of interest and to start some thought processes in motion, come with me for a minute as we roll back the calendar about a hundred years. By contrast, we can best contemplate the miracle of communication in our time. Too often we take for granted the convenience and ease of today's methods of communication. From these very hills that surround this Utah Valley in which we meet this morning, Indian smoke signals could be seen less than a hundred years ago as messages were sent across the miles to signal the success or failure of a hunting party or perhaps the approach of a covered wagon train. Yes, after thousands of years there had been few advances in the field of communication. Jungle drums, tom toms, smoke signals, and—oh yes—we mustn't forget the revolutionary new Pony Express of that day. But all this seemed to be about the best the mind of man was capable of after all that time.

An interesting sidelight of United States history suggests the ingenuity and the inventive genius of 1825 as the top brains of that day were employed to devise a sure and quick way of notifying the population of New York City about the departure of the first barge from Albany as it headed down the newly completed Erie Canal. The canal was a historic feat. It provided a new avenue of commerce and trade from the Great Lakes to New York City. All the citizenry of New York, some 430 miles downstream, were eager to start a giant celebration as the new waterway was officially declared in operation with the departure of this first barge.

Now this urgent need for a better-way of communicating was solved as follows: 43 cannons from the War of 1812 were stationed ten miles apart along the length of the Erie Canal. As the barge entered the canal, cannon number one fired; nearly a minute later, the attendant of cannon number two heard the sound, and he lit the fuse and cannon number two was fired; and so the sound was relayed until all 43 cannons had been fired in rotation. At last the people in New York heard the report of the last cannon, and at that instant the celebration was underway. Total elapsed time for the message—approximately one hour. It had to go 430 miles.

You see, sound travels slowly—only about 740 miles per hour. As a matter of fact, if we had a hollow tube telephone system in this country, with some means of propagating our voices through the tube instead of allowing our voice patterns to ride piggy back on electromagnetic waves, our California students here at the "Y" when calling home would shout "Hello" into the mouthpiece, and that hello would take about one hour to travel to the coast. Then mom or dad would shout back "Hello," and that's right, two hours have gone by and all you have said is "Hello." The only thing worse than the service would be the bill, especially if it were going to be at today's rates.

Let me give you one more interesting contrast in comparing the speed of sound with electromagnetic waves. The next time you watch a World Series baseball game on TV and see the batter hit a long fly ball to center field, just remember that the sound of the bat hitting the ball hops into a microphone not far from home plate and then speeds on electromagnetic waves directly into your living room. That speed is 186,000 miles per second—about 7 1/2 times around this earth in one short second. The center fielder in the ball park has had to wait for those lumbering slow sound waves to reach him some 300 feet away; and although he will probably catch the ball, TV viewers in California, perhaps 3,000 miles away, heard the crack of the bat before he did. All of this is made possible through the miracle of our modern-day electrical communication.

Well now, young people, we are living in a great day; and we read and hear about coaxial cables; we hear about micro-wave radio relay systems; we hear about earth-orbiting satellites, moon robots talking back to earth, and even "hot lines" between heads of nations, providing us with an absolute miracle of communication from a pure technological and mechanical standpoint. But as a world filled with more than three billion people, we are failing miserably in our ability to really get the message through. I think we can conlude that the source of our failure is human. It stems from the uncompromising, the selfish—yes, even at times the deceitful heart and mind of man. No one, in my opinion, can be a good transmitter unless he has first learned to be a good receiver.

One of the great communication problems of our day is the communication of empty words—just words, no real message, no stimulus for thought. As children of our Heavenly Father, he would have us say something as we give utterance, and that is what we would like to talk about here today.

Any person who reads and understands the scriptures is better prepared to speak with wisdom. How glorious that we have a divine, uncontaminated source of light and knowledge.

(Speeches of the Year, "If You Would Communicate Well," October 13, 1964, pp. 2-4.)
