Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Good Samaritan"

We had another group of young people who got all of the people of the ward to come out on a Saturday morning. The youth lined themselves up in front of the recreation hall. They had the big ones at one end, the medium size, then the shorter ones. Then they said, "Now brothers and sisters, you all have something that needs to be done, and we are just the people who can do it for you. The big ones are two dollars an hour, the medium size are a dollar-and-a-half, and the shorter ones are a dollar an hour." They had a slave market, and they went out as slaves for the people. They could have them for two hours or ten hours, and they did their work. They came back with four or five hundred dollars. It was a tremendous thing to see all of these young people involved in doing something for someone else. It was a tremendous thing!

What was at the root of it all? A prophet of God and vision and revelation and inspiration of our day. All of these things are happening all over the Church.

Let me tell you just one more thing before I close about this project called "Good Samaritan." Reverend Givens came to a banquet as we culminated "Project Good Samaritan." We were going to announce how much money had been raised. He had his leaders from California there. One leader from California was just amazed; and as he looked down on President Smith and President Lee and the rest of us assembled there, including many stake presidents and their wives, he said, "Why this is one of the most glorious things I have ever seen. We are united; we are together. You have done something for us and we needed it; we are so grateful to you." He said, "Now one thing I want to plea for here tonight. Let's not let the outside world come in now and put us at one another's throats. We have accomplished something here that is tremendous. And we can see one another as true brothers and sisters under our Heavenly Father. Let's not let the outside world come now and put us at one another's throats."

You know, they had a choir singing that night from this black congregation. They sang two songs. The words in the first song went like this: "Please don't move that mountain, but give me strength to climb it."

If the minority groups in the world need to learn one thing, it is the message of this song: "Please don't move that mountain, but give me strength to climb it."

That is exactly what we were trying to do for these people on that occasion. Then the other song they sang went like this: "Something in the way He moves lets me know He's my friend."

I think they were trying to tell us something and I hope that they will always consider us as their friends.

A little by-product of this "Project Good Samaritan": about two weeks later, Reverend Givens invited me to come over to their area church conference. They were having a regional conference of this three-million-member church, about the same size as ours. But these few hundred assembled were from this particular area. They had a special guest at that conference, the head of all their women's auxiliaries, the counterpart to Sister Belle Spafford of our Church, president of the Relief Society. As I talked to them, I concluded with this thought, "I want to tell you one more thing. If you really want to be blessed and you really want to be happy, why don't you designate one night a week, and circle your calendar, and have all your family together on that night without fail. You might want to read a few scriptures, and maybe your children can respond on some of the things they have been taught at school. Then you can conduct some of your family business. Afterwards you may want to have some refreshments and play a few games together and just have a good family circle. Then you can have your family prayer together before the hour is over. You might want to call it something like the 'Family Home Evening.'" As I finished, this woman stood up and said, "Reverend Givens, I've got one more thing to say." She came over to the microphone and said, "Brothers and Sisters, I have been taught all my life never to be a copycat; but I want to tell you, from this night on, I'm going to be a copycat. Because everyone in this church is going to hear about the 'Family Home Evening.'"

When people hear the truth, and when they hear something that has come from Heavenly Father through his prophets, they recognize it as truth. They seem to know that it is something that is eternal, that it will bring blessings to their lives. Oh, what a wonderful thing it is to see the Church recognized by other good people.

(Speeches of the Year, "The Church Is Alive," November 3, 1970, pp. 7-8.)
