Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Mr. Governor, Would You Believe Such a Thing Could Happen?"

While holding a series of meetings in the eastern part of the United States a few weeks ago, I was invited by the chief executive of one of the great states to visit his office. I had no idea what he wanted to discuss, but as we sat there, it soon became clear that he was concerned with the problems of youth, and he wanted to know three things about the Mormon Church: First of all, our program of activity for youth; secondly, our great missionary system (he was not so much concerned about the proselyting program of the Church, but what that missionary system did to build character in young men); and, thirdly, the great welfare program of the Church, which tends to restore and enjoin thrift, work, and such virtues that have built this great country.

As we sat there discussing these problems, the question of family prayer came up, and he told of his experience as a boy in his own home, where he knelt in devotion each day, and then he told about visiting several of the homes of his friends recently, where there was no devotion in the home. He had great fear for the future of the youth of this great land because of the lack of spirituality in the home.

Then I had the great pleasure of telling him something of our program, and made reference to a gold and green ball which had just been held in one of the great hotels in Washington, where six to eight hundred young men and women had enjoyed themselves in an evening of sociability. There were no cigarets, no liquor, and the party was opened and closed with prayer. I said, "Mr. Governor, would you believe that such a thing could happen?"

He said: "I wish it were more common. It is almost impossible for me to believe it in view of what I know of conditions that are facing the youth of this land and what is happening in my own state."

I told him that was only typical of parties held throughout the Church. . . .

(Conference Report, April 1944, p. 58.)
