Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"The True Fiber"

Life has many parallels. I remember . . . as I was married and got a job, I went to work for a very energetic young man from Chicago who had moved out to Ogden. We were in the sheep business; we were sheep merchants. We were quite successful, and like all successful businesses, we thought we would want to expand. We saw in the West a vast number of sheep here, and we saw the wool coming off these sheep. So we decided that we wanted to get into the wool business, which was related to the industry that we were in.

True, we didn't know much about the wool business—all the experts were back east in the Boston area and in the New England states. When these wool buyers would come out from the eastern states, they would go up to a grower, and they would take a look at his wool as it came off the sheep's back. They were usually there at the shearing corral. The shearer would tie the fleece and would hand it to the wool buyer. The wool buyer would look at it and would take out a strand or two, pulled from the fleece, to see what the staple was. Then he would look at the color to see how much dirt there was in it, the grease content; were there any burrs in it, any chaff? Then, in his mind he would calculate that the price in Boston for clean wool might be one dollar per pound, and would say to himself, "This fleece shrinks 55 percent. All I am interested in is, what is the pure content of this fleece in wool, when it comes to the pure fiber content of the thing that I have in my hands?"

He would be thinking of this wool as it whipped through the scouring plant where all the residue is extracted—the grease taken out—and as it came through the top manufacturing machines where it would become a strand of pure white wool. This was all that mattered to him, and he would try to analyze the fleece as best he could. The only way that he could analyze it was from previous experience of working at purchased wool. He had estimated what the wool would shrink, and then it went back to Boston through the mills. And they would send him a report of how accurately he had estimated. Well, it doesn't take very long, I assume, when a man makes 100 purchases, that he finds out where his mistakes have been, to where he adjusts in his observation and then comes up with a pretty close answer. Well, we had to go through all of this.

The thing that I learned from that business, although we were quite successful in it, was that there was a parallel there—that in this simple fleece of wool the only thing that counted was the true fiber, the pure wool. This was like life. The only thing that counts in life is the pure moral fiber that is within each of us—that after all is said and all is done with life, when we come to the end, what is our life but what we have made of it that is worthwhile?

(Speeches of the Year, "What Will You Choose," February 28, 1967, pp. 3-4.)
