Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"They Just Stood There and Visited and Visited"

One of my non-Mormon friends who passed away only a few days ago—who was rather prominently known, who wrote for national magazines, and was chairman of the board of trustees of one of our great universities— some months ago came to this city to address a meeting of dairymen, most of whom were members of the Church. After the meeting was over, he came up to my home for the purpose of a visit and a renewal of friendship. As I drove him back to the hotel that night, he turned to me, after being quiet for several moments, and said, "I don't know what it is, but each time I come among your people I experience something that I never experience anywhere else in the world. It's an intangible thing, but it's very real." He added, "I've tried to analyze it, I've tried to describe it, but the best thing I can do is to say that every time I come among your people, I get a spiritual uplift. What is it that gives me that feeling which I get no-where else?"

Brethren and sisters, what is it? You feel it. We feel it in these great conferences of the Church. We feel it out in the stakes of Zion. We feel it in little branch meetings or in meetings with missionaries in the far parts of the earth. It's a sweet thing. It's a priceless thing. It is a mark of the divinity of this great work in which we are engaged.

I recall while living in the East some years ago, I invited one of my good friends, not a member of the Church, to attend our sacrament meeting. He promised that he would sometime. Weeks went by. I met him on the street one day following a Rotary luncheon, and he said, "I was up to your meeting last Sunday night, but you weren't there." I explained that I was visiting another ward, and then he said in answer to my inquiry as to whether he enjoyed the meeting, "Yes, I enjoyed it, especially the spirit of it, but," he said, "I wish you would tell me one thing. Why is it that when your people come to the end of a meeting and the benediction is said that they don't seem to have any place to go?" He said, "That group stood up, recognizing the meeting was over, but they just stood there and visited and visited until I thought I was never going to get out of that building. Finally, when I got into the foyer, it was more congested, than ever." Well, that is a further evidence of this spirit—this spirit of love, this spirit of brotherhood that is so real, my brethren and sisters, in the Church.

(Conference Report, October 1950, pp. 144-45.)
