Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

VICTOR L. BROWN

"What Do You Mean, Milk?"

I was visiting with a young man one day. He is a member of a stake presidency. He was an officer in the army during the Korean War. He contemplated the possibility of becoming a professional soldier. He received a change of assignment. He knew where he was going, and he knew the reputation of his new commanding officer.

This officer was rather a wise man in some respects. He knew how to get something on the men under his direction so that he had them completely subservient to him. He was a very heavy drinker. He apparently still had some capabilities as an army officer. This young man approached this particular transfer with great concern. He wanted success, and knew he needed the recommendation of his commanding officer to achieve it.

You see, the way this officer would make his junior officers subservient to him was, when the new men came he would have a party. It would be a hard-drinking party. He would make sure that the new men drank too much. He would have women there and make sure that a compromising circumstance arose. Then he had something to hold over the heads of his men.

This young man knew that he was getting into this environment. He had already determined the kind of a person he wanted to be.

When he arrived at the party, the commanding officer said, "What will you have to drink?" "I'll have some milk, please, sir." You can imagine what happened at that. There was no milk.

"What do you mean, milk?"

"I'll have milk, please, sir."

After he had convinced the officer that he really wanted milk, someone went out and got it for him.

The pressures were on constantly to break this young man down, to make him conform to the environment he found himself in. As I indicated, he had made up his mind that he was going to be the kind of person he wanted to be, regardless of the environment.

Finally his commanding officer gave up. (Incidentally, all this time, he had worked his head off to be the best officer he could be, in every respect.) It came time for his transfer. He anticipated several demerits on his record. You can imagine his amazement when after he was transferred, his record contained the highest commendation possible from this commanding officer. He had been a nonconformist to the environment he found himself in. At the same time, he was a conformist to the standards he himself had accepted for his life.

(Speeches of the Year, "Conformity and Nonconformity," January 11, 1966, p. 4.)
