Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"It's Serving Our Fellowmen"

Now may I share some parts of the testimony of another young marine. I do not know how old he is, but I would think if he is out of his teens, he is not far out of them. He has been a member of the Church for two years. Until recently he had been in a special reconnaissance outfit. These are men who are taken by helicopter to the far distant areas of the jungle, dropped, and told to be back at the same place in five days to be picked up.

[He said:] "I found out something that almost everybody here knows. I've only been a member of the Church two years. I didn't find this out from any member of the Church. I wasn't doing a whole lot of studying when I came over here. I was looking for the way to become active. How can I increase my knowledge of the gospel? How can the Spirit humble me more? Well, I found this out. It came to me all of a sudden. It's serving our fellowmen. It's serving the guy that sleeps next to you. It's being dedicated. There's nothing in this life that matters but that.

"It's not what kind of car you have at home. It's not how many pairs of jungle boots you got back, or what you're saving. All these little things don't matter. We didn't come to this life with these things. We came to be happy, to serve our fellowmen, to glorify God, to return to our Father in heaven. This is the key as far as I am concerned, and that is service to your fellowman. It's what's in your heart that counts, not what's on your back.

"I heard David O. McKay say that the highest ideal ever taught in any religion is service to our fellowman. This I believe with all my heart, and I know I should be thankful that Scott was baptized before he was killed, and I truly am."

Then he continued: "Brethren, I know the Church is true. I know that this Church is divinely directed, that Joseph Smith had revelations, and that Jesus Christ is the head of the Church today. I pray that while we are over here we might strive to build our characters, to build our testimonies, that we might all do a little bit of suffering so that we might all know that joy that comes from just plain living, and that as long as our hearts are beating, and we're walking and taking, we don't have a thing to complain about, not at all."

This, then, is the testimony of a young LDS marine in South Vietnam. This is some of the spirit of our servicemen in war. After Saturday's meeting I witnessed five servicemen sharing this same spirit with five other servicemen as they took them into the waters of baptism in the South China Sea.

(Conference Report, October 1968, p. 120-21.)
