Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Sione Rose from His Knees"

Let me tell you of a young man who has felt the evidence of this love. I first met Sione in New Zealand. He is a Tongan. A finer, more clean-cut, intelligent young man I have never met anywhere. Sione comes from a very modest background—none of the luxuries and very few of the necessities. As a boy, Sione had a burning desire to obtain a college education in order to help his family as well as the Tongan people, A college education seemed totally impossible. However, one day while carrying drinking water to the men working in the taro fields, this thought came upon Sione: "If a fourteen-year-old boy by the name of Joseph Smith could pray to God and have his prayer answered, why can't I?" So Sione dropped to his knees in the taro patch and opened his heart to his Heavenly Father and told him of his desire to become an educated person so he could improve the lot of his own people. Well, Sione rose from his knees, went about his work, returned to his home and nothing happened for a while. Then one day an enevelope came in the mail. In the envelope was the notice that Sione had received a full scholarship to the Church College of Hawaii, and he hadn't even applied for it! Now Sione had to have several hundred dollars for fare to get to Hawaii. His parents didn't have a dollar. How could he get to Hawaii and take advantage of this great blessing that had come? Well, Sione had faith, and his parents had faith, and they had works along with their faith. When the time had arrived for Sione to go to Hawaii to enter college, he had enough money to buy a one-way ticket on an airplane to get to the college.

When I met Sione he had graduated; he had his degree. He was teaching school; he was a coach, one of the most loved and respected of all the teachers in the schools in Tonga. I was talking to Sione about another assignment that would be somewhat different, an assignment whereby he would be instrumental in making the fulness of the gospel available to his people in their own tongue, in their own language, in a language where there is practically no printing of the native tongue, except, of course, in the government documents. And as Sione told me his story and as we talked, the tears coursed down his cheeks and he said, "Bishop Brown, I'll do anything my Heavenly Father wants me to do, and I'll go any place that is required." This is the result of a young man, originally in his teens, having enough faith in God to ask, knowing that his prayers would be answered.

(Speeches of the Year, "The Faith and Courage to Be True," May 5, 1970, pp. 6-7.)
