Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"He Was Entranced with the Story of the Gospel"

Just about two weeks before Christmas, a companion and I boarded an airplane returning to Salt Lake City after an assignment in Mexico. My companion took the window seat and I took the aisle seat. This left an empty one between us. At the last moment we noticed a large number of servicemen being boarded. They were all sailors. A young man asked if the seat between us were available and we told him it was. He took it, and I had one of the most delightful experiences I have had for a long time.

This was a young sailor who had just finished boot camp. He was going home to Minnesota for Christmas leave. His next assignment was South Vietnam. He was one of the most refreshing young men I have met—unaffected, no pretense, friendly, warm. He was naive about travel, but, oh, how freshly naive! There was no embarrassment. He asked us if we traveled a lot, and we said we did a bit of traveling. He asked us a few things about the airplane.

As we got a little better acquainted, I asked, "Have you ever heard about the Mormon Church?"

He said, "Yes, I've heard about the Mormon Church."

I said, "Where?"

He said, "In magazines, and so on."

You know, before I would ask him if he would like to know more, he asked me to tell him about it. He beat me to the punch.

Fortunately my traveling companion was a superb missionary, formerly president of a mission. After we had talked for just a few minutes, I turned the conversation to him, because, you see, we only had a short time and he knew how to condense four or five lessons into one hour.

This young sailor had not eaten for twenty-four hours. He had had a lot of difficulty because of weather problems in getting to Los Angeles to board his airplane, and in the last minute rush the airline had left off some meals and the servicemen weren't going to get a dinner. My traveling companion and I weren't hungry since we had eaten earlier, so I slipped my meal over to this boy and my companion slipped his meal up to this young man's sailor buddy sitting in front of us.

Then a great lesson was taught—the gospel of Jesus Christ. This sailor boy who hadn't eaten for twenty-four hours didn't eat his meal! It sat there almost untouched. He was entranced with the story of the gospel of Jesus Christ. He didn't touch his salad, he didn't touch his dessert, he didn't finish his entree. I sat there while he was being taught the gospel and I watched him. I am sure he held his fork with food on it for five minutes without even putting it down.

(Speeches of the Year, "Therefore Be Ye Also Ready," January 3, 1967, pp. 2-3.)
