Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Let's Let Him Make That Decision"

You might be interested in some of the programs that are going on in the Church, particularly the one that I am presently associated with—the translation of the Church program into many of the languages of the world. So if you will bear with me for a few moments, may I just tell you a little bit about this great program.

About two or two and one-half years ago, the First Presidency asked the Presiding Bishopric of the Church to establish an organization to translate, print, and distribute the Church program in Mexico and Central and South America, primarily in Spanish to begin with, and then they included Portuguese, which, of course, is the language spoken in Brazil.

Bishop Vandenberg, Presiding Bishop of the Church, asked that I assume the responsibility for this assignment. Of course, I wondered where I should start.

Any good project must be started by establishing an organization to accomplish it, so I looked for a man to work under the Presiding Bishopric's overall supervision and directly under my supervision, to head this organization. I looked widely and I talked to many people. I couldn't feel quite satisfied that I had heard the name, nor had I interviewed the man who was the one to take on this tremendous assignment.

Finally, one day in conversation with several men, the name of a man came up that I had never heard before. One of the group said, "You can't get him; he is on the road to real success in business, and you just can't touch him." I said, "Let's let him make that decision." So I went back to my office and placed a call to this man and asked him if he would mind coming over to my office. He said he would be happy to and was there within about ten minutes. I had spent not over two minutes talking with him when I knew that he was the man, and he knew he was the man. He expressed a willingness to assume this great responsibility.

This wonderful person, Brother J. Thomas Fyans, has been associated with me now for two and one-half or so years, and we have traveled in excess of 200,000 miles together all over the world. The Lord has magnified him greatly.

One of the most inspiring experiences of my life has been the way the Lord has opened the way for us to find the right men at the right time.

We went to Mexico City where there was a small embryo of an organization; however, it just wasn't the kind that was necessary to assume this enlarged responsibility. We talked to many people, and we almost despaired of finding the right man. You see, it is impossible for us to send men from the United States into Mexico to manage our organizations there—they must be Mexican citizens.

As we looked, another name came to us from a conversation. I happened to have a stake conference in El Paso, Texas, and I asked this man (who lived in Pueblo, in old Mexico) to come to El Paso. He was a successful businessman, a Mexican, a wonderful person, well educated, on the road to success in his business (he was the district sales manager for a large firm). I no more than sat down with him than I knew he was the man and he knew he was the man, and he responded. Now we have an operation in Mexico that we are to be proud of—with every function performed by Mexican nationals!

Then we went to Brazil. When we left Salt Lake We didn't have the slightest idea of what to expect in Brazil and actually anticipated that we would do most of the work in Salt Lake. When we arrived at the airport in Sao Paulo, the mission president met us. We went to the mission home and met with the presidents of both missions in Brazil, the Brazilian South and the Brazilian Mission.

Within two hours our plan of approach was clear. We knew whom we needed to head the organization and he had agreed. He had just been offered a major position in the Mercedes-Benz agency for all of Brazil. Let me tell you just a little bit about him. He had been a Protestant minister. Just a few years ago, he was attending a seminar with other Protestant ministers. They were studying the various religions of the world. The director of the seminar called the mission home and asked the mission president to send someone down to explain the Mormon religion. The mission president assigned a young elder to go down and explain our religious beliefs. He didn't do that. He called them all to repentance and asked them to be baptized.

This really struck one or two of them as being rather bold and strange. This good man, Helio Camargo, decided that there must be something about this religion if a young man just in his teens (or just out of his teens) would have the courage to approach a group of ministers that way. He started to quietly investigate to see what caused and motivated this young man to have much courage. He started to study the gospel. He is a very intelligent man, a graduate of the West Point of Brazil. He began a principle at a time. He studied each one in depth, and as he became converted to that principle, he started to live it. This man started to pay his tithing six months before he was baptized because he had studied the law of tithing and had become converted to it. Then, after studying other principles of the gospel, he was baptized. Now he is our manager in Sao Paulo, Brazil, and he is a bishop in the Church in the first stake organized in South America.

Shortly after we had received the assignment for Latin America, we were given the same assignment for the European languages. This is when we met President and Sister Dean Peterson in Oslo.

One of our key men in Europe came from Gratz, Austria. He has an interesting background both inside and outside the Church. He had only been a member of the Church about six years. This man is of noble birth. The missionaries called at his home. He wasn't home. His wife told them to come back. When he came home and she informed him of the appointment, he told her that he would throw them out. She asked him to be a little more gentle than that. The appointment was for two o'clock in the afternoon. Right on the dot of two o'clock, two missionaries came to the door. One of them had a frayed shirt collar. This man thought to himself, if these young men are that devoted and this one is apparently of quite humble circumstances, then I guess I ought to be courteous enough to listen to them. So he invited them to come in and they started to teach the gospel to him.

He said, "No, I don't want that. I want you to answer some questions."

I only remember two or three of the questions, but there were about five or six. Now this is from a man who was a very devout Catholic.

"Does your church preach infant baptism?"

"Does your church preach that the family will live together after death?"

"Does your church treat the wealthy any different than they treat the poor?"

Of course the missionaries answered these questions.

Then he said, "This is all I need to know—I am ready for baptism!"

He has excellent facility with five languages. He can, as I recall, use another four or five languages. He has said that he is sure that all of the training he went through during his early life was to accomplish the work he is doing now, in helping to translate the gospel of Jesus Christ into his mother tongue.

I could go on and on, relating experiences of these wonderful people whom the Lord has raised up. Then He made it possible for us to find them and to find them at the proper time.

(BYU Summer Devotional, "To Every Tongue and People," June 20, 1967, pp. 3-6.)
