Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

ELDER MATTHEW COWLEY

Biographical Sketch

Recorded in the journal of Sister Abbie Hyde Cowley is the following: "Monday morning at 3:00 a.m., August 2, 1897, I gave birth to a fine boy weighing 8 1/2 lbs. Sister Swan and Brother and Sister Hale were present, and by the blessing of the Lord, I was safely delivered, for which I am ever grateful to our Heavenly Father." Thus is recorded, in the words of his mother, the birth of Matthew Cowley. His father, Matthias Cowley was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve.

In 1914, while Matthew was attending the LDS University in Salt Lake City, he received a call to serve as a missionary in the New Zealand Mission. When he arrived in New Zealand, he was still only seventeen years of age, but because of his pleasing disposition and great ability, he soon won the hearts of the Maori people of that mission. He became fluent in the use of the Maori language. At the conclusion of the normal three-year mission period, he received a special call from President Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church, to remain in New Zealand long enough to translate the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price into the Maori language, and also to revise and re-edit the previous translation of the Book of Mormon.

In 1919, after completing five years as a missionary, he returned to his home in Salt Lake City. When he returned home, he resumed his education. Through the efforts of friends, he was allowed to enter the University of Utah to begin his study of law. While attending the University of Utah, he was employed at the Federal Reserve Bank in Salt Lake City, and after completing one year of study at the university, he was admitted to the law school of George Washington University in Washington, D. C.

He attended school nights and worked in the Federal Reserve Bank for a while during the daytime. He later was employed by Senator Reed Smoot as a special assistant to the Senate Finance Committee, and continued in this service until he graduated and returned home. He began his law career upon his return in 1926 and was shortly thereafter appointed deputy Salt Lake County attorney. After two years as a deputy, he was elected to fill the office of county attorney. At the conclusion of this term, he returned to private practice until 1938, when he was called by the First Presidency to preside over the New Zealand Mission.

On July 13, 1922 while still studying in Washington, D. C., he returned home to be married in the Salt Lake Temple to Elva Eleanor Taylor. Their marriage was performed by President George Albert Smith, then a member of the Council of the Twelve.

On October 5, 1945, Brother Cowley was sustained a member of the Council of the Twelve as the Church met in solemn assembly in its semi-annual conference. In this conference, President George Albert Smith was sustained as the President of the Church, and his first call to the apostleship went to this young man whom he had guided and loved since early childhood.

On October 11, 1945, Elder Cowley was ordained an apostle, the sixty-fifth of this dispensation, by President Smith. Approximately a year later, a new position of responsibility among the General Authorities of the Church was created, and Elder Cowley was appointed to fill the position as President of the Pacific Islands Missions. In this new assignment, he was given the responsibility of directing the affairs of the Church in the many missions of the Pacific. His headquarters in this assignment continued to be in Salt Lake City, but during the following three years, he traveled almost continuously in the islands of the sea. The entire Polynesian people now had the opportunity of being blessed by him as had the Maori people during the thirteen years that he had lived with them as missionary and president.

He had a great gift of language and was able to speak in the native tongue so that he could be understood by the people in all his travels. In addition to his travels in the islands, he visited in the missions of the Orient and in Australia. He visited the Philippine Islands, Japan, and China, dedicating China once again for the preaching of the gospel. After approximately three years in this special assignment, he was released, and from then until his death, he traveled extensively along with the other General Authorities visiting the stakes and the missions of the Church.

At the time of his passing on December 13, 1953, he had become one of the most loved men of his time. Few men have ever been so greatly loved and so greatly respected. He affected the lives of everyone who knew him.

(Matthew Cowley Speaks, [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971], pp. vii-xii.)
