Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

PRESIDENT LOREN C. DUNN

Biographical Sketch

Loren C. Dunn, appointed to the First Council of Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1968, has been named supervisor of missions in the British Isles. He is also an associate member of the Missionary Committee of the Church.

At the time of his appointment in 1968, Elder Dunn was living in Natick, Massachusetts, and was director of communications for the New England Council for Economic Development, with headquarters in Boston. He was also secretary of the council's banking and finance committee.

Elder Dunn was born in Tooele, Utah, on June 12, 1930, a son of the late Alex F. Dunn and Carol Horsfall Dunn. His father was president of the Tooele Stake of the Church and publisher of the Tooele Transcript Bulletin.

Elder Dunn was married in the Salt Lake Temple on December 15, 1959, to Sharon Longden of Salt Lake City, Utah, a daughter of the late Elder John Longden, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, and LaRue C. Longden. The Dunns have three children.

He was graduated from Brigham Young University in 1953 with a BS degree in journalism. While at BYU he was a member of the basketball team which in 1951 won the Western States Conference championship and went on to win the National Invitation Tournament title. This team also toured South America.

From 1958 to 1961 Elder Dunn was editor of the Tooele Transcript. He then went on to Boston University where he received a MS degree in public relations. In 1962 he was assistant director of public relations for the Herald Tribune Fresh Air Fund in New York City. While in Boston he had articles published by Public Relations Journal and by the American Banker.

Elder Dunn was in the U.S. Army in Europe from 1956 to 1958. He was a director-elect of the Boston Rotary Club, and is currently a member of the Salt Lake Rotary Club. He was also a member of the Public Relations Society of America, the New England Press Association, and is active in Scouting at the council and regional level.

Elder Dunn was chairman of a special committee named by the governor to establish an industrial development information system for Utah. He is on the board of directors of Pro-Utah. He also is a member of the Utah Industrial Promotion Board.

His Church activities began with a proselyting mission to Australia in 1954-56, where he was a counselor to the mission president. He was group leader for Mormon servicemen in Aschauffenburg, Germany, then an Explorer post advisor in Tooele before going to New England. He was superintendent of the New England Mission Mutual Improvement Association before being made a counselor in the presidency.

Mrs. Dunn was Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association president in the Boston Stake and served in the stake Primary presidency. She was graduated from the University of Utah in 1958.
