Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Who Is Going to Care?"

I remember a story told by a forest ranger about a tourist coming to a national park to take pictures of wildlife. Not far from the campground he found what he was looking for—twin bear cubs rummaging around in a garbage dump, half playing, half looking for dinner. Grabbing his camera, he proceeded to take a series of pictures from a number of different angles. In his haste, he failed to realize that when you find bear cubs in the forest, the mother bear is never very far away.

As he moved to get a close-up shot of the playful cubs, he inadvertently came between the cubs and the mother bear, who was in the trees a short distance off. The bear struck out immediately for her cubs, and a near disaster was averted when a passerby, noticing the scene, alerted the tourist, who demonstrated unusual athletic ability as he vacated the garbage pit.

We often hear of the ferocity with which animals protect their young, and usually these stories are associated with incidents about parents who for some unexplainable reason abandon their children. While these actions can and should be condemned, nonetheless, we seem to live in a day and age where there is another kind of abandonment, which is almost worse than a mother leaving an unwanted baby on a doorstep.

What I am talking about is the temptation of parents to give up on their children, especially when those children seem to flaunt and disregard the laws of morality and conduct which the parents hold dear and which govern the home, and when the children seem to rebel against every effort parents make to correct their behavior or show them a better way.

At least a baby who has been left on a doorstep will be looked after by the appropriate agencies, and usually placed in a home where parents who want it will adopt it and love it and raise it as their own.

A boy or a girl who has been given up by his or her parents because they (the children) are off on the wrong foot and possibly even surly and rebellious to any parental effort is in a much more serious predicament. When the hard times come—and they will—who is going to care if the parents don't?

(Conference Report, October 1970, pp. 41-42.)
