Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"To Me, This Is the Generation Gap"

My grandparents came over from Kirkintilloch, Scotland. They settled out in Tooele. At the tender age of sixty Grandfather started a newspaper, and when he got to be about eighty years old, my father began to help him in the business. Because Grandfather had particular ideas as to how things should be run, there were differences of opinion. My father was trying to introduce new machinery and new innovations into the business, but Grandfather just couldn't see it. And this led to some rather interesting discussions as only it can between Scotchmen. I didn't know my grandfather, but my father tells of having a particularly stimulating discussion with him one day when Grandfather suddenly turned to him and said, "Now, Son, why can ye no be like me? Why can ye no be agreeable?"

My father passed away about five years ago. He was a very innovative man. He introduced some important concepts that strengthened our business and caused it to grow. But then my brother came along—the third generation—and he had still newer and more innovative ideas, some of which I don't think my father completely grasped because, you see, they were two different generations. There wasn't the difficulty between my brother and my father that there was between my father and my grandfather because greater understanding existed.

Well, my brother now heads the business, and he has introduced the computer and other innovations; but I suspect in a few years hence one of his boys will come up and say, "Now, Dad, there is a better way, and there is an easier way," and I suspect that if dad is like the rest of us he will say, "Now wait a minute, Son." And there might be a little debate about what is good and what is bad.

To me, this is the generation gap. It has always existed and always will. But I do think in light of this, that the younger generation has the greater responsibility. The younger generation is usually more flexible and because of this has a greater responsibility to close the generation gap—perhaps even a greater responsibility than the older generation.

I suspect that you can be more successful in trying to understand what the older generation is saying to you and what they mean than possibly they can in trying to understand what you mean. This modern world as it stands today in all its innovation and advanced science and technology would make it harder for them, I think, to come to a complete understanding of your point of view than it would be for you to reach out and try to find meaning in what they are trying to say. Try to keep this in mind as you seek to establish communication with those you consider your elders.

(Speeches of the Year, "The Need to Know," April 1, 1969, p. 5-6.)
