Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"His Name Was Lou Gehrig"

Going back to when most of you were still in the pre-existance, I suppose awaiting your chance to come here, Brother Dunn, at the age of thirteen, was anxiously trying to get involved in the career of being a ball player; and you know you have to start early in any profession. I started when I was in the crib. I was throwing the rattle back and forth and causing a little commotion and finally graduated to the play pen and other things. Finally, because of sheer perseverance, I got to be a bat boy for the Little Rock Travelers down in Arkansas. They were a local AA team. That doesn't mean much to you sisters, but it was a pretty active ball club that did a lot to prepare young men for the major leagues. To be a bat boy was not only wonderful because of its environment, but it had many fringe benefits, one of which was to get personally acquainted with all the players. Then, in the spring, the frosting—because the major league clubs would come through Little Rock, as they do now in Arizona, Florida, and California, and other states in the South where the warm weather occurs a little bit earlier than it does in the north; and they take on these local teams.

Well, during the late thirties, my idol of a team was the New York Yankees. I guess it was with most people. I have changed a number of times since, but among all of the players that made up that powerful row of pitchers and sluggers was the player of my life, who unfortunately passed away before most of you were born. You may have heard of him. His name was Lou Gehrig, and he became the symbol of everything good and wonderful in the world to me. I patterned my whole life after him. He had more influence on me than Mom, Dad, Sunday School, and priesthood leader all rolled into one, because sometimes people do this to you. It's wonderful and I think all the more reason we need to select proper idols. But I didn't have much sense or vision at the time. Fortunately, Gehrig was a great soul, a great Christian, a great leader. Being the bat boy on the field, I got personally acquainted with him. One day I walked up to him and I said, "Mr. Gehrig, I wonder if you would help me."

Here is the difference between the great person and average person. He slipped his arm around me. Most people don't have time for kids, pests at that; and believe me. I was a pest. I just followed him around like a shadow. He put his arm around me and said, "What can I do, Paul, to help you?"

I said, "Mr. Gehrig, I want to be a ball player."

He said, "That's fine. I think you will if you have the desire and the determination and you continually prepare yourself."

I said, "Well, that's just my problem. I want it more than anything else; but every time I walk out on the ball field, I get so scared I can hardly perform." (You know the butterflys; you almost want to quit before you start. You get it occasionally up here, don't you? Whenever you go to perform.) And I said, "Can you help me?"

He patted me on the towhead, and he said, "Don't you ever lose that fear, Paul. Don't you ever lose it." (Watch this teacher at work now.) He said, "Fear's good, but you need to learn to control it; don't lose it."

I thought, now that's strange from a great ball player; and I said, "Why is that?"

He said, "Because fear is there, I think, for a purpose." (That's Gehrig talking.) He continued, "You know, for what it's worth, today in this practice game, I'm just as frightened at the plate as I was the first day I walked out on the field. The difference is, I control it; I discipline it." I thought, well, that's interesting; you never looked very scared to me. He said, "Paul, when I come out of the dugout, because I feel this way, I'm reminded of two things, and this is why fear is good: I'm reminded that there is a higher source than me, and I've got to depend on it. I can't do it alone." (Too many people try to go it alone in this old world, don't they?) He continued, "So, I bring Him into my confidence and I get strength and direction. Then I am reminded that there are eight other ball players on the field." (Get that young people, because sometimes leaders-to-be think that they have to do it alone. No, the thing that made Gehrig great was that he was an all-team man.) And he said, "I need the other eight in order to perform properly."

Well, I asked him the next question which I think might have entered your mind: "That's wonderful, Mr. Gehrig; but how in the world do you control it? It's got me all over. Now, how do I discipline it?"

He didn't answer me. He said, "Let me think about it."

The day ended, still no answer; but the next day—the great teacher at work. I'm out shagging balls (that's picking up balls, ladies) behind old Red Ruffing. This name won't mean much to some of you, but he is still existing and has been considered for the Hall of Fame. A great big old 220 pound, red-headed pitcher who was pretty uncouth and had a vocabulary you didn't want to share with thirteen-year-olds; but there I was listening to it. I was handing him the balls so he wouldn't have to stoop over as he was throwing in to the players in batting practice. Here came Lou Gehrig, about the fifth or sixth guy to take his spot in the batting cage; and before he stepped into the arena, as it were, he called out, "Hey, Red, let the kid pitch to me." (Gasp!) I thought, me pitch to him, the greatest man in my life? Red didn't want to bother. See the difference in people? He said, "I haven't got time; I want to get through with my warm-ups and go take my shower."

Gehrig, who was normally a very calm, understanding soul, just raised his voice a little. He said, "I said, let the kid pitch to me!"

He said, "All right, here."

Well, when I stepped up on that mound, that ball, nine ounces, felt like a shot-put. I thought, how do you do it? When I threw the first one, I think it bounced about four feet out. Finally, the ball got a little bit closer, and he called out words of comfort and encouragement. After about the fifth pitch, I got it reasonably close where he could take a swing at it. With a little more comfort and counsel from him, I got the ball into where he hit one or two. Then about five or six pitches later he took one of the healthiest cuts I have ever seen him take, even in a pro game. Oh, did he have the wrist action and the powerful swing! He came on so fast the breeze would blow your head off. But he missed the pitch. Then he stood straight up in that batter's box; and he said, "Nice shot, Paul." Boy, I thought, look out world! I had just thrown that ball right by the greatest hitter in the game. Do you know what that did to my faith, to my confidence? And, I didn't have sense enough at thirteen to know that maybe he missed it on purpose. He might just have done that. Well, he missed another one or two in the process; and to keep me humble—that's always important isn't it, in this old world—he hit a couple out that haven't landed yet, that are still in orbit.

After he had finished his practice, he called me off the mound. He said, "Come here a minute." And then slipping that great, wonderful arm around me, he walked me over to the dugout. He said, "Paul, (I thought this was an interesting observation) you've got a lot to learn about the game yet."

"Yes, I suppose you can say that."

He said, "You know (here is the key, young people), for a boy thirteen, you have fantastic control. Keep working on it, and you will go all the way."

You know, I worked on that for the next five years without letting up because one man said, here's one little quality, Paul. You've got plenty of limitations. You've got more errors than perhaps good in you, but here's something that's strong in you. You capitalize on it. This is how you get the confidence and the faith, and discipline the fear; you start where you are strong. Always pick the strength, young people, and use it to overcome the limitations. That is all this great leader was telling me.
