Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"A Standing Ovation"

I had an opportunity, just a few months ago, to be a representative of yours at Boston College, one of the great institutions in the East. While on that campus, I had an opportunity to meet one of the distinguished cardinals from another faith. He was a very fascinating giant of a man, in his own right. He is not known to smile very much, however, and I thought, here is the supreme test. So as we were introduced, I was presented to him as the head of the Mormon Church in the New England area. I tried to qualify that, so I said, "No, sir, I'm a cardinal myself." He said, "You are?" I said, "Yes sir." He said, "I didn't think they had the position of cardinal in the Mormon Church." I said, "They don't. I played for St. Louis." Well, he almost smiled.

While there, it was my honor, along with two of my elders, to go before a very challenging class in religious education. A great number of the students were preparing for the ministry. It was fascinating to me to place my two assistants at the head of the class as we were given the time to talk about our faith. I might just say in preface that, prior to going over, I had received a call from the father in question when I first arrived in New England. We chatted about the niceties of the great country to which we were both assigned, and finally he said, "Dr. Dunn, would you come over and tell us about your faith?" I said, "Thank you for the honor. If I might speak very frankly, I don't know that you want me under the conditions that I am committed to come. So I'll tell you. I have been sent here by a prophet of the Lord, and I'll tell you as delicately as I know how that you're wrong and we're right. And if I did come, it would be on the basis of declaring the error of your faith and announcing the truth. I've worked for our Church on many campuses throughout the country, and I know that probably very little good will come from my visit other than you'll be more convinced you're right and I'll go away convinced I'm right. Now I have been sent for three years to call your people to repentance." "Thank you for your honesty," he answered, and we hung up.

Six months ago, he called again. "This is Father So-and-So; do you remember?"

"Yes, I remember our coversation," I said.

"I'd like to have you come and talk to my class," he remarked. "We have many that will be ordained to the ministry shortly."

I said, "Do you remember the qualifications I set down before?"

"Yes. We'd like to have you on that basis."

I said, "Fine, I'm your man." And so I took my two elders and went over.

When we got there, the class looked interested, and I had my two assistants stand and speak for about five minutes each. I do not think the importance of what they said was quite as great as what they radiated. They were twenty-one-year-old boys who had left their homes to come and preach the gospel of Jesus Christ; the Spirit was evident. As my first assistant started to speak, the first cigarette went out, then the second. The audience started to sit more erect in their tablet armchairs, and they listened. And then it came my turn, and after joking with them for a few moments and trying to create a proper rapport, I took from my pocket the thirteen Articles of Faith, and read each one in turn, giving a little two-minute dissertation on each. As you know, you must be rather sensitive when you are talking with an all-Catholic audience. I concluded by bearing solemn witness and testimony to this Church. And then it happened. It was almost as if a baton in the hand of a choir director had been set up as a signal. The class arose in unison and, for about two minutes, gave three Mormon elders a standing ovation. We found out a little later why. One by one, as they approached the front of the room taking each one of us by the hand, the comment was:

Thank God there are some people in the world that won't compromise.

(Speeches of the year, "Be Not Ashamed," September 29, 1970, pp. 4-5.)
