Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"I Was a New Board Member"

I had one other introduction that was rather interesting. I think I have shared this with some of you. I used to live in Hollywood, California. I moved from there with my good family when the children commenced to out-number the facilities. I hadn't been in my new stake more than a few hours when the stake president called and, as they often do, enlisted me in a new assignment. I was assigned to the stake Sunday School board. And very quickly I was turned over to the stake superintendent who gave me two assignments for the following week. Well, there I was, in a whole new area. I didn't know anybody or any place. But trying to be dutiful to my calling I went to the ward I thought was my assignment. (I later found that there were two wards on the same street, in different parts of the stake.)

I walked in—I thought on time, but found I was tardy by about fifteen minutes—and as fate would have it, there wasn't a seat left in the congregation. So what do you do?—a new board member on assignment, no seat in the audience. I thought, "I'll take my place on the stand." Well, I wasn't too diplomatic, and I walked up while a man was talking. It embarrassed him, so he stopped and watched me come up. I hurried and took my seat, bowed my head so the pressure would be elsewhere. Then he said something, about three minutes later, that told me I was in the wrong ward.

"Oh, good heavens," I thought. "What do you do now? I need to make my report. I've got to go visit the other ward." Then it struck me that I had one thing in my favor. Nobody knew me—here I was a new board member, new stake—so I quickly got up and walked out. The same fellow was still talking. You can imagine how my leaving must have built his confidence. I was never so glad to get outside in all my life. I hurried on, and found the right ward, and completed my assignment.

The following Tuesday we had a stake Sunday School board meeting. I went to report. The superintendent was so excited when I walked in, he grabbed me.

He said, "Do you know what happened in our stake?"

"No, what happened?"

"Well, last Sunday we had a spiritual experience we'll always remember."

"Oh! What was that?"

He said, "Do you know that at Blank Ward (the ward I had walked into first) they had a visit from one of the Three Nephites!"

I want to assure you this morning I'm not here in either capacity. But I am honored to be here.

(Speeches of the Year, "Know Thyself, Control Thyself, Give Thyself," October 7, 1969, pp. 6-7.)
