Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Where Do You Sign Up?"

I had a little girl down at the University of Southern California. (I think it is long ago enough so that you wouldn't identify her as your first cousin or somebody else's.) She came from a wonderful, typical Latter-day Saint home, her father was in a very responsible position. But like lots of young people who go away from home, she thought she would take the proverbial Roman holiday, and so she signed on her religious preference card, "Protestant," instead of standing up to be counted and signing it "Latter-day Saint." She thought she would get away for a little breather.

She was rushed by one of the very fashionable sororities at the university and it was about a month later before I learned from another Latter-day Saint student that she was even on campus. So I went to pay her a visit. That was my charge—I was supposedly the shepherd and this was one of my little lambs. So I went to pay her a call. She was living at a big, fancy sorority house on 28th Street in Los Angeles. It was lavishly furnished, with a big, curling, beautifully decorated staircase. I rang the bell, and the chimes sounded all over the place. I was ushered in, and she was summoned. I will never forget that experience. Little Jan descended the stairway holding in her hand a long cigarette holder, and attached to it was a long king-size cigarette.

She was very proud and flip about it, and as she came into my presence, she said in a very sophisticated voice, "Yeaaa-s?"

I said, "Jan, I'm Brother Paul Dunn, your institute director."

"Oh," she said, "I've had enough church," and she took a big puff and blew the smoke back in my face.

It was all I could do to hold my patience. But I mustered up courage, girded up my loins, looked at her, and I said, "Just so you will know, Jan, we have a wonderful program here. I have been commissioned by the Lord through his prophets to be your caretaker. I want you to know that we need you, and I think you need us."

"No," she said, "thank you anyway, I've had enough church. In fact, I'd appreciate it if you wouldn't bother me. Take my name off your records."

Well, I couldn't do that, because I knew of her capacity in becoming a true daughter of the Lord. So I commenced to work out a plan in my mind for her.

Fortunately she was in a four-year program, and every week for the next four years she either saw me, got a telephone call, or a letter. I used to pull her card—I had access to it from the dean's file, being the campus chaplain for the Latter-day Saints—and I would find out what building and what time she was in a particular class. Then I would just "happen" to be there when class let out. We'd bump into each other. I'd say, "Jan! How are you?"

"Oh, you again?"

"Why don't you come on over? We're having a great time."

"No, thank you anyway, Brother Dunn, but I just can't work you in—can't find the time—too busy." (What an excuse that is, "too busy.")

Well, to make a long story short, four years came and went. Then in the last semester of the fourth year a knock came at my door at the institute. I opened it, and in the framework stood Jan. For a moment I was speechless. Then I said, "I'm honored, Jan, that you'd come."

"I thought you might be." She said, "Where do you sign up?"

I said, "Are you serious?"

"Yes, sir."

I said, "May I ask just what motivated you to take a class?"

She said, "Very simple. I thought it was easier to sign up for a class and get you off my back."

I was flattered. She took a class.

A year and a half later an interesting event transpired. Brother Dunn was called to Salt Lake. Jan had met a wonderful dental student in our program, and a call came on the phone one day, "Brother Dunn, would you honor us with your presence in the temple?"

"I'd be honored, Jan."

And that wonderful day arrived. Kneeling across the holy altar in one of our sealing rooms in the Salt Lake Temple was this little former dental hygienist and a great young man who had all that any girl would desire, holding hands. And by the authority of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood, I had the sacred privilege of uniting that pair for time and all eternity.

As I felt the Holy Spirit come, I couldn't help but reflect back on that day so many years before, when she had descended the stairway and in that rather sophisticated sort of fashion, said, "Yeaaa-s, what may I do for you?" The very scene before me was what I had desired for her.

(Speeches of the Year, "Know Thyself, Control Thyself, Give Thyself," October 7, 1969, pp. 11-12.)
