Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Two Can Play This Game"

I appreciate, President Lewis, your gracious introduction today. I have thought of one or two unique introductions I have had. I don't know, it might be appropriate to share them with you. Brother Lewis indicated that I was at one time associated with the institute program in Southern California. In that particular position you often have a chance to visit with dignitaries and just people in general. We were in the process of doing some remodeling in our institute building on one occasion, and I was entertaining some bids from very important establishments. I had an appointment this one morning with a representative from one of the better-known firms. And right at ten o'clock, the appointed hour, a knock came at my door. I opened it and standing in the framework was a very interesting looking character. He still had his hat on, even though he was in the building. His tie and shirt had parted company and from the aroma that came from him, I could tell that he had just disposed of a Roi-tan before coming in. I could handle all that. It was his announcement that challenged me.

He said good morning with all the firmness I have ever seen in a man. He took me by the hand. He said, "My name is Joseph Smith."

Well, now, I don't know what your concept of the Prophet is, but mine was not this. And you know your mind will do a hundred and one things when startled. I was startled.

I thought, "Now what is he up to? Joseph Smith, Mormon Church, kind of a cocky character." I thought, "Two can play this game." So I just squared my shoulders and put out my chin and said, "I'm glad to meet you, Joseph. I am Brigham Young."

He really looked shocked. And then he gave me shock number two. He reached in his pocket, pulled out a business card. The firm I was expecting was represented, and his name was really Joseph Smith! By then I didn't have the heart to tell him that I wasn't Brigham Young. And so all during the conversation he kept saying, "Yes, Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Young." I can imagine what he must have told his cronies back at the office.

(Speeches of the Year, "Know Thyself, Control Thyself, Give Thyself," October 7, 1969, pp. 5-6.)
