Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Can You Qualify?"

One has said:

Two men look out

Through the self-same bars.

One sees the mud,

The other the stars.

It is a matter of point of view.

Opportunity is all about us. One of the processes that you are experiencing here at school is creating your own opportunities. Much could be said here. I think that, unfortunately, many Latter-day Saints tend to fall prey to the mediocre life—they have created little or no opportunity because they haven't fully capitalized on the talents and abilities they possess.

May I speak somewhat frankly. As an institute coordinator in Southern California I was privileged to be on some seventy different college campuses from time to time. It became quite well known that I was working with the college element—you. Thus, when both Latter-day Saint and nonmember business and industry leaders were looking for capable, dedicated people to hire, it was natural for them to call one who had daily contact with this trained element. No less than fifteen or twenty times a week I would receive telephone calls from some of the finest men of Southern California wanting to know about you.

I had in my desk almost continually job opportunities in more than fifty different categories. Do you know what my greatest problem was? I couldn't find Latter-day Saints qualified to fill them. Here is the paradox in our modern society—in any given week I would have five to ten college-age people walk into the office and say, in essence, "Brother Dunn, do you know where I can get a good job—a high-paying job?" I would open up the drawer and bring out my list and say, "You bet. Can you qualify?" There was often the sad commentary: Here were young men with all the capacities and the ability in the world, but they hadn't taken the opportunity to develop them to their fullest. I suppose if anything pained my heart it was to see young men and young women terminate their education too soon because they lacked the vision to see what was ahead in the immediate future.

One illustration comes to mind. I have quoted it a time or two, but it is very fresh in that it occurred the week that I was called to assume this particular position.

The vice-president of the Purex Corporation in the Southern California region called me. (He is not a member of the Church.) As he identified himself, he said, "We have never met, Mr. Dunn, but I know a great deal about your program and your people, and I am so impressed with the philosophy and the point of view that your group represents, that I would like to fill six junior executive positions now available with your people. I will take any six that you send over to me, sight unseen, providing, number one, they have a bachelor's degree or its equivalent." We spelled out what he meant by "equivalent"—in terms of other experiences and exposure to educational programs.

Then I paused to ask him: "Do you want some specific area of concentration—liberal arts, engineering, mathematics orientation? What do you need?"

He said, "It doesn't matter. Industry today will specifically train the individual in these areas of detail. What we want is a person with a broad point of view, who has been exposed to the educational processes—one who can solve problems without asking for advice every few minutes."

The securing of an education, you see, teaches us how to think and to rationalize and to apply principles. And this is the same procedure used in businesses.

I said, "Fine. Thank you. What's the second point?" You would expect it, I am sure, knowing this particular group. He said, "That you recommend without reservation the moral character of the individual that you send. Is he honest, true, and virtuous? If he can pass those two tests, Mr. Dunn, he has the job."

Then he spelled out the job details. . . .

The sad part of this story is that from seventy college campuses, I could only get two of the positions filled. Within two to three weeks of this experience, however, I had no less than twenty-five returned missionaries come in who had left school seeking the opportunity of a lifetime. They were somewhat concerned as to why people would not take them on and give them all of the rewards of life. Isn't it interesting?

Industry indicates to all of us that at the top, in any field of endeavor, the vacancy sign is always posted.

(Speeches of the Year, "Three Basic Ingredients for Success," July 20, 1965, pp. 9-11.)
