Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"There Is Nothing I Don't Know"

My father-in-law, if you will permit another personal reference, was not a member of this Church. He was a great Protestant minister. I suppose if there was a counterpart of an apostle in the Disciple of Christ organization, this would have been his position. He was termed "minister-at-large," and he was called all over the world to represent this great body of individuals.

He was at one time the president of a university sponsored by their church, although it was much smaller than Brigham Young University. He later became the head of Brite Bible College at Texas Christian University, which would be their counterpart to BYU. In this position he frequently entertained, of course, correspondence from would-be faculty members.

Shortly after his death, as I was helping my wife and her good mother sort out some of his materials, I came across a very interesting letter which I would like very briefly to share with you. This was addressed to him by a member seeking a position on his faculty. It says:

My Dear Sir:

Notified May 21 that financial stress let me out here without disgrace because I was a latecomer on the faculty. I teach almost anything in modern French, German, and Spanish—language, literature, courses for teaching, scientific material, and phonetics. I have made thirty-one public addresses since last January 1st. I have taught in three high schools, one state teachers' college, two state universities, and three denominational colleges. War, pestilence, and famine—not inefficiency—make changes necessary.

Keep sane by hobby of music, by playing the flute, baritone bass, alto horns, clarinet, and cello. Can direct and lead choruses, bands, or orchestras, including the a cappella choir which is now so popular. Have taught the cello for years and can instruct in all band instruments. Keep well by physical education. Have long taught and can still instruct, as a side line, in corrective exercises, floor activities, and gymnasium, line apparatus, heavy German gymnastics, and swimming.

Health lecturer. Used repeatedly for institute work in this capacity. I prefer teaching to research, though I keep up advanced studies. Taught high school administration during seven summer sessions. Teacher of German this summer for the third time.

Your correspondence invited. Scholastic record enclosed.

Respectfully yours. . .

If you sat in the position of my father-in-law, making the decision as to whether you would include this man on your faculty, what would you do? If a like individual in your particular Church organization seemingly radiated this kind of egotism, would you be inclined to want to include him or her in the program? I do not mean to suggest, in running this fellow down, as it were, that we should not be self-confident in letting people know our ability and talents. But here is a man who suggests by his attitude that he has learned it all! "There is nothing I don't know! You would be most fortunate to include me in your oganization." Chances are each of us would look very seriously for the individual who still had an attitude of wanting to learn more and one who would listen to the other fellow.

(Education Week Devotional, "Blessed Are The Teachable," June 8, 1964, pp. 6-7.)
