Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Happiness Is Being Able to Walk"

I guess all of these things about happiness have caused me to be a bit on the alert, so the other day I was naturally interested when "Dear Abby" wrote about happiness. Do you get "Dear Abby" in the Provo papers? Maybe you have some of the other advice columns such as Ann Landers. Anyway, Abby had just received a letter from a young lady that defined her ideas concerning happiness. Let me share it with you. The letter comes, as they usually do, addressed to "Dear Abby." The girl says:

"Happiness is knowing your parents won't almost kill you if you come home a little late at night. Happiness is having your own bedroom. Happiness is having parents that trust you. Happiness is getting the phone call that you have been praying for all day. Happiness is getting good grades, and making your parents proud of you. Happiness is being included in the most popular circle. Happiness is in having parents who don't fight. Happiness is knowing that you are as well dressed as anyone else. Happiness is something I don't have. (Signed) Fifteen and Unhappy."

Abby was quite smart, I thought, on this occasion; rather than answering the letter directly, she invited the reading audience to submit their responses. May I share a few of their replies.

"Dear Fifteen and Unhappy: Happiness is coming home on time so your parents won't worry. Happiness is having someone to share a bedroom with. Happiness is proving to your parents that you can be trusted. Happiness is in realizing that sometimes you are lucky that you don't get what you pray for. Happiness is including someone who is lonely and unpopular in your circle. Happiness is having parents who stay together in spite of disagreements. Happiness is keeping the clothes you have neat and clean and not worrying about how they measure up to somebody else. Happiness is not something you get, it is is something you give. (signed) Fifteen and Happy."

Here is one from Vietnam.

"Dear Abby: We're a bunch of guys in Vietnam doing a job for Uncle Sam, and we read your column in Stars and Stripes the other day. That fifteen-year-old kid sure has a lot to learn, doesn't she? Do you know what happiness is for kids out here? Happiness is having enough to eat so that when you go to sleep at night your stomach doesn't ache. Happiness is having shoes on your feet and any kind of clothing to keep the cold out. Happiness is having a roof over your head. Happiness is being able to get any kind of an education some time in your life. Happiness is believing that the dream of freedom, brotherhood, and peace for mankind will someday come. (Signed) Some Very Happy GI's."

And then finally:

"Dear Abby: Happiness is being able to walk. Happiness is being able to talk. Happiness is being able to see. Happiness is being able to hear. Unhappiness is reading a letter from a fifteen-year-old girl who can do all of these things and still isn't happy. I can talk and I can see and I can hear, but I can't walk, but I am thirteen and real happy. (Signed) Thirteen and Happy."

(Speeches of the Year, "Happiness Is. . . ." April 18, 1967, p. 4-5.)
