Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

ELDER ALVIN R. DYER

Biographical Sketch

Elder Alvin R. Dyer, an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, served in the First Presidency of the Church under the late President David O. McKay. He was ordained an apostle in October 1967 and served in the First Presidency from April 6, 1968, until President McKay's death January 18, 1970, at which time he resumed the calling as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve.

While still president of the Central States Mission in April 1958 Elder Dyer was called to be the first assistant general superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. After seven months he became an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve. He presided over the European Mission with headquarters in Frankfurt, Germany, from 1960 to 1962.

Elder Dyer, an engineer in the heating and ventilation field during his active business days, held membership in the American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers. During World War II he served as a member of the American Military Engineers, acting as a consultant. At one time he was active with the Exchange Club. During his service as president of the Central States Mission, he identified himself with the Missouri Historical Society, of which he is still a member.

Beyond high school, Elder Dyer obtained further education from many correspondence courses and other self teaching efforts. As a young man he became a journeyman sheet metal worker (1925-1933), which provided, with other things, a background for the heating and ventilating profession. He was manager of the heating and air conditioning department of the Utah Builders Supply from 1934 to 1949. He organized his own company, the Dyer Distributing Company, in 1949, which was highly successful. In 1956 he disposed of this company to devote all of his time to the Church.

One of thirteen children, Elder Dyer was born January 1, 1903 in Salt Lake City to Alfred Robert and Harriet Walsh Dyer. He married May Elizabeth Jackson in the Salt Lake Temple. They have two children, Gloria May Klein and Brent Rulon, and six grandchildren.

Elder Dyer has held many positions in the Church, extending back to 1924 when he returned from a twenty-six-month mission in the Eastern States, where he was the supervising elder of the New York District. He served as the superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association in the Sixteenth Ward of the Salt Lake Stake, after which he was called to be the first counselor in the bishopric of the Fifteenth Ward of the same stake, a position held for seven years. He subsequently served for eight years on two stake high councils, seven in the Salt Lake Stake and one in the Riverside. He later served as Sunday School superintendent of the Yalecrest Ward of the Bonneville Stake, and upon division of that ward he served as second counselor in the bishopric of the Monument Park Ward for three and one-half years and then as bishop for more than five years.

Elder Dyer is the author of many books, some dealing with history, such as The Refiner's Fire and This Age of Confusion. His many years of missionary service led to the publication of several books in this area. These are The Challenge, The Meaning of Truth, and The Lord Speaketh. Other books are The Fallacy and, most recent, Who Am I? The latter deals with the meaning of life and man's destiny.

Athletically minded, Elder Dyer played high school and semi-pro baseball and M Men basketball, and at one time bowled in major league circles. Of late he plays handball. At one time following his first mission, he had an opportunity to play professional baseball, but the offer was declined because of Church responsibilities.
