Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Dr. Novinski"

I mentioned an experience, in talking to the married students some few weeks ago, of my visit to Poland in the interest of laying the groundwork for the microfilming of the archives records of the Polish people, where even now negotiations continue; and undoubtedly we shall have the privilege of microfilming seventy-five million images which include the birth, the marriage, and the death records of these many people who lived anciently in this land, going back as far as the fifteenth century. These will be added, in time, to the vast genealogical research library of the Church from which will come family group sheets and the relentless work of going to the temple and doing vicariously for these ancient people what they were unable to do for themselves because of not having the gospel truths. [^1]

It required a considerable amount of arrangement to get into Poland. But because we were invited there by the government, many of these barriers were removed, making possible the experience we had there in meeting with the archives officials of the Polish government in which this particular field functions under the minister of education.

I recall at the conclusion of our discussions, when we had done all that we could in making preparations for this, that we desired to bear testimony of the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the opportunity was provided for us when Dr. Novinski, associated with the department of education, invited me to tell them something about the Church. So there, in one of the government buildings in Warsaw, we held a "share-the-gospel" cottage meeting and had the opportunity, while speaking in German, a language which these people understood, to bear testimony of the reality of the restoration of the gospel, of the reason for the microfilming of genealogical records, of the purpose of the Restored Church, and of its teachings and saving ordinances. These men (and they had invited many of the archives assistants to come in to this particular office) listened almost spellbound. Our message was so different from anything they had ever heard before. It seemed so distant to the conditions of living to which they were submitted and the beaten paths that they had to follow under the unrighteous dominion of their political situation. Finally, when the meeting was over, they asked us for literature. This is forbidden normally in that land, but these government officials asked for literature, which we gave to them in German.

We then had many hours before plane departure for Czechoslovakia, to which we had to fly enroute to Zurich to hold a stake conference in the Swiss Stake with Elder Howard W. Hunter. We were given the liberty of the city and permitted to take many pictures.

But there is one experience that came out of this that I want to mention this morning. As we traveled through the city we came to a certain area, and Dr. Novinski stopped the government car in the midst of a number of very wonderful buildings that had been recently constructed. These buildings were not ordinary structures. They were well built, indicating that the Polish people must have sacrificed other building needs to provide the materials for these, for there is a shortage of materials in Warsaw and in Poland. Dr. Novinski then explained that we were standing in the area once known as the Warsaw Ghetto—that infamous place to which the Jewish people of Europe were shipped from the conquered countries, there to await their eventual deportation to the exterminating chambers, which were not very far away.

As I stood there thinking of what the Polish people had done in erasing or endeavoring to erase from their memory the terrible experience of this place and the terrible inhumanities that had been brought upon the Jewish people, I thought of the experience of one of our young missionaries then serving in France who was in this ghetto with his mother and father. He is a Belgian Jew. When the time came for them to be taken to the gas chambers, he was with his parents at first, but somehow, in some way that he is not able to explain, from his written testimony to me, he was taken by the hand, by someone else and led out of the camp, thereby escaping the gas chamber. How this was accomplished he does not know, even now. At any rate he remained secreted in the environs of Warsaw and was not found.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Actual microfilming is now in progress, 1971.
