Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Still Smiling, in Her Wheel Chair"

In the recent past, I found honor and integrity in resplendent glory. I saw the trials of life multiply and culminate in a visit from the grim reaper. She was a young school teacher just reaching her majority. While decorating a Christmas tree, she had fallen from the ladder and broken her back and was consigned the rest of her life to a wheel chair. In her resourcefulness, she developed her memory through the years and became a reviewer of books, for which she received compensation to support herself. No vulgar books would she read or review. Time passed, and, from her wheel chair, she enthralled her numerous audiences. A book a month she absorbed, mastered, and made hers; and then she entertained her public. Years passed.

Illness came to her widowed sister who was bedridden. The wheel chair victim, from her captivity, waited upon the sister. And now her aging mother fell and broke her hip, and with two patients, this wheel chair nurse operated a miniature hospital. They both finally died and left her alone.

In the home, she carried on. Books and books—readings and readings. Her strong, clear voice was a call to courage. Her persistence in spite of many handicaps showed an indomitable will. No pity did she ask, nor succor, nor sympathy. She first read the book, wrote a condensation, then memorized the latter. Years passed. Her overworked vocal cords eventually became hoarse, and with it the means of her living was threatened. She used her precious voice as long as she could; then came the day when the hoarseness was diagnosed as treacherous cancer. Still smiling in her wheel chair, she asked nothing, finally giving up her reviews, then taking to her bed, with her voice petering out and her breath shortening; then to the hospital for short days of gasping; then to her grave. There was no blame, no bitterness, no moroseness, but smiles and thanks and gratitude. Facing sure death, she yet had no complaint, only sweetness and courage. That is integrity. Like Job of old, she knew that her Redeemer liveth.

(Speeches of the Year, "Integrity," February 25, 1964, pp. 7-8.)
