Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

ELDER MARK E. PETERSEN

Biographical Sketch

Mark E. Petersen has spent his entire life working with words—spoken words and written words, but always words. Words in his hands come alive. They seem to mean more, to carry greater urgency, to more clearly unravel a theme than they might otherwise do.

Merely listening to or reading Mark E. Petersen's words seems to tell one what manner of man is he. His forceful baritone voice, controlled by flawlessly distinct diction, betrays an original eloquence and tremendous energy.

Much of what Mark E. Petersen is reflects his early journalistic career. He was born with a twin sister November 7, 1900, in Salt Lake City to humble Danish converts, Christian and Christine Anderson Petersen. As a young boy Mark became a news carrier in order to help earn his own way at home. On Saturdays and during summers he helped in his father's small construction business. A love for work with wood was instilled that still remains today.

Following his mission to Nova Scotia, twenty-three-year-old Mark joined the Deseret News as cub reporter.

Mark Petersen's innate abilities and honest character flourished in such an environment, and within a few years his leadership capacity had led him through positions of news editor, managing editor, editor, general manager and president of Deseret News Publishing Company. He is also chairman of its board of directors and a director of the Newspaper Agency Corporation.

The year before Mark Petersen began his newspaper career he married Emma Marr McDonald. They have two daughters.

A few years later, Elder Petersen was asked to serve on the Sunday School general board. By the time he was managing editor he had also served on two high councils, had been second counselor in one stake presidency and first counselor in another, and had toured much of the Church, conducting conventions as a director of the Genealogical Society.

In 1944, at the age of forty-three, he was called to the apostleship and entered a new career, that of witnessing to all the world the truth about Jesus Christ. Elder Petersen presently supervises missions of the Church in the eastern United States.

His training with words is now sowing its seeds. He has authored innumerable pamphlets, tracts, booklets, books and Church editorials and is an unusually gifted speaker.

His daily training of handling major problems—particularly at getting to the heart of a problem—now finds lifetime use in the service of the Lord.
