While serving in the Philippines Area Presidency, I saw a great increase in the faithfulness and devotion of the Filipino people. Convert baptisms increased. Temple attendance increased, especially first-time endowments. Sacrament meeting attendance went up. More people faithfully paid tithes and offerings, and the number of Melchizedek Priesthood holders increased every year. Youth attendance and activity increased, and seminary and institute enrollments went up.

All of these indicators suggest that increased blessings, promised and prophesied by living prophets and the Lord Himself, are being poured out upon the people in a wonderful way. As the faithfulness and devotion of the members increase, the Lord will continue to pour out blessings upon His people.

Surely the pleas of President Gordon B. Hinckley, offered in the dedicatory prayer of the Manila Philippines Temple on 25 September 1984, will continue to be heard. He pleaded with the Lord to “lift the blight of poverty from which so many suffer. Particularly bless thy faithful saints who live honestly with thee in the payment of their tithes and offerings. As was promised of old by thy prophet Malachi, open the windows of heaven and pour out blessings that there shall not be room enough to receive them [see Mal. 3:10]. Bless thy saints in their faith that they shall remain true as Thy covenant people. Bless them in their homes that there shall be love and peace. Bless them that neither they nor their generations after them will go hungry, nor naked, nor without shelter from the storms that beat about them. Open their minds that they shall grow in wisdom in matters both spiritual and temporal.

“May thy Church in this island nation grow and increase in numbers. May the evil designs of its enemies be frustrated. May thy work become as ‘a city set upon a hill whose light cannot be hid’” (quoted in “Temple Brings Philippines All Blessings,” Church News, 30 September 1984, 10).

Surely the prophecy of “a city set upon a hill whose light cannot be hid” (see Matt. 5:14) is being fulfilled here in this unique island nation. I am grateful to have personally witnessed this magnificent growth and blessing.
