As children of a loving Heavenly Father, we are blessed with his love. Why, then, do we not always feel his loving guidance? As we learn to call upon the Lord in all things, our faith can become a real, sustaining power we can rely on in every circumstance. Then we can better feel his guiding hand in our daily lives.

In the book of Alma, Amulek reminds us that our Heavenly Father is deeply interested in all aspects of our lives, but that his guiding power comes fully into our lives only as we seek it. “Exercise your faith unto repentance,” Amulek teaches, “that ye begin to call upon his holy name. …

“Humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

“Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

“Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

“Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies. …

“Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

“Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

“Pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness” (Alma 34:17, 19–22, 24–26).

In what places and situations might you need to seek the Lord’s help more earnestly?

Many years ago, a young Latter-day Saint girl became lost in the rugged wilderness outside her family’s ranch. Frightened and bewildered, she realized she needed help immediately, so she closed her eyes and fervently prayed, “Father, show me the way home.”

The words had hardly left her mouth when she felt as if hands were placed on her shoulders, directing her. With this prompting, she started back up a nearby gulch. This strong impression remained with her all the way home and never left her until she turned the doorknob of her front door.

This experience helped form the foundation of the faith that sustained her throughout her life. “I wish all people, especially the lost ones, had such a knowledge of our Father’s love,” she said.

What personal evidences do you have that Heavenly Father hears your prayers and directs your daily life, even in small ways?

“Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him” (Rev. 3:20). In a well-known painting of the door described in this scripture, the doorknob is only on our side. Although the Lord stands ready to enter, he does not force us to invite him.

When we turn to God in prayer, we are in effect opening a door, attuning ourselves to receive the power of faith in our lives. “Remember that without faith you can do nothing; therefore ask in faith” (D&C 8:10).

The Lord sees us in our daily activities and is ready to respond. As he helped the young girl who was lost and afraid in the wilderness, he will show us the way home when we humble ourselves and seek him in prayer.

How does inviting the Lord into our lives give us the strength to follow his teachings?
