Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

How to Interpret the Scriptures

Since salvation comes to those who both know and do the will of the Lord, the saints are under express command both to search the scriptures and to keep the commandments. (John 5:39; D. & C. 1:37-39; 3 Ne. 23.) They are to "teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom" (D. & C. 88:77), for "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" of God, of Christ, and of the gospel laws. (D. & C. 131:6.) At the peril of losing their own salvation, men must learn the will of God concerning them, for "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.)

To learn the doctrines of salvation men: (1)Must search the scriptures diligently themselves (3 Ne. 23); (2)They must hearken to the voice of the prophets and inspired interpreters of the divine word who are sent among them; and (3)They must themselves so live as to have the spirit and gift of scriptural understanding and interpretation.

These three requisites are illustrated in the conversion by Philip of the "eunuch of great authority" in the court of "Candace queen of the Ethiopians." This high civil official, as he returned from worshiping in Jerusalem, and as he read aloud from the Messianic prophecies of Isaiah, was met by Philip who said: "Understandest thou what thou readest? And he said, How can I, except some man should guide me?" Thereupon Philip taught him the gospel of salvation, which is in Christ, and the eunuch, his mind enlightened by the Spirit and believing with all his heart, was baptized for the remission of sins. (Acts 8:26-40.)

"If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus," Paul taught the Romans, "and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. . . . For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things! . . . So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Rom. 10:9-17.)

But after personal study and research, and after being taught by an inspired teacher who does have the power of interpretation, the gospel student must get the revelations of the Spirit himself. Only then will the full and clear meaning of the scriptures be unfolded. This principle is the basic rule of scriptural interpretation. "Knowing this first," Peter said, "that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:20-21.) It is only when the Holy Ghost reveals anew the same truth originally given in the scripture that its full and perfect meaning is known.

After the baptism of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the Holy Ghost fell upon them in a miraculous manner. "We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation," the Prophet said. "Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of." (Jos. Smith 2:73-74.) Truly the things of God are known only by the power of the Spirit of God. (1 Cor. 2.)

Scriptural insight, however, is aided by a knowledge of the history, political and social conditions, educational status, and temperment of the peoples to whom the various scriptures were originally revealed. For instance, it was more difficult for the Nephites to gather the full import of Isaiah's prophecies than it was for the Jews in Jerusalem, because the Nephites were not taught "after the manner of the Jews." True, Isaiah's words "are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy"; but just as scientific and medical writings can be better understood by those trained in science and medicine, so those schooled in interpreting prophecies are in a better position to determine their full meanings. "I know that the Jews do understand the things of the prophets," Nephi said, "and there is none other people that understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews." (2 Ne. 25:1-8.)
