Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Obedience and Good Works Lead to Salvation

Matt 7 21Matt. 7:21. Kingdom of heaven] Celestial kingdom.

Matt 7 21He that doeth the will of my Father] "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." (Third Article of Faith.) Salvation does not come to those who merely confess Christ with their lips, or even to those who go about doing good works (as men generally view good works). It is reserved for those who do the very things which constitute the will of the Father, namely: (1) Accept and believe the true gospel, thus gaining faith in Christ, and thus believing in the prophets sent by Christ to reveal his truths, Joseph Smith being the greatest of these in this dispensation; (2) Repent; (3) Be baptized by a legal administrator who has power from God to bind on earth and seal in heaven; (4) Receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, also by the authorized act of a duly appointed priesthood bearer; and (5) Endure in righteousness and devotion to the truth, keeping every standard of personal righteousness that appertains to the gospel, until the end of one's mortal probation.

Matt 7 2222. Many will say] These fall into two categories: (1) False ministers, those who have professed to teach the gospel, but who have acted without authority from God. Included in this group are all teachers of religion—whether pagan, Jewish, Christian, or of whatever classification—who have not been "called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (Fifth Article of Faith.) Some of these are ministers who have so completely sold themselves to Satan that they have worked miracles by his power. (Matt. 24:24; 2 Thess. 2:9; Rev. 13:13-14; 16:13-14; 19:20.)

Matt 7 22(2) Those of the elders of Israel who are true ministers and prophets; who have been on missions for the Church, for instance; who have healed the sick and performed great miracles; but who did not magnify their callings all their lives and thereby endure in righteousness to the end. Some miracles, as the casting out of devils, are performed only by the true ministers who actually hold the power and authority of the priesthood. (Matt. 12:24-30.)

Matt 7 2323. I never knew you] I. V. Matt. 7:33. Ye never knew me] These two expressions convey substantially the same general thought. Jesus is saying: 'I never knew you as true disciples, for you never received the fulness of my gospel and came into my Church, and hence, Ye never knew me'; Or, 'Ye never knew me so fully as to be sealed up unto eternal life with your callings and elections made sure, and since you did not magnify your callings in the priesthood, you shall be cast out and be as though I never knew you.'

SCMatt 7 24Matt 7 25Matt 7 26Matt 7 27Matt. 7:24-27. These graphic statements are applicable to many situations. For instance: Those who build their houses of faith on the rock of revelation, rather than on the sands of sectarian delusion, shall have a spiritual structure able to withstand every temptation and turmoil. Or: Those who build celestial bodies by obedience to celestial law shall have a bodily structure that can abide the day, with all its tumultuous changes, in which this earth becomes a celestial sphere. (D. & C. 88:17-32.)
