Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Adultery and Sign Seeking Go Together

Luke 11 16Luke 11:16. A sign from heaven] They had already seen signs in such number and variety as had never before in all history been poured out upon a people. In their streets, houses, and synagogues, the lame leaped, the blind saw, the dumb spoke, paralytics walked and carried their beds, all manner of diseases were cured, devils were cast out, the dead raised—all by the command of him whom they now tempted. Yet, in the face of all this, they now demanded something new and different, some heavenly portent which would prove that what they had already seen was from above and not from beneath.

Matt 12 39Matt. 12:39. An evil and adulterous generation] Some sins cannot be separated; they are inseparably welded together. There never was a sign seeker who was not an adulterer, just as there never was an adulterer who was not also a liar. Once Lucifer gets a firm hold over one human weakness, he also applies his power to kindred weaknesses.

Matt 12 39"When I was preaching in Philadelphia," the Prophet said, "a 'Quaker called out for a sign. I told him to be still. After the sermon, he again asked for a sign. I told the congregation the man was an adulterer; that a wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and that the Lord had said to me in a revelation, that any man who wanted a sign was an adulterous person. 'It is true,' cried one, 'for I caught him in the very act,' which the man afterwards confessed when he was baptized." (Teachings, p. 278.)

SCMatt 12 39Matt 12 40Matt 12 4139-41. Sign of Jonas] "Jonah's burial in and coming forth from the 'great fish' (Jonah 1:15-17; 2) symbolizes the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ. . . . By repenting and believing Jonah, wicked Nineveh was saved; by repenting and believing Christ, the wicked Jews could have freed themselves from sin. And the miracle of the resurrection, symbolized by the sign of Jonas, stands as a witness against them that they rejected their God." (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 641-642.)

Matt 12 4242. Queen of the south] Queen of Sheba, an area south of Judea, in Arabia, near the shores of the Red Sea.

I. V. Luke 11:32-33. Rise up in the day of judgment] Those who have acted wisely in their day, walking according to the light and truth available to them, shall come before the judgment bar and receive rich rewards, while those who had even greater light and truth offered to them, but who rejected it, shall be condemned in the day of judgment. It shall be as though heathen and Gentile nations, those without the law and the light which Israel had, shall rise up in judgment against the chosen seed, whose opportunities to do right were far greater. The heathens of Nineveh repented when a man preached to them, but God's covenant race, the chosen of the whole earth, refused to repent when the very Son of God came among them. As given in latter-day revelation, the principle of judgment here involved is: "Of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnations." (D. & C. 82:3.)
