Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Heaven and Earth Acclaim the Savior's Birth

Lo! this night a God is born, the Word is made flesh, the great Jehovah makes clay his tabernacle, becomes a Babe in Mary's arms—and heaven and earth join in singing praises to his holy name. No scene quite like this has ever elsewhere been manifest to mortal man. Righteous men, finding their eyes open, see within the veil, and having their ears unstopped, hear the angelic hosts praise God and proclaim tidings of joy and peace on earth for men of good will everywhere.

Nephite kinsmen of the Jewish shepherds, though removed by half a world from the angelic choirs, were also blessed with miraculous assurances that the God of Israel was now the Son of David. During the preceding day, the voice of Jehovah had said to Nephi, grandson of Helaman: "Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfil all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets. Behold, I come unto my own, to fulfil all things which I have made known unto the children of men from the foundation of the world, and to do the will, both of the Father and of the Son—of the Father because of me, and of the Son because of my flesh." Then it was that there was a day and a night and a day on the Western Hemisphere in all of which there was no darkness; and then it was that all the people beheld the rise of the promised new star. (3 Ne. 1:4-21; Hela. 14:2-5.) Thus the very heavens and all the hosts of them bore record that God himself had come down among men.

Luke 2 8Luke 2:8. Shepherds] These particular shepherds were righteous and devout men who by lives of holiness and purity had prepared themselves to behold the angelic presence and hear the heavenly choirs.

Luke 2 1010. All people] Not just to the Jews, not just to the house of Israel, not merely to a favored few—the glad tidings of salvation were to go to all the ends of the earth; every ear should hear, every eye see, and every heart be penetrated.

Luke 2 1111. The city of David] Bethlehem, where David was born. A Saviour] The one who would work out the infinite and eternal atonement bringing immortality as a free gift to all (thus saving them from the temporal effects of the fall of Adam) and bringing eternal life to those who would hearken to his teachings (thus saving them from the spiritual fall).

Luke 2 1212. Swaddling clothes] Bands of cloth commonly wrapped around newborn infants. I. V. 12. And this is the way you shall find the babe] The swaddling clothes and the manger were not a "sign" which would identify Jesus; the angel was merely describing where he was and how he was dressed.

Luke 1 14Luke 1:14. And on earth peace, good will toward men] Marginal readings give what is probably a more accurate translation of the "Gloria in excelsis" song: "On earth peace among men of good will," or, "On earth peace among men in whom he is well pleased."
