Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

John Warns of Judgments, Commands Righteousness

Matt 3 7Matt. 3:7. Pharisees and Sadducees] Two of the most influential apostate sects among the Jews. The Pharisees were a zealous, devoted sect who accepted both the law of Moses and the traditions of the elders. They were pious and puritannical in conduct, glorying in frequent fasts and public prayers. Intensely patriotic and nationalistic, they believed in spirits, angels, revelation, immortality, eternal judgment, the resurrection from the dead, and rewards and punishments in the life to come.

Matt 3 7The Sadducees, on the other hand, categorically rejected and believed in none of these things. They were a sect composed of skeptical, worldly, wealthy people a selfish group finding their most powerful adherents among the chief priests. Though the Sadducees professed belief in the law, they rejected the traditions of the elders, and made no pretentions of piety or devout worship. The Pharisees were far more powerful and influential in Jewish political and religious life than were the Sadducees.

Matt 3 7Generation of vipers] An evil and wicked group, who by their poisonous opinions and corrupt influence, were destroying the religious health of the nation. Our Lord similarly castigated the scribes and Pharisees (Matt. 23:33), and the Prophet applied the same condemnation to the persecutors of the saints in this dispensation. (D. & C. 121:23.)

I. V. Matt. 3:34. If ye receive not me, ye receive not him] No man in John's day could believe in Jesus as the Messiah without also believing in John as his forerunner. It is the same today. No man can receive the full revealed assurance of the divinity of the Lord Jesus without, for instance, accepting Joseph Smith as a prophet and the one through whom the knowledge of Christ and of salvation has been revealed for this age. "He that receiveth my servants receiveth me," saith the Lord, (D. & C. 84:36; John 13:20.) "Whosoever receiveth me, receiveth those, the First Presidency, whom I have sent." (D. & C. 112:20.) Similarly, those who reject the Lord's prophet' and witnesses reject the Lord. (Luke 10:16.)

Matt. 3:10. Cast into the fire] Go to hell, to sheol, the spirit prison where the wicked suffer the burning fires of remorse of conscience as they await the day of the resurrection of damnation. (Alma 40:13-14; D. & C. 76:84-85, 105-106.)

I. V. Luke 3:17. Publicans] Roman tax collectors or tax farmers. Imperial Rome sold to the highest bidder the right to collect taxes in a given area. Publicans purchasing this power for large areas often resold it to numerous others who did the actual assessing and collecting in smaller areas. Exorbitant profits were often made by all through whose hands the taxes passed. Cases of exorbitant collections, bordering on extortion, were not uncommon.
