Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

What, New Revelation in Apostate Churches!

Matt 9 14Matt. 9:14. John was in prison. His work of preparing the way before the Lord was almost over. He had introduced the Messiah to Israel, had taught that salvation was in Christ only, and had commanded all men to follow him. Yet some of John's disciples, now leaderless and encouraged in their doubts and uncertainties by the Pharisees, had failed to catch the full vision of the Baptist's direction to forsake him and follow Jesus. Knowing John's ascetic manner of living, and seeing Jesus feasting at Matthew's table, they were perturbed and perplexed.

Matt 9 1515. Jesus aptly reminds John's disciples that it was John himself who had spoken of the Bridegroom. (John 3:25-26.) And who would expect the bridal party to fast at the wedding feast? But when the Bridegroom is taken from them, slain for the sins of the world, then shall the children of the bride chamber mourn and fast.

I. V. Matt. 9:18-21. At this point the Pharisees themselves take up the questioning, and the foundation is laid for an understanding of the enigmatic and parabolic statements about new cloth on old garments, new wine in old bottles, and the natural hesitancy of exchanging old wine for new.

Baptism in the power and authority of the Aaronic Priesthood was the accepted order among the Pharisees; from time immemorial they and their forbears had been immersed in water by legal administrators; and not only that, but from their ritualistic standpoint, they had kept the whole law of Moses. Why then should Jesus reject their baptisms and command them to be baptized again in his name by his disciples?

In reply, Jesus taught: 'The old order changeth; the law is fulfilled; it is superceded by the gospel. Messiah has come; look to him for salvation. Your baptism, good and legal in former days, now "profiteth you nothing."'

An analogous situation arose in the early days of this dispensation. So-called Christian churches on every hand were going through the formality of baptism, and some persons who had previously been baptized desired to unite with the restored kingdom without a new baptism. Thereupon the Lord revealed: "Behold, I say unto you that all old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing; and this is a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning. Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works. For it is because of your dead works that I have caused this last covenant and this church to be built up unto me, even as in days of old. Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek not to counsel your God." (D. & C. 22.)

Both Jesus and Joseph Smith were restoring the gospel in their respective days. All organizations except the restored kingdom were false. And reformation is not restoration. Who ever heard of adding live branches to a dead tree?

SCMatt 9 16Matt 9 17Matt. 9:16-17. What, new baptism in an old church, new revelation in a dying kingdom, new doctrine in an apostate organization! Could Jesus add Christian ordinances, with their spirit and power, to the dead formalism and ritual of the Mosaic procedures? Could new wine be put in old bottles (animal skins used as containers) without breaking the bottles and losing both the old and the new?

Luke 5 39Luke 5:39. Probably Jesus made some statement to John's disciples and clinched it in their minds by using this one sentence parable. The sense and meaning is: 'In following John, who was sent of my Father to prepare the way before me, you have conformed to the law of Moses. Now, however, a greater than Moses is here, even the Messiah, and as John taught, you must now follow him, even though it is difficult for you to "straightway" turn from your old teachings and accept the new.'
