Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Search the Scriptures, For They Testify of Jesus

SCJohn 5 39John 5 40John 5:39-40. "In the scriptures ye find your charter of eternal life; go search them then, and you will find that I am the great burden of their testimony; yet ye will not come to me for that life eternal which you profess to find there, and of which they tell you I am the appointed dispenser." (Jamieson, p. 137.)

SCJohn 5 3939. Search the scriptures] Gospel scholarship is woefully lacking both in the Church and in the world. There is only a handful of people now living who have an intelligent and comprehensive, working knowledge of the recorded revelations. None know as much as they should. Many of the rising generation in the Church take the gospel and its truths for granted without ever coming to a personal knowledge of the basic doctrines of salvation.

John 5 39Yet man's hope of gaining salvation is in direct proportion to his knowledge of God and the laws of salvation. No man can be saved in ignorance of Jesus Christ and the laws of the gospel. Man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge of God and the saving truths recorded in the scriptures. A fountain cannot rise above its source; a people cannot live laws of which they are ignorant, nor believe in a Christ about whom they know little or nothing. The Lord expects his people to learn the doctrines of salvation. "Search these commandments" (D. & C. 1:37), is a decree which applies in principle to all revelations of all ages.

John 5 4040. Life] Spiritual life while here in mortality and eternal life in the celestial realms hereafter.

I. V. John 5:41. Lest ye should honour me] What petty jealousies keep men from receiving gospel blessings! They will not accept the prophets sent of God, lest in doing so they thereby certify to the greatness and honor of the prophet-servant sent to minister to them. They reject the Son himself, lest in hearkening to his voice, they should honor him in the eyes of the people. What does it detract from one person because another is honored? Rightly viewed, is there not enough honor and to spare in God's kingdom for all who will receive it?

John 5 41John 5:41. I receive not honour from men] What honor could man bestow upon the Son? What college degree, honorary or otherwise, could be conferred; what political appointment made; what position of wealth or influence given, which would add to his position and stature? Similarly, what of eternal worth can prophets, apostles, and elders of Israel gain by seeking the honors of men?

John 5 4444. Struggles for the honors of men keep men from believing in and centering their hearts upon Christ, and they therefore lose their salvation.

John 5 44Honour that cometh from God] Among others: priesthood, revelation, visions, healing powers, that peace which the Spirit gives, the companionship of the Holy Ghost, eternal life itself.

SCJohn 5 45John 5 46John 5 4745-47. Just as no one can believe in Christ without believing in his Father also, so no one can accept the Son without accepting the prophets who testify of him. "Believe in Christ and deny him not," Nephi said, "for by denying him ye also deny the prophets and the law." (2 Ne. 25:28.) Christ and his prophets are one.

John 5 4545. One that accuseth you, even Moses] Though the Jews trusted in Moses, they were damned for rejecting the great law-giver's testimony concerning the Messiah. Similarly, though modern sectarians trust in Peter, falsely supposing they believe what that ancient apostle taught, they shall be damned for refusing to accept Peter's testimony about the restoration of all things in the last days. (Act 3:19-21.) In the same sense that Moses stands as the accuser of the Jews, so Peter, James, and John and the apostles of old will stand as the accusers of an apostate Christendom.

John 5 4646. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me] Similarly, if men today believed in Christ and the apostles of old, they also would believe in Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, and the restoration of the gospel. (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 75-77.)
