Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Abolishes Law of Retaliation

Matt 5 38Matt. 5:38. As befitted her low and carnal state, Israel received from Jehovah strict laws for the punishment of crimes. "Thou shalt give," the Lord had commanded, "life for a life, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe." (ex. 21:23-25; Lev. 24:17-22; Deut. 19:21.)

Matt 5 3939. After nearly fifteen hundred years of suffering, schooling, and preparation under this law of fear, Jesus now announces that it is replaced by a law of love. No longer shall the penalties of the Mosaic code prevail. In an attempt to preserve in our modern legal codes the Christian rather than the Mosaic standard of punishment for crimes, cruel and unusual punishments are by law expressly forbidden.

SCMatt 5 39Matt 5 40Matt 5 41Matt 5 4239-42. "Christ taught that men should rather suffer than do evil, even to the extent of submission without resistance under certain implied conditions. His forceful illustrations—that if one were smitten on one cheek he should turn the other to the smiter; that if a man took another's coat by process of law, the loser should allow his cloak to be taken also; that if one was pressed into service to carry another's burden a mile, he should willingly go two miles; that one should readily give or lend as asked—are not to be construed as commanding abject subserviency to unjust demands, nor as an abrogation of the principal of self-protection. These instructions were directed primarily to the apostles, who would be professedly devoted to the work of the kingdom to the exclusion of all other interests. In their ministry it would be better to suffer material loss or personal indignity and imposition at the hands of wicked oppressors, than to bring about an impairment of efficiency and a hindrance in work through resistance and contention." (Talmage, pp. 235-236.)

I. V. Luke 6:29-30. Contention leads to bitterness and smallness of soul; persons who contend with each other shrivel up spiritually and are in danger of losing their salvation. So important is it to avoid this evil that Jesus expects his saints to suffer oppression and wrong rather than lose their inner peace and serenity through contention. "He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me," he told the Nephites, "but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another." (3 Ne. 11:29.)

Matt 5 41Matt. 5:41. Compel thee to go a mile] Apparently Jesus had reference to the Roman law which authorized troops passing a district to commandeer the people and compel them to carry their luggage. To comply with this law often resulted in great inconvenience. The principle involved is that the saints should pay their taxes, abide by the laws of the land, and submit to those public burdens attendant upon citizenship.

Matt 5 4242. Manifestly, charitable contributions and lending to others is to be done in conformity with principles of sound sense and judgment.
