Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Cleave unto True Prophets, Shun the False

Luke 6 43Luke 6 44SCMatt 7 15Matt 7 16Matt 7 17Matt 7 18Matt 7 19Matt 7 20Jesus here reannounces the eternal truth that true prophets of God did then and should thereafter minister among men. He did not say: 'Beware of any who shall claim prophetic powers. Their claims will be false, for there shall be no more prophets.' Rather he taught: 'There are now and shall yet be many on earth claiming to be prophets of God. Some will be true prophets whose teachings shall lead men to my Father's kingdom; others shall be false prophets whose doctrines shall damn those who heed them. Beware of false prophets, cleave unto the true. How shall the false and true be distinguished? By their fruits.'

Matt 7 15Matt. 7:15. Prophets: "A prophet is a person who knows by personal revelation from the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Son of God, 'for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.' (Rev. 19:10; Teachings, pp. 119, 312.) Accordingly, every prophet bears record of Christ. 'To him give all the prophets witness' (Acts 10:43; Jac. 4:4), and if a professing minister of salvation is not a witness for Christ, he is not a prophet.

Matt 7 15"Nothing more than the testimony of Jesus is needed to make a person a prophet; and if this revealed knowledge has not been received, a person is not a prophet, no matter how many other talents or gifts he may have. But when a person has received revelation from the Spirit certifying to the divinity of Christ, he is then in a position to press forward in righteousness and gain other revelations including those which foretell future events. On this basis, should the necessity arise, those who are prophets are in a position where they 'could prophesy of all things.' (Mosiah 5:3.)

Matt 7 15"The mission of prophets is not alone to foretell the future. Even more important is the witness they bear to the living of the divinity of Christ, the teachings they give of the plan of salvation, and the ordinances which they perform for their fellowmen. All of the great prophets are possessors of the Melchizedek Priesthood; as legal administrators some have possessed keys enabling them to administer the fulness of gospel ordinances." (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 544-547.)

Matt 7 15False prophets] "When a man goes about prophesying, and commands men to obey his teachings," Joseph Smith taught, "he must either be a true or false prophet. False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets, and they will prophesy so very near the truth that they will deceive almost the very chosen ones." (Teachings, p. 365.)

Matt 7 15Joseph Smith also said: "If any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie; for, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detected." (Teachings, p. 269.)

Matt 7 2020. By their works it shall be known whether professing ministers of religion are true or false prophets. Joseph Smith was a true prophet. What fruits did he leave? There is probably more evidence of his divine call and mission than of any other prophet who ever lived, Jesus himself only excepted. Joseph Smith has left us the Book of Mormon, and the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. He restored all of the basic doctrines of the gospel, perfected the organization of the Church, performed a host of miracles, saw God, was visited by angels, uttered hundreds of prophecies which have been literally fulfilled, and finally sealed his testimony with his own blood. (D. & C. 135.)
