Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

6

DIKES VERSUS LIVING WATER

Much of the Netherlands lies considerably below sea level. Through the process of building dikes to wall out the salty sea, and through pumping the water into canals, the country of the ingenious, resourceful, and doughty Dutch has literally been born of the sea.

The process of wresting the good and precious earth from the bitter ocean waters has been going on for over seven hundred years, and there is no abatement of the struggle in sight. The gigantic dikes, or sea walls, may rise as high as sixty feet above the sea and are often broad enough on the top for a road over which traffic moves. The other side of the dike usually slopes down to green meadows below sea level. Thus, people on the dike can see down the chimneys of the houses nestling below. The fish on the one side are higher than the birds in the trees on the other.

However, there are no dikes tall enough, wide enough, deep enough, or strong enough to give man the security for which his soul cries out, for which he instinctively yearns, and for which he often frantically searches.

In February 1953 news media reported: "A mournful tolling of church bells and the scream of sirens awakened the Netherlanders at 4:00 A.M.; it was already too late. Waves chewed like bulldozers at the historic dikes of Holland, breaking through in at least 70 places, to reclaim what centuries of Dutch ingenuity has taken from the sea. . . . To the north, the flood crest went as high as 30 feet. . . . In a matter of hours, roughly a sixth of the Netherlands' 13,000 square miles—an area where 1,000,000 Dutchmen make their homes—was devastated." [^1] The desolation here and in nearby countries had taken a toll of over 1,500 known dead.

When natural disasters strike, we are shocked and saddened at the suddenness and unpredictability of tragedy and the realization that mortal life, at best, is surely a fragile and uncertain spark. The globe is constantly threatened by forces, both man-made and inherent in our dwelling places, so devastating and capricious as to stun and stagger us. And when I speak of forces, I mean the innumerable threats to life of every kind that abound on the earth, in the earth, and around the earth, whether it be here, in the Netherlands, or elsewhere in the broad universe.

Bookstore operators tell us that many of the books on best-seller lists are books on peace and happiness. And since we as a church have the sure answer to mankind's emotional and psychological problems in the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is most urgent that we continue to "lengthen our stride" to reach forlorn, lonely, hungry, and thirsty hearts, and those whose quest is for the truth.

Perhaps I can best emphasize what I feel by recounting the story of a young man named Jack Robertson, who was paralyzed from the waist down as the result of an automobile accident. A teacher at an elementary school in Scottsdale, Arizona, he had developed a burning desire to swim the English Channel and had trained for two long, grueling years, swimming great distances every day under all kinds of weather conditions in order to build up his strength and endurance. He was the first paraplegic ever to attempt the twenty-one-mile swim across the Channel. Because of the strong, treacherous currents, however, a swimmer must cover a far greater distance than that in order to reach the opposite shore.

The day finally came when he was to make his heroic attempt. Wearing a wet suit, flippers, and snorkel, he was carried to the beach at Dover, England, by his cousins, Tom and Don Philabaum, and there he crawled into the sea. Tom and Don accompanied him in a boat and fed him every hour. Jack had hoped to reach the French coast in fifteen hours. "For twelve hours the swim went well," he said. "Then I found myself swimming against the tide." The coast was near, but conditions had decidedly changed. "I gave it all I had," he declared. "Tom was urging me from the boat, saying, 'You've got to do it.' We were so close to France, and yet so far. It was the last few miles that completely drained me. The tides defeated me!" the swimmer exclaimed. His strength ebbed away as he tried to cope with the formidable obstacles in his path. [^2]

Life was made for struggle; and exaltation, success, and victory were never meant to be cheap or to come easily. The tides of life often challenge us. To understand why it has to be this way, we should maintain our understanding, our faith, and our courage by a constant rereading of the scripture that tells us, "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." (2 Nephi 2:11.)

Now may I suggest something that will enable us to maintain our spiritual strength and keep our testimonies vitally alive so that the trails, the storms, and the tides of life will not defeat us. This suggestion is that, above all, we should heed the words of Jesus to the woman at Jacob's well in Samaria when he said, "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life." (John 4:14.)

How could one's strength ebb or falter when it may be so dependably and continuously nourished and restored? This scripture tells us clearly that life, at its best and most vigorous, is spiritual and, as such, is the sincere expression of the soul of God. The spiritual self of each of us is that part of us that will never grow old, or become ill, or die, but it must be nurtured and invigorated. Drinking of the living water is the unique recipe, the only way!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A house of prayer and fasting: To make our homes become houses of prayer and fasting, we "pray always, that [we] may come off conqueror; yea, that [we] may . . . escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work." (D&C 10:5.) Our families should gather for family prayer morning and night. In addition, we should offer our own individual prayers for our personal needs. Unpublished manuscript, Winnipeg Manitoba Stake conference, October 27, 1990.
[^2] A house of faith: We can make each home a house of faith by believing in the goodness of God and believing that we can live gospel principles and live in peace and security. We need to have the faith to be obedient, to keep trying, and to keep a positive outlook. Sometimes we get discouraged and feel like giving up. But, as an old cowboy once said, "If I get bucked off, I must get back up on the horse and ride on." We can never give up. Louis S. Richman, "Struggling to Save Our Kids," Fortune, August 10, 1992, pp. 34-35.
