Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

9

POWER TO CHOOSE

The Lord has placed us here on this earth to learn from our experiences, both good and bad, and to prove whether or not we will be obedient. One of the most important gifts he gave us before our sojourn in mortality is the power to choose, the power within us to control our own ultimate destiny. So important was this gift that we, as premortal beings, fought in a war in heaven to preserve it. God cast Satan and one-third of the hosts of heaven out of his presence because they opposed this principle of agency. Our choice to follow the Savior and accept the principle allowed us to come to this mortal probation.

The choices we make from now and through the balance of our mortal existence will determine the degree of glory we will attain in the hour of final judgment or the final graduation ceremony. President Ezra Taft Benson told a graduating class several years ago:

"I believe that our Heavenly Father expects all members of his church to become exalted in the celestial kingdom. We are not striving for the lower kingdoms. We are not candidates for the telestial or terrestrial kingdoms. But we are candidates for the celestial kingdom and the highest glory in that kingdom. . . . Exaltation requires a great deal. . . . This means not just going to church, but living the gospel in your homes; not just holding the priesthood, but magnifying it as you live a life of happiness and joy. This is not happiness as measured by the world." [^1]

A good beginning can lead to a good ending. Therefore, the choices we make now are among the most important of any we will make in the scheme of life. If we have not been spiritually inclined, now is the time to become totally committed. If we have not married, now is the time to be serious about finding a mate. If we have not been paying our tithing, now is the time to begin obeying the law of the tithe consistently. Life to this point has been a time of deep preparation.

Even if we have wasted opportunities and even if we have made some truly regrettable mistakes, we can start today to make amends to do and be what is right.

Exercising our God-given power to choose, we can: Choose to love . . . rather than hate. Choose to laugh . . . rather than cry. Choose to create . . . rather than destroy. Choose to persevere . . . rather than quit. Choose to praise . . . rather than gossip. Choose to heal . . . rather than wound. Choose to give . . . rather than steal. Choose to act . . . rather than procrastinate. Choose to pray . . . rather than curse. Choose to live . . . rather than die. [^2]

I believe that the best choices in life can be condensed into one sentence: Always choose the light rather than darkness. In doing so, I suggest four choices we can make that will keep us in the light:

The Lord is the truth and the light. If we choose to know him, then we will walk in the light. Jesus said, "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.)

We can choose to know the Lord by reading the scriptures every day; by communicating with him in fervent prayer at least morning and night, and in times of trial, every hour or more, if needed; and by keeping his commandments. Remember, "Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him." (1 John 2:3-5.)

A revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith states: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.)

I remember that my mother was always reading and studying. She felt the importance of renewing her mind. She tried to improve herself a little every day. She worked hard to perfect her lessons for the Mia Maids, Laurels, and Relief Society members. She continued to read and study throughout her long life.

Where there is love and it is expressed, the Spirit is present. The Savior taught: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:34-35.)

"He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now. He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes." (1 John 2:9-11.)

"Whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother." (1 John 3:10.)

"He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love." (1 John 4:8.)

By choosing the light of the Lord, knowledge and truth, and the light of love in our lives, we will be qualified to live by the light of the Spirit. If we cultivate a heart that is constantly in tune with the Spirit of the Lord, our lives will be enriched. We will be able to make good decisions, and we will be comforted in times of trial and adversity.

We could compare learning to live by the Spirit with the way a pianist prepares for a concert. A pianist cannot cram his knowledge of music and his playing skill into one week or even one month of solid practice to prepare for a concert. But he prepares himself through consistent, diligent practice, day by day over a long period of time. Our spiritual preparation requires the same kind of effort, "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little." (2 Nephi 28:30.)

As we choose to live by the light of the Spirit, the greatest example on how to prepare ourselves spiritually is the pattern set forth by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "On Being a Light," address given at the Salt Lake Institute of Religion, January 2, 1974.
[^2] Notes from an address given by President Romney at the dedication of the Butler Second Ward building, Salt Lake City, November 12, 1961.
