Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

10

SHARING OUR LIGHT

As Latter-day Saints, we know that whatsoever is truth is light. (See D&C 84:45.) The source of this light is our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, who is "the light, and the life, and the truth of the world." (Ether 4:12.) In possessing this light, we can shine among our fellowmen through our lives and deeds, influencing them also to glorify our Father in Heaven.

Jesus wants us to know him because of the transforming power of that knowledge and because of the indescribable joy it brings into our lives. But the influence of the gospel is to extend beyond each individual. It is to be as a light that dispels the darkness from the lives of those around us. None of us are saved solely and simply for ourselves alone, just as no lamp is lighted merely for its own benefit.

The responsibility that no person can escape is that of wielding a personal influence. Daily words and actions influence the entire world. We each carry an atmosphere that radiates from us and that in some manner or degree affects others. We cannot escape it. We must so live our lives that we set the proper example to those about us. We are each a light, and it is our duty not to have that light hidden under a bushel, but to set it upon a hill, that all persons may be guided by it. The Lord has commanded us in these latter days: "Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations." (D&C 115:5.)

This divine counsel is given to us in the holy scriptures; Jesus addressed his disciples, saying: "Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:14-16.)

In these challenging times, we must take advantage of every opportunity to let our light shine in a world that is groping in spiritual darkness.

Those of my generation remember some of the necessary blackouts imposed during the second World War. To remain undetected by enemy bombers overhead or to conceal their location from the enemy, entire cities would be blacked out. Windows would be covered, shades drawn, lights snuffed out. Troops were told that in complete darkness, the flickering of a single match could be seen for more than a mile. In battle, the infantryman was cautious about showing light in any form lest he reveal his position.

Under these trying circumstances, people dreamed of freedom and normalcy and for better times to come. They talked about it. They wrote songs about it. I remember the haunting strains of the song "When the Lights Go On Again All Over the World." The war finally ended and lights did go on again, all over the world, and people rejoiced.

In many ways, however, our cities today are still blacked out. Electric lights may glimmer in many colors and with great intensity, but the spiritual candles of many are dim. Light is needed as never before in a world enveloped in spiritual darkness.

Many exciting challenges lie ahead for us, both young and old. Serious problems need to be solved. The threat of war is ever-present. Personal freedoms are being eroded constantly by too much government. We need to combat the increasing dependence upon government or other agencies to provide for us those things that we ought to provide for ourselves. The burden of physical, as well as spiritual, pollution and erosion is increasing. Personal and national debts are beyond control. We have challenges of taking the gospel to millions of people in nations throughout the world.

How can we, a relatively few, bring light to a world groping in spiritual darkness? Many would consider it an oversimplification to say that living the gospel of Jesus Christ gives answers to all the world's problems. As simplistic as this may sound, however, it is true. Of this I testify.

In reading the Book of Mormon, I have always been especially interested to learn of a time when conditions were similar to our own conditions today. Alma the Younger served as the political leader or chief judge, as well as the presiding high priest in the Church. He delivered up the judgment seat in favor of missionary work and confined himself wholly to the testimony of the word. He challenged his associates to be spiritually born of God, asking "Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14.)

Alma realized that he would have a greater influence upon his people and his nation through turning their hearts to God than he would with all of the political power men could bestow. This was true in the time of Alma. It is just as true today.

Thus, the cumulative radiance of our candles, as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, can illuminate a world filled with darkness, leading many others into the glorious light of the gospel. Darkness, after all, is the absence of light.

As our lights glow and illuminate, we must be certain that we are walking in the straight and narrow way prescribed by the Savior. If we fail in this mandate, we might be compared to a lighthouse built in a deceptive location, luring trusting sailors to their watery deaths. We must be certain that our lights are leading in the right direction. We might well ask ourselves, "What will happen in my family, in my community, in my church, if people follow my light?" Or we might ask, "What kind of a world would this world be if everyone were just like me?"

If we are to be a light to the world, we must guard against letting our light flicker or go out. Elder Neal A. Maxwell expressed the thought in this way:

"Just as the unsheltered flame flutters when brushed by gusts of wind, and just as the unsheltered flame flickers and sputters when dashed by rain, so our own lights can be threatened; and we as individuals need to avoid deliberately those conditions which dampen our light. We also need to search out and to create those conditions in which our light can burn more brightly and steadily. We need an appropriate blend of challenge and refuge, and of search and sanctuary—we need to create and to preserve the proper conditions for burning." [^1]

If we are to guard against those conditions that dampen our light, it might be well to consider some basic principles and areas we must be aware of.

First, integrity. The standard by which we should measure our integrity is not the world's standard but the standard the Lord has given us. Integrity is many things. It is giving an honest day's work to our employer. Integrity is honesty in what we say or imply, avoiding such business practices as misrepresenting ourselves or our products. Integrity implies faithfulness in marriage and family relationships. It means being loyal and true with each other and, most importantly, with ourselves and our Heavenly Father. I know of no way to make our lights shine brighter than by having complete integrity at all times with everyone.

Second, obedience. Nothing will smother the flame of the spirit more quickly and completely than disobedience or transgression. Obedience, therefore, assumes a central role in keeping our lights shining. It includes a clear understanding and frequent application of the principle of repentance for the times we may falter.

We have many good examples established by our associates and leaders. I think, for example, of President Marion G. Romney, a valiant leader and friend. How brightly his candle burned! When President Spencer W. Kimball counseled members to plant gardens, President Romney immediately tore up a section of his lawn and enlarged his garden space. He wanted to be one of the first to obey. May I share with you another example of his integrity and devotion in an example from his life that he related:

When I was set apart for my mission, . . . Brother Melvin J. Ballard laid his hands upon my head and said, among other things, "One never gives a crust to the Lord without receiving a loaf in return."

A few years ago, I had just finished paying for my home. For the first time in my life I was getting to the place where I could afford to buy my wife an ice cream sundae without feeling we would have to go without some necessity. Then, as I sat in general conference one Saturday morning, I unexpectedly heard my name read off as one of the General Authorities of the Church. Shortly thereafter I learned that my income would be cut in two—that is, I would receive a living allowance which was just about half of what I was then making practicing law.

Our ward was then about to begin building a meetinghouse. The bishop came to me and said, "Brother Romney, we think you ought to pay X dollars." . . . I looked at the bishop, and I felt I couldn't say what I felt, but I said, "Well, I'll pay it, but I'll have to pay it in installments because I don't have the money and I don't think I have the credit to borrow it." So I paid and paid, until finally I had only two payments left. I never had felt quite right about the bishop's judgment.

Then one day I read in the Book of Mormon the statement that "He that giveth the gift and not with real intent, it is accounted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift." (This isn't the exact quotation, but it is the exact thought.) I realized then that I was out about a thousand dollars. I remember that after I had paid the last installments, I paid a few more to try to convince the Lord that I had paid with real intent. Later, the bishop came to me and said, "Brother Romney, we didn't get enough money on that first assessment, so we think you should pay X dollars more." I didn't hesitate again; I didn't want to have to make any extra payments to show the Lord I had done it with real intent.

Well, about that time the stake president came to tell us they were building a stake house and needed a contribution—so we paid it. And then, the week we got it paid off, the stake was divided, and the stake house went into another stake. Then they started to build another stake house in our present stake, to which we have had the pleasure of making contributions. The making of contributions has never hurt us.

I am sure that everyone who makes a contribution to the building of these meetinghouses—or toward the financing of any other thing in the kingdom of God—is blessed. He receives far more than he could purchased with the money had he kept it. So I don't feel sorry for you people who have made the greatest contribution. I envy you. You will all receive blessings according to your contributions. No man can give himself poor in building the kingdom of God. [^2]

Countless souls were lifted through the shining light of President Romney. Each of us can be a light for others in much the same way, quietly living exemplary lives.

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we can take strength from one another, lifting and helping along the way. To illustrate this point, let me share an experience a friend of mine related to me.

He said that as a priesthood leader, he had assigned one of his faithful members, whom I'll call Bill, to fellowship and encourage David, a fellow quorum member, into activity in the Church. The bishop and Bill worked together, uniting in love and concern as they fasted and prayed in behalf of David. They visited frequently with his family, taking an interest in their affairs and helping them through a rather traumatic crisis. In many actions and expressions, they let him know of their love and persuaded him that he was wanted and needed.

Cautious at first, David began tentatively to participate in church activities, and soon he warmed to the fellowshipping of the Saints and began to feel an increased outpouring of the Spirit.

Time passed. In the meantime, Bill faced some serious problems of his own. His faith was tested. Through a series of setbacks his candle grew dim; his light flickered and went out. The same concerned priesthood leader noted the turn of events. This time it was David who was sent to rescue the very one who had once rescued him and helped rekindle his flame.

Yes, there is great safety in being our brother's keeper, for he is our keeper too. In his poem "A Creed," Edwin Markham expressed it this way:

There is a destiny that makes us brothers; No one goes his way alone: All that we send into the lives of others Comes back into our own.

To be a light for others, we ourselves must live in the light. To do this, we must make correct choices, walking in the ways of the Lord.

There are places where our lights shine the brightest. Elder Theodore M. Burton of the Seventy shared this experience with us:

When I was a young boy, I went with my father to inspect a mine in Nevada. We each had flashlights, but took no extra batteries with us, for we did not expect to be in the mine very long. But the tunnel was longer, colder, and deeper than we anticipated. Before we got to the end of the mine, where the mineral was, father told me to turn off my flashlight to save my batteries. By the time father had finished inspecting the mine, his flashlight began to dim, and he suggested we had better turn back. Before long his flashlight gave out completely, and I can still remember—until I again turned on my light—the panic I felt to be in such cold and utter blackness. Although my own batteries gave out before we reached the mine entrance, we were by then guided by the dim light coming from the mouth of the tunnel. How good it felt to see the light increase coming from the mouth of the tunnel. How good it felt to see the light increase as we made our way back to the entrance and found ourselves in warm, brilliant sunlight.

I have since wondered how anyone could knowingly prefer to live where it is dark and cold. How could anybody willingly prefer darkness and misery over light and warmth? Yet darkness, cold, and misery will be the lot of those who willingly and knowingly reject the Lord. John wrote, "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all." (1 John 1:5.) [^3]

I remember passing a dark and dirty pool hall in years past. When it changed ownership, the new owner spared no expense to clean up the place. He put bright lights where dim ones had been. He painted with clean new colors over dark and dingy walls. He replaced painted windows with clear glass that invited in the sunshine. The "new place" smelled clean and fresh and was bright, shining, and inviting. But what happened next was an interesting phenomenon. Most of the old customers stayed away; they chose darkness rather than light. A decrease in business was followed by a period of planned neglect. Clear windows become smoke-filmed and fly-specked. Bright lights were turned out. Walls became dirty. Eventually the old customers returned to their comfort zone in the darkness.

Familiarity with darkness can eventually erode our sensitivity until we choose darkness rather than light. Let us seek the light and keep our own lights shining, thus inviting the Spirit of the Lord into our lives, our homes, and the lives of our children and neighbors.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lifetime members who have never been active and, as a result, ofttimes raise their families in inactivity. Dean L. Larsen, "Self-Accountability and Human Progress," Ensign, May 1980, p. 76.
[^2] New converts who become spiritually disaffected and fall away, usually in their first few years of membership.
[^3] Active members who slip into transgression or have other problems that cause them to fall away. Often their problems include lack of knowledge and testimony of the gospel, hurt feelings that result in attitudes of unworthiness and guilt, and sometimes fear of participation in church assignments.
