Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

11

RESTORING THE LOST SHEEP

A young man sought out a wise man who was recognized far and near for his good judgment. He asked for his expert advice on how to attain new heights of achievement in his field of endeavor.

"Come with me," said the wise man. Taking the youth to a nearby stream, he immersed him and held him under the water. When the young man was released, he was nearly drowned and came up fighting for breath, gasping, "Air, air, give me air!"

"There," said the wise man, "that's the first lesson. When you want to succeed as badly as you wanted air, you will attain your goal. You will succeed."

Desire, burning desire, is basic to achieving anything beyond the ordinary.

Why do I begin with this story? Because desire in everyone involved is the first step in helping less-active Saints to become fully active. Those who are successful love what they are doing. It is a well-known fact that our attitude must be right before we can do what is right.

Elder Dean L. Larsen of the Seventy summarized this idea in these words: "When we understand what is right and what is wrong, we are in a position to exercise our freedom in making choices. In so doing, we must stand accountable for our decisions, and we cannot escape the inevitable consequences of these choices. Such freedom to exercise moral agency is essential in an environment where people have the highest prospects for progress and development." [^1]

Jesus concerned himself primarily with the teaching of fundamental principles, and these principles had to do with the spiritual and mental condition of the individual. The Savior knew that if one's mental state is right, most everything else would be right. But if the mental state is wrong, little can be accomplished in a person's life.

It is no wonder, then, that Nephi admonished his people to "feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do." (2 Nephi 32:3.)

Jesus said, "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 7:21.) "Enter ye in at the strait gate." (Matthew 7:13.)

President Marion G. Romney expressed most clearly what is meant: "It is not enough to do our best. Unless we do all we can, we do less than we ought. We must succeed in doing what is necessary. Unless we get the job done, it is not enough."

In seeking to strengthen those who are less active, we are concerned with four general groups:

This work of reclaiming the lost sheep, as Jesus so vividly expressed it, must receive top priority by every stake, ward, branch, quorum, and auxiliary leader. All less-active members should be considered candidates for activation regardless of their response to any previous approach. We must use kindness, patience, long-suffering, love, faith, and diligence. They must feel our genuine concern and untiring love.

For individuals to become fully active in the Church, they generally must experience a spiritual conversion and a social integration. We should strive to teach them the gospel and to extend warmth, genuine friendship, and fellowship to them.

At a stake conference I heard a story of member activation that moved me deeply. The bishop of one of the wards in the stake took a keen interest in arousing less-active brethren to church activity. He knew that the first step was one of communication, and that he must have a meaningful visit with each less-active brother, so he began by telephoning one of them.

The wife answered the phone and said, "Bishop, I surely appreciate your call. My husband is outside, but I will have him come to the phone."

When the husband heard that it was the bishop who wished to speak to him, he attempted to sidestep the phone call and responded, "Tell the bishop that I'm out sawing logs," adding, with a humorous touch, "Tell him I'm dead."

The brother spoke the truth more literally than he realized. It was true. He was sawing logs, and, tragically, he was dead to the spiritual things of his life.

A good wife, however, is a mighty force in any man's life, and, in a kindly manner, this woman persuaded her husband to come to the phone.

Then the bishop, using the power of suggestion and in a friendly voice, said, "I should very much appreciate having a visit with you for a few moments this evening in my office." The brother couldn't refuse such a warmhearted invitation, and a meeting took place.

The testimony of the bishop and his deep concern kindled a fire in the heart of the less-active brother, and he agreed to join the temple preparation class that was about to begin.

Each session, taught by a tactful teacher with a great knowledge of the truth and an inspiring testimony, motivated the less-active brother. He resolved to strengthen his family and bind them together eternally through the blessings of the temple.

This good brother may still be sawing logs, but there is now much more. He has added for himself an indescribable dimension of happiness, as well as joy to the lives of each and every family member.

In another ward, the bishop assigned his two most effective home teachers to work with one particular family. The husband and father had not attended church for many years, even though he held the office of elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood. The bishop approached the couple and asked if the specially selected home teachers could come and teach them the gospel in weekly visits to their home. The family agreed, and the teachers proceeded to bring gospel lessons tailored to the needs and desires of the family.

The bishop also helped by interviewing the couple every few weeks. The husband usually went golfing on Sundays and had no desire to change his lifestyle at first. During one interview, the bishop said to him, "You've got to get going on spiritual matters so that you won't lose your fine family." This caused the brother to think deeply about important issues, and within a couple of weeks he asked for another interview with the bishop and said that he had started paying tithing and that he and his wife wanted to set a goal of being sealed in the temple.

As this family became active, their whole attitude changed, and they seemed to be very happy to embrace the gospel principles and make the necessary changes in lifestyle.

In the case of yet another less-active family—parents and their five children—the home teachers lived in the same neighborhood. They first showed genuine friendship and neighborly concern until they felt they could talk with the family in a serious manner. They made an appointment, and as they met with the family, they asked if they could begin teaching them the gospel in weekly sessions in their home. They assured the family members that they would not pressure them in any way and that their visits would be designed to teach the doctrines of the Savior and answer questions they might have. Within a few weeks, the home teachers took the family to church, and soon the family began to attend on their own. The bishop interviewed the couple and helped them to set goals for the husband to be ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood and for them all to be sealed in the temple.

The bishop reports that it was touching to see this family all sealed for time and eternity. The sealing room in the temple was filled with friends and members of the ward.

The reactivated family members now bear strong testimony to the truth of the gospel, and many in the ward say they have never seen people change so much.

The president of an elders quorum in a stake in Brazil reported phenomenal success in reactivating fifteen elders in his quorum. I asked, "How did you accomplish this?" He said, "The quorum presidency and the home teachers visited them often. They knew that we really cared for them." The testimonies of the fifteen elders were strengthened, and they and their families are now active in the Church.

The Lord has said in modern revelation, "If it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" (D&C 18:15.)

I wish I could engrave on every heart what I so keenly know and feel. I bear unwavering testimony that our Heavenly Father and His Divine Son, Jesus Christ, rule and reign, and that we must all understand that the gospel is everlasting. It is forever and applicable to all, and each of us is to be held accountable. May the Lord bless us in this important work.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lifetime members who have never been active and, as a result, ofttimes raise their families in inactivity. Dean L. Larsen, "Self-Accountability and Human Progress," Ensign, May 1980, p. 76.
