Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

12

LET US LEARN OUR DUTY

Inscribed beneath Robert E. Lee's bust in the Hall of Fame are his words: "Duty is the sublimest word in our language. Do your duty in all things. You cannot do more. You should never wish to do less."

Most of us don't mind doing what we ought to do when it doesn't interfere with what we want to do, but it takes discipline and maturity to do what we ought to do whether we want to or not. Duty is too often what one expects from others and not what one does. What people think and believe and plan are all very important, but what they do is the thing that counts most. It is a call to throw out selfishness and to think of the common good of all.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was told in an impressive revelation: "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence. He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand." (D&C 107:99-100.)

We must always remember that duty reminds us we are stewards of all that our Creator has entrusted to us. When we accept duties willingly and faithfully, we find happiness. Those who make happiness the chief objective of life are bound to fail, for happiness is a by-product rather than an end in itself. Happiness comes from doing one's duty and knowing that his life is in harmony with God and his commandments.

Doing our duty is the best way to solve our problems. The proper pattern of duty has been set by those who have gone before us and is continued today by devoted teachers and leaders throughout the Church.

Every successful man and woman in the history of the world has known his or her duty and has had a firm desire to fulfill it. The Savior has a perfect sense of duty. Even though what was required of him surpassed the limits of human capabilities, he submitted himself to his Father's will and fulfilled his divine duty by atoning for the sins of mankind.

Joseph Smith was true to his calling and fulfilled his duty even in the face of severe persecution and great personal sacrifice. He persevered, he endured, and he accomplished the restoration of the true gospel of Jesus Christ.

Brigham Young also carried out his responsibilities. Over a period of many years of faithful service and duty, he brought the Saints to the valley of freedom and established a great and mighty empire. He was duty-bound and thereby achieved great things.

President Spencer W. Kimball accepted the charge to take the gospel to the ends of the earth. He faithfully pursued his duty and was a wonderful example to us in all that he did to spread the gospel of love. The result is a worldwide Church and the fulfillment of latter-day prophecy.

These great men all had the agency to choose. They might have chosen to follow a path easier than the one where duty led. But they did not. Certainly their duty did not always lead to personal comfort or casual convenience. Their duty frequently meant great sacrifice and personal hardship. Nevertheless, duty they chose, and duty they performed.

Life requires us to perform many duties—some routine, others more meaningful and important. An integral part of duty is to set the proper example and to take every opportunity to bolster others along this uphill road of life. This might be done with an encouraging word, a compliment, a handshake—any indication of caring. And we need to keep in mind that as we learn our duties well here, we also are preparing for the performance of eternal duties.

Every member of the Church—every man, woman, and child—is faced with an obligation to fulfill his duty. Every member of the Church is commanded to live the laws of God and keep his commandments. Each has the duty to pray daily, study the scriptures, draw close to the Savior, and serve others. Each should partake of the sacrament worthily and labor to strengthen the influence of the Holy Ghost in his or her life.

Each father has the duty to provide for his family and to teach them by example to obey the statutes of God. Each woman has a glorious duty to bring children into this life and to create a loving, learning, and supporting home atmosphere. Together, parents have the divine duty to bring up their children in the "nurture and admonition of the Lord." (Ephesians 6:4.)

It is the duty of children to obey their parents, to learn, and to help with household chores. They carry the scriptural charge not to contend and quarrel with one another but to accept their part in fostering family unity and progress.

All have the duty to share the gospel with others and to serve formally and informally as missionaries. All have a duty to identify their deceased ancestors and to help bring to them the blessings of the temple. All should diligently strive to be temporally prepared and to care for the poor and the needy. All should seek to strengthen those who are less active in the Church and to magnify their callings in their wards and stakes by giving faithful and devoted service.

These are some of our duties. They may not always be exciting or even enjoyable, but they are important. They will refine the spirit and strengthen the soul. They will aid the work of the Lord in great measure.

The Lord has told us, "Be not weary in well-doing." (D&C 64:33.) Being true to one's duty is the mark of a true disciple of the Lord and a child of God. May we be valiant in our duty, stay in step, and not fail in our most important task: keeping our second estate. Being true to our duty will bring us to God.
