Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

13

HE WILL BE IN OUR MIDST

In January 1831 the Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, gave a revelation to James Covill, who had been a Baptist minister for forty years. The first step in the process of becoming a Latter-day Saint, Brother Covill learned, is to accept the gospel. The Lord explained, "This is my gospel—repentance and baptism by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which showeth all things, and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom." (D&C 39:6.)

Then Brother Covill was told that accepting the gospel, he would receive a blessing greater than he had ever known. "I have prepared thee for a greater work," the Lord said, explaining, "Thou shalt preach the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth in these last days, the covenant which I have sent forth to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel. And it shall come to pass that power shall rest upon thee; thou shalt have great faith, and I will be with thee and go before thy face." (D&C 39:11-13.) What was said to James Covill when the Church was only nine months old applies with equal force to us now and is a remarkable and powerful reiteration of the promise made by the Savior during his earthly ministry: "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matthew 18:20.) His pledge that he will be in our midst when two or three are gathered together in his name is a wonderful declaration of his unbounded love for us and assures us of his presence in our church services, in our individual lives, and in the intimate circles of our families.

What Jesus meant when he said his presence might be felt in the intimate circle of each of our families is, I believe, depicted in the lives of two sisters, friends of ours, who live in two widely separated stakes. One sister married out of the Church. She hoped to convert her husband and then be married and sealed in the temple. Her husband, however, has never caught the spirit nor acknowledged the truth of the gospel and has been a passive influence in the religious life of his family. Nevertheless, this woman, who has developed a lovely and spiritual personality, set a beautiful example for her family and took her children to church with her and supported them in the performance of their church duties and responsibilities. She and the children, despite what could have been a ready excuse for neglect and indifference, exemplified the admonition of Jesus when he said, "Let your light so shine before men, that [others] may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:16.)

The second sister married a fine man who was a faithful Latter-day Saint. As the years sped by, however, they carelessly omitted what they had at first intended conscientiously to do—worship together in the name of Jesus. Although they always admired the Church and its principles, they had forgotten that they were now, in fact, the salt of the earth that had lost its savor. (Matthew 5:13.)

In a conversation about their children, the second sister asked the first, "Why have your children turned out so well and why are they so active in the Church despite the fact that you married out of the Church?" The first sister replied, "I took my children to Sunday School and sacrament meeting." Surprised, the second sister said, "I sent my children to church." And the first sister answered with greater emphasis, "Yes, but I took mine!" Hers was a case, as Jesus said, of "where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them" (Matthew 18:20), and this can be at home or elsewhere.

On another occasion Jesus said, "I stand at the door, and knock." (Revelation 3:20.) Unless we open the door and permit him to come into our lives, he cannot enter into our midst. Mere knowledge in itself may be—but is not necessarily—power. Knowledge is not motivation. Neither is logic. The springs of human action are inherently in feelings, not in intellect, and conduct generates feelings. This is explained in the Doctrine and Covenants in these words: "Whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.)

Only in accepting our Savior and doing his will do we acquire the feelings to do right. If we break the commandments, we get feelings for that too. This explains why parents' hearts may be broken and bowed in shame because of the sins and waywardness of their sons and daughters. Puzzled and perplexed, parents sometimes say, "We brought them up to be righteous boys and girls, and our family has always been a good family. We didn't teach them to behave like this!" The children may have learned the precepts, but precepts do not necessarily furnish the will and desire to do right.

Indeed, ignorance is not the only cause of sin and deplorable conduct. Fundamental to most wrongdoing are a lack of desire, the absence of a strong motive or the right influence, and a deficiency in living the precepts. Individuals who do right and "hunger and thirst after righteousness" (Matthew 5:6) receive and keep alive through their actions the feeling to do right. Inherent in the first principles of the gospel is the "desire principle"—the desire to love God and fellowmen "with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." (Matthew 22:37.) To attain these heights, each of us must work in harmony with God's will and create a spiritual climate that will bring Jesus into the midst of our lives, and then we must continue to live "with an eye single to [his] glory." (D&C 4:5.)

This conviction is clearly demonstrated in the lives of our devoted Church members. The Apostle Paul eloquently described the process of attaining spiritual perfection in his first letter to the Thessalonians: "For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost: so that ye were ensamples." (1 Thessalonians 1:5-7.)

Paul rejoiced in the fact that his teachings to the Thessalonians had not been meaningless words to them, for they had listened with great interest, and what was taught to them produced a powerful desire for righteousness in their lives. He was explicit in stressing that the Holy Spirit also gave them full assurance that what was taught was true. He did not hesitate to say that his life, as well, was further proof to them of the truthfulness of the message. He was pleased that they had received the gospel message with joy and happiness, despite many hardships. Finally, he noted what must have been their crowning achievement—that they were inspiring examples to all their neighbors. He paid tribute to them when he told them that wherever he traveled, he found people telling him about their remarkable good works and faith in God. From them, the word of the Lord had extended to others everywhere, far beyond their boundaries.

Knowing and keeping the divine laws and commandments have always generated faith, righteous living, and inspiration in our people.

The early Saints in this dispensation were forced to move often, and they were troubled about how permanently they were to build their houses. When they asked the Prophet Joseph Smith about this, he told them, "Build as if you are going to stay forever." The founders of the United States—who, we believe, were divinely inspired—built the nation to endure. The leaders of the Church today never for a moment lose sight of their sacred mission. They are building for us, for those to follow, for the future, for eternity.

There is a great lesson to be learned by all of us in a careful study of our history. The success of the Church may be attributed to our faith in God and to our being led under the inspired guidance of strong and devoted leaders, never taking the shortcuts, and keeping Jesus and his divine teachings dynamically in our midst.

Wherever two or three of us are gathered together, may the Savior always be in our midst!
