Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

14

THE EXAMPLE OF JOSEPH SMITH

A timid elder from a small town, new in the mission field, hears these words: "You don't really believe that Joseph Smith story yourself." Then the door abruptly closes and he walks down the path. Suddenly he stops, retraces his steps, and knocks at the door. Though he is frightened, he speaks loudly; "You said I didn't know Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I want you to know that I know he is, and I know he translated the Book of Mormon. I know he saw God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ."

Almost halfway around the world, another young man is confronted by one who has a superior education. The young man does not have the knowledge or the training to meet the arguments. Suddenly he stands up, looks directly into the eyes of the man with the fine education, grips him by the shoulders, and says, "I haven't had much education. My father died when I was fourteen, and I have been running a ranch to help support my mother and brothers and sisters. But I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God."

What a lasting impact this Latter-day prophet has had upon the lives of a large segment of mankind!

A great tribute to the Prophet, written by Elder John Taylor, a witness to the events of his martyrdom, is found in section 135 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

"Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood; and so has his brother Hyrum. In life they were not divided, and in death they were not separated!" (D&C 135:3.)

From this, we learn that Joseph Smith, a prophet of God, had the most important assignment on this earth with the exception of Jesus Christ.

Joseph Smith—a man who was untrained in theology—brought forth more printed pages of scripture than the combined pages from such scripture writers as Moses, Luke, and Paul. These include his translations of the Book of Mormon and the Pearl of Great Price, the revelations found in the Doctrine and Covenants, the writings in the Pearl of Great Price, and his revisions of portions of the Bible. What came through him was clearly beyond his natural abilities.

The Prophet's great achievements did not lie alone in prophesying, in speaking, or in writing, but also in what he was. One writer wrote: "A man's true greatness is not in what he says he is, nor in what people say he is; his greatness lies in what he really is. What he really is may be determined by how he acts in unguarded moments alone with his family or close friends." [^1] As President John Taylor said of Joseph Smith, "He lived great."

John M. Bernhisel, a man known for his integrity, wrote:

Having been a boarder in General Smith's family for more than nine months, and having therefore had abundant opportunities of contemplating his character and observing his conduct, I have concluded to give you a few of my "impressions" of him.

General Joseph Smith is naturally a man of strong mental powers, and is possessed of much energy and decision of character, great penetration, and a profound knowledge of human nature. He is man of calm judgment, enlarged views, and is eminently distinguished by his love of justice. He is kind and obliging, generous and benevolent, sociable and cheerful, and is possessed of a mind of a contemplative and reflective character. He is honest, frank, fearless and independent.

But it is in the gentle charities of domestic life, as the tender and affectionate husband and parent, the warm and sympathizing friend, that the prominent traits of his character are revealed, and his heart is felt to be keenly alive to the kindest and softest emotions of which human nature is susceptible. . . . As a religious teacher, as well as a man, he is greatly beloved by this people. [^2]

Wilford Woodruff made the following excellent and succinct observation: "I have felt to rejoice exceedingly of what I saw of Brother Joseph for in his public and private career he carried with him the Spirit of the Almighty and he manifested a greatness of soul which I have never seen in any other man." [^3]

Joseph Smith's greatness of soul drew many others to him. On one occasion, after delivering a sermon to a gathering of Saints, he was arrested by the sheriff, who was in league with a group of individuals who disliked the Prophet intensely. However, the sheriff was so impressed with the Prophet after being in his presence just a few minutes that he realized he had been deceived concerning the character of the man he had arrested. He had agreed to deliver Joseph into the hands of those enemies, but when he and his prisoner approached the mob, he whipped his horse and raced past them. Stunned, they gave chase but were soon left in the distance. They stopped at an inn for the night, and the sheriff gave the Prophet the bed while he himself lay on the floor with his feet against the door and his pistol in his hand. He was determined to assure the safety of this man whom, just a few hours before, he had considered a despicable individual. [^4]

It is important to be a great prophet, but one cannot be a great prophet without being a great man, "for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh." (Luke 6:45.)

John A. Widtsoe, a member of the Council of the Twelve from 1921 to 1952, wrote, "Greatness is a product of many causes. It is like the mighty flowing river, fed and made possible by thousands of mountain rivulets. Even so with Joseph Smith. The reflection from innumerable facets of his character makes up the picture of Joseph Smith's greatness." [^5]

Those who live as contemporaries of Joseph Smith had the advantage of knowing him personally, but we who live a century and a half after his martyrdom are not without advantage. We have the advantage of perspective. Time has a way of supporting those who are truly great and exposing those who would fain greatness. The Lord called Joseph not just to be an example and guide to those of his own day but to benefit, through his teachings, those who would come after.

Elder Widtsoe noted that Joseph Smith had four qualities that made him great and were "the cornerstones of his character: (1) He had unchanging faith and trust in God. (2) He loved truth. (3). He was humble. (4). He loved his fellowmen. These qualities always lead to greatness. Without them there is no true greatness.

"Doubt did not belong to Joseph Smith's nature. The Prophet's faith in God—in His existence, reality, and relationship to man—was superb. Joseph took God at his word, as in the First Vision." [^6]

Joseph Smith lacked knowledge, but through prayer he approached God in faith, and an answer was given to him. (See James 1:5.) Throughout his life he took counsel with the Almighty and did not try to act alone upon his own judgment. He accepted the responsibility of restoring the kingdom of God on earth. In spite of brutal treatment and heartbreaking defeats, his mind was ever active. He had faith and trust in the Lord.

Joseph knew only one direction: forward. At the time of his death he was still building Nauvoo into a major city, devoting energy to his campaign for the presidency of the United States, and organizing explorers to seek out a location in the West were the Saints could move and become a mighty people. He asked his followers to do nothing he would not do himself.

Because of his faith, the Prophet served even when it was not convenient. He also asked others who followed the Lord to serve when they were in the most trying circumstances. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Wilford Woodruff did not find it inconvenient to return to Far West in fulfillment of a prophecy the Prophet made a year before, in 1839, when he was in the hands of bitter enemies. But Brigham Young would not allow a prophecy to be unfulfilled. Despite sickness among themselves and their families, and having to leave their loved ones in the most dire circumstances, the faithful apostles traveled many miles to return to Far West and then took leave for their missions. These sacrifices and manifestations of faith and obedience brought forth great blessings to the kingdom. The apostles converted many thousands in England who had been praying for the truth.

With his great faith and trust in God, Joseph had an insurmountable optimism. He knew the truth, and the truth made him free—free from fear, free from doubt, and free from pessimism. He said, "If I were sunk in the lowest pit of Nova Scotia, with the Rocky Mountains piled on me, I would hang on, exercise faith, and keep up good courage, and I would come out on top." [^7]

Why was Joseph able to be cheerful, hopeful, and pleasant, and engage in fun-filled activities? He wrote: "Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. . . .

"Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. . . .

"Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; . . . and let all the sons of God shout for joy!" (D&C 128:19, 22-23.)

The Prophet loved truth. His story began with his petition for truth, which led to the First Vision. Truth made him fearless. He had a lionlike courage. He could not exchange truth for popular approval. When the people of Palmyra held a mass meeting at the time the Book of Mormon was being printed and passed a resolution against his venture, his reply was to guard the manuscript of the book more carefully. [^8]

There was no retreat from truth. He published the Book of Mormon and went on to organize a church that challenged the popular errors and superstitions of the centuries.

Not only did he love truth, but he also had a remarkable ability to teach truth. Brigham Young said, "The excellency of the glory of the character of Brother Joseph Smith was that he could reduce heavenly things to the understanding of the infinite. When he preached to the people—revealed the things of God, the will of God, the plan of salvation, the purposes of Jehovah, the relation in which we stand to him and all the heavenly beings, he reduced his teachings to the capacity of every man, woman, and child, making them as plain as a well-defined pathway. This should have convinced every person that ever heard him of his divine authority and power, for no other man was able to teach as he could, and no person can reveal the things of God, but by the revelations of Jesus Christ." [^9]

Elder Charles W. Penrose was impressed with the Prophet's ability to assist others in obtaining knowledge from God: "He was enabled to instruct the inhabitants of the earth how they could obtain the Holy Ghost so they could obtain a knowledge of his existence through this heavenly gift so they might be guided in his ways and know that they were walking in his paths." [^10]

Joseph was a humble man. He recognized that he was only an instrument in God's hands. He took no glory to himself. He told the Saints, "I am a man and they must not expect me to be perfect. If they expect perfection from me, I should expect it from them, but if they would bear with my infirmities and the infirmities of the brethren, I would likewise bear with their infirmities." [^11]

Joseph was completely honest. He honestly and openly made public his weaknesses. He honestly and openly expressed love. He honestly and openly expressed remorse.

Contrary to the will of the Lord, Joseph allowed Martin Harris to take the first 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript that had been translated. When Martin lost them and the Lord chastised Joseph severely, Joseph made no attempt to hide his error or the Lord's rebuke. The account is in sections 3 and 10 of the Doctrine and Covenants and is readily available for all the world to read. He did not try to hide his weaknesses. He was more concerned with helping others by example than he was with improving his own image or building his own ego.

On one occasion he characterized himself: "I am like a huge, rough stone rolling down from a high mountain; and the only polishing I get is when some corner gets rubbed off by coming in contact with something else, . . . [such as] religious bigotry, priestcraft, lawyer-craft, doctor-craft, lying editors, . . . mobs, blasphemy, . . . and corrupt men and women—all hell knocking off a corner here and a corner there. Thus I will become smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty, who will give me dominion over all." [^12]

The Prophet loved his fellowmen. He did not hesitate to tell them so or to show his love by his acts. The end of a letter to Jared Carter reads: "I love your soul, and the souls of the children of men, and pray all I can for the salvation of all." [^13]

Because of his love for his fellowmen, Joseph never missed an opportunity to preach the gospel. He was almost certainly a missionary. When he visited Washington, D.C., he told the president of the United States about the gospel. While in prison, he taught the gospel to guards. Love for his fellowmen included exceedingly great love for his family, his wife, his children, his parents, and his brothers and sisters.

Joseph's interest in others and his concern for their welfare was felt by nearly everybody. He enjoyed wrestling. Even as an adult he frequently played catch, pulled sticks, and engaged in similar contests with young people. He often told jokes, to the amusement of his companions, and moved upon the same plain of the humblest and poorest of his friends. To him there were no strangers. [^14]

Joseph had a capacity to forgive, as is displayed in a letter he wrote to W. W. Phelps. After Brother Phelps had signed an affidavit that led to the arrest of Joseph and resulted in much suffering for the Saints, Joseph wrote to him: "It is true, that we have suffered much in consequence of your behavior—the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord—'had it been an enemy, we could have borne it.' . . . However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Father has been done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. . . . I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal. . . . 'Come on, dear brother, since the war has past, / For friends at first are friends again at last.'" [^15]

Brother Phelps went on to be rebaptized and was a faithful member of the Church.

Writing in his journal in August 1842, the Prophet revealed his deep love for his wife, Emma: "With what unspeakable delight, and what transports of joy swelled by bosom, when I took by the hand, on that night, my beloved Emma—she that was my wife, even the wife of my youth, and the choice of my heart. Many were the reverberations of my mind when I contemplated for a moment the many scenes we had been called to pass through, the fatigues and the toils, the sorrows and sufferings, and the joys and consolations, from time to time, which had strewed our paths and crowned our board." [^16]

Once when he was in prison for an extended time, Joseph wrote to her: "My dear Emma, I very well know your toils and sympathize with you. If God will spare my life once more to have the privilege of taking care of you, I will ease your care and endeavor to comfort your heart." [^17]

Six of the eleven children of the Prophet and his wife—five natural children and one adopted son—did not survive infancy. Four natural sons and an adopted daughter lived to maturity. Emma gave birth to her last child at the age of forty, five months after the Prophet's death. He loved his children and recorded many activities with them, such as these: "After dinner I rode out in company with my wife and children." "Enjoyed myself at home with my family, all day, it being Christmas." "Remained at home and had great joy with my family."

Joseph had great love for his parents. "Words and language are inadequate the gratitude that I own to God for having given me so honorable a parentage," he wrote. "I love my father and his memory; and the memory of his noble deeds rests with ponderous weight upon my mind, and many of his kind and parental words to me are written on the tablet of my heart. . . . My mother also is one of the noblest and the best of all women. May God grant to prolong her days and mine, that we may live to enjoy each other's society long." [^18]

Joseph's relationship with his brother Hyrum was like that of David and Jonathan: "I could pray in my heart that all my brethren were like unto my beloved brother Hyrum, who possesses the mildness of a lamb, and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ; and I love him with a love that is stronger than death, for I never had occasion to rebuke him, nor him me." [^19]

This love and appreciation also extended to his other brothers, two of whom preceded him in death. He wrote:

"Alvin, my oldest brother—I remember well the pangs of sorrow that swelled my youthful bosom and almost burst my tender heart when he died. He was the oldest and the noblest of my father's family. He was one of the noblest of the sons of men. . . . In him there was no guile. He lived without spot from the time he was a child . . . and when he died the angel of the Lord visited him in his last moments." [^20]

"My brother, Don Carlos Smith, . . . also was a noble boy; I never knew any fault in him. . . . He was lovely, a good-natured, a kind-hearted and a virtuous and a faithful, upright child; and where his soul goes, let mine go also." [^21]

It seems appropriate that Joseph received revelations from God and the sealing power to assure that family life would be continued forever eternally. It must have eased the pain of separation from Alvin to know that in the future, all of the Smith family could again be reunited. The Prophet Joseph has brought comfort and joy to numerous faithful who also have known the pain and heartbreak of separation from loved ones. The Lord Jesus Christ has always placed primary emphasis on the home and family, and his servant, Joseph Smith, demonstrated this in his personal behavior. Joseph did not ignore, but joyfully accepted his responsibility as a family member.

Yes, the Prophet truly had greatness of soul. The four cornerstones of his character—faith, love of truth and humanity, humility, and love of his fellowmen—make him the epitome of the whole, well-rounded man.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Leon Hartshorn, Joseph Smith, Prophet of the Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1970), p. 38.
[^2] History of the Church [HC] 6:468.
[^3] Journal of Discourses [JD] 7:176.
[^4] HC 1:88-89.
[^5] "I Have a Question," Improvement Era, December 1948, p. 809.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Quoted in John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, An American Prophet, Classics in Mormon Literature ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1989), p. 9.
[^8] HC 1:76.
[^9] JD 8:206.
[^10] JD 23:348-49
[^11] HC 5:181.
[^12] HC 5:401.
[^13] 13. HC 1:339.
[^14] 14. Leonard J. Arrington, "Human Qualities of Joseph Smith the Prophet," Ensign, January 1971, pp. 36-37.
[^15] 15. HC 4:163-64.
[^16] 16. HC 5:107.
[^17] 17. Quoted in Church section, Deseret News, April 17, 1968, p. 3.
[^18] 18. HC 5:126.
[^19] 19. HC 2:338.
[^20] 20. HC 5:126.
[^21] 21. HC 5:127.
