Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

18

EARNING OUR HERITAGE

Goethe, one of Germany's distinguished poets and philosophers, wrote: "Whatsoever you have inherited from your fathers, you must earn it in order to possess it."

One vital part of the heritage we have received from our fathers that we must earn if we are to possess it is the United States Constitution. Gladstone, a renowned English statesman, said that "it is the most wonderful work ever struck off at a given time by the brain and purpose of man." President Abraham Lincoln admonished us to teach the principles of the Constitution in the schools, in seminaries, and in college. He urged, "Let [it] . . . be written in primers, in spelling books and [wherever possible], let it be preached from the pulpit, proclaimed in legislative halls, and enforced in courts of justice. And, in short, let it become the political religion of the nation."

In a revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Savior said, "I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose." (D&C 101:80.) The Savior established the Constitution so that "every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:78.)

I believe that we should think seriously about the Constitution and rededicate ourselves to understanding and living by the principles it stands for. As the Savior raised up wise men to establish this tremendous ideal of government, only wise men and women can maintain it. If we do not practice the ideals of the Constitution, we can become anonymous and ineffective.

Our forefathers believed that we should always know what is going on in government and should do our best to keep it relatively small and dedicated to protecting each of us in the enjoyment of life, liberty, and property. We must insist that our government refrain from running our individual lives, so long as we are law-abiding. We must not permit government to take responsibilities that we should bear for ourselves.

More than two hundred years ago, one of the founding fathers of this great nation, Thomas Jefferson, made this observation: "The natural progress of things is for government to gain ground and for liberty to yield." Our obligation as citizens is to help retain the liberty granted to us in the Constitution.

I encourage each of us to think about government, to participate seriously in every phase of it, and to do our part in blocking its tendency to monopolize our lives. If we will do so, we will please the founders of the Constitution. In short, if we earn again what we have inherited, we will never fail.

The story is told that Alexander the Great was puzzled to find Diogenes examining a pile of human bones. "What are you looking for, Diogenes?" asked Alexander. The reply came at once. Said Diogenes, "I am searching for the bones of your father but I cannot distinguish them from his slaves." Life consists of much more than the mere physical, as Diogenes graphically pointed out. The physical alone, as important as it is, makes us individuals of little consequence.

We must become individuals of consequence. We must develop our talents and gifts and become all that we can, making the best possible use of the inheritance given to us by our forefathers. We must learn the truth, love the truth, and live the truth. For, as Abraham Lincoln said so aptly, "The only assurance of our nation's safety is to lay our foundation in morality and religion."

We also must learn to love our progenitors. Vince Lombardi, legendary coach of the Green Bay Packers, told a group of businessmen, "Love is loyalty. Love is teamwork. Love respects the dignity of the individual." [^1] To love our forebears and appreciate the heritage we have received from them, we must develop the same great desire that they had for freedom, liberty, and learning.

To make this desire meaningful and practical, we must first relate it to the principles of the gospel. To incorporate gospel principles into our daily lives, we must follow the lives of great men and women in the Church. Their examples are specific and concrete, reducing abstractions to believable, practical principles we can follow.

Think with me of the great inheritances that have been showered upon us, not inheritances of wealth or material things, but of knowledge, faith, and inner strength. These are the spiritual substances that build individuals, productive families, and righteous nations. They are inheritances that we must earn if we are to possess them.

The most important heritage that we can receive is knowledge that the gospel is true. The gospel truths were restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, under the hands of heavenly beings, by prophets of old and by the Lord himself. Imagine the glory and intelligence that flowed through the mind of Joseph Smith to the early leaders of the Church as they received the truths of the Godhead, the Atonement, the plan of salvation, the first principles of the gospel, and the organization and mission of the Church. We have the privilege of knowing and loving these truths because our forefathers paid the price of diligence and righteousness and even gave their lives for the upbuilding of the kingdom.

With the restoration of tremendous religious truths came the restoration of the priesthood, the power of God delegated to man on the earth. Most male members of the Church are privileged to bear this holy priesthood. All of our brothers and sisters who are members of the Church enjoy the blessings and power that come from the priesthood of God. With the restoration of the priesthood came the restoration of the saving ordinances of the gospel: baptism, the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, temple endowments, and the sealing of marriage for time and all eternity. What a great privilege is ours to have temples dotting the earth where we can be instructed, blessed, and endowed with power from on high.

We have also inherited the Book of Mormon. If we live according to the principles taught in this inspired record, we will find happiness, strength, and exaltation. It was written for our day and for our problems. It addresses the challenges we face in today's world and will give us additional power to combat the adversary only if we will study and pray to understand its teachings and live by them. President Ezra Taft Benson emphasized again and again how important the reading of the Book of Mormon is to us. When I say "reading," I mean studying and pondering its great truths. He told us many times to read it carefully and prayerfully.

In addition to the Book of Mormon, we have received the Bible, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. These sacred scriptures, of divine origin, contain a code for living, born of the commandments of God and the teachings of Jesus Christ. The inspired words of these God-given scriptures constitute a formula for becoming like God and for enjoying a full, happy life.

Our heritage should cause us to focus on our parents. We must not forget them. They have brought us here, given us life, nurtured and taught us, and provided for us throughout our childhood and youth. Most of us have inherited physical and emotional characteristics from our parents. More important, most of us have received from them love, a good example, and teachings of honesty, morality, devotion to what is right, kindness, and respect for others. The crowning blessing of all they have given to us is the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

For such blessings, we should be eternally grateful. Children brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord have the wealth of eternities in their grasp. They see the truths of life as standards of strength, and they grow spiritually toward the ultimate goal of Godhood. Those of us so blessed have inherited a great deal indeed.

Parents generally deserve much more than sons and daughters give back to them by way of tribute or honor. I am grateful to my parents for their careful attention to teaching me to live the principles of honesty in word and deed. My father, for example, was totally honest. He set a great example for the entire family.

One time when I was about seven years old, my father sent me to a hardware store on an errand. He gave me five dollars, which in those days, could buy a great deal. When I arrived home and accounted for my purchases, he counted the change and discovered that the clerk had made a mistake and had given me one dollar too much. The store was about a mile from our home, but he insisted that I walk the entire distance back and return the money.

This was a good lesson. It taught me to always count the change and to make sure I received the correct amount, neither too much nor too little. This is typical of the lessons of honesty he taught us children all during our childhood and teenage years.

How careful are we in our dealings with others? Infractions of the code of honesty are common, but any true Latter-day Saint knows the attitude of the Lord toward such behavior. No man is worthy of his priesthood calling and no woman is without blame who consciously lies, cheats, or steals in any way.

Our task to earn our inheritance in order to possess it is especially important in living a life of sexual purity. A clean heart is part of one's great heritage. Many have received it from their forebears but have not honored it themselves. Others have not received a sacred inheritance of morality but have paid the extra price to repair it and to pass on to their posterity a clean and pure example of virtue, chastity, and modesty.

Satan would have us believe that infractions of the moral code are acceptable because they seem to be so common. "Why worry," he asks, "if you do not control your thoughts or if you allow pornographic or immoral entertainment to be part of your life? Everybody's doing it. It isn't so bad. You can handle it." His logic leads us to rationalize in our minds and suppose that attending just a few R-rated movies or immoral PG-13 movies will not really harm us. And he teaches others to ask, "Are we so unworthy when we watch just two or three questionable programs on the cable television channel? Are the sexually explicit romance novels of the day really so bad?"

These rationalizations, prompted by Satan, become great deterrents to our spiritual growth. Pornography in all of its forms is found at the movies, on television, and in printed form. It constitutes a spiritual poison that is addictive and destructive. Every ounce of pornography and immoral entertainment will drain away a part of our spirituality. Only a little immoral material and entertainment can cause us to lose all of our spiritual strength. The Lord's spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle.

Perhaps Satan would tempt young men and young women further by suggesting that going a little too far in their physical affection with a date is not so serious. After all, they are aware of the main commandments and have no intention of violating them. But what we must remember is that our procreative powers are sacred, beautiful gifts from God and are to be used only in marriage. Sexual activity outside of marriage is forbidden. Physical affection while dating and when a couple are engaged to be married must be limited to the conservative and wholesome and must remain within the bounds the Lord has set. Such expressions of affection are far different from those that are commonly portrayed in the media of our day.

Satan is a master at step-by-step deception. He can make little things seem harmless when, in reality, they quickly bind our spirits and destroy our souls. He makes immodest dress and suggestive behavior seem very acceptable. The ancient prophet Nephi wrote of how Satan deceives us:

"And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God.

"Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark. . . .

"For the kingdom of the devil must shake, and they which belong to it must needs be stirred up unto repentance, or the devil will grasp them with his everlasting chains, and they be stirred up to anger, and perish; for behold, at that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good." (2 Nephi 28:8-9, 19-20.)

The desire to acquire spiritual qualities in our lives will lead us to appreciate our inheritance and will help us use this inheritance wisely in every thought and deed. We will receive what we deserve. The Lord has told us: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

We must recognize the hazards of shortcuts and looking for the easy way. We must obey the law and pay the price if we are to receive the reward or achieve the goal.

When James A. Garfield, once president of the United States, was the president of Hiram College, a father brought his son for admittance as a student. The father wanted the boy to take a course shorter than the one offered and exclaimed: "He can never take all that in! He wants to get through quicker. Can you arrange it for him?"

"Oh, yes," replied President Garfield. "He can take a shorter course. It all depends on what you want to make of him. When God wants to make an oak, he takes one hundred years, but he only takes two months to make a squash." [^2]

Please remember that we must earn whatever we have inherited from our forebears in order to possess it. This great principle teaches us the formula for developing gratitude, personal strength, service to others, and a genuine testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I would like to add one more ingredient of life that is so important for each of us as individuals, and that is the power of prayer. Prayer has been the great undergirding strength of my life. On many occasions the Lord has answered my prayers, and I bear testimony that nothing brings us more strength and more peace and more answers to today's vexing problems than to speak with the Lord humbly in sacred prayer.

May I relate one experience I had on March 17, 1986. I boarded a plane in Leeds, England, after having conducted a stake conference in that city. The plane I boarded had often been referred to as "the goose." It was given this name because it was so awkward looking. Little did I realize that it was not always reliable mechanically.

We took off in a rainstorm and had been in the air for about fifteen minutes at an altitude of 18,000 feet when the right motor exploded. We lost altitude rapidly. I thought at first that those could be the last moments of my earthly life.

I sat on the second row near the front of the plane, and the cockpit door was open. Observing the anxious and frightened look on the faces of the pilot and co-pilot did not help my anxiety.

The pilot turned the plane around and headed back toward the Leeds airport. When we're in danger, memories of mistakes we have made in our lives often flash through our minds. This happened to me. The next thought that came to me was to ask for divine intervention from the Lord through fervent prayer. After I had offered my humble prayer, I had a peaceful and calm feeling that we would land safely and all would be well.

As the runway came into our view, it appeared that we would not make it. But suddenly the plane seemed to gain new power, and we landed exactly at the end of the runway. Numerous fire engines and ambulances were standing by, ready to assist if needed. All the passengers breathed a sigh of relief and clapped their hands. Instead of joining with them, I said another silent prayer of thanksgiving for the Lord's intervention.

This was another miracle that occurred in my life, that the Lord is ready and willing to assist when we ask for his help and guidance. May we never forget that prayer in our lives is a necessity—not only in times of danger, but on a day-by-day basis. It will bring us joy and happiness and peace of mind.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] U.S. News and World Report, December 5, 1986, p. 153.
[^2] Quote Magazine, January 15, 1987, p. 3.
