Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

19

RUNNING OUR MARATHON

In recent years, running has become a popular form of exercise throughout the world. Many run primarily for the exercise, but others run to condition themselves for well-publicized races of various distances. Perhaps the premier endurance race is the marathon, a modern-day race that has its roots in ancient Greece. Today, the meaning of the word marathon has been broadened to include any contest or activity of great length that requires extraordinary effort and endurance.

A young friend of mine, whom I will call Alan, recently ran his first marathon—a distance of 26.2 miles. He had set his goal several months in advance, learned what preparation was required, and disciplined himself to follow a rigorous training schedule. He sought the advice of experienced runners and read articles on running a marathon. He practiced running the marathon route and planned a strategy for traversing the hilly course.

Finally, the day of the marathon arrived; it would be the culmination of months of training, discipline, and sacrifice. He got off to a good start in a large crowd of runners. He felt strong and confident, following his predetermined strategy. About eight miles into the race, on a downhill part of the course, he caught up with an experienced runner named Brent, who had given him sound advice during his training. Alan decided to match his stride to Brent's disciplined and experienced pace.

As they passed the eighteen-mile mark, Alan struggled to stay with Brent so that someone he knew would be by his side if he began "hitting the wall." Hitting the wall means feeling a sudden urge to quit, encountering an almost tangible barrier that requires a tremendous effort to overcome. It often comes at about the twenty-mile mark.

For the next two miles, Alan kept pace with Brent. Then it hit him. He felt a sudden loss of energy, an almost overwhelming desire to stop or walk. "Stay with me," Brent said. "We all feel it at some point. You can get through it. I'll help pull you through."

Somehow Alan continued. He and Brent began to pass spectators. He knew his wife, children, and other family members would be watching about one mile ahead. Drawing on the strength provided by thoughts of his family, he was able to hang on until the desire to quit left him.

As Alan and Brent finally neared the finish, Alan found the last mile to be the hardest of all. The two runners crossed the finish line just five seconds apart. Alan was more exhausted than he ever had been but elated because he had beaten his goal by more than fifteen minutes and had finished among the top twenty-five runners.

In some respects, progressing through life is like running a marathon. Young people are near the beginning of their earthly sojourn. They chose to come to this earth and to be tested and proved, and the end may seem too far away to concern them now. But life, like a marathon, requires a good start and a strong, consistent effort all of the way to the finish.

Just as marathon runners set explicit goals, so should each of us, young and old alike, look ahead and decide what we want to do with our lives. Now is the time for us to fix clearly in our minds what we want to be or what we want to be doing one year from now, five years, ten years, and beyond. If we have not already received a patriarchal blessing, we should set a goal to receive one and strive to live worthy of its promises. A patriarchal blessing is one of the most important guides in life that members of the Church enjoy. We should write down our goals and review them regularly, keep our goals before us constantly, record our progress, and revise our goals as circumstances dictate. Our ultimate goal should be eternal life—the kind of life God lives, the greatest of all the gifts of God.

After we visualize ourselves as we would like to be in five, ten, or twenty years from now, we should identify the preparation we will need and determine to pay the price in effort, money, study, and prayer. We should be sure we understand the course or path we will be taking. The ideal course of life is not always easy, and comparatively few will find it and complete it. It is not a well-marked freeway, but a narrow path with only one entrance. The way to eternal life is straight and narrow.

When I think of staying on the right path, I am reminded of Lehi's dream about the tree of life. In it, the love of God was likened to a tree that bore delicious fruit that was desirable above all others. Nephi recorded his father's words: "And I also beheld a strait and narrow path, which came along by the rod of iron, even to the tree. . . . And I saw numberless concourses of people, many of whom were pressing forward, that they might obtain the path which led unto the tree." (1 Nephi 8:20-21.) Many of these people later "fell away into forbidden paths and were lost" (v. 28), but those who ignored the scoffing and ridicule of the world and held tightly to the rod of iron enjoyed the fruit of the tree. The rod of iron represents the word of God, which leads us to the love of God. (See 1 Nephi 11:25.) We must hold firmly to the rod of iron through the mists and darkness, the hardships and trials of life. If we relax our grip and slip from the path, the iron rod might become lost in the darkness for a time until we repent and regain our grasp of it.

Remember that success results when preparation meets opportunity in our lives. We will not always know precisely what opportunities will come or when they will come, but we can be sure they will be valuable only to the extent that we are prepared to respond to them. We can see the equation of preparation plus opportunity equaling success in the lives of leaders in the Church, government, business, professions, and, hopefully, in our own lives.

Preparation is vitally important in the Church so that we can do our part when called upon and so that the Lord can use us when he needs us.

In life, as in a marathon, we should seek the help we need, and not depend on our own strength alone. We have never done all we can to finish a task until we have sought help from the Lord, loved ones, Church leaders, and friends.

Relying only on our own abilities can lead to the sin of pride. In the opening section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord described the wicked condition of many in the world: "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god." (D&C 1:16.) If we boast in our own strength and "walk in our own way," we can slip easily from the straight and narrow path to the broad roadways of the world. We must not be misled by the occasional easiness of the way, like the downhill part of a marathon. Rather, we should keep close to the Lord and trust in him during the easier times, just as we do in our uphill struggles.

Marathon runners pass aid stations located along the course where they receive water, encouragement, and assistance. Without this help, many runners could not carry on. Each of us also have "aid stations" to help us keep moving along our course. These include our parents, other family members, ward leaders, and teachers who have "run more races" and are farther along the path of life. It is important that we benefit from the experience they have accumulated; trust them; seek their advice, counsel, and support; and then listen to them. They will help us stay on course.

We should always be willing, even anxious, to help others. Nothing else we do will give us the same satisfaction and joy within because, we are told, "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) Ignoring the needs of others is a serious sin. Alma asked the people of the Church in Zarahemla, "Will ye . . . persist in the wearing of costly apparel and setting your hearts upon the vain things of the world, upon your riches? Yea, will ye persist in supposing that ye are better one than another . . . ? Yea, and will you persist in turning your backs upon the poor, and the needy, and in withholding your substance from them?" (Alma 5:53-55.)

King Benjamin taught that we must care for those in need—the poor, hungry, naked, and sick—both spiritually and temporally if we are to receive a remission of our sins from day to day or, in other words, if we are to walk guiltless before God. (See Mosiah 18:29.)

I suppose that some of us, at one time or another, feel that we are "hitting the wall," which gives us an almost compelling urge to quit, give up, or give in to temptation. Each of us may meet challenges, adversities, and temptations that seem to be more than we can bear. In times of sickness, death, financial need, and other hardships, we may wonder whether we have the strength, courage, or ability to continue.

People today face the same temptations that have been common throughout history, plus many others that were unknown to earlier generations. However, God will not allow us to be tempted beyond our ability to resist. (See 1 Corinthians 10:13.) He does not give us challenges that we cannot surmount. He will not ask more than we can do, but may ask right up to our limits so we can prove ourselves. The Lord will never forsake or abandon anyone. We may abandon him, but he will not abandon us. We never need to feel that we are alone.

The reason to stay on course in a marathon is obvious. Staying on a course that leads to a righteous life may be less obvious but is much more important. In simple terms, a righteous life is the way—the only way—to happiness, joy and peace. We read in the Book of Mormon: "Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.)

Our Heavenly Father knows the way for us to enjoy happiness and peace; the principles of the gospel mark the way. They are a gift to us, his children.

The Lord has given us the gift of agency (see Moses 7:32) and instructed us sufficiently to know good from evil (see 2 Nephi 2:5). We are free to choose (see 2 Nephi 2:27) and are permitted to act (see 2 Nephi 10:23; Helaman 14:30), but we are not free to choose the consequences. With absolute certainty, choices of good and right lead to happiness and peace, while choices of sin and evil eventually lead to unhappiness, sorrow, and misery.

An obvious parallel between life and a marathon is the necessity to run diligently and endure to the end. Among Nephi's final words to his people were these: "And now, . . . after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; . . . Ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ . . . and endure to the end." (2 Nephi 31:19-20.) I think of this promise of the Lord: "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isaiah 40:31.) We have that promise.

I pray that the Lord will guide each of us in running our personal marathon. Then we can say, as Paul wrote to Timothy, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." (2 Timothy 4:7.)
