Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

21

THE IRON ROD

After Lehi left Jerusalem and took his family into the wilderness, he dreamed a dream. He described what he saw in the following verses from the Book of Mormon:

"I saw in my dream, a dark and dreary wilderness. And it came to pass that I saw a man, and he was dressed in a white robe; and he came and stood before me. And it came to pass that he spake unto me, and bade me follow him. And it came to pass that as I followed him I beheld myself that I was in a dark and dreary waste.

"And after I had traveled for the space of many hours in darkness, I began to pray unto the Lord that he would have mercy on me, according to the multitude of his tender mercies. And it came to pass after I had prayed unto the Lord I beheld a large and spacious field. And it came to pass that I beheld a tree, whose fruit was desirable to make one happy. And it came to pass that I did go forth and partake of the fruit thereof; and I beheld that it was most sweet, above all that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen.

"And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with exceedingly great joy; wherefore, I began to be desirous that my family should partake of it also; for I knew that it was desirable above all other fruit.

"And as I cast my eyes round about, that perhaps I might discover my family also, I beheld a river of water; and it ran along, and it was near the tree of which I was partaking the fruit. And I looked to behold from whence it came; and I saw the head thereof a little way off; and at the head thereof I beheld your mother Sariah, and Sam, and Nephi; and they stood as if they knew not whither they should go.

"And it came to pass that I beckoned unto them; and I also did say unto them with a loud voice that they should come unto me, and partake of the fruit, which was desirable above all other fruit. And it came to pass that they did come unto me and partake of the fruit also.

"And it came to pass that I was desirous that Laman and Lemuel should come and partake of the fruit also; wherefore, I cast mine eyes towards the head of the river, that perhaps I might see them. And it came to pass that I saw them, but they would not come unto me and partake of the fruit.

"And I beheld a rod of iron, and it extended along the bank of the river, and led to the tree by which I stood. And I also beheld a strait and narrow path, which came along by the rod of iron, even to the tree by which I stood; and it also led by the head of the fountain, unto a large and spacious field, as if it had been a world.

"And I saw numberless concourses of people, many of whom were pressing forward, that they might obtain the path which led unto the tree by which I stood. And it came to pass that they did come forth, and commence in the path which led to the tree.

"And it came to pass that there arose a mist of darkness; yea, even an exceedingly great mist of darkness, insomuch that they who had commenced in the path did lose their way, that they wandered off and were lost.

"And it came to pass that I beheld others pressing forward, and they came forth and caught hold of the end of the rod of iron; and they did press forward through the mist of darkness, clinging to the rod of iron, even until they did come forth and partake of the fruit of the tree." (1 Nephi 8:4-24.)

In the interpretation that Nephi gave, the "rod of iron" meant "the word of God." We must hold fast to it. If we do, we shall never perish, for "neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction." (1 Nephi 15:24.)

The world has always been filled with temptations. God's plan was that there be opposition in all things. However, his plan also included the path and the directions that would lead us back to him. If we would stay on the pathway and follow the directions, we must pray always, read the scriptures, keep the commandments, and endure to the end.

It is significant to note what an important part prayer plays in finding the iron rod. When Lehi saw the man who bid him to follow, he was first led into a dark and dreary waste, where he remained in darkness for many hours until he began to pray to the Lord for his tender mercies. Then he saw the whole picture of his vision. He was led to the tree and was able to partake of the sweet fruit, which was sweeter above all he had ever tasted.

President David O. McKay wrote: "Prayer is the pulsation of a yearning, loving heart in tune with the Infinite. It is a message of the soul sent directly to a loving Father. . . . You cannot imagine an effective prayer without visualizing and feeling a personal God." [^1] As we feast upon the word of God, we must talk with the Author of these scriptures to gain understanding and enlightenment.

When we are not in the act of praying, the Lord asks that we have a prayer in our hearts. (See Alma 34:27.) If we are praying to him who is our Creator and asking for guidance and understanding, is not our grasp upon the iron rod? We let go when we stop praying.

We are commanded to pray (Alma 34:17-27) both vocally and in secret. Secret prayer is a personal, private communication that God has provided between us. Elder Francis M. Gibbons wrote: "Satan and his followers, who have been cast out of God's presence and are dead to His spirit, are excluded from those who, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, may know the thoughts and the intents of our hearts. So, in his wisdom and mercy, God has provided a channel of communication between him and his children on earth that Satan, our common enemy, cannot invade. This is the channel of secret prayer. The significance of this to the Latter-day Saint is profound, for by this means we are able to communicate with our Heavenly Father in secrecy, confident that the adversary cannot intrude." [^2]

As parents, if we teach the importance of prayer in our homes, we must pray ourselves. We must have our family prayers morning and night, a blessing on the food at each meal, as well as our personal, private prayers.

We must express to our Heavenly Father our gratitude for all things. The brother of Jared was chastised for failing to call upon the Lord. We are reminded often by our Church leaders to counsel with the Lord, express our gratitude, and ask for those things we stand in need of. We are to pray that our afflictions will be consecrated for our gain. (See 2 Nephi 2:2.) Though at times our memories of this important principle dim, our accountability still remains.

Sincere praying implies that when we ask for any virtue or blessing, we should work for the blessing and cultivate the virtue. President David O. McKay wrote: "The principle of humility and prayer leads one to feel a need for divine guidance. Self-reliance is a virtue, but with it should go a consciousness of the need of superior help—a consciousness that as you walk firmly in the pathway of duty, there is a possibility of your making a misstep, and with that consciousness is a prayer, a pleading that God will inspire you to avoid that false step." [^3]

The word of God is all around us. We have his precious word in the scriptures. The Lord has told us the plain and precious truths that will lead us back to him. He has commanded us to read them, to feast upon the word. We must feast upon his word in order to understand our responsibilities. We can't just nibble.

Elder J. Richard Clarke has written, "The holy scriptures are the word of God. If we are to know God, we must read His words, for therein He stands revealed to the honest heart." [^4]

It is important to understand that in order to be practicing Latter-day Saints, we must study the scriptures. As Saints, we need to become acquainted with the great heroes of sacred literature and to pattern our lives after them. We don't need to be natural students to read the scriptures; we just need to love the Lord and desire to believe on his word.

A reality of the scriptures is that we never really read them enough. Each time we read the scriptures, we receive new insight, new direction, new information, new strength, a new level of spirituality, and new beauty.

Since feasting on the word of God has a "more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than . . . anything else" (Alma 31:5), the more of the word of God we have and act upon, the more we will press forward. Much spiritual energy is necessary for the marathon of discipleship. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell has said, "If we fail to attend the feast, if we do not search the scriptures, we will miss the needed and reminding truths that God has sent among us for that purpose." [^5]

President Marion G. Romney declared: "I don't know much about the gospel other than what I've learned from the standard works. When I drink from a spring I like to get the water where it comes out of the ground, not down stream after the cattle have waded in it. . . . I appreciate other people's interpretation, but when it comes to the gospel we ought to be acquainted with what the Lord says . . . You ought to read the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants; and . . . all the scriptures with the idea of finding out what's in them and what the meaning is and not to prove some idea of your own. Just read them and plead with the Lord to let you understand what he had in mind when he wrote them." [^6]

The motto of Bible week in 1989 was: "To Know Where You're Going, Read the Bible." That is the purpose of the scriptures: to give us direction, to be a road map for life, to keep us holding to the iron rod.

In the scriptures we find information expressed so simply that any mind can in some degree grasp it, yet so sublime and so great that when we come to investigate its depths, it requires greater powers and greater understanding than what man naturally possesses.

We are admonished to "search the scriptures; for they are they which testify" of the Savior. (John 5:39.)

We are so fortunate to have the fullness of the gospel with additional scriptures that give us added understanding and direction. Without access to a fullness of scriptures, people substitute deliberation for revelation. It is the truth that makes us free. (John 8:32.)

As long as man continues to dwell outside God's presence, the search for his word and the meaning of his word must continue. It is still a major access to him. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught:

"Search the scriptures—search the revelations which are published and ask your Heavenly Father, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, to manifest the truth unto you, and if you do it with an eye single to His glory nothing doubting, He will answer you by the power of His Holy Spirit. You will then know for yourselves and not for another. You will not then be dependent on man for the knowledge of God; nor will there by any room for speculation. . . . For when men receive their instruction from Him that made them, they know how He will save them. . . . Again we say: Search the Scriptures, search the Prophets and learn what portion of them belongs to you." [^7]

Holding to the iron rod requires that we keep the commandments. Learning the gospel from the written word is not enough. It must also be lived.

President Spencer W. Kimball counseled us to "hold fast to the iron rod. The Savior urged us to put our hand to the plow without looking back. In that spirit we are being asked to have humility and a deep and abiding faith in the Lord and to move forward—trusting in him, refusing to be diverted from our course, either by the ways of the world or the praise of the world. I see that quality of readiness and devotion in our people today. There is so much yet to be done! Let us, then, move forward; let us continue the journey with lengthened stride. The Lord will lead us along, and he will be in our midst and not forsake us." [^8]

Jesus said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.) We bring glory to our Creator by keeping his law and setting a good example as his disciples. True happiness in this life and the life to come is found in keeping the commandments of God. We should "live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." (D&C 84:44.)

The Ten Commandments focus on our relationships with God, self, parents, and neighbors. Further commandments add detail. In addition to honoring God, we are to honor our parents. We are to honor others. We are to esteem neighbors as ourselves. We honor God by surrendering to God, by giving away our sins—by putting at his feet the old self, old baggage, old equipment, and so on. Doing this ensures our getting to know God, and it brings greater richness in other relationships too.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell explains, "What seems so plain—keeping the commandments in one's daily life—is 'it!' There is not something else of a higher order which we are supposed to be doing instead." [^9] This is truly exercising free agency. We are actually free to make choices.

King Benjamin reminds us of the blessed and happy state of those who keep the commandments of God. They will "dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness. O remember, remember that these things are true; for the Lord God hath spoken it." (Mosiah 2:41.)

Nephi admonishes us: "And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

"Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:19-20.)

It is vital for us to realize that life's real difficulties are "but for a small moment" and to trust in God's timetable.

Elder Maxwell has written: "Enduring brings such a rich supply of experience, of opportunities to use our moral agency, especially when we take Jesus' yoke upon us in order to learn of Him in an accelerated way: 'Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls' (Matthew 11:29). Experience, however, cannot be rushed. Experience requires time. And time requires patience." [^10]

We came to this earth to experience resistance. It was part of the plan. The law of opposition makes freedom of choice possible. The Lord told Joseph Smith: "Thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high. . . . If thou art called to pass through tribulation, . . . know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 121:7-8; 122:5, 7.)

"Being human, we would expel from our lives physical pain and mental anguish and assure ourselves of continual ease and comfort," President Kimball taught, "but if we were to close the doors upon sorrow and distress, we might be excluding our greatest friends and benefactors. Suffering can make saints of people as they learn patience, long-suffering, and self-mastery." [^11]

The word of God is sweeter than all others. We must hold onto these precious things so that we will not be led into temptations and overcome by the adversary. The word gives us understanding of our purpose and direction in life. May we be loyal and true in our faith, in saying our prayers, in keeping the commandments, and in enduring to the end.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 137.
[^2] JD 7:33.
[^3] Keep the commandments. McKay, Treasures of Life, p. 311.
[^4] Endure to the end. J. Richard Clarke, "My Soul Delighteth in the Scriptures," Ensign, November 1982, p. 15.
[^5] Neal A. Maxwell, A Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990), p. 53.
[^6] Marion G. Romney, address delivered at coordinators' convention, Seminaries and Institutes of Religion, April 13, 1973.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 11-12.
[^8] Spencer W. Kimball, "Let Us Not Weary in Well Doing," Ensign, May 1980, p. 81.
[^9] Maxwell, A Wonderful Flood of Light, p. 103.
[^10] Ibid., p. 90.
[^11] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 98.
