Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

25

THE STRAIGHT AND NARROW WAY

While traveling along a mountainous road one evening through a driving rainstorm punctuated with frequent claps of thunder and flashes of lightning, Sister Wirthlin and I could barely see the road in front of us, on the right, or on the left. I watched the white lines on either side of that road more intently than ever before. Staying within the lines kept us from going onto the shoulder and into the deep canyon on one side and helped us avoid a head-on collision on the other. To wander over either line could have been very dangerous. Then I thought, "Would a right-thinking person deviate to the left or the right of a traffic lane if he knew the result would be fatal? If he valued his mortal life, certainly he would stay between these lines."

That experience of traveling on the mountain road is like life. If we stay within the lines that God has marked, he will protect us, and we can arrive safely at our destination.

The Savior taught this principle when he said: "Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat." (Matthew 7:13.) "For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it." (D&C 132:22.)

King Josiah reigned over Judah in righteousness. When he was only eight years old, he succeeded his father as king. Scripture tells us that although he was just a boy, he "did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, . . . and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left." (2 Kings 22:2.)

The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "God doth not walk in crooked paths, neither doth he turn to the right hand nor to the left, neither doth he vary from that which he hath said, therefore his paths are straight, and his course is one eternal round." (D&C 3:2.)

Though these teachings of the Savior are plain and direct, we are still at risk of getting sidetracked. Some people choose to follow the teachings of the Lord and of his living prophet only when it is convenient, rejecting them when sacrifice or deeper commitment is required. Some fail to follow only because the Lord's divine teachings do not agree with their own preconceived notions.

We get sidetracked when we submit to temptations that divert us past the bounds of safety. Satan knows our weaknesses. He puts attractive snares on our paths at just those moments when we are most vulnerable. His intent is to lead us from the way that returns us to our Heavenly Father. Sin may result from activities that begin innocently or that are perfectly legitimate in moderation; but in excess, they can cause us to veer from the straight and narrow path to our destruction.

One example is sports. Many of us enjoy going to ball games and watching them on television. I am no exception. I love to watch a good athletic contest. But if we spend excessive time with sporting events, we may neglect things that are much more important.

Good physical and spiritual health can help us to stay on the straight and narrow way. The Lord gave his code of health in the Word of Wisdom, a "principle with promise" that modern medical science continues to substantiate. (D&C 89:3.) All of God's commandments, including the Word of Wisdom, are spiritual. (See D&C 29:34-35.) We need to nourish ourselves spiritually even more than physically. Are we giving adequate emphasis to our spiritual health?

Another activity that can detract us from the proper way is watching television excessively or viewing improper movies. While fine productions on these media are uplifting and entertaining, we need to be very selective in choosing what we see and how much of our time we devote to such activities. Our precious time must not be diverted to the sideline attractions of vulgar language, immoral conduct, pornography, and violence.

Another temptation to detour us is placing improper emphasis on obtaining material possessions. Jacob, the Book of Mormon prophet, warned: "Do not spend money for that which is of no worth, nor your labor for that which cannot satisfy." (2 Nephi 9:51.) And in even stronger words, he said:

"Because some of you have obtained more abundantly than . . . your brethren ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts, and wear stiff necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel, and persecute your brethren because ye suppose that ye are better than they.

"And now, my brethren, do ye suppose that God justifieth you in this thing? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But he condemneth you. . . . Do ye not suppose that such things are abominable unto him who created all flesh? And the one being is as precious in his sight as the other." (Jacob 2:13-14, 21.)

The Savior taught clearly the proper value of worldly possessions in his conversation with the rich young ruler who asked what more was required to have eternal life. Having kept all the commandments from his youth, he asked the Master what he still lacked. Jesus told him to sell all that he had and give to the poor, and come and follow him. But the man went away sorrowing, for he loved his possessions. (See Matthew 19:16-22.) How many of us would pass this test?

Many of us have made sacred covenants to live the laws of sacrifice and consecration. But when the Lord blesses us with riches and affluence, we may give little thought to how we should use these blessings to help build up his church.

The scriptures are full of warnings against worldliness and pride because they too can lead us off course. The Lord explained to the Prophet Joseph Smith that many people veer from the path "because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world." (D&C 121:35.)

We must also be certain that we do not cross over the lines of safety into paths of immorality. President Ezra Taft Benson declared: "The plaguing sin of this generation is sexual immorality." [^1] The broken hearts and broken families that come to my attention demonstrate that immorality is, indeed, a very serious problem in the world and even among some Latter-day Saints.

The first deviation toward moral breakdown in an individual is similar to a spark that ignites a devastating forest fire. On a hot, windy summer day a few years ago in Midway, Utah, embers from a small campground fire were fanned into a raging forest fire that soon swept over the entire mountainside. Before the flames were brought under control, the lives of two outstanding members of the Church were lost. The roaring fire had destroyed the beautiful autumn foliage as well as eighteen homes. We risk similar damage to our moral integrity when we let our guard down for even one brief moment. The spark of an evil thought can enter our mind that could ignite and destroy the moral fiber of our soul.

How can we keep ourselves on the straight and narrow way? The Lord gave the answer over and over again. We must learn the word of God by studying the scriptures, and apply his word by praying to him daily and serving our fellowmen.

Using an apt symbol, the psalmist wrote: "Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path." (Psalm 119:105.) God's word, then, is the light for our path, the iron rod or railing to which we can cling. It provides the limiting lines that we must not cross if we are to reach our destination.

Through daily study of the scriptures and the words of the modern-day prophets, we can keep our values in line with the will of our Heavenly Father. The scriptures lead us "to the fountain of living waters, or to the tree of life; which waters are a representation of the love of God." (1 Nephi 11:25.)

Daily prayer can help us keep on the path that leads to eternal life. In Proverbs we read: "In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 3:6.) Praying in private and as families will help us to stay close to our Heavenly Father and to know what is of most value to us and to him. We are very unlikely to stray if we offer a humble, simple prayer at least each morning and evening to express thanks and to seek divine guidance.

As we pray, let us occasionally take a personal inventory to see how we measure up in our righteousness, in meeting the standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ. We each can know for ourselves, as the Lord knows, where we need to improve. We must hold to the standards. If we have advanced in material, outward things, how are we doing inwardly? Are our lives acceptable to the Lord? Are we willing to acknowledge our sins and then make the effort to forsake them, repent, and make the course correction that will return us to the straight and narrow path?

I know that each of us has much to do. Sometimes we feel overwhelmed by the tasks we face. But if we keep our priorities in order, we can accomplish all that we should. We can endure to the end regardless of temptations, problems, and challenges. Those who remain faithful will receive God's greatest blessing—eternal life—and the privilege of living with our Heavenly Father and his Beloved Son in the celestial kingdom.

Elder Marion G. Romney said, "When earth life is over, and things appear in their true perspective, we shall more clearly see . . . that the fruits of the gospel are the only objectives worthy of life's full effort." [^2]

The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob declared: "O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there." (2 Nephi 9:41.)

I pray that we may enjoy the fruits of the gospel. Let us be faithful and true to our covenants. Let us each be mindful of the straight and narrow way and do all we can to stay within the straight lines in the midst of the storms and temptations of life. Let us study the scriptures, hold to the rod of the word of God, be prayerful in all we do, and perform Christlike acts of service. May we be filled with charity, which is the pure love of Christ, and may that love be reflected in our actions. Then we will observe the "weightier matters" of God's law while not leaving the rest undone. (Matthew 23:23.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Church News, March 8, 1947, pp. 1, 8-9.
[^2] Conference Report, April 1956, p. 9.
