Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

29

A TIME OF PREPARATION

There is a beautiful scripture in Ecclesiastes about time: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven. "A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; "A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up; "A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance . . . "A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing . . . "A time to keep silence, and a time to speak; "A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace. " (Ecclesiastes 3:1-8.)

No matter how old we are, we are always in a state of preparation.

The Savior prepared for his life mission for thirty years. At the age of twelve, he was aware of his mission. When his anxious mother and earthly father sought him three days after the Passover, he asked, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49.) His ministry lasted only three years, but what he accomplished in those three short years was a miracle and has influenced hundreds of millions of people throughout the world for two centuries.

The purpose of this life is to prepare to meet God. Alma stated this concept so well: "For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold, the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors. . . . Do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity; behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed." (Alma 34:32-33.)

Prepare and perform are the key words in how we will improve our time in this life.

This day is the day to perform our labors. We should not just mark time and kill time, for time is too precious to waste. We do not want procrastination to use up our precious time, for the Lord revealed in that great council in heaven before the foundation of the earth was laid that an earth would be created "whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them; and they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abraham 3:24-26.)

We are told in Jude 1:6 that "angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day."

We made choices in our first estate, and as a result, we are here today. Today is the time to improve ourselves. We should not procrastinate. Today is the time for us to decide what our priorities will be and how we will accomplish them. Procrastinating decisions that will affect our eternal salvation and seeking for happiness in doing things contrary to the commandments will not help us keep our second estate.

The testing ground of proving ourselves is our day-to-day tasks and responsibilities, such as caring for our physical needs—obtaining food, shelter, and clothing. No doubt the majority of our time is spent in seeking to take care of these basic needs.

Everyone is given the same amount of time. Each of us has twenty-four hours in each day. We all know that some people accomplish several times more than others. There are also some who are over-accelerated, who hurry too much and accomplish too little. Time management is really self-management and discipline in how we manage ourselves in the time allotted. It involves making choices, and choosing how to use that time that is sometimes difficult.

Most people manage their lives by crises. They are driven by external events and circumstances. As each problem arises, they focus on the problem. However, effective time managers are not problem-minded. They are opportunity-minded. They think preventably by using long-range planning. They set their priorities, organize themselves to accomplish these priorities, and then execute their tasks. In other words, they prepare, then perform their tasks to improve on their time.

With so much to accomplish in so little time, how can we manage our day-to-day tasks in a way that all can be accomplished? Here are some suggestions:

Sister Wirthlin is a great example when it comes to exercising. She either plays tennis or walks two miles every day. She often persuades me to go walking with her, and this is no leisurely stroll. Exercise is an important part of our day, and the time spent in it will pay dividends.

The story is told of a productive writer who travels widely. She always keeps paper and pencil on hand. When others are wishing away the minutes on long flights and agonizing about missed connections, she makes notes for her next book. She has written several novels while waiting for her children at music and dance lessons and sports practices. She loves time. Time is good to her.

What should our priorities be? The Savior taught, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matthew 6:33.)

There are three priorities I hope you would consider at the top of your list when making your life choices. Elder Mark E. Petersen, in a Church News editorial, [^2] mentioned three areas that distinguish our way of life from that of the world:

This way is the way of love, understanding, fair dealing, doing unto others as we would want them to do unto us. If we do not love our fellowmen as we love ourselves, we are violating this fundamental commandment. John wrote, "He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? . . . He who loveth God love his brother also." (1 John 4:2-21.) The Golden Rule is a rule of salvation. Without it, there is no salvation.

Read the Sermon on the Mount. It is filled with fundamentals on human relations. Then read the Beatitudes. Each one is a priceless gem of interpretation of the second great commandment. Our destiny is to become like our Father in Heaven. He has placed us on a testing ground, a field of learning to develop a Godlike character.

Jesus spoke with Mary and Martha about mismanaged priorities. While Mary sat at his feet, learning of salvation, Martha worked in the kitchen. Finally Martha, annoyed that Mary was not helping her, complained to Jesus. He answered her kindly and patiently: "Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that good part." (Luke 10:41-42.)

Too often we do not recognize what is needful. We allow what is important in our lives to be replaced by details and activity that we think we are doing for our families. Sometimes these details need to wait so that the words of the Savior may be heard, so that a father can play ball with his son, or so that a mother can take time to talk to her daughter. What is important should receive the most attention in our lives.

In our daily time management, we need to take the time to love our neighbor and develop close and loving relationships with family members. This should be our top priority.

The Savior taught his disciples that if they loved him, they would serve him: "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." A sure sign of failure to love him is to fail to keep his commandments. The most unhappy people in all the earth are those who have turned bitter against the Church.

In some respects, progressing through life is like running a marathon. We chose to come to this earth and to be tested and proven. How we manage our time will help us to go the distance through this life and prove ourselves to our Heavenly Father.

If we truly seek first the kingdom of God, all things will be added unto us. He will shower blessings upon us beyond our imagination in this life. And then in the great judgment day, we will hear him say: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matthew 24:25.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^2] Follow the prophet. As quoted by LeGrand Richards, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 384.
