Joseph B. Wirthlin, Finding Peace in Our Lives ( 1995)

30

"CHOOSE THE RIGHT"

The restored gospel of Jesus Christ powerfully teaches that a loving Father in Heaven has placed us here upon this earth to learn from our experiences, both good and bad. The Lord spoke with tender reassurance to a tortured, disheartened Joseph Smith suffering in the cold, dark dungeon of Liberty jail to remind him: "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 122:7.)

In order to make the most of our education, our Father has given us the gift of agency to learn to use wisely during our sojourn on earth. The power to choose, to control our own destiny, was so important that a war in heaven was fought to preserve it. Our Father bore the grief of seeing one-third of his spirit children lost to Satan as casualties of the evil one's determination to destroy the plan of life and exaltation. Our choice to follow the Savior saved us from being cast out and brought us to this mortal probation.

Let us reflect for a moment upon how we have used the tremendous power of agency in our lives thus far. Let us consider the choices we have made. Many of us have chosen to pursue an education or a vocation, a choice that has eternal worth, for the Lord has revealed that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection." (D&C 130:18.)

President Brigham Young taught that education should "improve our minds and fit us for increased usefulness," and "make us of greater service to the human family." [^1] "Education," he explained, "is the power to think clearly, to act well in the world's work, and the power to appreciate life." [^2]

To help us graduate successfully from the "college of life," to help us earn some honors in the rigorous curriculum of adult mortality, to help us choose the right when a choice is place before us, [^3] may I suggest three simple guidelines. Though simple and familiar, these three principles are eternal and will serve us as well as they have served our ancestors and as they will yet serve our descendants: first, follow Christ; second, follow the Prophet; and third, follow the Spirit.

The Savior lovingly beckons to everyone, to all of our Father's children everywhere throughout all time. His invitation, "Come, follow me," is universally extended to all people across all eras of human history.

He marked the path and led the way, And every point defines To light and life and endless day Where God's full presence shines. [^4]

What he declared in the meridian of time stands as unassailably true today as it was nearly two thousand years ago when he proclaimed, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." (John 14:6.) In the Book of Mormon, Jacob powerfully exhorts us to come unto Christ and to follow the Lord's straight course: "O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One, Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Nephi 9:41.)

Jacob's elder brother, Nephi, queried, "Can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments?" (2 Nephi 31:10.) The resounding response is found in the Redeemer's own words: "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15), "for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do" (3 Nephi 27:21).

To follow Christ, we must obey his commandments.

With all my heart I echo the Savior's admonition that we choose to hear and heed the word of God. "Keep the commandments," we sing. "In this there is safety and peace." [^5] In our world today, the only protection from "all the fiery darts of the adversary" (D&C 3:8) is to choose to "put on the whole armour of God, that [we] may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil" (Ephesians 6:11).

And Satan is certainly wily. He is cunning, the master of deception and the father of all lies. Only by keeping all the commandments are we protected by "the whole armour of God" from Satan's incessant, insidious efforts to lead us carefully into his power. Peter taught us of Satan's ferocious devotion to our destruction when he wrote to the saints of his day: "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour." (1 Peter 5:8.)

We must keep all the commandments. We cannot approach the gospel as we would a buffet or smorgasbord, choosing here a little and there a little. We must sit down to the whole feast and live the Lord's loving commandments in their fullness.

We who have been taught the commandments know what to do: pray, study the scriptures, fast, pay our tithes and offerings, attend our meetings, partake of the sacrament, magnify our callings, serve others, sustain our Church leaders, do our home teaching and visiting teaching, make and keep sacred covenants, share the gospel, be honest, true, chaste, benevolent, and virtuous.

The righteous King Benjamin, who loved his people dearly, gathered his people together near the end of his righteous life to share with them the deepest feelings of his heart. After reviewing the basic beliefs and commandments of the gospel of Christ with them, he offered this simple but powerful exhortation: "And now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them." (Mosiah 4:10; emphasis added.)

As we strive to follow the Savior by keeping his commandments, we need to be aware of Satan's powerful persuasive efforts to confound and frustrate the plan of happiness. For example, he would have people believe that chastity and virtue are outmoded traditions of the distant past, that one can indulge in immorality and not suffer the consequences. Such are the lies that he spreads by any and all means possible. In contrast to Satan's deception, ponder the following words from President Spencer W. Kimball, who spoke plainly on this subject:

"That the Church's stand on morality may be understood, we declare firmly and unalterably, it is not an outworn garment, faded, old-fashioned, and threadbare. God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and his covenants and doctrines are immutable; and when the sun grows cold and the stars no longer shine, the law of chastity will still be basic in God's world and in the Lord's Church. Old values are upheld by the Church not because they are old, but rather because through the ages they have proven to be right. It will always be the rule." [^6]

No more powerful invitation to follow the Savior can be found in scripture than Moroni's valedictory admonition: "Come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness." (Moroni 10:32.) May we follow Christ to a rich, full, abundant life of peace and joy. When we are heavy laden, his promise of soul-refreshing rest is sure. (See Matthew 11:28-29.) And may we follow him to life eternal, to dwell forever with him and with our Father who is in heaven.

In a powerful message entitled "He Invites Us to Follow Him," President Howard W. Hunter explained what it means to follow the Savior: "Christ's supreme sacrifice can find full fruition in our lives only as we accept the invitation to follow him. . . . To follow an individual means to watch him or listen to him closely; to accept his authority, to take him as a leader, and to obey him; to support and advocate his ideas; and to take him as a model. . . . Just as teachings that do not conform to Christ's doctrine are false, so a life that does not conform to Christ's example is misdirected, and may not achieve its high potential destiny." [^7]

The Savior has declared that whether we receive the word of God "by [his] own voice or by the voice of [his] servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.) If we are to follow Christ, we must follow the prophet, the Lord's mouthpiece on earth. The Lord prepared and chose President Howard W. Hunter as the "prophet to guide us in these latter days." [^8] May I share a personal experience that taught me a great deal about this Christ-like man.

While I was serving as president of the European area of the Church, Sister Wirthlin and I traveled throughout Finland, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway to hold meetings and conferences with members and missionaries. As we neared the end of our rigorous travels, we arrived, along with President and Sister John Langeland, in the small city of Alta, Norway, where we held a meeting with the members. Afterwards we climbed a beautiful mountain, and at midnight we enjoyed a picnic. It was as light as noonday. At that time of the year, there was no sunset in Alta, which is located near the top of the world, well inside the Arctic Circle. As we watched the sun hover in a straight line as it moved across the horizon, we marveled at the precision and exactness that the Savior employed in creating the earth in all its majesty.

As President Langeland and I reviewed together our many meetings and travels, we were happy that we had made the extra effort to meet with the members in such a remote part of Norway. Over the years, few General Authorities had visited these small and widely scattered branches. But while chatting with the local leaders, we learned that in the city of Hammerfest, on the other side of a high mountain north of Alta, a branch of the Church had been established, a small branch that was not on our itinerary. Hammerfest is one of the world's northernmost cities, making its tiny branch one of the most remote units of the Church.

To our surprise, we learned that in September 1966, Elder Howard W. Hunter, as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, had been the first General Authority to visit the Hammerfest Branch, a visit that was accomplished with considerable difficulty. The story of that visit as reported in the Church News is worth telling because it says so much about the man whom the Lord has now chosen as his prophet, seer, and revelator:

"'Hammerfest is difficult to reach by normal transportation. It was originally planned that the visitors would fly . . . by seaplane. A change in the weather eliminated any possibility of using a plane, as is often the case. It was decided that they should travel by car from Alta, the closest city to Hammerfest with a commercial airport. Snow had started to cover the roads. Several times en route Elder Hunter and Pres. [Leo M.] Jacobsen had to push their car through the snow. When it seemed as if further progress was impossible, a truck came by and towed the car over the summit to Hammerfest.'

"They finally arrived at ten-thirty that night for a meeting that was to have started at seven o'clock, and found that the members had waited for them. 'They had come from a number of places along the north cape and from as far as Kirkenes near the Russian border,' Elder Hunter said." [^9] The members in Hammerfest, anxious to meet an apostle of the Lord and to hear the voice of one called as a special witness, waited three and a half hours for Elder Hunter's delayed arrival. Their faith, hope and prayers were rewarded as he shared with them his powerful testimony of the Savior. Despite great hardship, Elder Hunter, with God's blessings and protecting care, kept his commitment to minister to the Lord's sheep in that far-away small branch. "As a result of [his] visit, 'missionaries report[ed] a more friendly attitude among the people of the town and a new feeling of strength among the local members.'" [^10]

While impressive and moving, this is not an extraordinary event in the life of President Hunter. Rather, it is quite typical of his wholehearted devotion to the work of the Lord. He has traveled in nearly every corner of the earth. He possesses an indomitable zeal for preaching and proclaiming the gospel. He is undaunted in his determination to encourage the Latter-day Saints to be faithful in obeying God's commandments.

We all remember President Hunter's experience at Brigham Young University when, as he stood up to address a fireside in the Marriott Center, a young man rushed up and threatened him with a bomb. President Hunter did not flinch nor would he read the message demanded by the assailant. The students began to sing "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and a group of students and security officers managed to subdue the man. A doctor who came to the podium took President Hunter's pulse following this frightening incident and reported that it was normal. He resumed his speech by saying, "Life has a fair number of challenges in it." He stopped, looked over the audience, and added, "as demonstrated." [^11] This is another good example of a man with a purpose who was not distracted from his sacred calling regardless of danger.

President Hunter has asked us all to "live with ever more attention to the life and example of our Lord, Jesus Christ, especially the love and hope and compassion He displayed." He wants us "to treat each other with more kindness, more courtesy, more humility and patience and forgiveness." [^12] In short, he asks us to develop and demonstrate Christlike attributes in all our dealings with others—to love our neighbors as ourselves. To show compassion, we must possess charity, "the pure love of Christ" that the Father bestows upon "all who are followers of his Son, Jesus Christ." (Moroni 7:46-47.)

In recent years the Church has rushed humanitarian aid to flood victims and to refugees fleeing oppressive conditions and famine in many parts of the world. As a church, we are working to heed our prophet's counsel to show Christlike compassion toward our neighbors throughout the earth. But what are we doing individually to follow the prophet's call to provide compassionate service to our fellow beings?

President Hunter has also asked us "to establish the temple of the Lord as the great symbol of [our] membership and the supernal setting of [our] most sacred covenants," and encouraged us to draw closer to the Savior as "a temple-attending and a temple-loving people." "Let us hasten to the temple," he has said, "as frequently as time and means and personal circumstances allow." [^13]

I hope that those who are of age and are eligible to do so will take time to attend the temple regularly. Even if a temple is not close by, each individual should work to become and remain temple worthy. President Hunter has said that it is the "deepest desire of [his] heart to have every member of the Church temple worthy."

Just as we must seek a healthy balance in our temple attendance, we must also see that "all . . . things are done in wisdom and order" (Mosiah 4:27) in regard to our gospel study, and especially in regard to hearing and heeding the counsel of our prophet and of the others whom the Lord has called to lead the Church. Let us not grow so busy in our daily activities that we thoughtlessly fail to "feast upon the words of Christ." (2 Nephi 32:3.)

All who teach in the Church should teach by the power of the Spirit. We have been instructed that "if [we] receive not the Spirit [we] shall not teach." (D&C 41:14.) The prophet Nephi testified that the Holy Ghost "will show unto [us] all things what [we] should do." (2 Nephi 32:5.) Let us follow the Spirit and heed its quiet promptings. Learning to follow the Spirit requires considerable effort and ongoing attention.

Recently I was reminded of how vital it is to always be alert to the quiet whispering of the Holy Ghost. While on an assignment in Hawaii, Sister Wirthlin and I visited the island of Molokai, where one of the world's few remaining leper colonies is found. We drove into the mountains to a trail that leads to an overlook, and from there the colony can be seen in the distance below. After laboring up the trail, we were disappointed to discover that rain and fog obscured the valley below us and we could not see the colony. As we walked back to our car, we passed a young man headed toward the overlook. I offered a polite greeting, and from his answer, I could tell that he was from Germany.

I served a German-speaking mission in Austria and Switzerland as a young man. Here was a young man whose countenance bespoke a sincere heart and an approachable personality, and I spoke his language and understood his culture. I felt prompted to open my mouth and introduce the gospel to him, but because other people were around us, our brief encounter was interrupted, and we went our separate ways without my having said a word about the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. I failed to be the missionary that every member of the Savior's church ought to be.

As we drove away, I had the disturbing feeling that I had failed in my duty to proclaim the gospel. I remembered the Lord's words in the Doctrine and Covenants: "But with some I am not well pleased, for they will not open their mouths, but they hide the talent which I have given unto them, because of the fear of man. Wo unto such, for mine anger is kindled against them." (D&C 60:2.)

We drove around the island to see Molokai's beautiful waterfalls. After many miles, the road came to a dead-end, and we got out of our car to enjoy the beautiful surroundings. We had been there only a few moments when another car drove up and stopped. The young man we had seen on the overlook trail got out of the car, smiled, and gave me a warm handshake. As I grasped his outstretched hand, I thought to myself, This time I will do my duty!

We introduced ourselves, and I learned that he attended a university in a small city south of Dusseldorf, Germany. I spoke of my experiences in his country and of my admiration for the German people. Speaking of my work in Europe gave me an opportunity to explain some of the basics of the gospel. As we parted, I asked for his address and telephone number, which he gladly shared with me. I felt that he was truly a newfound friend and an interested investigator.

Upon my return to Salt Lake City, I wrote to the president of the Germany Dusseldorf Mission. I explained how Sister Wirthlin and I had met this outstanding young man and gave him his address, asking him to send missionaries to continue the gospel discussion that I had begun in Hawaii.

I don't believe it was happenstance that my wife and I met this young man twice. Our meetings were not chance encounters or mere coincidence. But the Lord doesn't always give us a second chance to share the gospel. I had failed to follow the Spirit the first time when the still small voice spoke to my heart and mind to prod me to action. But when I saw that young man get out of his car later, I quickly made up my mind I would not fail a second time and that I would open my mouth as the Lord so emphatically commands in revelations that apply to all of us.

In the thirty-third section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord commands us three times in three verses to "open our mouths": "Open your mouths and they shall be filled, and you shall become even as Nephi of old . . . Yea, open your mouths and spare not, and you shall be laden with sheaves upon your backs, for lo, I am with you. Yea, open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent, and prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (D&C 33:8-10.)

In the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord reveals that one of the principal purposes of the restoration is to proclaim the gospel—to bring truth and priesthood authority back to the earth so that missionary work can be organized and carried out as a mighty effort upon the earth in the last days. In verse 23, he explains that one of the reasons he called Joseph Smith to his prophetic work was so that "the fullness of [the] gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers."

Each of us has the sacred responsibility to proclaim the gospel. The Savior's commandment applies to all members of the Church, not just to full-time missionaries or to returned missionaries. We each have the responsibility to follow the Spirit when it prompts us to share the gospel so that others can come to follow the Savior.

We must act when the Spirit speaks! When I hearkened to the Spirit, the young man from Germany responded positively to my message. But it wasn't really my message. It was God's message, brought to my mind by the Spirit of the Lord. I was but an instrument in the Lord's hands, led by his Spirit to open my mouth and proclaim the message of the Restoration. In opening my mouth, I became, as the Lord promises, "even as Nephi of old." (D&C 33:8.) Father Lehi gives this explanation of why his son was so adamant in proclaiming the gospel: "Behold, it was not [Nephi], but it was the Spirit of the Lord which was in him, which opened his mouth to utterance that he could not shut it." (2 Nephi 1:27.)

The Spirit will always guide and direct aright. It will protect us from temptation, enlighten our minds, and comfort our hearts. The Lord has told us: "Put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit." He then goes on to promise: "I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy; and then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive." (D&C 11:12-14.)

The Holy Ghost will keep us ever vigilant, for, as Alma taught, Satan desires to have us, "to sift [us] as chaff before the wind." (Alma 37:15.) We need to listen to the still small voice and "suffer not [ourselves] to be led away by any vain or foolish thing." (Alma 39:11) We need to focus our energies on the things that matter and not waste our lives laying "up for [ourselves] treasures upon the earth where moth and rust doth corrupt." (Matthew 6:19; 3 Nephi 13:19.) Let us not trade away our eternal spiritual birthright for a mess of materialistic pottage.

When I was called to serve and sustained as a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles in October 1986, I shared some fundamental feelings of my heart that the Spirit brought to my mind. On that occasion, greatly humbled by the sacred trust the Lord and his prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, had placed upon me, I expressed these thoughts:

"Our religion is really the only thing we will have left ultimately and we must love it dearly. The gospel of Jesus Christ is more enduring than fame, more precious than riches, more to be desired than happiness. Understanding and living the gospel leads to the possession of a Christ-like character. The aim of each of us is to live a noble and exemplary life.

"Our Heavenly Father has endowed us with hearts of courage and faith, with strong wills, and with the ability to understand and to see clearly the difference between right and wrong. He has mercifully clothed us, each member, with the gift of the Holy Ghost, which gives us insight and personal power. . . . The light that emanates from our Savior beckons us on, undismayed. A righteous self-discipline can and will rule our lives." [^14]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Follow Christ. Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 255.
[^2] Follow the prophet. As quoted by LeGrand Richards, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 384.
[^3] Follow the Spirit. "Choose the Right," Hymns, no. 239.
[^4] Hymns, no. 195.
[^5] Hymns, no. 303.
[^6] Ensign, November 1980, p. 96 (emphasis added).
[^7] Ensign, September 1994, p. 2.
[^8] Hymns, no. 19.
[^9] Eleanor Knowles, Howard W. Hunter (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), pp. 175-76.
[^10] Ibid., p. 176.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 305-6.
[^12] Statement to the Press, June 6, 1994.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Ensign, November 1986, pp. 60-61.
