During my mission in Guatemala, I learned of the joy we can feel in our lives as we serve. I also learned of the joy that comes from allowing others to serve me. One act of service directed toward me changed my life forever.

For most of my mission, my companions and I were rarely invited to eat with other families.

While I was serving in Rabinal, a small farming village, a loving family invited my companion and me to dinner one evening.

This family had nothing of monetary value. Their one-room adobe home had no windows, only openings in the adobe. There was no running water; they carried water up from the river. They barely had enough food for themselves and their three children, but they offered to share with us.

Upon arriving at their home, we noticed only two place settings on their little table. When we asked if they had eaten, they said that they would eat later. My companion and I realized that they would only eat if anything remained. I imagined the children looking, after our departure, to see if there were any black beans left in the bowl and tortillas on the plate. My companion and I exchanged a knowing look and took small portions. I don’t remember black beans and tortillas ever tasting so good.

We sincerely thanked them and prepared to leave. They encouraged us to eat more, but we took some candy wrappers out of our bags and told the sister that we had been snacking and were full but that her meal was delicious. We gave a few pieces of candy to the children.

We shared a message, offered a prayer, and left.

As we stood outside thanking the father and saying goodbye, we could see through a little opening in the home that the mother was serving the children from the remaining food on the table. I’m sure the parents didn’t eat that night.

I learned a great deal from that family. These dear parents taught their children to offer selfless service, no matter how humble their station in life.

But the greater lesson for me was the power of allowing others to serve me. Sister Jean B. Bingham, former Relief Society General President, taught, “Our service to others is a demonstration of discipleship and our gratitude and love for God and His Son, Jesus Christ.”

We sometimes deprive others of the opportunity to demonstrate their discipleship through service. We might feel that others need service more than us or that it is too inconvenient for them. Do we allow others to serve us when they feel a prompting to do so?

Each of us knows that when we spend time serving others, our love for them grows. Allowing others the same opportunity will provide them with the same experience of increased love.

The author lives in California.
