John K. Carmack, Tolerance: Principles, Practices, Obstacles, Limits ( 1993)

PREFACE

As the close of the twentieth century nears, many people around the globe keep hoping to see more evidence of tolerance in the world. With the end of the cold war between the United States and Russia, a golden era of peace and freedom seemed possible. Swords, it was thought, could be beaten into plowshares, ushering in an era of goodwill and growing prosperity. Surely society would no longer tolerate stereotyping, class hatred, and religious persecution. It appeared that the practice of judging others on the basis of race, color, religion, or national origin, if not entirely discredited, was at least receding in the face of experience and enlightened thinking.

Many hadn't considered sufficiently, however, that sustained tolerance requires a foundation of rock-solid principles that affect our attitudes and practices of tolerance. And in men and women such tolerant attitudes and practices themselves develop one at a time, built on sound principles that motivate them to treat others well. Good homes that foster these principles are essential to the process, but children often lack such homes. Many other obstacles stand in the way of pervasive commitment to tolerance.

Living among American Indians in Arizona during my early years, I developed an interest in the tensions and prejudices that often exist between races. Living in communities in California that enjoyed the mixture of virtually all races and nationalities enlarged this interest. Particularly defining for me were years of Church service in the Los Angeles Stake where conferences took on the look of a mini-United Nations assembly. In attendance were black, Jew, Korean, Chinese, Latin American, Armenian, deaf, and Caucasian brothers and sisters, all laboring and worshiping side by side. For me, my wife, and our children, a conviction of the need for tolerance became a central tenet of our religious and family life.

During the years my family and I lived in Los Angeles, I formulated the goal of writing this book, but the press of professional, business, and family life did not allow me the needed time to write it. Then, while serving as a mission president, I found I had even less time for a major project. I managed, however, to outline a book on tolerance.

Assignments that came to me after my call to serve as a General Authority in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints required that my wife and I live in Asia. In this capacity, we helped supervise more than twenty countries for the Church. Here was not only a firsthand opportunity to work with other cultures and races but also time to think and observe. The Asia assignment has allowed me to write this book. Tolerance, then, is less a research project than a discussion based on observation, thought, and analysis.

A general outline of the book's contents is as follows:

First, I identify tolerance as a personal and world issue, one that is fundamentally important for the welfare of people. Then I define tolerance as an action-oriented doctrine requiring more than passive acceptance of other people. Involved, active, caring tolerance is part of the way to meet challenges we face in neighborhoods and among the nations of the world.

We find tolerant and broad-minded people sprinkled in every neighborhood and nation. Identifying their attitudes and practices is central to learning what we need to know about tolerance. Thus, one chapter is devoted to exploring these attitudes and practices. Then the principles that drive tolerant women and men are identified and discussed, and this is followed by a discussion of the terrible obstacles that we must overcome on the way to achieving and sustaining tolerance.

In connection with the quest for tolerance, the book also poses the question, Are there limits to tolerance? and provides an affirmative answer that suggests we are not required to tolerate some of the corrupt and evil influences that are affecting our societies.

The chapter on tolerant friends who have helped The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints grew out of a study in preparation for a talk I gave to the Cannon-Hinckley Club in Salt Lake City on the night of the big San Francisco earthquake, 17 October 1989. Research assistance by employees of the Church Historical Department, including Glenn Rowe, Grant Anderson, Mary Gifford, Ronald Barney, and many others, contributed to the chapter. The Church Historical Department is a rich resource center with helpful, intelligent, and dedicated professionals available to assist serious researchers. The department's staff also helped provide background materials for the lessons drawn from the Missouri era of Church history used in the chapter on lessons of adversity. That chapter contains ideas from an address I delivered 29 March 1991 at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, at a symposium on the Missouri era.

My desire has been to create a useful book that will not only share my own convictions but also be of practical help to readers in motivating them to assess tolerance in their own lives and, where needed and desired, change their attitudes and practices as regards tolerance. Another hope is that the book will provide a tolerant basis for meeting family, personal, and institutional issues we face together.

My wife, Shirley, has given her wise and steady counsel and support to all aspects of this book. Much of what I know and feel about tolerance has come through the rich association with our children: Lisa Palmer and her husband, Brian; Paula Kinnison and her husband, Mark; Stanford and his wife, Lori; Barbara Carmack; and Julia Carmack. Other friends and colleagues have made suggestions that made the manuscript more useful, accurate, readable, and tolerant. Elder Monte J. Brough of the Seventy has been a major contributor to this book as we have served together in Hong Kong, Cecilia Jensen provided anumber of helpful suggestions that improved the book, and Richard Turley took time to read and provide needed counsel on an early draft. My secretary, Ada Hui, deserves special mention. Her cheerful and diligent labor with the manuscript was exceeded only by her patience with me.

Cory Maxwell of Bookcraft was a thoughtful and encouraging supporter, and the entire Bookcraft staff has placed on its editorial and artistic stamp the book.

I alone, however-not my counselors and editors nor The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints-am responsible for what you read here, although my years of service as a leader in the Church and my love for the doctrines of Jesus Christ have contributed to any benefit you find in the pages that follow.
