John K. Carmack, Tolerance: Principles, Practices, Obstacles, Limits ( 1993)

Chapter One

Tolerance: A Personal and World Problem

No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main.

—John Donne

A lmost everyone agrees that we need more tolerance, not only among nations, races, religions, and communities but also in our own homes. Not all agree, however, that we can do something about it. This book rests on the firm personal conviction that we can improve. Early in my life I began to develop that conviction, and discovered personal intolerance that needed uprooting.

In Winslow, Arizona, my family lived next door to Mrs. Daughwalter, a German emigrant who had raised her family in the United States. She had never fully adapted to the culture and spoke English with a heavy German accent. That accent was not in style in 1939 and 1940 with the onset of World War II.

The neighborhood children, including me, made fun of her decidedly German accent, taking advantage of her hot temper expressed in volatile outbursts when dogs or cats or children played on her lawn. On such occasions she would come flying out of her home with a broom-waving it in the air to help communicate her message, "Get off my lawn!"-and broken English would invariably give way to native German.

We called her "Old Lady Daughwalter." She lived alone, her son and family near but across town. We loved to laugh at her antics and seized opportunities to taunt her. We felt justified in our behavior-after all, she was German and had little patience for dogs, cats, or children. She seemed different and out of place.

Hearing the unhealthy and harmful talk the neighborhood children indulged in, Father took me aside for a talk. "Don't you know that Mrs. Daughwalter is getting older, that she is a fine person and an excellent neighbor? I want you to treat her with respect and help the other children in the neighborhood do the same." Our talk had an effect on me because of the love and respect I had for my father, but events yet to come drove his points home.

During our family's last winter in Arizona and just before we moved to California in 1942, Mrs. Daughwalter became seriously ill. She was unable to arise from bed to light a fire or cook meals. Father took over, appointing me-as the oldest of the boys-to assist. "John Kay, I want you to bring in wood and coal every morning and make Mrs. Daughwalter's fire." I don't remember the assignments given others, but I remember that I accepted and discharged my duty.

The dividend reaped from my morning chore was to be greater than earning Mrs. Daughwalter's love and respect, although the idea that she would give such love and respect to me was a wonderful revelation for a young man. She was grateful to Mother, who prepared her meals, and credited Father with saving her life that winter. She expressed her gratitude and love to me in her broken English. I discovered that behind her broken English was a pure heart and a good person, who probably had a right to be cranky when dogs and cats and neighborhood boys violated her land space. She became a close friend to the Carmack family. Even after we moved to California, she mailed German candies and cookies to us until she died.

The greater dividend to me was that I began at an early age the unnatural but essential process of looking beyond appearance, broken language, and even crankiness to the real person. People deserve to be treated as brothers and sisters because they are all children of God. No matter what the circumstances, almost everyone deserves decent treatment and respect.

One of the tragedies of war is its tendency to build up in people attitudes of hatred against whole nationalities, races, and cultures. During such times, stereotyping spreads to epidemic proportions, and the rhetoric gets harsh and ugly.

This book takes its theme from teachings of Jesus, who taught and exemplified tolerance constantly. In the Sermon on the Mount, the spirit of which is beautifully summed up in the Beatitudes, Jesus insisted that the meek, the merciful, the peacemakers, and the pure in heart were blessed. His followers must expect and endure hatred, personal vilification, misunderstanding, and persecution. (See Matt. 5:3-12.)

Notions of tolerance are not limited to the New Testament; they are also found in the Old Testament and are in large measure a part of many religions. Other labels can be attached to the attitude and practice Jesus taught, but the term tolerance catches in one word the richness of Christ's teachings. The Golden Rule is a good summary of the doctrine of tolerance: "Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets" (Matt. 7:12).

Tolerance is a fundamental character trait of great people and a part of the attitudes and practices of those we admire and respect. People without tolerance are diminished and poor.

Every day I find a personal need to become more tolerant. Thus, I wrote this book as an aid toward self-improvement, mine and others'. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and friends and observers of the Church can also improve their tolerance. Latter-day Saints have no corner on this doctrine. Readers of all faiths will find new dimensions in tolerance as they deepen their commitment to its practice.

The subject of religious intolerance is a constant topic of discussion in states like Utah and Idaho, where large Latter-day Saint populations live side by side with members of other religious persuasions. Perhaps this book can stimulate more healthy discussion and serve as a catalyst in upgrading rhetoric, motivating people of goodwill in developing attitudes, habits, and practices of tolerance. Many observers of Utah affairs have identified the problem of religious intolerance as a major issue. We all need friends and neighbors who care, and Utah poses special challenges to some who move there to live.

Two of the world's major problems are intolerance and misunderstanding. Almost all current serious unrest has religious and cultural roots. Internationally, intolerance between religious and ethnic groups is rising. No nation seems immune from intolerance, and the stakes are high. Peace will never be achieved until most of us master the attitudes and practices of tolerance.

Riots and looting in United States cities, shrill and extreme rhetoric on abortion legislation from both sides, wars between religious and ethnic factions in former Yugoslavia, and shellings in Kabul all speak eloquently of the need for greater tolerance.

Based more on experience than logic, this book is a practical manual for developing attitudes and improving practices of tolerance. It contains no plea to eliminate racial and cultural differences or to abolish countries and boundaries in a scheme of social engineering. Rather, the conviction here is that understanding the underlying elements of tolerance and identifying the attitudes and practices of tolerant people will deepen our commitment to be the kind of tolerant citizens and neighbors Christ described in his Sermon on the Mount, Golden Rule, and other teachings.

Peaceful neighborhoods, communities, states, and nations ultimately will come from Christ's ideals and beliefs that take root among us. Neighbors of differing religious persuasions need to do more than endure each other, although that is better than taking up swords. Tolerance of the kind Jesus taught requires binding up the wounds, not passing on the other side of the road.

We can enjoy the benefits of tolerance, as defined in this book, without sacrificing our beliefs, principles, racial characteristics, or religious practices. While Latter-day Saints "claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience," we also believe the corollary to that phrase, "and allow all men the same privilege, let them [meaning all of us] worship how, where, or what they may" (A of F 1:11). Both we and our neighbors can hold on to our beliefs without wavering, claiming the right to believe and worship as we choose, but in fairness and tolerance.

When we called our daughter Paula to verify that she, her husband, Mark, and their children had not been harmed during the riots and looting in Los Angeles in the spring of 1992, Paula urged, "Dad, please write your book." This is it.
