John K. Carmack, Tolerance: Principles, Practices, Obstacles, Limits ( 1993)

Chapter Six

The Limits

Fair is foul, and foul is fair: Hover through the fog and filthy air.

-William Shakespeare, Macbeth

I n previous chapters defining and describing tolerance I have briefly mentioned the reality that some people carry on activities that assault good taste, decency, and values we hold dear. Many of us would agree that we live in an increasingly violent and corrupt society. Thorough coverage of the topic of tolerance requires that we pause to consider abuses by word and action that we should not tolerate. There are times we should say, "In the name of common sense and decency, stop!" As Elder Neal A. Maxwell said, "In Sodom they probably had absolute free speech, but nothing worth saying!"R1 [^1]

For example, we need to draw lines and set some standards in dealing with indecency in our communities. This is not easy to do in the nations and communities that value free expression, freedom of religion, and freedom from censorship and arbitrary abuse by government. We admire the diversity such freedom encourages. A wide variety of oral and written expressions brings richness and honesty into our lives. No one has a corner on valuable and quality language use. Not only do I welcome and applaud this freedom, I believe it is a fundamental principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Drawing Lines

In our personal lives we constantly draw lines that demarcate our own behavior. We decide what we will read, how we will act in meeting life's challenges, what standards will govern our behavior, what we will or will not do in various situations, and what words we will and will not say.

In all of these decisions about our personal standards, what we deeply believe about life guides us. For example, Christian principles guide men and women of Christ; tenets of Judaism guide the committed, religious Jew; the teachings of Catholicism guide the believing Catholic; Islamic principles guide the follower of Islam. Most of us make decisions and draw lines to govern our lives.

One of the practices we noted about tolerant people is that they do not impose their own beliefs and standards on others, but they have beliefs and standards that they do not compromise. One of these standards is that they are tolerant of others. Tolerant people allow others the agency and freedom to be who they want to be and to believe as they choose.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has espoused a number of lofty and noble principles that establish standards for its members. For example, as we read in the Articles of Faith written by Joseph Smith, we believe in God, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost; there are four fundamental principles and ordinances of the gospel; we exercise faith in Apostles and prophets; and we strive to be honest and tolerant of others and their beliefs.

The Church expects its members to live according to these standards as a condition of membership. An individual member often sets higher standards than those required, but members can forfeit their privilege of membership if they violate the commandments by crossing those lines drawn to instruct and guide Church members.

These standards are not imposed on those who do not belong to the Church. Others are free, within limits, to live as they choose.

This is not to say, however, that there are no standards that govern communities, or that tolerance requires that we accept any and all behavior. How far must we go in tolerating conditions when deterioration of standards increases violence and corruption in our communities? What does a tolerant person do when, in the words of the three witches in Shakespeare's Macbeth, "fair is foul, and foul is fair"?R2 [^2]

Communities, states, and nations do not generally draw lines governing what people can think and believe, although some totalitarian regimes still attempt to do this. Every society, however, has established lines that if crossed will subject its citizens and others in the society to penalties designed to punish and deter those crossing the lines. These penalties should, of course, be administered with fairness and due process.

For example, actions such as committing murder, robbery, assault, or battery; refusing or failing to obey traffic rules; driving negligently or recklessly; and interfering unduly in the rights of another person will not be tolerated. Every society draws its lines and establishes penalties to be applied when citizens cross the lines.

Societies even establish limits and standards governing oral and written words to ensure an environment of decency and safety.

In the United States, certain written and oral words and pictures are not dignified as free speech guaranteed by the First Amendment of the Constitution. The United States Supreme Court narrowly defines and classifies certain words, phrases, and pictures as pornography. Thus, laws against publishing pornography do not violate the First Amendment, because such words and pictures are not protected by the United States Constitution.

Likewise, words that may injure or defame others, or words that create clear and present danger of harm to others can subject the person using them to criminal and civil penalties.

Thus, even in a tolerant nation we draw lines and set standards for the protection and benefit of society. People can also set their own standards higher than the community or the Church as long as these do not infringe on the rights of others.

Must We Tolerate Abusive Words and Actions?

Most people would agree that we need not and should not tolerate the publication of pornography or defamatory words or pictures. That is a fairly easy line to draw for most of us. But are there other abuses, in addition to pornography and defamation, that tolerant people should oppose? If so, what are they and what can and should be done about them?

Words

Let's start with words. It has already been said that tolerant people do not need to tolerate pornography. Although there are strict laws regulating the publishing and distribution of it, a flood of such filthy material pollutes our communities. The doctrine and practice of tolerance does not require us to tolerate pornography. There are some idealistic people and others commercially involved in producing and distributing pornography who will vehemently disagree with what has been said here, but most people will agree that we can draw the line to exclude pornography without violating the principles of tolerance.

Now the going gets harder but much more important. Where should tolerant people draw the line on material in feature films, television programs, magazines, music, and art that includes scenes and words of violence, debauchery, vulgarity, and immorality? What, if anything, should we do when we discover a consistent pattern in music and entertainment that belittles a church (ours or another's), religion, and traditional family life and values?

Let us presume, as is true in the United States, that most of the material we have just described is speech protected by the constitution of our own country.

Do decent people have to accept as necessary norms in their communities the standards that the United States Supreme Court uses to determine whether the Constitution protects certain words classified as free speech? By publishing its opinions narrowly defining pornography, is the Supreme Court endorsing everything that is legally protected? The answer is, of course not. The Supreme Court is only establishing the line at which the law will apply to protect us.

Here we need to make some clear distinctions. Merely because something is legal does not make it right or decent. Despite Supreme Court definitions, communities are not required to approve material that is vulgar, indecent, violent, and depraved. As Arthur Henry King says, "We cannot say that these pornographic and violent productions on film and on television are not evil."R3 [^3]

Much of public entertainment belittles and attacks directly and indirectly personal and sacred beliefs about God and religion, held dear and important by most people. Does tolerance require that we passively accept the status quo as regards the content of some of this entertainment? Just because we cannot successfully use courts to enforce higher standards, must we accept all depictions of violence and corruption?

Film critic Michael Medved noted in a 1992 book, "It was not so long ago that all civilized people avoided attacking another man's religion as a matter of common decency."R4 [^4]

We need to draw some lines and exercise our own rights of free speech in order to motivate the entertainment industry to set higher standards and draw lines that recognize basic community values as it formerly did. Clearly much of the industry has gone too far, not only in negatively portraying religion but also in negatively depicting family life, marriage, parent-and-child relationships, and moral relationships between men and women. The entertainment industry also abuses our ears with a barrage of vulgar language and portrays violence as if it were the common and accepted way of dealing with the problems of life.

You may be thinking, "I agree with your basic concepts, but we can't do anything about it." Is that true? No, there is much that can be done about these deplorable conditions. Setting reasonable and rational personal limits to help us decide what publicly marketed entertainment we will patronize is not an intolerant course to take.

In establishing our personal program of tolerance, let's draw the line at tolerating entertainment that numbs the conscience, destroys faith in man and God, advocates or teaches violence and immorality, and bombards our sense of decency with vulgarity and especially the degradation of women and children. Our personal decisions can be shared to persuade others to join us. We can also seek to communicate our feelings to those who create and market offensive material.

Here are a few examples of things we can do:

Â We can avoid attending or watching entertainment and art displays that are offensive and destructive of basic values.

Â In direct and tolerant ways, we can make known how we feel about the assault that offensive material makes on our values and publish these feelings to others, especially those producing and marketing such material.

Â We can join with others in our communities to exercise our rights of free speech-in a variety of peaceful and legal ways-to oppose corrupt and filthy entertainment of all kinds.

But, it might be asked, isn't that advocacy of censorship? This is one of the immediate accusations we hear when we attempt to insert a word about standards, decency, and opposition to corrupt music, television, art, and films. As Elder Maxwell observed, "An otherwise permissive society, which tolerates almost everything, usually will not tolerate speech that challenges its iniquity. Evil is always intolerantly preoccupied with its own perpetuation."R5 [^5]

Why is it right to insist on freedom of speech and tolerance for those who produce and sell entertainment and yet deny that same freedom for those who oppose the part of the entertainment that is indecent? Allowing one segment of society to enjoy a freedom that is denied another is not right. Making our views known on issues of importance is an exercise of guaranteed freedoms just as much as producing and marketing entertainment is. We should not get so defensive and tolerant that we cower from our responsibility to stand up to growing indecency and corruption. Those who speak against indecency should be prepared to be ridiculed, stereotyped, vilified, and charged with censoring free speech. Society needs to hear from people who care for values enough to endure the usual cry of outrage without backing down.

Actions

Communities usually have an easier time drawing lines regulating dangerous conduct of people than they do in regulating entertainment and music. Basically, government should formulate laws that establish peaceful communities and punish crime. That is the essential function of government. Seldom should we take the law into our own hands where there is an established form of authority. Our opinions and ideas about regulating conduct should, of course, be communicated to our public officials, but as much as possible we should control harmful and dangerous actions by working within the established system.

Occasionally there may be a vacuum of authority that requires us to protect ourselves by using measures of self-defense until the authorities arrive, and common sense dictates that we be alert to danger. Tolerant people can and should, however, generally rely on government to control dangerous actions by our fellow citizens.

Refusal to operate within the established system of government is one of the signs of fanatacism at work. For example, some people refuse to pay income tax; some set up their own private system of defense against perceived enemies; others refuse to obey laws against plural marriage; and some even establish their own private system of criminal justice, including meting out various punishments for breaking their private rules.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Church has a wise and authoritative set of principles that govern in these matters:

We believe that the commission of crime should be punished according to the nature of the offense; that murder, treason, robbery, theft, and the breach of the general peace, in all respects, should be punished according to their criminality and their tendency to evil among men, by the laws of that government in which the offense is committed; and for the public peace and tranquility all men should step forward and use their ability in bringing offenders against good laws to punishment (D&C 134:8).

A little further on, the Doctrine and Covenants reads:

We believe that men should appeal to the civil law for redress of all wrongs and grievances, where personal abuse is inflicted or the right of property or character infringed, where such laws exist as will protect the same; but we believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government, from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to the laws, and relief afforded (D&C 134:11).

These are excellent statements governing tolerant people in dealing with the actions of hostile elements in society. Usually we rely on the government to protect us against destructive actions, except in emergencies.

Summary

Tolerance does not require that we stand powerless and ineffective in the face of corruption, abuse, and moral deterioration.

Dangerous abuse, especially in art and entertainment, can be countered by doing the following things:

a. not watching, patronizing, or acquiring music, videos, television, films, or art that violate standards of decency;

b. influencing your families and associates to guard their homes against the invasion of negative entertainment material;

c. joining with other community groups to influence public opinion against the spread of corrupt entertainment and art, whether or not it is legally classified as pornography, while remembering always to be fair and tolerant and to allow room for honest differences and values that do not threaten to harm your community; and

d. not being cowed into neutrality by purveyors' charges of censorship or their insincere cloak of free speech, but rather insisting on the right to be heard yourself within the framework of tolerance, good taste, and common sense.

---
Notas:
[^1] Keep your own standards high, governing your participation and patronage in art and entertainment according to principles of decency, thereby setting a personal example without imposing your standards on others. We can tolerate art and entertainment that we do not enjoy as long as it does not endanger the safety and morality of our communities by offending reasonable standards of decency, morality, and good taste.
[^2] Remember that the Church and other institutions also have the right and privilege to establish standards as a condition of membership. These standards may be higher than those of the community at large.
[^3] Stand firm against every kind of personal involvement with pornography.
[^4] Join with others in legal steps available to keep pornography out of your community.
[^5] Express disagreement in tolerant language when attacks on your own or others' religions are found in entertainment and art. Without imposing censorship, fight the growing corruption in art and entertainment by
