John K. Carmack, Tolerance: Principles, Practices, Obstacles, Limits ( 1993)

Chapter Eleven

Now, Let's Do It

Into the hands of every individual is given a marvelous power for good or for evil-the silent, unconscious, unseen influence of his life.

-William George Jordan

This book rests on three personal convictions:

First, tolerance is a basic part of great character.

Second, tolerance is in short supply.

Third, tolerance can be learned.

Awareness would increase if every segment of society would place tolerance on its short list of subjects to be studied. Awareness would lead to more acts of tolerance; more acts of tolerance would lead to more character; more character would lead toward the Millennium most Christians look forward to.

Thinking and writing about tolerance has benefited me. My hope is that what has been presented here will interest and broaden my family, Church members, and my friends.

If readers of this book have persevered to this point, they are ready for some last counsel to wrap it up.

So what should we actually do about tolerance? Other than reading and thinking about tolerance, is there anything more we can do? Has this just been an exercise in philosophy, an exploration of a moral concept? Suggestions are provided at the end of most chapters in this book, but here are the final ones.

During my college days Standard Stations Inc. hired me for the summer as a service station attendant. As summer jobs go it was a good one. The pay was fair and the work interesting. We dealt with the public, serviced their automobiles and sold gasoline, oil, and accessories.

Standard was an aggressive sales organization. They gave us two weeks of intensive training, primarily in sales techniques, before we started our first assignment. They trained us to discover the needs of the customers and fill those needs. We searched for worn fanbelts, threadbare tires, and grimy oil.

My first assignment was with Bill in downtown Santa Barbara, California. He had a great personality with the customers and knew them all by name. I was new and eager to do a good job. Although Bill welcomed me warmly, he spent much of his time grousing and complaining to me about his assistant manager. Bill said the assistant manager couldn't sell, was lazy, and Bill rated him as a substandard employee. The company must have agreed because the assistant manager had been stuck in that job for many years. It didn't take me long to realize that Bill was saying the same negative things to the assistant manager about me. I was off to a poor start, not fulfilling the high expectations the company had for me and I for myself.

As the summer traffic picked up on Highway 101, the district manager transferred me to Hal's station on the highway at State Street. I immediately began to change. Hal told me he was delighted to have me and had heard good things about me. He said he had asked for me and expressed his confidence and trust in me. I felt accepted and appreciated. Through the rest of the summer my record spoke for itself. I blossomed into a contributing and high-achieving employee.

Another interesting thing happened. Management also transferred Bill's assistant manager to another station. In a short while he became the leading tire salesman in the district. Soon he was promoted to manager.

The next summer when I came home from school, virtually every station asked for me. Today I don't remember the pay I received, except that it was fair and competitive with other possible employment, but I remember the feeling of being understood, accepted, and trusted. I also remember the terrible feeling of not being trusted. My suggestion is that we try to remember and practice the tolerance and trust Hal showed me.

If we could just raise the level of active, involved tolerance a few percentage points the results would be outstanding. Treating others as we would have them treat us is the attitude we need to have. Negative habits of distrusting people and institutions have a way of fulfilling the dire prophecy implied-"I knew that person couldn't be trusted."

If everyone we meet is a son or daughter of God, can we not assume high potential in most of them and treat them accordingly?

Sending positive signals of understanding and acceptance to our spouses and children is a good way to start a habit. The self-esteem created and the productive lives that emerge from a tolerant home environment, multiplied by thousands and millions, are what the world needs. So let's start at home, include those we work with, and touch everyone we meet with the attitude of tolerance. We can develop a tolerant attitude as easily as we can an intolerant and negative one.

Â I would be a friend to the friendless and find joy in ministering to the needs of the poor.

Â I would visit the sick and afflicted and inspire in them a desire for faith to be healed.

Â I would teach the truth to the understanding and blessing of all mankind.

Â I would seek out the erring one and try to win him back to a righteous and happy life.

Â I would not seek to force people to live up to my ideals but rather love them into doing the thing that is right.

Â I would live with the masses and help to solve their problems that their earth life may be happy.

Â I would avoid the publicity of high positions and discourage the flattery of thoughtless friends.

Â I would not knowingly wound the feeling of any, not even one who may have wronged me, but would seek to do good and make him my friend.

Â I would overcome the tendency to selfishness and jealousy and rejoice in the successes of all the children of my Heavenly Father.

Â I would not be an enemy to any living soul.

Â Knowing that the Redeemer of mankind has offered to the world the only plan that will fully develop us and make us really happy here and hereafter I feel it not only a duty but a blessed privilege to disseminate this truth.R1 [^1]

Let's not just passively accept others; let's look for ways to show our tolerance by what we do. Here are some things you might try:

Â Drop a letter.

Â Make a call.

Â Give a quiet signal that you don't enjoy an ethnic joke.

Â Look for a stranger at church and welcome her or him.

Â Quell any tendency you may have to complain and grumble; subdue any signs of pride and feelings of superiority you may find creeping into your attitudes.

And let's not even get too intolerant with intolerance. We can easily develop a holier-than-thou attitude and become judgmental. Latter-day Saints need to be particularly sensitive to this tendency. By our habits of clean living we stand out as different and are thus noticed. We can easily slip into intolerant habits and rhetoric.

We need to develop the practice and skills of versatility. Versatility requires that we even meet the needs of people who irritate us-cold and ambitious social climbers, for example. Rather than try to save them from themselves, we should rely on the natural rough and tumble forces of life to rub off those rough edges. Let's do what we can to meet their needs. The opportunity to teach a quiet lesson may come along if they know we care. Versatile people go out of their way to meet the needs of others.

Patience, another attitude of tolerant people, will increase if we practice it. Let's begin by developing more patience at home. You can start by doing such simple things as:

Â Counting to ten

Â Biting your tongue

Â Letting an angry letter sit overnight

If we are impatient by temperament, we can replace this habit with practice. As we broaden our circle of friends and associates beyond those of our immediate family, another practice of the tolerant, we develop greater understanding of diversity, which leads to greater patience.

Here are some other practices you can focus on in order to develop tolerance:

Â Read and learn about people.

Â Develop the habit of being quiet when tempted to speak negatively about another.

Â Guard against becoming a has-been who spends significant amounts of time recounting past glory, and instead live in the present tense and be excited to gain the most out of every new opportunity.

Â Live your religion and keep your standards high, but resist the temptation to impose your standards on others.

Â Be a stimulating, excited person, without assuming a false personality.

Â Take time to get all sides of an issue when you are faced with difficult or controversial matters.

Â Don't be impetuous on things that matter.

These and other habits will mark us as tolerant people. Tolerant people don't need to impose their standards on others. Their example speaks louder than words. Everyone benefits.

Through effort and practice, let's develop all of the attitudes and practices of tolerant people. It will make a difference in our effectiveness in life.

We should be particularly kind and helpful to those of other churches and, if possible, find ways to join with other churches in community affairs. This shared involvement has been one of the great benefits of the Boy Scout program. It has allowed, even required, churches, community organizations, and leaders to work cooperatively for common goals.

Let's quietly and firmly stand up and be counted when our own church is unjustifiably maligned; let's defend the right of members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and other churches to worship according to the dictates of their own consciences; and let's do such things cheerfully, calmly, and confidently, without anger. Much good is found in almost all religions. We should fight inner tendencies to downgrade another church or to say negative things about any other religion, and we need to avoid the implied put-down and superior attitude of, "They're not LDS, but Â� "

Let's not boycott business people because they belong to other religions, or deal exclusively with those of our church. Let's broaden our outlook when it does not compromise principle.

Â Being constantly alert for people in need

Â Offering help

Â Doing what you can, wherever you are, with those who come across your path

Let's keep firmly in mind that writing critical articles on religion is not the same thing as living our religion. There is a place for scholarship and criticism, but these activities are not what we mean when we say, "She lives her religion." Religion in its pure form is what James advocated in the New Testament-visiting the fatherless, the widows, and being doers of the word. Isn't this the reason that loving the Lord with all our hearts and our neighbors as ourselves are the two great commandments? If we obey those two commandments we will live a righteous and full life.

President Spencer W. Kimball warned: "They who get off on tangents and ride hobby horses to death are they who become fanatic. Let them understand that they must be tolerant of others' faults but never accept as justifiable their own."R2r

And Elder Boyd K. Packer observed that "a virtue when pressed to the extreme may turn into a vice. Unreasonable devotion to an ideal, without considering the practical application of it, ruins the ideal itself."R3 [^2]

Tolerant people keep their feet on the ground and deal more with experience-things as they are-than logic. They value common sense and develop wisdom. They also trust the current prophet's counsel on important matters affecting their salvation. We should be careful, remembering that more is sometimes less in religion as in life.

We need to fight the common tendency to become ambitious for higher office and recognition that creeps into our thinking. Recognition and higher office have nothing to do with salvation. Let us live as President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., advised: "In the service of the Lord, it is not where you serve but how. In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one takes the place to which one is duly called, which place one neither seeks nor declines."R4 [^3]

Power and position tend to seduce and corrupt us. Tolerant people fight undue ambition, retaining the drive for excellence in performing roles assigned to them. Character and obedience are more important than position.

In conclusion, tolerance, like perfection, is a process, not something we achieve fully in this life. It is something we reach for. As we strive for it we grow closer to achieving it, but though we never quite reach perfect tolerance, we never stop trying and growing. Tolerance can be learned. Its attitudes and practices can be acquired with study and time. We should hold on to the truth, keep high standards, learn to do well, and gain in tolerance and respect for others.

Let's claim our privilege of worshiping God according to our own consciences. After claiming that privilege, let's use it. We should also "allow all men the same privilege" (A of F 1:11). Life will be richer and have more meaning. The good we do and the joy we spread will be a rich legacy for our families, the Church, and the community. Let's resolve now to incorporate as our own the motto of Teddy Kolleck, mayor of Jerusalem:

"Let's be more tolerant!"

FTNT: 1, Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 235. ~

FTNT: 2, John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses 1:155. ~

FTNT: 3, Kimball, Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 240. ~

FTNT: 4, Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 4:113. ~

FTNT: 1, Ezra Taft Benson, The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 446. ~

FTNT: 2, Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 228. ~

FTNT: 3, George Albert Smith, in Conference Report, October 1945, pp. 173-74. ~

FTNT: 4, Charles W. Nibley, "Reminiscences," in Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939), p. 522. ~

FTNT: 5, Kathleen Hill, quoted in William Manchester, The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill, vol. 2, Alone: 1932-1940 (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1988), p. 433. ~

FTNT: 6, See Peter F. Drucker, The Effective Executive (Great Britain: William Heinemann Ltd., 1967, and Pan Books Ltd., 1970), p. 151. ~

FTNT: 1, "Know This, That Every Soul Is Free," Hymns, no. 240. ~

FTNT: 2, M. M. Kaye, The Sun in the Morning: My Early Years in India and En-gland (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1990), p. 99, italics in original. ~

FTNT: 3, Sir Arthur Wing Pinero, in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 13th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1955), p. 761. ~

FTNT: 4, Joseph Smith, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, comp. and ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), p. 473. ~

FTNT: 5, Quoted in David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953), p. 190. ~

FTNT: 6, For an excellent discussion of the subject of litigation, see Dallin H. Oaks, The Lord's Way (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), pp. 153-88. ~

FTNT: 7, See Aleksandr Isayevich Solzhenitsyn, One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, trans. Ralph Parker (New York: Dutton, 1963). ~

FTNT: 1, Finley Peter Dunne ("Mr. Dooley"), in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 13th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1955), p. 835. ~

FTNT: 2, For example, see Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 302. ~

FTNT: 3, Kimball, Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 236. ~

FTNT: 4, Kimball, Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 236. ~

FTNT: 5, See M. Scott Peck, People of the Lie (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983). ~

FTNT: 6, William Shakespeare, Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, act 1, scene 5, line 108. ~

FTNT: 1, Neal A. Maxwell, That Ye May Believe (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1992), p. 74. ~

FTNT: 2, William Shakespeare, Macbeth, act 1, scene 1, line 12. ~

FTNT: 3, Arthur Henry King, The Abundance of the Heart (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), pp. 47-48. ~

FTNT: 4, Michael Medved, Hollywood vs. America (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1992), p. 91. ~

FTNT: 5, Maxwell, That Ye May Believe, pp. 74-75. ~

FTNT: 1, History of the Church 3:190-91n. ~

FTNT: 2, Reported by George A. Smith, in Journal of Discourses 17:92. ~

FTNT: 3, Thomas L. Kane to "My dear friends," 11 July 1850, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah (hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives). ~

FTNT: 4, See Almon W. Babbitt to Brigham Young, 7 July 1850, in Journal History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (hereafter cited as Journal History), LDS Church Archives.f

FTNT: 5, See letters from John M. Bernhisel to Brigham Young, 27 March and 16 September 1850, LDS Church Archives; 7 September 1850, in Journal History, LDS Church Archives; 9 August 1850, LDS Church Archives. ~

FTNT: 6, John M. Bernhisel to Brigham Young, 8 May 1852, Journal History, LDS Church Archives. ~

FTNT: 7, Deseret News, 9 March 1874. ~

FTNT: 8, Quoted in Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 369. ~

FTNT: 9, Charles Dickens, The Uncommercial Traveller and Reprinted Pieces Etc., Oxford Illustrated Dickens (New York: Oxford University Press, 1968), p. 223. ~

FTNT: 10, Dickens, The Uncommercial Traveller, p. 232. ~

FTNT: 11, See Benjamin L. Rich, Ben E. Rich: An Appreciation by His Son (Salt Lake City, 29 August 1950), p. 24. ~

FTNT: 12, In Rich, Ben E. Rich, pp. 24-25. ~

FTNT: 13, Joseph Rosenblatt, quoted in "Religious Freedom Is Their Key Aim," Church News, 16 September 1984, p. 11. ~

FTNT: 14, Ali ibn-abu-Talib, in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 13th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1955), p. 73. ~

FTNT: 15, In "Religious Freedom," p. 11 ~

FTNT: 16, Donald A. Eagle, quoted in "Religious Freedom," p. 11. ~

FTNT: 17, Al Brooks, quoted in "Religious Freedom," p. 11. ~

FTNT: 18, New York Times Magazine, August 1985, p. 908. ~

FTNT: 19, New York Times Magazine, p. 914. ~

FTNT: 1, In Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 14th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1968), p. 1100. ~

FTNT: 2, John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses 20:115. ~

FTNT: 3, William Wordsworth, "Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood," The Complete Poetical Works of William Wordsworth (London: Macmillan, 1924), p. 359. ~

FTNT: 4, Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 235. ~

FTNT: 5, Kimball, Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 235. ~

FTNT: 6, Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939), p. 316. ~

FTNT: 1, Marvin J. Ashton, "Pure Religion," Ensign 12 (November 1982): 63. ~

FTNT: 1, George Albert Smith, quoted in Bryant S. Hinckley, "Superintendent George Albert Smith," Improvement Era 35 (March 1932): 295. ~

FTNT: 2, Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 236. ~

FTNT: 3, Boyd K. Packer, "Covenants," Ensign 20 (November 1990): 85. ~

FTNT: 4, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in Conference Report, April 1951, p. 154. ~

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: Brother Brigham called on the Saints to act.

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: If only one of two parties is willing to forgive, a one-sided tolerance develops that is better than intolerance on both sides. There is always a chance that the spirit evidenced by the behavior and goodwill of the one will catch on and influence the other in the same direction. But tolerant people forgive even if the other side does not.

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: This counsel has seemed wise to the prophets, knowing how difficult marriage and family relations are under the most favorable circumstances. Such counsel has never been in the form of a command, but the suggestions and counsel of a prophet of God deserve great respect.

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: in which his thesis was that we cannot reform or explain the actions and problems of some people, except to say that these people are evil. Tolerance is ineffective in dealing with them. Almost always effective in human relations, tolerance must occasionally be reserved for another day.

See footnote: We can continue to pray for evil and corrupt people. We can forgive them for their trespasses against us. We cannot, however, transact business with them.

See footnote: There are some limits that should govern the doctrine and practice of tolerance.

See footnote:

See footnote: (King uses pornographic in a broader sense than the Supreme Court definition.)

See footnote: These times of almost total free expression have supplanted that earlier day. As Medved points out, the attack on the sacred beliefs and sensibilities of human beings is now perpetrated in music, television, and feature films by some of the most talented men and women in those fields of entertainment.

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: Perhaps she represents thousands of fair-minded Missouri citizens whose opinions the government did not consider in establishing its intolerant public policy.

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: On all official letters from Jerusalem he has the following words stamped: "Let's be more tolerant." This is advice worth repeating.

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: Occasionally we might visualize our child as a mature individual who happens to be a child at this moment.

See footnote: surely a great trait in both parent and child.

See footnote:

See footnote:

See footnote: but when criticism and hatred reach an organized, widespread, and constant level, then the unbalanced may use it, if unchecked, to justify any number of unfair and heinous acts that feed on the extremist rhetoric.

See footnote:

See footnote:

---
Notas:
[^1] Be more tolerant at home, at work, and with everyone you meet. In everything we do we can help other people by exercising tolerance. People have a deep hunger to be understood, accepted, and trusted. Tolerant people provide those human needs. All people need more tolerance. In employment, for example, all want fair wages or salaries, good working conditions, and other benefits. But our greatest need is to be understood, accepted, and trusted. Those are deeper human needs. Let me share a personal experience.
[^2] Let your tolerance be active. Active tolerance became the way President George Albert Smith lived, both before and after he became President of the Church. It became something of a creed in his life. Who could measure the good that he did in his lifetime? His creed is reprinted here, and every item is worth following:
[^3] Gain and use the attitudes and practices of tolerance.The following paragraphs contain some ideas that will help us gain the attitudes and practices of tolerant people.
