Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Acknowledgments

We wish to express appreciation to Arden Roney, who, in May 1961, made a suggestion which led to the publication of this bookÂs "great-grandfather." This caused us to crystallize our thinking concerning the manner in which we had gone about understanding and teaching the Book of Mormon for many years past.

v We offer our heartfelt thanks to our wives, Ardith Hunsaker Pearson and Mary Smith Bankhead, who have kept us in the harness and have seen to it that the tugs were always tight.

v Whatever good things of an academic nature we have done would not have happened if it had not been for the start given us at BYU by the late Dr. Sidney B. Sperry. He was the ideal administrator--a plain, loyal, kind man who offered brotherly encouragement along the path of righteousness and truth.

v We thank all others who were responsible for our being at BYU and for our other positions of trust in which we were allowed the free exercise of our minds.

Introduction

Introduction

vi Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord.

vi Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe which is instructed into the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old." (Matt. 13:51-52)

vi The Book of Mormon is like such a scribeÂs treasure. It is full of "things new and old." All of its treasure is useful. Nothing which is said hereafter is intended to disparage or render ineffective any of the efforts of teachers or scholars who believe the Book of Mormon and teach or write about it. Every book has a main message and purpose, plus many "by-products" which may or may not have been suspected by the author. To some, Chaucer or Shakespeare may be more important as history than as literature or more important for linguistic research than for short-story plots. But, in their time, these authors had a purpose or a message that was more important to them than other considerations.

vi Our main purpose in writing this book is to help the reader begin to fill up his "bag" with treasures of knowledge out of the Book of Mormon that he can bring out whenever he is called upon to teach or preach. We say "begin" because the Book of Mormon is an almost infinite mine of spiritual treasure, and we will only scratch the surface and lay bare the mother lode.

vi We can look in the pages of the Book of Mormon for many things; but the best thing to look for is that which was intended for us. The authors of the book, first and foremost, desired to bring souls to Christ that they might be saved. It is not that we should ignore or refuse to take note of other things, but the book was written to us and for us as well as for the modern Lamanite and Jew. Should we fail to hear the somber warning of those who "whisper" to us "out of the dust" (2 Ne. 26:19), it will help us little to know on which side of the river Sidon the battle was fought when their lifeÂs blood was spilled.
