Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Studying the Book of Mormon

Various Approaches

3 2. Some remarkable and valuable inferences have been drawn from studies of evidences for the truth of the Book of Mormon that come from within the book. Consider as an example the proper nouns in the Book of Mormon. These certainly did not come from a fertile imagination. Where could Joseph Smith have obtained them? Why do they prove helpful in defending the Book of Mormon when investigated without prejudice? Dr. Hugh NibleyÂs two books, Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites and An Approach to the Book of Mormon are the classical works in this area. These contributions alone would have justified his having lived.

3 3. Akin to a study of such evidences is a study of discoveries in anthropology, archaeology, and geography that tend to corroborate the Book of Mormon story. Some very exciting artifacts have been collected and catalogues. To a converted "Mormon," the evidence seems too great to be passed off as coincidence.

3 4. Another approach to Book of Mormon study is the story approach. In this method, the student or teacher usually emphasizes the information that tells where the Book of Mormon people when and what they did. When such information is followed by a helpful lesson, this can be a very effective way to teach morals and ethics. Of course, similar lessons can be taught quite as effectively from the writings of the worldÂs great poets and from great novels. We might also call this the anecdotal approach. With some, it is more historical; with others more moral. But it rarely gets close to the heart of things if storytelling is all that is done. On the other hand, all methods of studying and teaching the Book of Mormon will profit if allied with a knowledge of history of the Book of Mormon peoples. With all of our searchings and ponderings back and forth on specific doctrines, we should occasionally sit down and read the book from cover to cover as we would a novel.

4 5. Finally, we can study the book as that which it claims to be. The four preceding approached to the Book of Mormon are all useful, all valid. A complete study of the book would have to include them. But the main message of the book could be neglected if no more were done with it than is generally implied in the above four approaches.

What the Book Claims to Be

The title page of the Book of Mormon states that its purpose is to convince both Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, and to reacquaint the Lamanites and other branches of the house of Israel with the promises made to their fathers and with the LordÂs intention of keeping those promises. Elsewhere we learn that the Book of Mormon is a witness of the Bible. (Morm. 7:8-9; 2 Ne. 3:12; 2 Ne. 29:3-14.) One of the clearest declarations of intent is found in these words of Nephi:

4 And it mattereth not to me that I am particular to give a full account of all the things of my father, for they cannot be written upon these plates, for I desire the room that I may write of the things of God.

4 For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved.

4 Wherefore, the things which are pleasing unto the world I do not write, but the things which are pleasing unto God and unto those who are not of the world.

4 Wherefore, I shall give commandment unto my seed, that they shall not occupy these plates with things which are not of worth unto the children of men. (1 Ne. 6:3-6.)

4 Think how happy the world would have been to find the Book of Mormon plates, to grub them up with the archaeologistÂs shove, and then (if they weren't melted down for their gold or declared a fraud deliberately planted to deceive them) to set the worldÂs greatest linguists to work translating them! They could have had a heyday. They could have squabbled over the gold plates for at least a hundred years and never agreed on a thing. Of course, the book would then have had no value as scripture. It is precisely because the gold plates came the way they did and were then taken away that the Book of Mormon can be the "keystone of our religion"--its source as well as its message must be accepted on faith.

5 Or think how happy the world would be if the bookÂs pages were filled with maps and other data which would prove its authenticity so that the need, as they might suppose, for exercising faith could be eliminated! Of course, that too is a snare and a delusion. But who has not secretly wished that the gates of a city could be found with the word Zarahemla inscribed in several languages across its top?

5 Instead it is such a book that those "who are not of this world" love it for the good that is in it and the good to which it bears witness. They need no external proof. It leads them to the God of Israel, Jesus Christ, and shows them how to be saved through him and his gospel. The Spirit bears witness to their souls. (Moro. 10:4-5; Alma 5:44-48; 2 Ne. 33:10-11; D&C 50:13-21.)

5 In order for the Book of Mormon to realize its purpose of bringing souls to Christ in the latter days, it must do two things. One is that it must tell us about Christ and his gospel in a plain manner so that there can be no confusion. Great and wonderful as the Bible is, that book as we have it today does not do that, as is evidenced by the myriad interpretations that arise out of it.

5 But to tell of Christ and his gospel is not enough. The book also must fortify the reader against those ideas which exclude the gospel from his mind or prevent him from seeing it in its true light. Some beliefs are compatible and some are not. Love and mercy are compatible. Love and self-preservation (personal or national defense) are generally compatible. But love is not compatible with hate or aggression. Love cannot possess a mind that is full of hate and aggression. Love cannot conquer a nation which excludes love and freedom. So it is with many other ideas or states of mind and being in the world today. In his infinite foreknowledge, God so fashioned the Book of Mormon that it anticipated the needs of our times. It contains a warning against the evil philosophies and practices of our day.

Christ and His Gospel

The Book of Mormon message about Christ and his gospel can be divided into at least the following eight areas:

6 2. The legal necessity of a Redeemer. The Book of Mormon clarifies the meaning and nature of sin, law, punishment, mercy, grace, and justice. It tells why obedience to law without a Redeemer would avail nothing. It gives the terms upon which mercy can claim the sinner without destroying justice. No one can know his need for a Redeemer without knowing these things well enough to cause him to put his trust only in Christ.

6 3. The nature of the Atonement. In King BenjaminÂs great sermon--and elsewhere in the Book of Mormon--we are brought to the realization that JesusÂ atonement was an expiatory act by a divine being. His agony in Gethsemane for our sins caused him to bleed at every pore. As he hung from the cross--his heart broken, made to feel forsaken by his Father--he was offered as the last sacrifice, the spear of a heathen soldier doing service as the sacrificial knife. We are bought with his blood if we will plead for him to apply the price.

6 4. The initiation of repentance by the broken heart and contrite spirit. When Benjamin finished his sermon, he discovered that it had had a most profound effect upon his hearers. An even more pronounced change came over some others who had been more wicked. Alma the Younger and some Lamanite royalty were stricken as though dead. Zeezrom became exceedingly ill and would have died if God had not sent Alma to heal him. By these stories and in other ways, the Book of Mormon brings its readers to a realization of the enormity of sin and the necessity of recognizing our guilt.

6 5. The first principle of the gospel. A knowledge of the four foregoing area is prerequisite to faith in Christ. But it must be an active faith--a "faith unto repentance." (Alma 34:15-17.) Nowhere is it possible to get a better understanding of the purpose and meaning of the first principles of the gospel than in the Book of Mormon.

7 7. The need for enduring to the end. Since much of the Book of Mormon is to or about those who are or were members of the Church, it is understandable that the doctrine of enduring to the end is contained in nearly every chapter in either an implicit or explicit form. The book is a great instrument to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees." (D&C 81:5; see also Gal. 6:1-4.)

7 8. The moral life of a Saint. As one might reasonably expect, Jesus repeated to the Nephites that greatest of sermons, which we commonly call the Sermon on the Mount. But many other choice sermons are given and many stories are told to guide the feet of a Saint in the path of righteousness. The reader is told the formula or guide which will determine right from wrong in any situation. In this study guide, this formula is called "the moral imperative." One explanation of it is found in Moro. 7.

Warning Against Modern Pitfalls

The first thing we must realize if we are to benefit by the warning voice of the Book of Mormon is that it was addressed to the people of our day. The words of those who have slumbered in the dust were tailored to fit our needs. Then they were hidden up and saved for our time.

7 And no one need say they shall not come, for they surely shall, for the Lord hath spoken it; for out of the earth shall they come, by the hand of the Lord, and none can stay it; and it shall come in a day when it shall be said that miracles are done away; and it shall come even as if one should speak from the dead. (Morm. 8:26.)

7 Hearken, O ye Gentiles, and hear the words of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, which he hath commanded me that I should speak concerning you, for behold he commandeth me that I should write, saying:

Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways; and repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries, and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings, and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel. (3 Ne. 30:1-2.)

Two-Way Warning

The Book of Mormon tells us stories about Korihor, Nehor, Sherem, Zeezrom, Alma the younger, Corianton, Laman, and others whose faults or mistakes are just as common in our day as in times of old. They are a warning to us. These men were deceived by Satan. Korihor taught many things which are similar to the teachings of Karl Marx. Nehor was a great "liberal" in the same sense that the word is now appropriated by many who take what they call a liberal view of religion and politics. And they show the same intolerance for opposition that he showed. Not Latter-day Saint need be deceived by any of the modern Sherems, Nehors, Korihors, and their like. We have been adequately warned. As students and teachers of the Book of Mormon, we ought to ponder the apostate prototypes in the Book of Mormon and try to see them in our modern culture. And this we will do if we always keep paramount the idea that we must study and teach the Book of Mormon as a warning voice to our day.

Studying the Warning Message

9 God has the power to tell people what he wants them to know and bring them to understanding (not misunderstanding) in their own tongue. (D&C 1:24.) The voice of God told the Three Witnesses that the book was true and the translation correct. Joseph Smith said it was "the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 4:461; see also 3 Ne. 5:18; D&C 17:6; D&C 20:6-10.)

9 If there is any error in the teachings of the Book of Mormon, no man, by human means, will be able to discover it. If Lehi said that Adam introduced sin and death into the world, it was so. Had he a knowledge of modern geology, paleontology, or biology, his story would have been no different. Anyone who accepts the book in any less degree than this fails to understand the potential power and influence of the book. What is even worse, he may have condemned his own soul or delayed the progress of those who listen to him if he teaches ideas which cast doubt on the truth of the Book of Mormon.

10 We must not think of knowledge as though it were somewhat analogous to a spectrum, with the subjects ranging from accounting to zymurgy, let us say, with all subjects of equal value. Some seem to feel that, if the gospel embraces all truth, Shakespeare is as important as Moses; that salvation is an endless process of learning, and the more you learn, the more you realize that you know nothing. If one accepts the premises from which these people reason, he can only conclude that a lifetime spent on one segment of the knowledge spectrum is just as useful, just as much an indication of love for the gospel, as a lifetime spent on any other segment, and that is definitely not the case.

10 This philosophy must be eliminated if one is to teach or learn the best that is in the scriptures. There are, as Paul said, two areas of knowledge: That which can be learned by men and that which can be learned only with the help of revelation. (1 Cor. 2:11.) The "things of God" can be known only by revelation. One must fully partake of the spirit of JacobÂs words:

10 Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him; and it is impossible that man should find out all his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God. (Jacob 4:8.)

10 In saying the above, of course, there is no intent to imply that, under the right set of priorities, the learning of man cannot be very productive and worthwhile. (2 Ne. 9:28-29, 42-43.)

10 3. The student or teacher must get a correct understanding of the nature of man. Man is not necessarily essentially good or utterly depraved. Some people are quite good, some quite evil. None are born with a load of guilt or blame; but, as they grow up, some prove to be very good and some become very depraved. But all are fallen. All are lost. Without the Redeemer, none can be saved.

We are not just the product of heredity and environment. While we do not bring with us to earth a memory of a premortal experience, we do bring the characters we formed in that previous life. We developed those characters over a comparatively long period of time--how long we do not know. But we know we are here to be tested, tried, and finally judged. GodÂs judgment would be a farce if there weren't something eternal of us that we brought with us, for which we alone are responsible. We are free to improve or get worse. We can repent or we can refuse to repent. We cannot be coerced into goodness by God, because he has said he will not use coercion and he is a God of truth. But he can and will hold us accountable. He warns us and offers help all the day long; but when night comes, we must face the consequences of the preparations we have made in the day. We need to listen to what God says and not change it to fit our own prejudices.

11 4. Teachers and students must learn to relate the Book of Mormon to their own times, not just the times of the ancient writers of the book. They must not approach it with scholarly detachment, but must become involved in it. Then they will identify each character with their counterparts in our times. They will believe that the theology is true, will accept the moral code as their own way of life, and will identify the false religious and political philosophies of our day for what they are and thus be forewarned.

11 5. Teachers and students should study the Book of Mormon itself. While study guides have value, the greatest value comes from reading the Book of Mormon itself and then pondering and praying about its message. The better study guides tend to lead people into the Book of Mormon itself, while the less valuable study guides tend to lead them out of the Book of Mormon and into commentaries and other readings about the Book of Mormon by studying everything except the Book of Mormon that you can by studying the book itself.

Paying the Price for Knowledge

It takes time and hard work to learn anything worth learning. The time spent must be active, effective, dedicated, productive time. There must be practice, repetition, and participation of some sort. It usually takes an hour a day for eight to ten years to produce a somewhat accomplished piano player. Athletes practice long hours for years and give a sport their best all-out effort. Such learners never really know whether it is all going to pay until the scholarship or the contract is offered to them.

In the so-called exact sciences--mathematics, physics, chemistry--and in the applied sciences, such as engineering and medicine, students are expected to attend lecture courses besides reading large and detailed texts. Then they are required to go into laboratories and do tests and exercises which illustrate the things they have read and heard. In addition, they have problems to work at home that must be done in writing. Courses in grammar demand a great deal of written work in class and at home. Students must learn to diagram sentences, to write proper essays, themes, and term papers.

12 All important areas of learning are difficult and require a great deal of "homework." Students generally know that and usually are willing to pay the price. Yet, none of the rewards for any of these academic, athletic, or artistic efforts are as important as the rewards for learning the knowledge offered in the scriptures. Should we expect it to be easier to provide for our spiritual welfare than for our temporal welfare?

12 In one of the great sermons recorded in the Book of Mormon, Jacob decried the materialism and adultery of the Nephites. With reference to their materialism, he said this:

12 Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you.

12 But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God.

12 And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good--to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted. (Jacob 2:17-19.)

12 What Jacob is saying is that the first quest is a search for the kingdom (the true Church) and for a hope in Christ (the assurance of salvation given by the First Comforter, or gift of the Holy Ghost). No earthly goals should preempt this great quest. Yet most members put worldly success ahead of gaining a testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon and all that goes with it. They promise themselves they will get around to it after they graduate, or after they are settled in their careers. By and by it becomes "when the family is raised." And so on. Most members finally die without having even read the entire standard works through once. Yet they have promised themselves a thousand times to get it done. If the whole Book of Mormon had been read as often as the first three chapters of 1 Nephi, we would be a Church of, perhaps, a hundred times the influence we presently are. We even may have removed the curse God put on us for neglecting the Book of Mormon. (See D&C 84:54-58.)

The authors would like to suggest that all would profit by recording their thoughts about the scriptures in written form. We are never too old to start doing "homework." Everyone tends to collect the best that comes "across his desk." You will find that, if you try to write your own thoughts, by and by these scraps of paper or journal notes will become some of your most prized possessions. With such an important and eternal subject as the fulness of the gospel presented in the Book of Mormon, how could you expect or hope to learn it without producing your very best effort in written homework? The Lord has said we must "awake and arouse [our] faculties." (Alma 32:27.) We are told to seek "with real intent." (Moro. 10:4.) And we are often reminded that "faith without works is dead." (James 2:21.)

13 One form your "homework" might take is writing dialogues. Hundreds of students have found this a very useful method of preparing for missionary work in the mission field or with neighbors at home. What you do is take a particular doctrine you have learned and imagine yourself teaching it to someone else. Give him or her a name and then write a dialogue between that person and yourself. Try to anticipate what the responses and objections will be and how you will meet them. If you can pick a specific individual you already know, you will find it easier to predict his or her reactions. By and by you will have a system worked out that will produce success in your missionary endeavors. It also will result in spiritual experiences that will bring joy equal to anything you ever have experienced.

13 Another form your writing might take is that of making lists of ideas and concepts on each subject you study. Read, study, and ponder the passages suggested in this book or in the Topical Guide (TG) which is found in the latest edition of the Bible published by the Church. Then sit down and try to make a list of concepts on that subject. For instance, on baptism, you might include in your list these concepts or ideas: (1) Baptism is a covenant. (2) Baptism is the door or gate through which we must enter to get onto the path that leads to eternal life. (3) Baptism places us under covenant to keep all the covenants that have been accepted by common consent. (4) Baptism obligates us to mourn with those who mourn, comfort those who stand in need of comfort, and so forth. (See Mosiah 18:8-10.) (5) Baptism has no value without faith in Christ and repentance. (6) Baptism is invalid if we do not forgive our enemies and all who have harmed us. (7) And so on.

As you write these lists, try to bring the Book of Mormon into your life today. The present Church manuals call this "likening the scriptures unto us." This idea is derived from 1 Ne. 19:23. It is antidote to the "me-here-and-now" attitude of many selfish humanistic movements of the sixties, seventies, and eighties.

14 Ask yourself, "What is the passage trying to tell me about my life, my friends, my family, my school work, my government, my neighbor, my mission, my Church activity. What is it trying to tell me about 'the great plan of the Eternal God' (Alma 34:9), about my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, about my eternal life?"

14 When something comes to your mind form the message of the scriptures, combine the language of holy writ and your own language and express the idea or concept in writing. Make a numbered list in writing of these ideas and concepts as you read the scriptures on various subjects. This is your homework assignment. Those who have done this testify that it bears good fruit. It is worth the effort, determination, and work that it requires.

14 The following list is a recapitulation and expansion of the reasons why you should do this written homework:

14 1. It is your opportunity to express yourself in "Book of Mormon language" as you learn to understand it and adopt it as your own. A "Book of Mormon man or woman" is recognized by his or her speech patterns and ideas about every facet of life. If he speaks the language, you know he has been there.

14 2. The lists give you an opportunity to see what you have learned from studying the scriptures. It is said that you don't know anything until you can teach it and that writing makes your thinking more accurate. It you put it in a sentence or a paragraph, you begin to look at it and wonder if it will pass inspection. This makes you more careful about what you say.

14 3. These lists or writing exercises give you an opportunity to see how well you can form thoughts in your mind and then express them in writing for your own or someone elseÂs reading. Only practice can make you a writer. Writing is among the hardest work there is; but that is no more of an excuse to stop trying than it would be to stop trying to improve your percentage at throwing the basketball through the hoop. All good things come hard.

14 4. Your writing will serve as a complete set of notes for later use. And these notes will be a by-product of your study of the Book of Mormon. They will be a reminder of the ground you have been over.

14 5. This "homework" can be a future reference and outline for you as you make and accept teaching assignments in your life as a parent and as a servant of the Lord in his Church.

15 If you often review and revise what you have written, you will find that a lot of your homework for future assignments was completed when you first began to earnestly study the Book of Mormon and the other scriptures.

15 One other thing on this written work: Except for assignments from teachers, who assign homework for their own specific purposes, develop your own system and organization of writing. We generally are more productive when we are being creative instead of just imitating someone else.
