Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

How This Book Is Organized

The main body of this book is made up of separate sections or topics, such as baptism, faith, repentance, and so on. In turn, each topic has five parts: (1) a title, including an acronym or code name which serves as a short title; (2) and explanation of the content of the topic; (3) a "take-off passage"; (4) a list of scriptural references called "other passages"; and (5) a set of "study questions." Following is a detailed explanation of the purpose and content of each of these five parts:

19 1. The title and acronym identify the subject matter in the section or topic. If you find the title unclear or inadequate, just read the first few sentences of the explanatory section.

19 The acronym or code name (e.g., B for Baptism), which is set off by bullets to the right of the title, serves additional purposes. Like all acronyms, it serves as a short title. This makes it possible to refer back and forth in this book from one section to another more conveniently. And it is the basis of a marking system which is illustrated in the appendix. If you follow this marking system, you may find it desirable to subdivide some of the acronyms--like B1, B2, B3, and so forth. This will make is possible for you to separate the passages on that subject into appropriate subtopics.

19 2. The explanatory section has the purpose of giving unity and direction to the set of references which follow it. It is not meant as a full explanation of the subject under investigation, but as a means of indicating what you might look for as you study the passages listed. Of course, you may find things you value more highly than any we have mentioned. That is one of the things we hope will happen.

19 3. The Take-off Passage serves several purposes. One purpose is to serve as the starting place for your marking system if you decide to use ours or one of your own. If you use the acronyms we have suggested, or a set you have made up yourself, you can write this acronym in the margin where the take-off passage appears in your Book of Mormon. Don't feel compelled to use our take-off passage. You should start with the passage you feel is the best starting place. Then you can write another passage in the margin of your Book of Mormon by that one. This other passage should be the next one you want to go to on the subject suggested by the acronym.

You will note that our take-off passage for Baptism (B) was Mosiah 18:8-18. (That was President Harold B. LeeÂs favorite passage on the subject of baptism.) The next passage we give is 2 Ne. 31:5-17, which tells why Jesus had to be baptized and why we have to be baptized. The next passage is 3 Ne. 11:21-28, the one in which Jesus himself tells us how baptism is to be done. The next passage is Moro. 8, which absolutely forbids infant baptism and gives a highly theological treatise on baptism and the doctrines immediately related to it.

20 You may wish to write "B" in the margin by each one of the above scriptures. And you may wish to write all of the references listed in the Baptism (B) section by every other passage listed. (See sample page in Appendix.) Or you may wish to list just one passage by each other passage. In any event, all this is just by way of suggestion for a system by which you can have a whole series of ready-made sermons or lessons outlined in the margins of your scriptures. If you are called out of the congregation to speak, all you have to do is thumb through your scriptures until you see an acronym that you feel prompted to start following back and forth. Then you can speak "as one having authority, and not as the scribes and Pharisees."

20 Some have listed all the acronyms, together with their take-off passages, in the front of their copies of the Book of Mormon. Then all they have to do when called upon for a speech or lesson is to prayerfully go over the list until they feel inspired in the selection of a topic. Of course, the idea is not to just read out the passages in turn--though that would be better than many could do without such an aid. The idea is to read each passage in turn and then explain to your audience how it clarifies the topic upon which you are speaking.

20 4. The Other Passages section is just what the name and the information in D&C 3, above imply. If you decide to use the acronyms as a marking system, do not get in too big a hurry to cross-reference all of the "other passages" to each other, especially if there are a lot of them. Cross-reference them as they become fully meaningful to you. Also, consult the Topical Guide for additional passages. Be sure you understand the connection of one passage to another. Avoid too many that are simply repetitive. Think in terms of a logical flow for a sermon, and reference them accordingly.

Another way to approach this marking system is to combine it with the Topical Guide (TG) in the new edition of the scriptures. In that case, you may wish to circle or underline footnotes in the TG and in the Book of Mormon/Triple Combination index, and at the bottom of the page and write the acronym you wish to use in a prominent place on the page in such a manner that, when you see this acronym and the circled footnotes, you will remember why you did it. If you master the TG and sprinkle acronyms in appropriate places in your scriptures, you will soon find that you have developed the ability to discourse on almost any subject that can properly come up in your Church assignments.

21 5. The Study Questions section is meant to stimulate thought and analysis about the particular subject being studied. These questions are framed on the assumption that the reader has looked up the passages and pondered them. Still, it is suggested that the questions be read once before the "other passages" are read. That will help the reader find further implications in these passages. Then he can go back to the questions and give them a second try.

21 The authors do not claim to have presented all the passages on any given subject, or even a significant portion in some cases. You may find what you consider better passages when you start searching on your own initiative or through the TG. Also, this is by no means an exhaustive list of Book of Mormon subjects or concepts. It is an illustration of a system of studying and can be used as a system for marking the scriptures. We have tried to use what have been to us the most useful passages. We have also presented some useful and less often observed subject areas.

21 You will note that some sections have many references and some have only a few. One reason for that is that one needs only a few passages on some subjects to give one plenty to study or talk about. In other cases, even though the material is lengthy, there are so many ramifications that it is necessary to show some of them, and the only way that can be done is by listing a lot of passages. In some large areas such as repentance, for instance, we have used what almost might be called a random selection. You may want to subdivide these sections and add many references.

21 You will also discover that there is considerable overlapping on some subjects. This is inevitable because there are many different issues raised within a single verse of some of the best Book of Mormon sermons. Study the passages first, and then decide which passages to use in your marking system. Perhaps it might be well to use an inexpensive copy of the Book of Mormon the first time you try a marking system. You will not regret the practice.

The passages we have used are mainly expository in nature. That is, we have selected passages with an emphasis on doctrine. Next you may want to find good anecdotal passages to add interest to your lessons and sermons. For example, the great prayer recorded in John 17 is illustrative of the principle of prayer, while the prayer of the Lamanite king in Alma 22 can be used in a story approach to prayer. Of course, any theological or expository passage can be introduced by telling the story in the context.

22 In the following pages the subjects are arranged chronologically by take-off passage. That is, they come in the order the take-off passages appear in the text of the Book of Mormon. An alphabetic index to these subjects, based on the acronyms, appears at the end of the book.

22 We hope this will be only the beginning of your systematic study of the scriptures. If you will pay the price, you can find great treasures of knowledge in the scriptures:

22 And again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel.

22 And they shall observe the covenants and church articles to do them, and these shall be their teachings, as they shall be directed by the Spirit.

22 And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach. (D&C 42:12-14.)
