Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Book of Mormon Was Written to Convince Both Jews and Gentiles That Jesus Is the Christ JG

In its present nuance, the word Jew refers to someone who affiliates with the Jewish religion or is known to be of Jewish lineage. A Gentile is someone who is not of Jewish lineage or religion. But it is not as simple as that. We really need to know what Lehi and his descendants meant by Jew and Gentile.

27 At the death of Solomon in the tenth century B.C., Israel split into two kingdoms: Israel and Judah. At the time Lehi and company left Jerusalem, most of the kingdom of Israel (also sometimes called Ephraim, Kingdom of the North, the Ten Tribes, and so on) had been carried away captive into parts of what is now Turkey, Syria, Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan. A large number of them, possibly the majority, had escaped from that area into "the north countries." Some of them were still in Samaria, their homeland. Certain members of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh had left their tribal lands and joined the southern kingdom, Judah. Lehi and Ishmael came from this loyalist group. Since the tribe of Levi was always spread throughout all Israel, much of Levi was in the south. Also, when the Ten Tribes became idolatrous, many of the Levites migrated into the south lands. So in LehiÂs day (600 B.C.) the following ten tribes were lost: Reuben, part of Levi, Zebulon, Issachar, Dan, Gad, Asher, Naphtali, Ephraim, and Manasseh. The prophets referred to them as Israel. But the reader of the Bible has to be careful, because the word Israel sometimes means all of JacobÂs descendants and sometimes only Jacob himself. The context has to be read carefully.

The tribes that were left in the kingdom of Judah were Judah, Simeon (which tribe had no separate identity because that tribe had been lost in Judah), Benjamin, and part of Levi. Also there were those small parts of the tribes of Joseph. The ten tribes are counted as ten because of the part of Levi that was with them. And the three tribes of the south are only three because Simeon was included in Judah and not counted. That part of Ephraim and Manasseh were too few to count. Indeed, a careful reading of the Old Testament reveals that the kingdom of Judah probably included a small number from every tribe. ItÂs likely that a very small number from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin, besides that large part of Levi, had ended up with the ten northern tribes. The division was not as cut and dried as some have made it out to be. The common folk among all the tribes didn't take the division as seriously as did the royalists among the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim. These common folk intermarried as they pleased and went where they pleased most of the time.

28 When Lehi and his descendants said "Jew," they meant anyone who was a citizen of the country of Judah. On that basis they still called themselves Jews. (See 2 Ne. 33:8.) Anyone else was a Gentile, that is, a foreigner. Theoretically they did not include the ten lost tribes as Gentiles. Yet in a practical sense they must have. For Joseph Smith is identified in the Book of Mormon both as a Gentile and as a descendant of Joseph. And it would be natural for them to think of the ten tribes as Gentiles, since those tribes had been lost among the nations. Actually the basic meaning of gentile is "the nations."

28 Gentile is a transliteration of a Hebrew word that means "nation" in its singular form or "nations" in its plural form. It also does service as the word for alien, foreigner, stranger, and so forth. Thus, before the kingdom split there were Israelites and "the nations," meaning outsiders. After the split and the loss of the ten tribes, there were Jews and "the nations," or Gentiles. Besides that, in the Hebrew Bible you would find that same word used by the writers to refer to the "nations" of Israel--the twelve tribes, or thirteen when you count Joseph as tow. The translators, of course, took care of that for you by the various English translation words they used when they came across that Hebrew word.

28 We have to go one step further to grasp the full range of meanings in the word gentile. Paul, in Ephesians, set up a word play that uses the Gentile-versus-Jew idea to emphasize the power that conversion has to make us citizens of ChristÂs kingdom. He indicates that, after rebirth, the Jews and Gentiles were "no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints." (Eph. 2:19.) In this sense the Church of Jesus Christ of any dispensation is the "homeland," or Israel, and all others are Gentiles, or aliens. In the LDS church, we tend to include ourselves, the Jews, the American Indians, and some of the Pacific Island peoples on the non-gentile side and all others on the gentile side.

It is not strange to find that one of the avowed purposes of the Book of Mormon is to convince the Jews that Jesus is the Christ; for those whom we know as Jews never accepted him. The Jews of JesusÂ day who did accept him are now lost among the Gentiles. It also is not strange that the Book of Mormon was written to convince the Lamanites that Jesus is the Christ; for they do not know him by that name in their traditions. But it was strange in 1830 for a backwoods gentile boy (who didn't know he was and Israelite) to announce that the Book of Mormon was going to convince the Gentiles of ChristÂs divinity. In that day the Gentiles believed the Bible quite generally and hence claimed to believe in the divinity of Christ. Certainly Joseph Smith on his own never would have thought that the Gentiles he knew needed to be convinced that Jesus was the Christ. But they needed more convincing now. Comparatively few in the Western world today believe in a Christ who continue to be a resurrected being. Therefore they reject him in anything approaching a Book of Mormon sense, which is the same sense as the New Testament. Indeed, most Americans and Europeans have become humanists since Joseph SmithÂs day. Even those who claim to be Christians are frequently more humanistic than Christian in the biblical sense. That is, they accept Darwin and Sagan over Moses on creation, and the "higher critics" over Paul and John on the reality and permanence of JesusÂ resurrection. (For a definition of humanism, see H.)

Take-off Passage

Title Page (end of second paragraph).

Other Passages

1 Ne. 6:4; 2 Ne. 25:11-30; 2 Ne. 26:12; 2 Ne. 29:1-3; 2 Ne. 33:10; 3 Ne. 29:8, 9; 3 Ne. 30; Morm. 5:14-21; Morm. 8:35; Ether 12:41; Moro. 7:35; Moro. 10:30; D&C 3:16-20.

Study Questions

29 2. From a Book of Mormon point of view, why would other Christians, even their devout leaders and evangelists, have to be converted to Christ?

30 3. What does Nephi give as the real test of whether someone believes in Christ?

30 4. Who are the keepers of the gate and what must be done to enter into the path?
