Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Faults of Men Which the Book of Mormon Says It Might Contain Are Not Doctrinal Errors FM

Some have used the passages cited below as evidence that the Book of Mormon contains doctrinal errors and is unreliable as an absolute authority. Some of these people think Joseph Smith wrote the book. Others think the ancient Nephites wrote it, but that it contains errors and superstitions of their less enlightened times. They believe, therefore, that the Book of Mormon and all other scriptures have to be submitted to their test of reason. In other words, whatever does not agree with the learned or scientific consensus of our day must be rejected as false. They believe, for instance, that while Lehi would have logically believed that Moses was right about the Creation and the fall of Adam, now that we have discovered evolution we know better. Therefore they think we should reject anything the Book of Mormon prophets wrote that disagrees with the modern view of man and creation.

30 A careful scrutiny of the passages listed in this section, however, will show that the writers were referring to their own human foibles that they had recorded, and to their grammar. These were the "mistakes of men" they mentioned. They were not referring to their theology. They made no apology for the doctrines they taught. Also, we have the word of God in the testimony of the Three Witnesses that the book is true. In D&C 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says that he uses our own language for the purpose of bringing us to understanding, not misunderstanding. We can be sure that if there are doctrinal or historical errors in the Book of Mormon no human will ever discover them. Though all the world believe otherwise, if Lehi said the earth and everything in it was immortal until the Fall, it was so.

Take-off Passage

Title page (last sentence).

Other Passages

Testimony of Three Witnesses; Morm. 8:12-17; Morm. 9:31-34; Ether 12:23-28, 35; D&C 1:17-29; D&C 17:5, 6; D&C 18:1-5; D&C 20:6-15; D&C 68:4; 1 Cor. 2:14.

Study Questions

31 2. What limitations do men and women have that make it impossible for them to successfully criticize or explain away revelation?

31 3. How do you know that any attempt to discredit the Book of Mormon is destructive of faith and is inspired of the devil?
