Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

We Must Have Determination in Grappling with Problems DIG

Even when our Heavenly father gives us a commandment, he does not necessarily make it easy for us to comply with it. We sometimes have to surmount great obstacles to fulfill the commandments of the Lord. Joseph SmithÂs life is a testimony of this fact. The story of Nephi obtaining the brass plates is another example of this principle. Everyone who has struggled with the Lord for an answer to his prayers to the point where he has received the answer knows that it usually does consist of an all-out struggle. It is like JacobÂs all-night wrestle with the Lord that left him crippled, or like the prayer of Enos that lasted all day and into the night.

33 One reason why we have to live by faith in this life is that we are forced to make decisions based on what we believe is right. We then have to follow through on those decisions--even if the way is hard. making decisions and sticking with them, even when the going gets rough, is what develops or proves character. Even gaining the knowledge we need to be saved is a struggle. No one can do it for us. It comes "line upon line," and it has to be searched for and yearned for.

Take-off Passage

1 Ne. 3:7.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 4:15-35; Jacob 7:26; Enos Mosiah 26:14; Alma 5:45, 46; Alma 8:10-27; Alma 17:2-5; 1 Thes. 1:5, 6; D&C 58:1-7; D&C 121:1-9. (For anecdotal material consider the story of the translation of the plates, or any of the many stories of Joseph SmithÂs determination to serve the Lord in the face of opposition. Heber J. GrantÂs life was largely inspired by 1 Ne. 3:7. He overcame many things because of the inspiration he got from Nephi.)

Study Questions

34 2. How did Nephi benefit in having to struggle to obtain the brass plates and build the ship?

34 3. Do you believe a righteous government would save people from the opportunity to handle their own problems, to make mistakes and correct them, to fail and succeed, or to struggle to provide their own daily bread and nest egg for the future?

34 4. Do you believe you should vote for politicians who propose welfare legislation that would prevent you from learning self-reliance, faith in God, and courage?

34 5. Do you see any similarities between the welfare states now existing in many lands and the one Satan planned for us? (Moses 4:1.)

34 6. Why did God reject SatanÂs plan?

34 7. Why would God not answer your prayers about many things if you were an indecisive person who had not first tried to decide a worthwhile or righteous course of action?
