Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Fall of Adam FA

Probably most speculation about the Fall is useless, for the truth or error of this speculation cannot be made known in this life by human means. A good discussion of the Fall need go no further than the Book of Mormon goes. This consists principally of explaining (1) that the Fall came about as a result of a transgression by free agents, (2) that it introduced sin and death into an erstwhile immortal world, (3) that an atonement has been made so that no one will be able to blame his fate on the Fall, and (4) that the Fall served a great purpose in GodÂs plan for his children.

47 Rejection of the doctrine of the Fall is now almost universal throughout the world. In its place we are taught that man is the product of organic evolution. Organic evolution is the basic doctrine underlying humanism, socialism of almost every variety, fascism, and many other ideas prevalent in the world today. Rejection of organic evolution and acceptance of the fall of Adam would be fatal to those ideas.

47 Organic evolution is based on three ideas:

48 2. The principle of common descent. This is the doctrine that all life on this planet has a common ancestor or common ancestors. Life, evolutionists say, commenced hundreds of millions of years ago when certain hydrocarbons combined into microscopic forms thought to be precursors of life. Yet the probabilities (odds) of this happening at all, and of becoming self-perpetuating, are so astronomical as to be beyond the comprehension of mortal man. Indeed, according to mathematicians who have figured it out, it would take thousands of pages to list the zeroes in the odds figures involved in these beginning events. It requires far more credulity to believe it than to believe the story of the Garden of Eden.

48 3. The principle of natural descent. This principle states that all life have been mortal from that first fraction of a cell life to the present complex forms of life that exist today.

48 If any one or all of the above three tenets of the religion of humanism is false, organic evolution is false. And, therefore, if the Fall occurred, organic evolution is false; because the doctrine of the Fall is antithetical to all three.

Take-off Passage

2 Ne. 2:17-25.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 9:6; Mosiah 3:19; Mosiah 16:3-8; Alma 12:21-27; Alma 22:13; Alma 42:2-7; Hel. 14:16; Morm. 9:12, 13; Ether 3:2; Rom. 5:14-20; Moses 4:6-2; Moses 5:4-11; Moses 6:46-62; D&C 20:18-20; D&C 29:40-43.

Study Questions

48 2. If you accept the scriptural teaching that a great part of the mission of Christ was to overcome the effects of the Fall, why could you not accept the theory of organic evolution as fact?

48 3. Why is it a waste of time to try to reconcile the scriptures with the theories of men of any given period of time?

49 4. How does the fall of Adam affect people as individuals and the human race as a whole?

49 5. Why is it impossible for people to prove or disprove any explanation of the Creation without the help of revelation?

49 6. According to the scriptures, what was the state of "all things" when they were first created? How long would they have remained in this state if there had been no Fall?
