Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

It Is Necessary to Overcome the Flesh If We Wish to Be Saved F

Paul in 1 Cor. 2 and Benjamin in Mosiah 3:19 both taught that there is a potential in each of us for a "natural man" or "man of flesh" to gain the ascendancy and develop an appetite for sin. This "natural man" must be displaced by a "spiritual man" or reborn person if we wish to escape from carnal desires. (Used in this sense in the scriptures, of course, the word man has always meant both man and woman.) All Christians who are Christian in the biblical sense believe that the fallen flesh is some kind of a problem to the soul of man, and that this fallen flesh must be overcome or ruled by the spirit in man. "For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace." (Rom. 8:6.)

49 As Paul continued this sermon on carnality (carnal means "flesh") and spirituality, he explained to the Roman Saints that the way to overcome the flesh was through Christ and by the help of the Spirit.

The problem of good and evil in mankind has always been a subject of debate among philosophers, theologians, and educators. Some solve it by denying that the problem exists. Others maintain that it is environmentally induced and would not exist if we gave the government and the scientific community enough money and power to redirect society into benign pursuits. Horace Mann declared that if every child were educated in public schools, violence and crime would disappear. No matter how each new generation increases the educational budget, many educators claim that not enough is being spent on teachers, counselors, administrators, facilities, and special programs. "Give us enough money and we will be able to solve the problem." The theory is that violence is primarily the result of unemployment, and unemployment is the result of lack of education, and lack of education is the result of inadequate taxes to support public education.

50 Another explanation of good and evil puts forth the claim that evil is entirely a matter of heredity and nothing can be done about it. This was the bases of Taylor CaldwellÂs novel, Wicked Angel, and it has been explored in many novels. Cain was a son of perdition and apparently inherently evil. How can he be explained by heredity or environment? Of course, he cannot unless you reject the Bible account of the origin of man and accept organic evolution, which would give Cain millions of human and sub-human ancestors. The Pearl of Great Price explains him by stating that he was a son of perdition before he was born. (Moses 5:24.)

50 There are, of course, other explanations of the problem of good and evil. And, as with most of those explored above, there usually is some truth to them. But the Book of Mormon solution (which is also the Bible solution) is the only true and adequate solution; all others are so mixed with error as to make them false. This solution is that, to the extent that evil can be eliminated, it only can be eliminated when sinners overpower the flesh. Christ, his Spirit, and the gospel are the tools that must be used. That is, we must believe in and accept Christ. We must obtain his Spirit, the gift of the Holy Ghost, by obeying the gospel. Then, through constant strivings against temptation, we can gain the ascendancy over the flesh. No one can simply be educated into righteousness in even the best of state schools. Even the most powerful governments, with unlimited taxing power and wealth to tax, could not, by creating social programs, develop a righteous society.

50 It is not that the flesh has a separate life of its own. We are made up of an intelligence that was "organized" into a spirit in the premortal spirit world. This spirit was born into a mortal body that was conceived by our mortal parents, who passed on the fall of Adam to us. Because of the Fall and because of the presence of the devil and his angels, this body and spirit can be led into sin. However, we can withstand temptation. We can say no to the devil. We can improve in our ability to say no. We have the light of Christ, which is the power of truth and the means of leading to right and truth. We can gain a second spiritual help, the Holy Ghost. Then we have even greater light and truth, greater power to select and obey the best principles. This life is essentially a test to see if we will follow the flesh or follow the light that God has given us to lead us to Christ and salvation.

Take-off Passage

2 Ne. 2:29.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 19:6; 2 Ne. 2:16; 2 Ne. 4:17; 2 Ne. 10:24; 3 Ne. 28:9; Ether 3:2; D&C 1:19; D&C 38:11; D&C 93:4; D&C 101:26; D&C 112:23; Abr. 3:18-28; Joseph Smith History 1:28; Rom. 7:13-25; Rom. 8:1-18; Gal. 5:15-26; 1 Pet. 2:11.

Study Questions

51 2. On the other hand, what explanations for good and evil are common to all people?

51 3. Why can evil people come out of the same environments as good people?

51 4. What is the Book of Mormon solution to the problem of the "flesh"?

51 5. What did Christ have in common with all of us that made him subject to pain, temptation, and similar mortal conditions? what did he have that was not common to the rest of us and which made it possible for him to rise above every temptation?

51 6. What bearing does our handling of the "flesh" have on our ultimate destiny?
