Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Nephi Taught That Those Who Put Their Trust in the "Arm of Flesh" Instead of in God Will Be Cursed T

In our times, maybe more than any other, people look to mankind for a solution to all their problems. They seen to think that someone else--usually "science" or "the government"--can and should take care of all their worries, all their woes, all their wants, and all their cares. Not only that, they think that scientists are smarter and more reliable than prophets on all matters of education or information about any subject whatsoever. And of course there are times when some scientists know more than some prophets about a given technical area. For instance, if you wished to know how DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) operates in the scheme of heredity, you would go to a biochemist instead of an Apostle. Even if the Apostle were a biochemist, you would go to him as a biochemist instead of as an Apostle on that subject. There is nothing wrong with that. But if you were concerned about the constant effort of evolutionists to repeal MendelÂs laws ("like begets like") in contradition to the efforts of the Apostles to explain creation in scriptural terms, who would be your most trustworthy authority? In this case, if the consensus of the biochemists, if they disagree with the prophets, means more to you than the consensus of the Apostles, you are putting your trust in the arm of flesh instead of in God.

53 There are two possible ultimate authorities: God or man. No matter how you try, you cannot come up with a third. The only question is whether or not God speaks. Most men would say, "If I knew that God has spoken on any scientific or religious or political subject, I would accept it. But I don't know that he has. And there is no way I can know that he has. The prophets of the Bible were men just like me."

53 And that would be a true statement if all we had was the Bible and if it were true that God doesn't speak any more. Then you would be accepting men instead of God. For if God does not speak any more or is nonexistent any more, all the authorities on the Bible are just Bible "scientists." Then there is only one authority: man.

But with the advent of the Book of Mormon there is a way to discover for yourself that God has spoken again and that he will go on speaking through his prophets--and even through you, in some cases--forevermore. Therefore, with a testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon, you are justified in trusting in God instead of in science.

54 Your trust in science should be limited; but your trust in God should be unlimited.

Take-off Passage

2 Ne. 4:34-35.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 4:17-20; 2 Ne. 22:2; 2 Ne. 28:31; Mosiah 4:6; Mosiah 7:19, 33; Mosiah 23:14; Alma 36:3, 27; Alma 37:32; Alma 38:5; Alma 58:32-37; Hel. 12:1-3; D&C 1:18-19; D&C 11:12; D&C 84:115-116; 2 Sam. 22:3; Mark 10:24-25; 2 Cor. 1:9-10; Eph. 1:12-14; 1 Tim. 4:9-10. (See also MID and NEED.)

Study Questions

54 2. When should you trust science, technology, government, money, education, and natural resources to solve your problems? What guidelines has the Lord give us? Where can you find them?

54 3. Why is it impossible to have God and science as equal final authorities?

54 4. What can Christian families do to overcome the bad teaching influences in the world which impose humanism on their children? How can they reinforce the good teaching influences which only encourage pursuit of truth?

54 5. How does the past record of the learned world discourage you from putting your trust in it now?

54 6. Make a list of decisions you could make and actions you could take right now that would show absolute trust in God.?
