Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Works Are Necessary Even Though We Are Saved by Grace WG

Some extreme sections of Christendom have taught that the doctrine of grace means that a person can live a life of debauchery until he or she is dying, and then, with the last mortal breath, "confess Jesus" and be saved in the same eternal bliss as those who have practiced virtue all their days. Some even have taught that, once you have "confessed Jesus," nothing you can do can make any difference. You will be saved regardless of the life you live. "Once in grace, you cannot fall." (See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 338ff.)

Joseph Smith reacted strongly against this concept. He used a statement of PaulÂs in Hebrews to show that, if you really obtained a state of grace (that is, obtained the right to be saved and exalted through the atonement of Christ), and fell from grace, you would fall into perdition. (Ibid.) Falling from grace, then, would be to turn your back on the "blood of the covenant" and to consider it "an unholy thing." (Heb. 10:26-31.) On the basis of Heb. 6:4-6 and its context, and the Heb. 10 statement, Joseph Smith argued that you can fall from grace after coming under grace; but, if you fall from grace, you become a son of perdition. Of course, he made it clear that no one can obtain a legitimate claim to the highest rewards of the Atonement (reach a state of grace) without baptism at the hands of the priesthood of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and without being sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise.

61 Some Church members, after the days of Joseph Smith have gone so far as to deny that we are saved by grace at all. Rather, they have taught, we are saved by our works. They have gone even further: they have quoted PaulÂs statement in Eph. 2:8-9, "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of words lest any man should boast," and have said that this salvation refers to the resurrection only. We know that is incorrect for two reasons: (1) Paul stated that this salvation he was talking about came through faith; and faith is not required for a resurrection. (2) Nephi taught exactly the same thing in 2 Ne. 25:23.

61 President David O. McKay, referring to Eph. 2:8, said "That statement is absolutely true." (CR, April 1957, p. 7.) But he also taught the necessity of works and ordinances along with faith and grace. The key to understanding this statement of PaulÂs is in the tenth verse: "for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them." It is the rebirth which creates a creature who has good works. It is not the good works of the creature which creates the rebirth. Nevertheless, a rebirth follows the exercising of faith in Christ and the experiencing of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

61 The confusion can be laid to rest if we always remember that our good works do not pay the demands of justice for our evil deeds. Only Christ can do this. That is why he performed his atonement. And his atonement was an act of grace because it went above and beyond the minimum demands of justice. Jesus was obligated to pay for AdamÂs sin, all sins committed purely because of our being in a fallen world (sins committed in ignorance); and he was obligated to bring about a resurrection as a free gift. (See Rom. 5:15.) But it might be argued that he was not legally obligated to pay for the sins we commit knowingly, except in the sense that he had volunteered to do it. A host and hostess are required by convention to be kind to considerate guests. But if the host and hostess are kind to inconsiderate guests, we say they are gracious. That helps explain why Paul and Nephi taught that we are saved from the justice of God by grace, not by our good works. And it may help explain why father Lehi taught that no "flesh" is justified by the law. (See NFJ.)

62 But it goes even further than mere graciousness. We can pay for our own sins, but it would require a second spiritual death or second separation from God to do it. We can understand this better if we always remember that obedience to traffic laws, for instance, will not pay for the infractions that are seen by officers of the law, even if the number of times we obey outnumbers the times we disobey thousands to one. The same is true of other civil laws: obedience does not pay for disobedience. GodÂs law works the same way. Only he always sees the infractions. And the payment is very severe if we wish to pay it ourselves. This is why Paul said that the wage of sin is death--spiritual death, or separation from God. Therefore the atonement of Christ was necessary. he satisfied the demands of justice for all of us see we do not have to make this terrible payment ourselves. Thus his grace brings about an act of mercy which satisfies justice.

Take-off Passage

2 Ne. 10:24-25.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 2:5-8; 2 Ne. 11:5-7; 2 Ne. 25:23; 2 Ne. 31:1-20; Ether 12:41; Moro. 9:26; Moro. 10:32-34; D&C 20:30-32; D&C 76:94; Moses 6:52; John 3:16; Eph. 2:8-10. (Most of Romans was written by Paul to explain why good works are efficacious, natural, and necessary in the life of a Saint in spite of the fact that we are saved by grace.)

Study Questions

62 2. How could a Latter-day Saint use the Book of Mormon to talk about grace to a nonmember who thinks of himself or herself as being "saved"? Consider writing a dialogue to illustrate how you would do this.

62 3. How do the scriptures and ideas in this section show that it is unwise for anybody to assert that Paul and James disagreed on faith and works?
