Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Contest in Every Intelligent Mind Is Revealed Versus Human Knowledge RVHK

Man is at an inestimable disadvantage when pitting his knowledge against GodÂs knowledge. In the very best of circumstances man must reason from the part (his world) to the whole (GodÂs world); whereas God, from whom and by whom all things exist, always from the whole to the part. Man must constantly extrapolate, interpolate, and guess. God knows all things. He sees things in their entirety, in their true perspective. Hence the most reliable knowledge we have is that which God reveals or has revealed through his prophets. Therefore revealed religion should be the criterion of human reason or human knowledge, rather than the reverse. A test which shows whether someone has hold of the iron rod is his attitude toward the word of God in the standard works and the words of the living oracles. If he is ashamed of the word of God because he sees that it disagrees with the consensus of the scientific community, he does not have a firm hold of the iron rod.

70 It is only natural for fallen man to question whether God really speaks to the prophets. That is especially in this so-called time of "enlightenment" when we think we know so much simply because we can recite the errors of the past. have you noticed that most people blame the western worldÂs errors and superstitions of past centuries on the clergy of the day? They conveniently forget that, in those times, the clergy had a monopoly on education and learning. All the scientists were churchmen and all churchmen were the learned of this world, not the learned of GodÂs world. There were no prophets among them, by their own admission. And when the church lost its monopoly on learning, the error continued in the science of the secular world.

70 It may be precisely because of the history of the "making of the modern mind" that the Lord designed the Book of Mormon and its coming forth in the way he did. On the one hand, it at least appears that the book cannot be verified empirically. But on the other hand, the sincere seeker can verify it for himself. This verification comes by divine revelation which leaves no doubt. One of the most important parts of the whole Book of Mormon plan was that the gold plates should not be available for scientific examination. if they were, the book would cease to have the value it presently has. Then the scoffers could really have a heyday. They could argue interminably about authenticity and translation; and then, when those issues were settled, argue forever about whether it means anything to our day. Few would be converted by it. It would not be the proof of modern revelation. Its content would not be unassailable by human reason. The Church could not have been founded on it as the "keystone." It would not prove that Joseph Smith and his successors are prophets. It would just be another artifact in a mountain of artifacts.

Take-off Passage

Jacob 4:8-13.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 8:19-30; 2 Ne. 9:28, 29, 42; 2 Ne. 28:1-6; 2 Ne. 32:4; Jacob 7:11-20; Mosiah 12:27; Alma 12:9-11, 28-30; Alma 30:13-18; Alma 32:34; Alma 36:26; Hel. 16:17, 18; Deut. 29:29; John 3:16-21; 1 Cor. 1:18-31; 1 Cor. 2; Col. 2:8.

Study Questions

71 2. What is the difference between how we receive revealed knowledge and scientific knowledge?

71 3. What are the limits that are placed upon what science can investigate?

71 4. What are the limits placed upon what we can learn about GodÂs world? (See Moses 1.)

71 5. Why do deists and humanists prefer to believe in a god without substance or in a set of natural laws which they give the qualities of godhood? In what ways is it correct for them to call Latter-day Saints anthropomorphists? In what ways is it incorrect for them to call us anthropomorphists? How do you know that it was Gnosticism, not the Bible, that won at the Council of Nicea?

71 6. See if you can list three reasons why revealed knowledge must be the standard by which you judge the validity of all other knowledge.
