Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

We Can Avoid Many Errors by Taking Counsel TC

Counseling is a tradition, a commandment, a policy, and a way of life in the Church of Jesus Christ. Even the prophet and President of the Church has two counselors who are provided, prepared, and chosen in the wisdom of God. This presidency, in turn, may receive counsel from the Twelve. The Twelve regularly set apart stake presidents, who have two counselors to give them counsel; and stake presidents ordain bishops, who have two counselors who give them counsel. Similarly this is the practice with priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations. And a man has a very important and intimate counselor in his wife--and vice versa. Thus the Church organization provides a full value of counsel operating from center to periphery and back again. In like manner, children must learn to take counsel from parents, parents from bishops as assisted by home teachers, bishops from stake presidents, and stake presidents from General Authorities. Poor is the person who has no counselors, and foolish is the person who does not seek counsel.

72 Why all this counsel? Because the Lord "counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy over all his works." (Jacob 4:10.) The Prophet Joseph Smith learned by heard experience that it is wise to take counsel. (D&C 3:4, 7.) Part of Sidney RigdonÂs undoing was that he failed to take counsel. (D&C 63:55.) If we follow counsel, we will be able to establish Zion under the LordÂs direction. (D&C 105:37.) The pure in heart, the wise, the nobel, and the virtuous will seek counsel from the prophet. (D&C 122:2.) Indeed, it might be said that the acceptance or rejection of counsel by a Saint gives his duly ordained priesthood leader insight into his mind and spirit. It gives evidence of a memberÂs attitude and response to the mind and will of God. (D&C 124:118.) And it can be destructive of the spirituality of a man of learning, of riches, or of any other special interest if he reaches the state of mind or attitude in which that interest keeps him from accepting the counsel of priesthood authority. (2 Ne. 9:29.)

Take-off Passage

Jacob 4:10.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 13:38-40; 2 Ne. 3:11, 12; 2 Ne. 5:32; 2 Ne. 26:28, 29; Morm. 7:8,9 John 3:16-21.

Study Questions

72 2. What associations can you see between this subject and the one called NEED?

72 3. How could a prospective missionary profit from making the associations suggested in questions 1 and 2 above?

72 4. Who was the only person who knew exactly what God wanted him to do from moment to moment? Why?

72 5. What is there about the rest of us which makes it impossible to know exactly what to do all the time?

73 6. How do the mortality and imperfection of all men relate to the taking of counsel?

73 7. How does counseling relate to the reception of revelation?
