Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Anti-Christs of the Book of Mormon Taught Many Things That Are Now Taught by Humanists H

By Joseph SmithÂs day the idea of an antichrist had evolved into the idea of an Anti-Christ. The word antichrist is the Bible term for the false teachers in the Church who taught a false Christ instead of a true Christ. the Greek preposition anti, roughly translated, means instead of. It also carries the meaning of "face to face" or mirror image. The image in the mirror, looking back at you, is face to face with you. It looks like you. Yet it has no substance. It is a counterfeit of you, in a sense. It only appears to be you. So when John in his epistles spoke of antichrists, he was speaking of the belief of the Gnostics that God is a substanceless spirit rather than a resurrected being. (See 1 Jn. 2:18-22; 1 Jn. 4:1-3; 2 Jn. 1:7.) Such a god is like the image in the mirror--really nothing, a counterfeit. Through the centuries thereafter, the term antichrist became Anti-Christ, and by Joseph SmithÂs day it referred to those who opposed Christ. Thus during World War II there was a lot of speculation about whether Hitler was an antichrist (or Anti-Christ). Of course, that was an error. The antichrist of the Bible came, as John said, in his day, and was the doctrine of the spirit god, which became the "Triune God" adopted at the Council of Nicea. This apostate doctrine taught that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost were one God at the same time they were three and were totally without substance or form.

74 On the surface it would seem that the Nephite Anti-Christs--Sherem, Korihor, Nehor, and others--were not antichrists of the Bible variety. But they had a lot in common with the Bible variety. For instance, they came out of the true Church. In other words, they were apostates always. They were never Lamanites, though they led some Lamanites into the same errors. And they were deceivers and liars like the antichrists that Paul and John condemned. If we look further, we discover that the Book of Mormon Anti-Christs shared many characteristics with modern humanists.

74 Most humanists don't call themselves humanists, just as Bible antichrists do not call themselves antichrists. (Book of Mormon Anti-Christ, on the other hand, denied Christ openly.) But all modern humanists reject Christ either openly or by divesting him of his godhood and by relegating him to the stature of humanity. At best, they think of him as a great moral teacher who was deified by his followers. The reason why humanism is called humanism is that the humanists consider man to be the ultimate. They put man in the place of God. Of course, most of them deny that; but their teachings and actions betray them.

One way to understand humanism is to compare it with the true gospel of the Bible and the Book of Mormon. This shows God to be the supreme power in the universe, and the Father and the Son to be two separate, resurrected beings. It shows that the Father and the Son are omnipotent (all-powerful) and omniscient (all-knowing) and have the power to act everywhere at once if necessary. (Paul said that Jesus was "the brightness of [the FatherÂs] glory, and the express image of his person." [Heb. 1:3. Furthermore, it shows that the Father and the Son reveal their will to mankind through prophets. This revelation takes many forms that are all valid and real and convey true information in a manner that it can be understood.

76 Humanists, in general, accept the idea of a god; but to them he is a force (sometimes called "evolution" or "natural law") that is everywhere in the universe. he is not personal or embodied. he might just be called "the law." There are those who believe in the Father and the Son as two separate, resurrected beings but who think of them as subservient to the law rather than masters of the law. Apparently they visualize the god as super-scientists in heavenly laboratories, ever seeking truth. They do not accept LehiÂs statements in 2 Ne. 2 and Joseph SmithÂs in D&C 88:36-44, which clearly teach that, without Go, the law could do nothing. Indeed, God is the giver and upholder of the law.

76 By definition, God is the most powerful thing or being. Hence to humanists the law is God; but to Christians the Father and the Son are God. And they are united and are equal in power and purpose.

76 Furthermore, humanists do not believe in prophets and revelation. To them, revelation is the greatest thinking of the greatest minds. And their authority is the consensus of the scientific community. They accept men like Marx, Freud, Darwin, Dewey, Nader, and Sagan above Moses, Isaiah, Joseph Smith, Abraham, and Paul. To a great extent, they make each man his own god a prophet. Together with Sherem, Nehor, and Korihor, they say, "There is no Christ. you cannot know things to come. you say and believe such things because you are irrational or superstitious. Every man fares according to the genius of the creature. It is vain to expect knowledge and temporal blessings from this Jesus you have invented. Nothing you do is evil. It is natural to follow the appetites of the flesh. You canÂt help what you are. Just do Âyour thingÂ and, when you die, that will be the end of everything."

Take-off Passage

Jacob 7:2-20.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 11:35; 1 Ne. 12:18; 1 Ne. 14:13; 2 Ne. 9:28-29, 39-43; Alma 1:2-6; Alma 10:14-16; Alma 30; Hel. 2:4-5; Hel. 16:15-21; 3 Ne. 29; D&C 46:7; D&C 50:13-22; Rom. 1:18-32 (note verse 25); 1 Cor. 2. (See also KR, CR, NEED, and D.)

Study Questions

77 2. What common lies did Sherem, Nehor, and Korihor share about the source of their motivations, ideas, and teachings? What other lies or mistakes did they share?

77 3. What modern belief about the origin and nature of man is shared by all modern humanists? What effect does this have upon morality/

77 4. In what way is organic evolution absolutely essential to the philosophical soundness and the success of communism, fascism, and all types of socialism or Marxism?

77 5. List some teachings of Marx, Freud, Dewey, and their followers which are similar to the teachings of Sherem, Nehor, and Korihor.

77 6. What sort of things must parents do if they wish their children to grow up as Christians instead of humanists?
