Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Family Teaching Was a Major Part of the Life of Faithful Israelites FT

A significant difference between Babylon, the city of the devil, and Zion, the city of God, is in the way they approach the responsibility to teach the children. In Zion, education will be the responsibility of parents and the Church. The ancient Israelites were expected to teach their sons and daughters everything possible or available to know God and man and the universe around them. Besides that, each boy was to be taught a trade or means of making a living, and every girl was to be taught all those things upon which the preservation of life and society and home are dependent. The teaching of a trade was usually the fatherÂs direct duty, and trades tended to be passed down from father to son. The wealthy often hired tutors for their children or sent them to a local school taught by available masters.

78 A careful study of the Book of Mormon will show that the responsibility for supporting and promoting education among the Nephites was in the home and that it remained in the home.

Take-off Passage

Enos 1:1-3.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 1; 2 Ne. 2; Mosiah 1:1-8; Alma 5:6-14; Alma 36-42 (especially 36:17); Hel. 5:5-13; Moro. 8:1; Moses 6:58-62; Prov. 1:8. (Consider also the education in law and tent-making of Paul. Both of these examples followed the Hebrew pattern.)

Study Questions

78 2. How do books of remembrance (journals) enter into or serve in family education?

78 3. Can a father or mother safely farm out all the education of their children? Which subjects can be most safely farmed out? Which least safely?

78 4. Why must we not fully rely on the Sunday School, the Primary, and the seminary system for the spiritual education of our children? What precautions should we take?

78 5. List some of the things the Church has done to help us teach our children in the home. Why is this a proper function of the Church?

78 6. How are spiritual subjects made to depend upon secular subjects?

78 7. How do secular subjects depend upon spiritual subjects? In other words, how can we go astray if we learn secular subjects without he control of spiritual subjects?

78 8. Why do most people overemphasize secular subjects to the dangerous neglect of spiritual subjects?

78 9. Why is the education of our children one of the greatest responsibilities we have?
