Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Proper Spirit of Service Is to Remember Always That We Are Serving God SOS

King Benjamin taught that public servants, religious or secular, should always remember that they are in the service of their God. And they are servants, not masters. It is a Christian duty to serve God. We are not even the masters or owners of our own bodies. They are temples of God and should be kept clean and holy. He has "loaned" them to us. We eventually will be given them forever by the power of the resurrection. But the quality or glory of each personÂs body then will be determined by what he or she did with it during this life. Hence we are mistaken and even somewhat blasphemous when we say that we can do as we please with our own bodies.

80 We have become a very self-centered and self-serving people. Even some of the Saints talk of their callings as opportunities to grow and develop instead of opportunities to serve God--usually by serving our fellow men and women. Missionaries sometimes go into the field with the idea that it is a chance to travel, learn a language, or otherwise serve their own selfish ambitions or interests. True, Church service results in growth--if done to serve God. If it is not done to serve God, the chances are that the "growth" will be the snare and a delusion.

81 And we have no claim for a reward when we serve, according to Benjamin. Of course, a reward come in a roundabout way. In fact, we are rewarded overmuch constantly, Benjamin says. In addition to everything else, GodÂs grace provides a redemption that we can neither earn nor merit, no matter how great our service. There is a formula, of course, by which we can obtain this salvation; but all our good works and service will not guarantee it. In fact, the good works and good service are an outgrowth of the new creature who is created by a spiritual rebirth.

Take-off Passage

Mosiah 2:17.

Other Passages

Jacob 2:17-19; Mosiah 2:9-27; Mosiah 4:21; Mosiah 23:10-12; Hel. 12:1-6; 3 Ne. 24:5; 4 Ne. 23; Matt. 20:20-28. (Note also the story, in Mosiah 28, of Alma the Younger and the sons of Mosiah, who desired to spend their lives in service. Mosiah I, Mosiah II, and other Nephite leaders also devoted their lives to the service of their fellowmen.)

Study Questions

81 2. Why is it clear that King Benjamin did not set up a government welfare program supported by taxes?

81 3. What would have been wrong with his doing so? Would it be any less wrong to force men to give their knowledge away than to give their material wealth away? Why do such systems fail? (See D&C 134:2.)

81 4. Why does GodÂs plan leave men free to be saved or damned by how they use or misuse their material and intellectual wealth?

81 5. Why did Satan promise to save everyone?

81 6. Why is it impossible to get out of the LordÂs debt?

81 7. Explain in your own words the circumstances under which pursuit of a career or of money in business or government would be safe for your soul.
