Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Christian and Humanist Opinions of Psychological Disorientation Are Different PSYC

On several occasions the Nephite prophets and missionaries were accused of being "mad" or "deranged." Abinadi was one of these. And he was, of course, out of harmony with the society of King Noah. Being out of harmony or at odds with the world around us is considered a sign of maladjustment or mental sickness in our modern society, as it was in AbinadiÂs day. But the truth of that accusation depends on the condition of the world we live in. If the world is spiritually and mentally sick, being in harmony with it is sickness.

83 From a Christian point of view, sin is sickness. We learn from the Bible that homosexuality, which is not only rampant today but is officially tolerated, is one of the prime evidences that a society may be too sick to be saved. Such societies are "ripened in iniquity" and the judgments of God are about to come down upon them and destroy them. As we watch this condition develop, we can see that the judgments often are natural and inevitable. Who can honestly deny that sexual chastity, if universally observed, would not stop many plagues, save millions of lives, and end untold human misery?

It would have been sickness for Abinadi to be in harmony with King Noah and his people or for Lehi to be well adjusted to the political and social mess of 600 B.C. Jerusalem. Remember that the Jews howled against Jeremiah and the other prophets at that time. They could not see any cause for JeremiahÂs criticisms and warnings. But every dire prediction was fulfilled, including cannibalism. And it was all a natural consequence of being out of harmony with true reality, the reality of GodÂs law.

84 Even death is better than surrender to some things. Many times we have to choose between social acceptance and personal honor. What price are you willing to pay to keep your integrity? How cheaply can you be bought in the market that sells prestige, social acceptance, advancement, and worldly honors? The purpose of the gospel is not to help us adjust to the carnal world. We must live in the world, but we must not be of it. The purpose of the gospel is to help us adjust to eternal life.

84 Everyone who fully accepts Christ is bound to be out of step with his generation except in those choice times when the entire society is converted. The world will judge the Christians as mad, but it is the world which has "gone crazy."

84 Most people accept the fact that there are people who are irrational for reasons other than sin. We have no quarrel with that. The trouble is that many fail to see that sin is irrational and that it can lead to all sorts of social, political, economic, and spiritual problems. Indeed, most of the ills of humanity could be cured by honest repentance.

Take-off Passage

Mosiah 13:4

Other Passages

1 Ne. 1:19, 20; 1 Ne. 16:1-3; 2 Ne. 8:7; Mosiah 17; Alma 1:3, 7-9; Alma 24:22; Alma 30:16; Alma 60:13, 25-28; Hel. 13:2-5; Luke 6:22, 26; John 5:44; John 7:7; John 12:43; John 15:19; Rom. 12:1-3; 1 Jn. 2:15-17; D&C 1:14-18; D&C 84:49-53.

Study Questions

84 2. How is the problem of psychological sickness related to the moral imperative? (See MID.)

85 3. What is the Book of Mormon prescription for the cure and prevention of psychological sickness, as it is defined in this section?

85 4. How do welfare/socialist states prevent full and healthy maturation of personality and character?

85 5. Why is it more natural for women than for men to seek security?

85 6. Why do men tend to become violent and aggressive towards women when the roles of the sexes become confused? How does this show the wisdom of GodÂs laws that govern homes and families?

85 7. How do wars and plagues illustrate the natural consequence of the kind of insanity which rejects the laws of our Heavenly Father?
