Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Book of Mormon Doctrine of Liberty Is That No People Can Be Free Unless They Worship Christ FREE

The passages presented here are only a small part of those that deal with the subject of liberty; but they are indicative of what may be looked for. All of Alma, from chapter 43 on, as well as some earlier parts, is an account of a war for liberty. Helaman and Third Nephi, in large part, continue this account. This part of the Book of Mormon is not there simply because Mormon was a military man, as some have speculated. It is there because we live in a similar time and need the warning it gives because we are making the same mistakes.

87 The Book of Mormon shows that sin is the enemy of spiritual and political liberty. No wicked people have ever been free. No wicked people will ever be free. Slavery and freedom, like peace and war, start in the souls of men and women and proceed outward therefrom into the environment. Environment, after all, is only a reflection of the people who make it. Therefore, it is foolishness to suppose that government can create a good environment which, in turn, will made good people.

The Book of Mormon shows that the price of liberty, if it has to be won, is blood--the blood of Christ to purchase our spiritual liberty and the blood of patriots to purchase our physical or political liberty. If so great a price must be paid for it, how we ought to cherish it and try to preserve it!

88 When men and women lose their faith and courage, they often look to demagogues who promise what they cannot or should not give. We should remember that we need faith more than bread, and courage more than raiment. When we have faith and courage, we can get the bread and raiment. If government is to give its citizens anything of a material nature, it must first get it from its citizens. Government doesn't produce anything. Only people produce. Therefore, when people ask the government to solve their economic problems, what they really are saying is, "Take that other manÂs means away from him and give it to me." Such action is morally wrong. That is why the Lord said that "no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual . . . the right and control of property." (D&C 134:2.) We only need to look around us to see that violence and civil war result from failure to observe such principles.

88 The Book of Mormon shows that in general a nation tends to become rich when its citizens are good and free, and that poverty tends to be their lot when they are evil and in bondage. This is because sins tend to reduce productivity and to waste resources. Just consider such a fact as that the grain that is used to produce alcoholic beverages could feed all the hungry of the world. And consider the fact that the price citizens pay for drug control and all other crime control and punishment could take everyone off the poverty rolls. We feed and clothe hundreds of thousands of criminals in our prisons. If the biblical civil code were followed, they would be executed, banished, or forced under threat of death to make restitution; but they would never be imprisoned. There is no scriptural evidence that God condones prisons in peacetime. Only those who have lost faith in the love of God and the reality of life after death think execution of criminals is worse than prison.

88 The Book of Mormon also shows that God expects us to do our own giving. Charity ceases to be charity when government does our giving for us; because charity is, by definition, voluntary. It was the Gadiantons who promised a share in the spoils if elected. And the amount they shared with their duped followers was probably as small as it is in America today, where less than a third of what we are taxed for the poor ever reaches them. In the times of righteousness, there were no poor among the Nephites because they cared for them out of the goodness of their hearts, not out of the "goodness" of a predatory government.

89 And again, the Book of Mormon shows that we cannot have good government without good religion; namely, the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed in this dispensation. In fact, the Book of Mormon warns us that the United States will go down into spiritual and temporal destruction and slavery if it rejects the Book of Mormon. (1 Ne. 14:6-7.)

Take-off Passage

Mosiah 29.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 5:18; Mosiah 4:16-26; Mosiah 5:8; Alma 43:29-31; Alma 44:1-7; Alma 46:8-22; Alma 53:17; Alma 58:8-12, 33-41; Alma 60; Alma 61:9, 21; Hel. 14:29-31; John 8:30-36; 2 Cor. 3:17; Gal. 5; D&C 56:16, 17; D&C 88:86.

Study Questions

89 2. Discuss the time element involved in losing spiritual and physical liberties.

89 3. Why would we go unwarned if we were not warned by prophets and other religious leaders? Why can we not rely on politicians to warn us against the loss of our liberty?

89 4. Why is it impossible to leave your religion (Christian or anti-Christian) behind you when you go into the voting booth?

89 5. What does the Book of Mormon call a wise vote? an unwise vote? What is the consequence when the majority vote unwisely?

89 6. Why should people be allowed to vote even if they vote away their freedom?

89 7. How do both the righteous and the wicked profit when justice catches up with unwise uses of the franchise?
