Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Mosiah Set Up a Christian Constitutional Republic CCR

During the American Constitutional Convention, Dr. Benjamin Rush, quoting a Swiss gentleman, said that "Democracy is the devilÂs own government." When the United States Constitution was written, Benjamin Franklin is supposed to have said, "We have given you a republic; letÂs see if you can keep it," or words to that effect. There was, in those days, a great distinction made between democracy and republicanism. Our school children were taught this distinction right up until around the turn of the century, when the influence of John Dewey totally permeated American public education. DeweyÂs philosophy was based on the enthronement of democracy. He believed that all truth--social and scientific--was to be determined by a consensus. Now Americans are very confused about the entire subject.

90 You can understand the nature of a true Christian constitutional republic when you understand the government of "three whiches" that Mosiah gave to the Nephites. (Mosiah 29:25.) This was a government of laws (1) which were given to their fathers, (2) which were pronounced correct, and (3) which were given to them by God. In a democracy, the voice of the people is sovereign (all-powerful), while in a true Christian constitutional republic, God is sovereign. His sovereignty is expressed mostly through his law.

90 The colonists were not inclined to accept the Constitution. They were mostly Protestant, and the English influence was very strong. They were steeped in the tradition of the Magna Carta and the Bill of Rights. This philosophy is based on the idea that the government (king) is sovereign and it (he) grants rights to the people. The Constitution was framed on the assumption that God is sovereign, but he grants sovereignty to the people collectively. Therefore, the government has only such rights as the people grant it. This is exactly the opposite of the English tradition. According to R.J. Rushdoony in his book, This Independent Republic, a major reason why the colonists finally ratified the Constitution was that the Protestant clergy stumped for it on the grounds that it was based on biblical law, GodÂs law. However, it was also necessary to add a bill of rights to get the approval of the colonists. This was done in the form of amendments so that the basic philosophy of the Constitution could be preserved.

There is no universally accepted definition of what constitutes a republic or what differences exist between democracy and republicanism. However, among many Christians who honor the Constitution, there is some consensus. This consensus embraces two principles: (1) the sovereignty of God and (2) a limited franchise. And these two principles are essentially the basic principles of the Nephite rule of the judges set up by King Mosiah. This is the reason why some people call the Nephite rule of judges a Christian constitutional republic.

91 The sovereignty of God is easier to discern in the Nephite republic than in the American republic. In fact, the citizens of the American republic for all practical purposes have abandoned the idea of GodÂs sovereignty. It is only to the extent that we are still governed by the Constitution that we recognize GodÂs sovereignty. And even then it is not a conscious recognition of sovereignty, because few recognize or believe that the Constitution was based on biblical law. In the early days of this republic the Bible was the law book of last resort. That is, when judges determined the disposition of cases, they were influenced directly or indirectly by the Bible. They were influenced by the Bible even when they didn't consciously know it. Now they are influenced by the consensus of the legal community as the "law book" of last resort, and few judges allow biblical law to influence their decisions. In other words, we have deteriorated into a democracy, and the people are sovereign in every aspect of our lives. Even our moral values are determined by consensus.

91 We must always remember that, if God does not rule, men rule. If GodÂs law is abandoned, the laws of men will be embrace. There were cases of the corruption of GodÂs law among the Nephites, too. Those were the time of great trial and trouble. When the prophets are despised, the people suffer poverty, pain, and slavery.

91 The second principle mentioned above, a limited franchise, is easily misunderstood. The thing to remember is that the franchise need not be limited as to who can vote--any reasonable and fair set of voting qualifications will do. But is must be limited as to what people can vote on.

In what way, then, should the franchise be limited? As to what you can vote on. Freedom and a true republic cannot be preserved if people can vote to repeal GodÂs law. And they must not vote on whether or not to repeal physical, chemical, economic, or social laws. Bills have been introduced into state legislatures to change pi from 3.1716 . . . to 3.0. It was argued that this would simplify geometry for engineers and others and would make the teaching and learning of mathematics must easier. The Utah legislature once passed a law against the Great Salt Lake being allowed to rise above a certain level. Of course, these lawmakers weren't doing anything as inane as those who tried to change pi. But they might as well have; for it did no good to pass the law. The lake hasn't obeyed that law and neither has the governor. In the meantime, if you will think about it, you will see that our federal government has passed myriad laws which attempt to repeal every known law of economics. And these don't work either. All these laws do is complicate commerce and increase the poverty they are supposed to stop.

92 The only legitimate use of the franchise is to vote on whether Smith or Jones shall hold political office. And the main standard by which we should judge their worthiness is how we perceive they will defend, support, and execute the constitutional law. Politically speaking, the only good politician is the one who is absolutely knowledgeable about the Constitution and will absolutely defend it. That is why God repeatedly called David the best king. He was on one occasion a murderer and an adulterer in his private life; but he honored the law in his public life. So far as we can tell, David did not tax the people; he did not create a bureaucracy; he absolutely protected the property rights of the people and brought criminals to justice. At least, he did those things better than any other king the Israelites ever had in the Old World. There were better kings in America among the Nephites, but none better in the Old World among the Israelites there.

92 Of course, the rule of the judges was attacked by the kingmen right from the start. The kingmen were the totalitarians of that day. The totalitarians of our day are (1) the advocates of unlimited democracy (the totalitarianism of the majority which dethrones God), (2) socialists of several varieties, (3) Communists, and (4) Fascists. There are always totalitarians. Maintaining freedom is a constant struggle unless the Lord sets up a special circumstance, as he will during the Millennium. Totalitarianism is the devilÂs system, and he is always at war against freedom and Christianity.

Take-off Passage

Mosiah 29:11-39.

Other Passages

Alma 10:17, 18, 27; Alma 51; Alma 60; Hel. 6:37-39; Hel. 7:5; 3 Ne. 7:6; Luke 11:52; D&C 98:4-12; D&C 101:77-80, 134. (Study Ezra Taft BensonÂs speech "The Proper Role of Government," in An Enemy Hath Done This, Jerreld L. Newquist, comp. [Salt Lake City: Parliament Publishers, 1969], pp. 125-48.)

Study Questions

93 2. Why do the Latter-day Saints have a special reason to accept the United States Constitution?

93 3. In what practical and limited way is the voice of the people sovereign in a Christian constitutional republic?

93 4. How is the franchise misused in the United States from a constitutional point of view? How does this make us an unlimited democracy?

93 5. What is there about the nature of man that makes unlimited democracy dangerous?

93 6. Why is it impossible for a people to remain free if they have the power to vote themselves or others money from the public treasury?

93 7. Discuss the difference between the Soviet Socialist Republics and the rule of the Nephite judges with reference to the franchise and sovereignty.

93 8. How much power must a government have if it is going to redistribute the wealth of its people?
