Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

It Is Our Privilege to Be Instruments in the Hands of God IHG

In the previous topic (FG), we raised the question of free agencyÂs compatibility with GodÂs infinite foreknowledge. Part of the answer is found in AlmaÂs soliloquy found in Alma 29:1-9. He commences by mourning the fact that he does not have the power of an angel so that he could overwhelm all mankind with the greatness of the gospel and in effect force them to accept salvation. Then he says, "But behold, I am a man, and do sin in my wish." He then proceeds to explain, among other things, that (1) as a general rule, God gives every nation or people the amount of information they want, as demonstrated by what they have done with what they have. (2) Individuals are raised up to give this amount of information in their own tongue to their own nations. (3) We are instruments in the LordÂs hands in spreading whatever portion of the word the Lord, in his wisdom, sees as fit, proper, and just for each nation and people. (4) It is to our glory that we can be the instruments of the Lord.

96 From the above we can infer that the Lord has foreordained certain people to come at certain times so that all the rest of mankind, through these chosen leaders, prophets, and missionaries, will have an adequate chance to exercise their agency and determine their ultimate salvation or damnation. We also can infer that many of the chosen teachers will be left temporarily without a full knowledge of the gospel so that they will teach only what they are supposed to teach. But, if that is the case, it will be made up to them later on. If their intent is to be GodÂs instruments, and if they so conduct their lives, they will receive the reward of an instrument of God.

96 People are not the only instruments of God in prearranging history so that all mankind can exercise choice. For example, the Book of Mormon is one of the greatest instruments ever devised to bring about the purposes of the Lord. It is the prime instrument of our day to reconcile souls with Christ. The Bible, too, was nurtured down through the ages and designed as a great instrument for people both in and out of the Church. There are some imperfections in it; but they are as nothing compared to the great power it still have to work upon the souls of men and women to bring them to better and greater choices. in the Siberian labor camps, prisoners have been brought to a great conviction of the divinity of Christ and his work by reading just scraps of the Bible--sometimes only those scraps preserved in the writings of Tolstoy, whose works Stalin made the mistake of not destroying.

Besides people and books of scripture, modern inventions, such as television, are instruments in the hands of the Lord to bring the word to all who have ears to hear. Scientific advancement blossomed just before and came to fruition just after the introduction of the present dispensation of the gospel. Many natural explanations for this have been advanced by great thinkers in the Church; but no explanation is better than the simple fact that the Lord so arranged it for his own instrumentality in bringing about his eternal purposes without interfering with the agency of man. Thus scientific geniuses also can be instruments in the LordÂs hands--whether or not they intend to be.

Take-off Passage

Alma 29:1-9.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 1:24; 2 Ne. 3:24; Mosiah 23:10; Mosiah 27:6; Alma 1:8; Alma 2:30; Alma 17:11; Alma 26:3; Alma 35:14; D&C 1:1-5; D&C 42:6; D&C 81:2-5; D&C 84:75-87; D&C 88:77-81.

Study Questions

97 2. How does the Book of Mormon affect and improve the instrumentality of missionaries?

97 3. What can we learn from the attitude and actions of Book of Mormon prophets and missionaries that will improve us as instruments of the Lord?

97 4. How does the Book of Mormon work as an instrument in bringing people to Christ? in bringing them to baptism? Why can they not have the one without the other?

97 5. Relate this subject of instruments to D&C 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants.
