Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Korihor Exalted Human Reason Above Revelation KR

When we call Korihor a rationalist, we are emphasizing a common but oversimplifies definition of the term. One accepted idea is what the philosophy of rationalism proposes is that the human intellect is the supreme source of knowledge and truth, that revelation is unnecessary and nonexistent, and that religious truths can be discovered and refined by the human mind alone without inspiration. In that sense, Korihor was a rationalist. But many rationalists would reject that definition. Some, such as James Martineau, the nineteenth-century theologian and rationalist, would even claim that miracles can occur; but they would argue that their meaning must be subject to human reason. Other rationalists would argue that miracles that do not make sense to the human mind must be rejected as spurious. That is, they insist on a "reasonable or rational world," as they see the world. Korihor argued that it was not reasonable to believe in Christ or in prophecy. "No man can know that which is to come." This is quite common, though not universal, rationalists position.

98 Treatises on rationalism very commonly point out that rationalism arose as a alternative to "revelationism" or the literal reliance upon and interpretation of scripture. So religious people who attack rationalism do so out of the belief that rationalism is the enemy of revelation. And, of course, radical rationalism always has been the enemy of revelation and the prophets, just as Korihor was the enemy of revelation and the prophets.

98 In this section we are using Korihor as the prototype of all that is evil in rationalism. In that sense rationalism is, to a great extent, one of the parents of such other evils as behaviorism, organic evolution, relativism, humanism, socialism, and so on. Neither rationalism nor these other "evils" are necessarily totally evil. All of them have advanced human knowledge; and therefore they are useful even if no other way than the way in which Satan serves a purpose in their life--that is, as the "opposition" in all things. (2 Ne. 2:15.) If he didn't serve a purpose here, the Lord never would have temporarily banished him here instead of sending him straight to perdition, wherever that is. (Of course, Satan is totally evil, while the above relatives of rationalism are not.)

98 There is nothing in "Mormonism" which is anti-rational in an ultimate sense. It is just that we realize that only God, the infinite being, is capable of defining what is rational and what is irrational. Our minds are always afflicted with ignorance and error. Hence there are gaps which we cannot fill--gaps which cause us to be irrational to a greater or lesser degree.

Once we have understood this weakness of humanity--this propensity for ignorance and error--and have received a divine testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon, we can reason in the following way: We know that the scriptures are true, except for possible errors in the Bible--which is a very minor problem. Therefore, our job is to use our reasoning powers to determine what they say not to sit in judgment on their truth. We do not read Nephi and Isaiah and ask ourselves if they were right or wrong. We read them and ask ourselves if they were right or wrong. We read them and ask ourselves what they say. We use to its limit every gray cell we possess, to decipher the meaning; but we do not use one ounce of mental energy trying to decide whether Isaiah and Nephi were repeating only the superstitions of their times. We already got that problem out of the way when we made that great discovery by personal revelation that the Book of Mormon is true.

99 Of course, this process of "reasoning" out the meaning of the scriptures is a rational process. Therefore we too are rationalists in a sense. But we are different kind of rationalist from Korihor and all those people who think the scriptures must be judged by the current knowledge consensus of the learned world.

99 A poor, confused rationalist (of the Korihor type), on the other hand, has never paid the price of a testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon. So he doesn't know about any of the standard works. He is in the pitiful and impossible position of having to forever compare their words with the words of his truly cherished authorities, the scientists and humanists, to determine what he will believe and what he will reject. After all, that is all he does when he uses what he fondly calls his "reasonable mind." Reasoning or rationalism is never more than running the new idea past all the old ideas stored in the "computer" we call a mind. And if there is any ignorance or error there, the output will be adversely affected.

99 That doesn't mean that the faithful will never make mistakes about what the prophets said. But if they keep forever at the task of reading and trying to understand the scriptures, they will be following a safe course. They know that because they know that the Book of Mormon is true and that it came the way Joseph Smith said it came.

99 It is important to remember that Alma made Korihor stick to his original premises; and then he showed him that, of necessity these premises made KorihorÂs whole case rest on his "word only." (Alma 30:37-43.) Alma, on the other hand, had much for Korihor to consider and weigh in studied judgment: (1) "the testimony of all these thy brethren"; (2) the testimony of "all the holy prophets"; (3) "the scriptures"; and (4) "all things." (Alma 30:44.)

Take-off Passage

Alma 30.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 2:18-27; 2 Ne. 9:27, 28, 42, 43; 2 Ne. 28:6; Jacob 4:8; Jacob 7:2-7; Alma 1:2-5; Hel. 16:17-20; 1 Cor. 2; D&C 50:1-24.

Study Questions

100 2. How can it be shown that organic evolution rests entirely upon rationalism or the reasoning of human minds--not on empiricism, properly defined, nor on revelation?

100 3. What basic tenets do you see in education and the social sciences that are derivatives from or are corollaries of organic evolution?

100 4. Identify some teachings of the carnal mind that Korihor taught in order to have success. (Alma 30:53.)

100 5. In what ways is rationalism, as here defined pleasing to the carnal mind?

100 6. Identify some areas today in which men are having success because they teach KorihorÂs concepts.

100 7. How do todayÂs "get rich quick" and "success" books relate to Korihor and his philosophy?
