Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

"Except a Man Be Born Again, He Cannot See the Kingdom of God" BA

Some have a certain spiritual awakening which makes it possible for them to "see" the kingdom of God--that is, recognize that the gospel has been restored and the true Church has been reestablished on the earth. Then, if they are "born of the water and of the Spirit," they are able to enter the Church; and, if they endure to the end, they can enter into their rest in GodÂs kingdom.

107 Some are "stillborn." That is, they do not act upon that first spiritual awakening which gives them the knowledge or intimation of the great thing which has happened. One retired Lutheran minister in Winona, Minnesota, in 1941, who received a testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon but did not join the Church, asked the Elder who helped him get that far (Glenn Pearson), "How many ÂMormonsÂ are there?"

107 The Elder replied, "About 750,000."

107 The minister then said, "Well, if all who know it is true were to be baptized, I suspect you would have 7,500,000 members."

107 The astonished Elder asked, "Why do you think that?"

107 The minister said, "I believe that, out of every ten who know that ÂMormonismÂ is true, only one ever joins the Church."

107 "Why do they not join?" asked the Elder.

107 "Mostly, I suppose, because of these things"--and the minister held out a cigar in one hand and a cup of coffee in the other.

108 But, of course, there are other reasons for so many spiritual stillbirths. The Word of Wisdom may have been the biggest stumbling block on the path to the baptismal font in that day; but it surely isn't now. Among other things, unchastity and the pride of the intellectual mind in the "precepts of men" are greater problem today. In any event, the two major things that keep people out of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are sin and ignorance.

108 The sorrows and frustrations of this mortal world are inflicted upon us mostly by wicked men who seem incapable of exercising self-control. The only solution is the one Christ has given us: We must have a change of heart and become new creatures with a new Spirit which will sanctify our souls and give us the power we need to overcome the flesh. Paul recognized--as do all the prophets--that there is a certain amount of war within because of the "enmity of the flesh." but no psychological adjustment is more than a half measure except the one that the Great Physician prescribed. Christ is the Great Physician of human souls. He is the begetter and deliverer in our spiritual rebirth. It is when we see him as he is that the mighty change can be wrought within us.

Take-off Passage

Alma 36:5-26

Other Passages

Mosiah 5:2-7; Mosiah 27:23-28; Alma 5:7-25; Alma 7:14; Alma 22:15; Alma 38:6; John 3:3-5; Moses 6:59-61.

Study Questions

108 2. What relationship do you see between Book of Mormon teachings on this subject and the so-called motivation to do right and to exercise self-control?

108 3. How can a person know if he has been born again?

108 4. How is this principle associated with the atonement of Christ?

108 5. What three things happen to a convert which justify calling his experience a rebirth?
