Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

When We Die We Go into a Spirit World SW

Between the death of the mortal body and its resurrection we live in a spirit world. That world, though invisible to our mortal eyes, is near, in, and above this earth. In this spirit world the righteous and the wicked are more completely separated than they are in this life.

109 There are various names for the places of the wicked and the righteous. In the Bible the place of the righteous was sometimes called AbrahamÂs bosom, and the place of the wicked was called hell, sheol, or hades, depending on the language. Sheol also did service for the whole world of the dead. And paradise, a Greek word, originally meant a "park" or "place of waiting." Hence it could mean simply the whole spirit world. However, by Joseph SmithÂs day paradise had come to mean heaven or the place of the righteous. In the Book of Mormon the usual name for heaven are heaven or paradise, and usual name for hell is hell. One has to consult the commentaries of the linguistic experts to be sure of what is meant in the Bible in every case. Even then, whether he gets the correct interpretation will depend on which experts he consults and how well he understands what they say.

109 If we endure with faith in Christ and repentance to the end of our mortal lives, we go to the spirit world paradise to wait for a joyous resurrection. Of course, we do not just wait. While in this "rest of the Lord," we can be sent on missions to the "prison house," as hell has sometimes been named.

109 If we do not endure to the end or have never got onto the path, we go to hell or the prison house. There our condition is described as one of misery. Perhaps the misery varies according to the degree of wickedness. After all, the wicked in this life are in misery, too; and they seldom realize it. In any event, Satan has greater and more immediate or personal power over us in hell than in this life. Hell is his present home. Perdition is his future home.

Take-off Passage

Alma 40:6-15.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 9:10-13; 4 Ne. 14; Moro. 10:34; Matt. 14:26; Luke 16:22-25; Luke 24:36-39; 1 Pet. 3:18-21; 1 Pet. 4:6; D&C 138. (See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith, Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966], p. 472.)

Study Questions

110 2. What passages of scripture or incidents in the scriptures give you a knowledge of what a personage of spirit looks like?

110 3. What concepts in the Book of Mormon bring peace and happiness to a person who has loved ones in the spirit world?

110 4. In what way is death a partial judgment?

110 5. Under what circumstances does work for the dead prove helpful to the spirits in prison?
