Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

God Has Bound Himself to Respect the Relationship Between Justice and Mercy RJM

Every good and normal person has a sense of justice and mercy. Even the wicked seem to want a just and merciful world, especially in an ultimate or eternal sense. Even in times of great wickedness, the Nephites wanted prophets for commanders of their armies.

110 Justice and mercy seem to be in opposition to each other: the one seeks a payment for each offense; the other yearns to forgive or to be forgiven. Christ, as the Judge and also the Redeemer of all men, has reconciled these two qualities within himself through his atonement and by offering the law of the gospel as the means by which we can obtain the benefits of his atonement. Having paid the price of all sin himself, he has obtained the legal right to forgive the truly penitent--himself, he has obtained the legal right to forgive the truly penitent--those who have obeyed the gospel. The good are appreciative of the fact that they can depend upon the justice as well as the mercy of God. The wicked stand in fear of justice because their sins condemn them. Of course, we all would stand condemned if there were no opportunity to repent made possible by the Atonement.

God is a God of truth. He does not lie. If he lied, he would cease to the God by the definition; for God, by universal agreement of the definition of the word God and the nature of the being of God, does not lie. He has said that he will not rob justice; therefore, he will not. This means that he can forgive only those sinners who have a claim on his mercy through the Atonement and through their repentance from all of their sins. This does not mean that the Lord is forced by any external power to forgive only repentant sinners. He is only compelled internally by his own honor. He is not dependent on anyone for his power. And he plays no favorites. All are treated equally and equitably. Sin is punished either in Christ (through the Atonement) or in the sinner (by GodÂs or eternal punishment). And obedience is rewarded by escape from punishment or any condition which limits progress and happiness.

Take-off Passage

Alma 42:12-28.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 2:6-10; 2 Ne. 9:46; 2 Ne. 11:5; Jacob 6:3-13; Mosiah 3:24-27; Mosiah 15:7-9, 27; Alma 7:12; Alma 10:21; Alma 12:32-35; Alma 34:15-17; 3 Ne. 26:5; D&C 88:35.

Study Questions

111 2. Why do the concepts of justice and mercy lose their meaning and become rhetorical symbols when the concept of the Atonement is forsaken?

111 3. What relationships are there between Gethsemane, repentance, mercy, and relying on the merits of Christ?

111 4. What will decrease our fear of justice and increase our assurance of mercy?

111 5. What does the statement "perfect love casteth out all fear" have to do with justice and mercy?
