Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Book of Mormon Justifies Wars of Defense W

There are very few, if any, issues in the world today that are more divisive than war--to fight or not to fight. Vietnam and Korea are monuments to this divisiveness, for the divided counsels in America caused her to lose both of those wars. And, in the peace, many more were murdered by the victors than dies in the military actions when the United States was engaged. At least, that is true for Vietnam.

112 The Book of Mormon is quite clear about war: (1) it is the result of the wickedness of fallen men in a fallen world; (2) it always is started by the evil designs of power-hungry totalitarians; and (3) good men and good nations should never go to war except to defend their liberty, their lives, their families, and their property. Also, in the case of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, the Book of Mormon points up some rare conditions under which a Christian would be justified in being a conscientious objector even if his freedom were at stake: He had fought and killed so much--and loved it--before his conversion, that any further killing would jeopardize his eternal salvation. Normally, however, people are expected to defend their lives, families, liberty, and property.

112 In modern revelation, the Lord has declared that war will be among us until the second coming of Christ. (D&C 63:32-34.) War will be part of the judgments that will make a full end of all nations. (D&C 87.) he has commanded us to renounce war and proclaim peace. (D&C 98:16.) He has given us his law that justifies the Saints in entering into battle. (D&C 98:23-38.)

112 A significant number of the pages of the Book of Mormon deal with war. It was written for us and it very likely was intended to advise us on the problems we have with wars, with pacifists or "doves," and with "hawks" or "warmongers." It gives many great teaching on war to guide the Saints in every nation. And they certainly need guidance; for the Lord has said that the Saints "shall hardly escape." (D&C 63:34.)

Take-off Passage

Alma 43:1-3.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 14:10-14, 22; Alma 43; 3 Ne. 7; D&C 1:17-19; D&C 63:32-34; D&C 87; D&C 98:16-38. (See PEACE, HATE, ADC, PD, KR, GC, FREE, and Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974].)

Study Questions

113 2. Why do men fight wars over land or property? (See conference talk by President David O. McKay, October 1962.)

113 3. What does the Book of Mormon teach about victory, the peace conference tables, corruption I government, prisoners of war, draft dodger, disarmament, men of arms, the price of political freedom, protected sanctuaries, and so on? What does it teach about threatened enemy occupation of other "parts of the land, which would lay a foundation for serious consequences" (Alma 50:32)? How does all of this apply to our situation today?

113 4. What do you believe the Church is doing today to avoid the evils of war? Why can you safely say that the LDS missionary system is the greatest anti-war program in the world?

113 5. What does it take to justify a Saint in going to war?

113 6. Compare the Book of Mormon and the American press as sources for a philosophy about war.
