Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Freedom and Prosperity Are Based on the Land L

A rule of propaganda is that the bigger the falsehood and the more often it is presented the more likely it will be that people will believe it. One of the biggest errors of all time is that "human rights are more important than property rights." Before the 1930s very few Americans believed it. But it was repeated so often during the Great Depression that soon people believed it. Since then few Americans even question it, and even fewer could tell you why it is an error. The reason, of course, is that, if they did not believe this error, the practice of the redistribution of wealth by the power of government could not be justified.

The truth of the matter is that all human rights are based on property rights. And all property rights are based on the land. The history of the struggle for freedom from the feudal lords in the western world is a history of the struggle to break the feudal monopoly on land. Those poor, oppressed people rightly saw that they had no hope unless "their homes, too, were their castles" and they could call a piece of land their own. The struggle to have the right to own land without being a nobleman or a government bureaucrat was won by the shedding of the blood of patriots and heroes. The establishment of the United States of America under the Constitution was the ultimate and greatest victory in this struggle. And now, virtually in one generation, we have trampled under our feet the blood of that covenant and considered it a thing of naught.

115 All one really needs to do to see the truth of the statement that all human rights are based on property rights is to ask these questions: What are the human rights which are considered more important than property rights? Do they cost money? Where will the money come from? When you have honestly answered those questions you will know why greedy and covetous people invented the idea that "human rights are more important than property rights." You will also know that without property there can be no rights. Then it becomes a question of whether property shall be private or whether we shall continue the flight back to feudalism. You canÂt have it both ways; for the minute you have given the government the power to take one manÂs property away from him and give it to another, you have given the government all power over you to exercise at its discretion. And government bureaucrats can be as despotic as feudal lord. You can vote out politicians; but bureaucrats continue on from on administration to another. The one real restraint we can successfully place upon government is the restraint against seizing our property for the purpose of redistributing it to others considered more deserving of it. Government cannot guarantee us life. It can only guarantee to try to defend us from those who would take our liberty away from us. But is can, with very few exceptions, guarantee us the right to own and control our property. If you think about it, you will see that all wars are fought on and over property. Without property, life and liberty are meaningless even to the tenuous extent that they ever can exist in this mortal life?

115 The earth was organized from material and created in such a way that it could be inhabited. The Lord intended that his children should possess it. (1 Ne. 17:36.) Therefore, we find that everything Christians hold sacred, near, and dear to their hearts is bound to individual ownership and control of property.

Christians are taught by the Lord to defend and redeem their land, if necessary, by the shedding of blood. The Lord has given certain parcels of land to his covenant people to bring about his eternal purposes and to secure their mortal existence. When the Israelites went into the promised land, they immediately divided it up into inheritances by families. When Nephites took over any area, they divided it up into inheritances by families. When the "Mormons" went into any part of the Great Basin, one of their first pieces of business was to follow that same old Israelite custom of dividing up the land by families. The Almighty has given divine deeds to some of his real estate. There are over 1600 references to land in the complete concordance to the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants.

Take-off Passage

Alma 44:5.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 2:20; 1 Ne. 13:9-20, 30; 1 Ne. 17:23-40; 1 Ne. 22:7; 2 Ne. 1:5-9; 2 Ne. 3:2; 2 Ne. 10:7-19; Enos 1:10; Mosiah 29:21; Alma 43:45-48; 3 Ne. 15:12-14; 3 Ne. 21:4; 3 Ne. 14:2; D&C 101:8; D&C 134:1-2. (See President David O. McKay, Conference Report, October 1962.) See also ALJ, W, and PI.

Study Questions

116 2. What security would an LDS family have in a dedicated home?

116 3. What are some things that are more precious than life in this state of probation?

116 4. When, where, and why should men risk their lives in war?

116 5. Why is it becoming increasingly difficult for people in America to own their homes free of debt?

116 6. Why does every economic problem grow instead of shrink when the government tries to solve it?

116 7. From what source does all wealth issue?
