Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

A Good Share of the Corruption of the Bible Was by the Deletion of Plain and Precious Things COBD

Joseph Smith said that we believe the Bible "as far as it is translated correctly." (A of F 1:8.) Because of this obviously rational and unimpeachable statement, devious people have accused the Mormons of not believing the Bible. Actually, we believe far more of it than any other people. Even the most fundamental of Christians are forever searching for additional light on the original text and its meaning. Some have published new "translations" in the twentieth century. Thus they demonstrate by their actions that they take exactly the same view Joseph Smith expressed in the eighth article of faith.

122 Judging by the nature of the work involved in Joseph SmithÂs inspired "translation" of the Bible, he meant that we believe the Bible to the extent that it is the same as it was originally given. Very little of the work he did could be called "translating" in the usual sense of the word. Mostly he put pack parts of the Bible that had been taken out. And he got these parts by revelation in many cases and by deductions based on revelation in others.

122 Nephi described the genesis of a church which was more abominable than any other church. (1 Ne. 13.) He said that after the Bible went from the Apostles to the Gentiles in purity, it was corrupted by that church. He implied that most of the damage was the deletion of plain and precious things concerning the gospel and the covenants of God.

The Book of Mormon contains a number of passages which show that the brass plates contained information which our present Bible does not. Certain New Testament passages indicate that the Old Testament of JesusÂ day and PaulÂs day also contained these things. For instance, PaulÂs allusion to the tame and wild olive trees in his letter to the Romans has frustrated the scholars because he so obviously expected those who read his message to know what he was talking about. Perhaps they had ZenosÂ account. (See Jacob 5.) Besides Zenos, the Book of Mormon tells us about the writings of Ezias, Zenock, and Neum, whose books were in the brass plates.

123 We have to be careful that we do not overplay the idea that the Bible has been corrupted by deletions and changes. It is very probable that the Lord outsmarted the adversary and arranged to have the Bible preserved in that manner and to that degree that would best serve his purposes. We can safely believe almost every verse that is left. Only a few passages are wrong enough to create any problems.

123 President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., made some wise suggestions about the Bible, the essence of which follows: (1) Stay with the King James version, because the men who made that translation were believers who would only rarely deliberately translate figuratively instead of literally. (2) Accept almost everything you understand in the Bible unless a modern revelation or unimpeachable scholarship has shown it to be false. (3) Question or withhold judgment on those ideas which appear only in a single Bible passage and have no confirmation in modern revelation.

Take-off Passage

3 Ne. 10:14-17.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 13:20-32; 1 Ne. 19:10-21; 2 Ne. 3:5-22; Jacob 5; Jacob 6:1; Alma 33:3, 13, 15; Alma 34:7; Alma 46:23-27; Hel. 8:19, 20; Hel. 15:11; Luke 24:25-27, 44-47; Rom. 11:16-25; 1 Cor. 15:3, 4; Gal. 3:8; Moses Abraham; Joseph Smith Matt. 1; D&C 45:15-60.

Study Questions

124 2. How do the ideas and scriptures given in this section help you to understand the Bible better? Give examples.

124 3. Does it appear to you that Joseph Smith could have had the training, background, and time to formulate the teachings and ideas pointed out in this section without divine help?

124 4. Why were the plain and precious things taken out of the Bible?

124 5. What evidence do we have that the Old Testament has been changed? the New Testament?
