Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Book of Mormon Proves That Christ Is the God of the Old Testament CGOT

When Jesus visited the Nephites, he informed them that he was the personage who gave the law to Moses. Elsewhere the Book of Mormon identifies him as the Creator. Abinadi, in fact, gave these four reasons why Jesus has the title of Father: (1) as the heir of his Father or inheritor of the title, (2) as the complete and constant agent of his Father, acting in his behalf, (3) as the Creator or "Father" of heaven and earth, and (4) as the Father of the faithful, those who are begotten sons and daughters of God through spiritual rebirth.

There are many names for Deity. Probably most of them could be used for either the Father or the Son. In the LDS Church we frequently refer to our Heavenly Father by the name of Elohim when we want to be sure there is no mistake about the identity of the person about whom we are talking. In the same manner and for the same reasons, we commonly call Jesus Jehovah. The use of the word Elohim in this manner is arbitrary, and the name Jehovah could just as well be applied to the Father as to the Son. However, it is true that the personage who identified himself as Jehovah was usually, if not always, Jesus. But since he was always acting on behalf of the Father, he could have been using a name that applied as well to the Father as to the Son. Jehovah is probably the first person, singular, present form of the verb to be in the Hebrew language. Most likely it simply means "I AM."

127 To most churches in the Christian world--and especially to the Jehovah Witnesses--Jehovah is the "God of the Old Testament" and is identified with the Father. Of course, it is a moot point in the case of all but the Jehovah Witnesses; because most Christians do not distinguish between the Father and the Son in the way we do. They think of them as different "masks" or manifestations of the same form for a special purpose. But the main point of doctrine in the Jehovah Witness church is that Jehovah is the Father, the eternal God. They believe Jesus is a later and lesser God, and that both are immaterial, all-pervading "spirits" in their present state, with separate identities. Thus the Jehovah Witnesses also take emphatic issue with the LDS position even though in a slightly different way than do the Catholics and Protestants.

127 To a Latter-day Saint who understands the content and purpose of the Book of Mormon, the answer is simple. There is no need for argument. Just find out that the Book of Mormon is true and then read what Jesus said in Third Nephi.

Take-off Passage

3 Ne. 15:5.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 6:4; 1 Ne. 17:25-30; Jacob 4:4, 12; Alma 39:17; Alma 19:7-13; Mosiah 3:5; Mosiah 13:13; Mosiah 15:1-6; Hel. 8:14-2; Ether 3:15, 16; Isa. 6:1-6; John 4:25, 26; John 8:58; John 12:41.

Study Questions

128 2. From the CGOT vantage point, when did Christianity begin and what does this mean to the conventional theory of all religions evolving from the simple to the complex, from lower forms to higher forms?

128 3. What does the Book of Mormon say about ChristÂs omnipotence and omniscience/ how does knowing that he is the God of the Old Testament help prove his omniscience and omnipotence?

128 4. How does this section help prove the fallacy of the idea that the God of the Old Testament was a cruel God and that Jesus introduced a more loving God?

128 5. Make up a step-by step argument or list of agreements by which you would show someone that Jesus is the Jehovah who gave the law of Moses.
