Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Day of the Lamanite Is Dawning DL

Early in President Spencer W. KimballÂs administration, he announced that there were then 500,000 "Lamanites" in the Church. Most of them were "south of the border," of course. And few were what have been called full-blooded "Indians." In face, such people are becoming more and more rare relative to the population of the America as a whole.

130 There have been "Indians" in the Church since Joseph SmithÂs day, but not many. As late as the 1930s the number was negligible. Then, in little more than a generation, the number who could claim descendancy from Lehi and Ishmael rose to over a half a million. And it is still rising.

130 In some ways, it is unfortunate that we call them "Lamanites." When peace and righteousness broke down in America in about A.D. 300, those who rebelled against the Church and the prophets called themselves Lamanites as an act of rebellion. But they probably were as much of a mixture of ancestry as were those who called themselves Nephites. In other words, when these two appellations were revived, they had more of a political and religious significance than a genealogical significance. This is borne out in how the Lord speaks of them in D&C 3 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

131 Nevertheless, my work shall go forth, for inasmuch as the knowledge of a Savior has come unto the world, through the testimony of the Jews, even so shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto my people--

131 And to the Nephites, and the Jacobites, and the Josephites, and the Zoramites, through the testimony of their fathers--

131 And this testimony shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites, and the Lemuelites, and the Ishmaelites, who dwindled in unbelief because of the iniquity of their fathers, whom the Lord has suffered to destroy their brethren the Nephites, because of their iniquities and their abominations.

131 And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records--that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled which he made to his people;

131 And that the Lamanites might come to the knowledge of their fathers, and that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved. Amen. (Verses 16-20.)

131 The above passage at least implies that converted descendants of Lehi and Ishmael might as well call themselves Nephites as Lamanites. Most of all, they should call themselves Christians. And they were promised that, when that happened to them, their day would have arrived. The number of LehiÂs descendants in the Church must be now (1986) close to a million. Their history was all foretold in the patriarchal blessings of Lehi and his and IshmaelÂs children. The best of those promises are now being fulfilled. The "day of the Lamanite" is dawning with great promise and glory.

Take-off Passage

3 Ne. 16:11-12.

Other Passages

Book of Mormon Title Page; 1 Ne. 15:13-17; 1 Ne. 22:8; 2 Ne. 4 and 5; 2 Ne. 30:3-5; Jacob 3:6; Alma 9:16-17; 3 Ne. 21:20-29; Morm. 5:19-20; D&C 3:16-20.

Study Questions

132 2. What have you learned from this section that you did not know already about the "blossoming" of the people we commonly call Lamanites?

132 3. Trace the different meanings of the title "Lamanite" in the Book of Mormon.

132 4. What avenues are open to you to help the "Lamanites" reach their full potential?

132 5. What evidences do you know of which show that the "Lamanites," as a total people, did not apostatize any further from original Christianity than did the Gentiles? How do language barriers affect our perceptions about the remnants of Christianity among the "Indians"?

132 6. What are some changes you have seen among the "Lamanites" during your lifetime?

132 7. Find statements from at least three Presidents of the Church which bear on "Lamanite" destiny.
