Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Bread and Water of the Sacrament Have Separate Significances As Well As Common Significance B&W

Some have supposed that the atonement of Christ was performed simply to break the bands of death and bring about the universal resurrection. These are the people who are most likely to emphasize that we "save ourselves." They give PaulÂs statement about "working out our salvation with fear and trembling" a different meaning than the one he intended. They overlook the fact that good works are the result of the rebirth. Good works are a part of the natural life of the "new man." These good works do not pay for bad works. The sins we have committed can be paid for only by Christ. Our good works do not "earn" or "merit" anything, even if we must do them in order to become fit subjects of the heavenly King. The scriptures are quite clear in showing that not all are saved and that those who are saved are saved through Christ, or, in other words, cleansed through his blood. Since all are resurrected, it follows that Christ did more than bring about a resurrection. And in his time Gethsemane was not just an hour of decision, as many in other Christian churches believe.

133 The two purposes (resurrection and atonement) of JesusÂ mission are pointed out to us in the two elements and two prayers of what we call "the sacrament." Also, the prophets have clearly taught that Jesus brought about both an atonement and a resurrection, as the following verses indicate.

133 Wherefore, beloved brethren, be reconciled unto him through the atonement of Christ, his Only Begotten Son, and ye may obtain a resurrection, according to the power of the resurrection which is in Christ, and be presented as the first-fruits of Christ unto God, having faith, and obtained a good hope of glory in him before he manifesteth himself in the flesh.

133 And now, beloved, marvel not that I tell you these things; for why not speak of the atonement of Christ, and attain to a perfect knowledge of him, as to attain to the knowledge of a resurrection and the world to come? (Jacob 4:11-12.)

133 While the Atonement made the resurrection possible, it still has a greater function than just resurrection. And that is the reason for both bread and water. The bread represents the body or the resurrection; the water represents the blood or the Atonement.

Take-off Passage

3 Ne. 18:1-11.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 2:10; 2 Ne. 10:25; 2 Ne. 25:23; Jacob 4:11, 12; Mosiah 3:15-18; Mosiah 4:2, 6,7 Alma 5:27; Alma 21:9; Alma 24:13; Alma 33:22; 3 Ne. 20:8; Moro. 4; Moro. 5; Moro. 7:41; John 6:5. (See James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1962], ch. 33: "The Last Supper and the Betrayal.")

Study Questions

133 2. With what crucial events do you associate the bread?

133 3. With what crucial events do you associate the water? How are these events related to each other?

134 4. How do the events in questions 2 and 3 relate to the plan of salvation and Christ as our Redeemer?

134 5. Why do many in the world think Gethsemane was merely an hour of decision? How do you know they are wrong?

134 6. Find two passages of scripture in which Christ implied that his greatest suffering was in Gethsemane.

134 7. How can you demonstrate that the words salvation and redemption ordinarily do not refer to resurrection per se when used in the scriptures?
