Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

A Saint Is One Who Has Been Sanctified by the Blood of Christ SB

The word saint comes from the same root as sanctify and sanctification. Thus a Saint is one who has been sanctified by Christ. In antiquity, as now, all members of the Church of Jesus Christ were addressed as Saints. That is because it was--and is--assumed that, when they were baptized, they had believed and repented fully and were therefore sanctified.

137 The scriptures speak of two types of sanctification. One is sanctification by the Spirit. When we are born again and receive the new Spirit (the gift of the Holy Ghost), we are regenerated or made over into new creatures--at least, this process begins. This is possible only because of the atonement of Christ. In a sense the Spirit sanctifies us because the old wicked spirit of the carnal man is "rooted out of [our] breast." (Alma 22:15.) Now we are less disposed to do evil, but there is still the problem of satisfying the demands of the law for the sins we have committed. As soon as a sin is committed, it becomes a part of the past which must be accounted for. In the present, we may be better. We may never commit that sin again. But no amount of good deeds satisfy the law for the evil deeds that have been committed. This is where sanctification by blood, the blood of Christ, comes in. It pays for the past in the case of the truly penitent. Sanctification by the Spirit and by the blood work hand in hand to purify and redeem our souls.

Take-off Passage

3 Ne. 27:19.

Other Passages

1 Ne. 12:10, 11; Mosiah 3:11-15; Alma 5:21, 27; Alma 13:11; Alma 21:9; Alma 34:8-13, 36; Moro. 10:33; Moses 6:60.

Study Questions

137 2. Why is Christ the only one who can and will sanctify a qualified candidate of the human race?

138 3. How does our obedience to law relate to the merits of Christ in the process of salvation?

138 4. Why would sanctification by the Spirit by inadequate, if not impossible, if there were no sanctification by blood?
