Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Book of Mormon Was Written for Our Time FOT

We must look at the significance of the Book of Mormon from many angles. In the previous section (BDP), we presented it as the foundation of authority for the restoration of the gospel and for the establishment of the Church of Jesus Christ in these last days. In the next section, we will emphasize the fact that each person must take its message personally. These ideas, together with other approaches to, or aspects of, the Book of Mormon, were dealt with in much greater detail in the introduction to this book. The reader will understand these three sections (BDP, FOT, and WTI) better if he reviews the introduction.

142 The Book of Mormon was deliberately and specifically written for our time. Its pages are mostly devoid of history, geography, technology, and so on, by commandment. That is, the Lord told the writers to leave these things out, for the most part. It would have been impossible, of course to leave out every detail about such things. But as far as possible the writers, under divine guidance, wrote a universal message. What they wrote is as useful to one segment of the "family of all the earth" as another. More than that, the book is liberally sprinkled with statements directed specifically at modern Lamanites, modern Gentiles, modern Jews, and all the modern people of the earth. These statement are of the order: "God hath shown you to me." "I know your doings." "I will meet you before the judgment bar of God and you will be judged by the things I have written." And so on. They carry the idea that the Lord is not only speaking to us but he is also telling us exactly what we need to hear. To think of the Book of Mormon as anything but a message to our day is like mistakenly driving into a cul-de-sac. You are only going to have to turn around and find the right way.

One of the greatest fallacies of our time is the mistaken and dangerous notion that progress demands that old religious ideals be set aside simply because they are old. The Ten Commandments are thought to be no longer current. We have "progressed" beyond such old mores. The pundits of the arts, of the media, of the academic community, and of the political scene attempt to promote, under the guise of progress, such old and wicked practices of homosexual rights and abortion. They destroy the family in the name of progress. They deny the reality and validity of GodÂs laws in the relationships of the sexes. They attempt to destroy or regulate social and economic laws. Somehow they seem to think that the passage of time is synonymous with the march of progress. The truth is that all men are fallen through Adam. No man can be saved except through Christ. The Ten Commandments and the Sermon on the Mount are as current at the end of time as at the beginning of time. That is what the Book of Mormon brings firmly home to the person who finds out that it is true and came the way Joseph Smith said it did. Such a person can read the Book of Mormon and see that U.S. News and World Report is no more current than Alma and Helaman. "There is nothing new under the sun." "That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already been." Alma and Helaman are talking about the same kind of events and problems as are constantly before us in the modern news. However, the Book of Mormon has the answers and the warning applicable to our day so that we can avoid making the same mistakes if we will but apply the book to our time.

Take-off Passage

Morm. 8:34-35.

Other Passages

Title Page of the Book of Mormon; 1 Ne. 13:30-42; 1 Ne. 19:23; 1 Ne. 22:8-11; 2 Ne. 3:11-12 (whole chapter is applicable); 2 Ne. 26:14; 2 Ne. 29; 3 Ne. 21:1-9; Ether 12:38-41; Moro. 10:27-29.

Study Questions

143 2. What messages have you found in the Book of Mormon that are applicable to current national problems? to international problems?

143 3. Have any of these messages changed your life?

143 4. What messages have you found for the future in the Book of Mormon?

143 5. What is the greatest proof you have found that the Book of Mormon was written for our day?
