Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Book of Mormons Was Written to the Individual WTI

Many people make the mistake of thinking there are such things as a collective mentality, collective guilt, and collective responsibility. But all minds are single. All guilt belongs to individuals. No one is responsible for anyone elseÂs sins. Many may unite in committing and atrocity; but each person involved is responsible for his own decision to be involved. The Lord may address a multitude; but he always is talking to each individual separately. When a nation decides to appropriate money through taxes, individuals earn and pay the money. There is no formless mass or anonymous entity that vicariously suffers all this pain and deprivation. Every dime spent by the government was taken from some individual. And since all taxes are regressive, it is the poor who pay the highest percentage of tax on income. Insofar as they receive unearned benefits from "government" funds, many of them got into this tax predicament through greed, envy, willful ignorance, and other sins or shortcomings--all of which are individual. Some, of course, are not greedy, envious, or ignorant. They suffer through the greed, envy, and ignorance of their fellow beings. But these suffer only in this life if they individually follow the instructions of the Lord given in the Book of Mormon.

144 In many recent Church manuals there has been a section called "Likening the Scriptures unto Us." (This idea come from 1 Ne. 19:23.) We can, of course, liken the family of Lehi unto our families. We can liken the Nephite church unto our church. We can liken the kingmen and Gadiantons unto the fascists and socialists in our society. We can liken the Anti-Christs unto the Mormon apostates and critics. And so on. But if we look deeper than the surface, we have to see individual sin and individual goodness. Of course, the idea is to look at ourselves--each individual should look at himself or herself. That is where knowledge begins. That is where sin begins. That is where repentance begins. We can join study groups; but we can learn only as individual. We can join motivational groups; but we improve only as individuals. "Seeking with real intent" is done only on an individual basis, even if several sincerely do it at the same time. If you are to reform the world, you start with yourself, then work on your spouse, children, ward, stake, and so on. But you follow the rules all the way. (See also BDP, FOT, and Introduction to this book.)

Take-off Passage

Morm. 8:34,35

Other Passages

Preface to the Book of Mormon; 1 Ne. 13:39-42; 2 Ne. 3, 2 Ne. 27; 3 Ne. 5:8-18; Morm. 7:8-10; Morm. 8:12-35; Morm. 9:34-37; D&C 1:29; D&C 3:16-20; D&C 5; D&C 6:14-24.

Study Questions

144 2. Give some examples from the Book of Mormon of individuals who first reconciled themselves to Christ and then helped others.

145 3. Relate Oliver CowderyÂs conversion to Moro. 10:4-5. (See D&C 6.)

145 4. Do you feel that you have spent enough time studying the Book of Mormon to allow it to accomplish its mission in you?

145 5. List the objectives you think the Lord had in mind for you when he cause the Book of Mormon to be written and translated.

145 6. How does the reaching of these objectives by individuals help groups? What groups?
