Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

The Moral Imperative As Defined by a True Christian Is Christ MID

Sincere and knowledgeable totalitarians (state worshippers) of all kinds believe that the supreme good is that which benefits or promotes the goals of the state, and the supreme evil is that which harms or deters the goals of the state. Most humanists (worshippers of humanity), whether knowledgeable or ignorant, believe that right and wrong can and should be determined by a consensus (majority opinion). In other words, the moral imperative of the totalitarians is the state or the goals of the state, and the moral imperative of most humanists is total and unbridled democracy. (Technically, that kind of democracy is also totalitarianism--the tyranny of the majority; but we will ignore that aspect of it.)

152 Every philosophy or religion has a moral imperative. It is called moral because it involves choices between right and wrong. It is called imperative because it demands attention. It is the standard or criterion which is most important to the adherents of that particular philosophy. It is the standard which will determine how they will vote. It will choose their music, their entertainment, their occupations to a certain extent, their spouses, and will be the basis for every other decision which affects the quality of their lives. Paul told the Roman Saints to avoid those who cause divisions in the Church of God because they do it to "serve . . . their own bellys." (Rom. 16:18.) The moral imperative of no end of people is their own belly--at least part of the time. And to have two moral imperatives is to be double-minded. Such a person does not have "an eye single to the glory of God."

152 The Book of Mormon very clearly tells us the final will and word of God on the method of determining what is good and what is evil. That which persuades us to come to Christ is good and of God, and that which leads away from Christ is evil and of the devil. This is what a true Saint will accept for his or her moral imperative. This truth is one of the best tools for a missionary to use to find the true believers. People who accept this moral imperative will find out that the Book of Mormon is true.

Take-off Passage

Moro. 7:5-22.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 25:28, 29; 2 Ne. 32:4-9; 2 Ne. 33:2, 5, 10-15; Ether 4:11, 12; Moro. 10:6, 7; D&C 88:40.

Study Questions

153 2. Why is it untrue that right and wrong are relative and hard to define?

153 3. Use examples to show how using Chris as you moral imperative can help you make good moral and intellectual decisions or choices.

153 4. How can you use the above "take-off passage" to show that people are justified in exercising faith in the Book of Mormon, in modern prophets, and in modern revelation? Write your answer to this question as a dialogue with an investigator in which you show him that it is perfectly rational and responsible to believe in these things if he professes a belief in Christ.
