Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Repentance Is Not Synonymous with Perfection or Reformation REP

The Book of Mormon often tells us that we must "repent of all our sins" to be saved. What does that mean? Does it mean that we must be absolutely perfect before we are candidates for salvation? If that were the case, very few of us could have any hope. Does it mean, "If you have truly repented of your sins, you will never do any of them again?" If that were the case, practically no one would have a covenant relationship with Christ. For we all have some sins that don't "scoot" the minute we say "scat." And if falling back into some sins from time to time were proof that repentance never occurred in the first place, what would you do with that most encouraging of all scriptures, Mosiah 26:30?

156 Sometimes saying what a thing is not helps to explain what it is. For instance, repentance is not the act of moving from imperfection to perfection in one great move. Repentance is a necessary and recurring step on the road to perfection; but it is not perfection itself. Again, repentance is not reformation. A humanist, for example, can reform; but he canÂt repent without renouncing humanism. One can repent only if he knows about and believes in Christ. And his repentance is not complete unless he has been baptized by immersion for the remission of sins by one holding the true priesthood of God. And a person has not repented if he hasn't experienced a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Reformation is and should be a constant process of improvement and perfection in the lives of all who aspire to greater goodness. But one could spend his life reforming and never repent.

156 Repentance is an event in which the repentant person, with the help of Christ and the Spirit, turns his life around. He is going one direction (away from God), and he turns around and goes the opposite direction (toward God). It is that time when the carnal man decides to put on Christ and be saved. In the process, he experiences a whole-souled rejection of his past love of sin and decides to devote his life to Christ and to righteousness, as defined by Christ. He feels like the Lamanite king who said, "I will give away all my sins to know thee, and that I may be raise from the dead, and be saved at the last day!" (Alma 22:18.) He comes down in the depths of humility and justice of God and the power of Christ and yearns for the salvation which is held out to him through the atonement of Christ.

156 In a sense, as implied in the scriptures, a person can repent again and again. Yet there is a difference between this first whole-souled turning around that means repentance and the subsequent renewals of steadfastness to the first decision. Enduring to the end means using the principles of faith in Christ and repentance to the end of our mortal lives. That is, whenever we have fallen prey to human weaknesses and strayed from the path, we renew our faith in Christ and our repentance or change of direction.

Also, we should be careful how we teach the "four RÂs" or "five RÂs" of repentance. Too many people who use this gimmick fail to relate to Christ to it. They are describing something more of a humanistic process than a Christian process. It is recognition of Christ which awakens us to repentance. And try as we will--and must--we cannot make a complete restitution for our sins. Much of our "restitution" to our fellowmen is nothing more than an act of contrition--the bringing forth of "fruit meet for repentance." How could you make a complete restitution for adultery, for example? And we cannot even begin to make a restitution to the demands of justice. We could never made a restitution to God that would be sufficient to bring us back into the presence of God without ChristÂs atonement. He paid the price through his blood. Even if we offered our own blood as a means of restitution, it would be nothing more than an act of contrition--not an act of "blood atonement"; for only ChristÂs blood atones. We must remember all this when we talk about restitution.

Take-off Passage

Moro. 8:24-26.

Other Passages

Mosiah 3:11, 12; Mosiah 26:30; Alma 11:34-37; Alma 17:2-4; Alma 22:12-18; Alma 34:30-41; Alma 37:32-34; Alma 39:6; Alma 41:8-10; Alma 42:24; 3 Ne. 18:30-32; 3 Ne. 27:19. (The Book of Mormon contains hundreds of passages on repentance.)

Study Questions

157 2. What earthly rewards or incentives are offered to the man who will seek Christ in the spirit of repentance? What heavenly rewards?

157 3. What messages were delivered by Book of Mormon prophets that caused men to repent? Give examples of how these messages worked.

157 4. How would a man who knows about Christ approach repentance differently from one who is a deist or a humanist?

157 5. What is meant by the expression "faith unto repentance"?
