Glenn L. Pearson, Reid E. Bankhead, Building Faith with the Book of Mormon ( 1986)

Perfection Is a Universal Goal PER

The dream of individual and group perfection is universal in the sense that practically all normal people carry it in their minds and hearts. All are utopianists of some sort or another. They think how they would order society if they were all-powerful.

158 There are basically two kinds of perfectionists: the Christian kind and the humanistic kind.

158 Christians seek individual perfection first and expect group perfection to come as a by-product of individual perfection. Humanists seek group perfection first and presume that individual perfection will result from the perfection of the organization and environment of the group.

158 Christians seek to promote perfection by preaching or persuasion. Humanists always enlist the power of government to bring about perfection by force or by "human engineering."

158 Christians seek to develop a type of internal self-control brought on by conversion to Christ and through Christ. Humanists seek to develop external control by social pressure and fear of governmental reprisal.

158 PlatoÂs Republic was one manÂs description of how the government ought to engineer perfection. It has been the inspiration behind no end of humanistic utopian dreams during the last several hundred years.

158 The American Revolution was a true revolution in that it turned its back upon all menÂs utopias and set up a free society in which each man could pursue his own dreams without interference as long as he himself did not illegally and immorally interfere with others. This revolution created the climate and favorable soil out of which the modern kingdom of God could grow.

158 The French Revolution was an entirely different affair. The intent of its humanistic backers was to set up utopian liberty, fraternity, and equality, all of them guaranteed by the government. All they got was chaos and violence. And we have seen similar humanistic plans come and go ever since: fascism, Nazism, communism, and Fabian socialism. All of these latter nightmares grew basically out of the dreams of one man, Karl Marx; but he was one in spirit with the French Revolution.

158 The Book of Mormon reveals the following principles about perfection and utopias:

158 1. Men cannot establish utopias. Only God can.

158 2. God establishes utopias in his own time and way by leading off chosen people to chosen places and by destroying the wicked so that the righteous can become perfected in Christ.

159 If God creates the climate for utopia and we labor diligently, we can establish Zion. That is the name of GodÂs utopia. The name of the humanistic utopia is Babylon--and it shall fall. After it falls and the earth is cleansed by fire, Zion will be established for a thousand years. That is what we call the Millennium.

Take-off Passage

Moro. 10:32-33.

Other Passages

2 Ne. 31:20; Alma 11:44; Alma 32:34; Moro. 8:16; Matt. 5:48; D&C 45:46; D&C 50:24; D&C 67:13; D&C 76:69; D&C 107:43; D&C 128:15-18; D&C 129:6.

Study Questions

159 2. How does the one-world dream of the gentile nations differ from the doctrines, plans, and destiny of the LDS church? (See D&C 65.)

159 3. How does this section (PER) relate to NFM, FA, WG, and NFJ?

159 4. What teachings of the Book of Mormon would your children have to understand and accept to lay a foundation for perfection?
