My name is Annie B. Biwole and I live in Douala, Cameroon.

I have been a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since May 8, 2010. I grew up in a practicing Catholic family.

For as long as I can remember, my parents would wake us up every morning at dawn for family prayer, then we would do the same thing again in the evening before bed. Every Sunday we went to mass.

But as soon as I came of age, I never went to church again because I didn’t understand anything.

Several decades later, when I was in my fifties, while living outside my country, I began to feel a great lack of spirituality within me, but I did not know what to do or where to look.

Since I was Catholic and I was living in a very Catholic country (France), I decided to choose a church where I could go every Saturday to worship.

The beautiful church I found was often empty, with just a few little old women kneeling in prayer, and from time to time getting up to light one of the candles placed on a table at the back of the room.

And I imitated them because I didn’t know what else to do.

I did this for about seven months until my older sister, who was also seeking the truth, changed churches and convinced me to become a Pentecostal like her.

From that moment on I started reading the Bible, without understanding much about it.

But the advantage was that I started keeping the commandments and applying the teachings I received.

Still, I felt like I was missing something.

One night I had a dream in which someone said to me: “Blessings for you and your family can be found in your home country.”

I didn’t understand what that meant, but because of my son’s health problems, I had to leave the foreign country I was living in to return home to Cameroon to support my sick son.

Arriving in Cameroon in September 2009 after more than 30 years of absence, I went from one pentecostal church to another, but I still had the same feeling within me that something was missing.

I often saw young men passing by, dressed in a white shirt and ties, two by two. I thought they were Jehovah’s Witnesses.

And, since I was looking for the truth and didn’t know where to find it, why not try them? I said to myself.

When questioning them, they introduced themselves as missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

After two lessons, they invited me to attend sacrament meeting, and, miraculously, I finally felt inner peace. I finally felt at home because I had found the truth I was seeking.

Seven years later, when I went to the temple, I finally understood the meaning of the dream I had, because I performed ordinances for several people in my family.

I testify that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true restored Church on the face of the earth.
