Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

PREFACE

It is a glorious thing to observe young people as they begin to respond to the promptings of the Spirit, grow in spiritual graces, and become productive and contributing members of the kingdom of God on earth. Nothing brings more satisfaction to parents or loved ones than watching the youth of the Church become all that they were meant to become. But tragically, some of the rising generation do not reach for the rod of iron, do not follow the examples of parents or Church leaders, do not acquire the conviction or develop the commitment to the Church that we had anticipated. Some children drift aimlessly, remaining only a stone's throw away from full activity; others vigorously turn away from time-honored values and embrace the ways of a degenerate world.

This work focuses on the phenomenon of wandering children. It is not meant to make us all feel a little better in knowing that others share our pain. It is, rather, a call for us to have hope——hope for the future, hope for those who now seem so hopeless, hope for reconciliation and reunion. Such hope is not based on the power of positive thinking, though it is good to be positive; it is, rather, based on doctrine——sound, solid doctrine——doctrine from the prophets that offers us true and lasting hope for the future in the face of present ills and challenges with our children or other loved ones.

So much of our hopelessness stems from our inability to comprehend and thus lay hold on the grand prophetic promises that await those who are true and faithful to their covenants. In so many matters that matter, Joseph Smith the Seer has opened celestial windows and beckoned the Saints of the Most High to gaze with him upon the scenes of eternity. He has called upon us to repent of small-mindedness and broaden our horizons. As a supernal comfort to those whose children wander for a season, he implores us to search the scriptures, ponder the revelations of God's covenant spokesmen, and believe the soothing word regarding the power of the gospel covenant. This book seeks to point us toward those consummate blessings that can be ours if we trust in and rely upon the Lord Jesus, the Mediator of the Covenant. It is an invitation for us to focus on things that matter most——covenants, ordinances, families, sealing power, and righteousness. That all who read these pages may feel to glory in the power of the gospel and thereby rejoice in "the testimony of the covenant" (D&C 109:38), is my sincere prayer.

In the preparation of this work, I am deeply indebted to many who offered counsel, consolation, and references, as well as others who helped to sharpen my focus on this singularly significant doctrinal theme. It is always a bit awkward to mention specific people, but I express particular thanks to my colleagues Larry E. Dahl, Leon R. Hartshorn, E. Dale LeBaron, Robert J. Matthews, Joseph F. McConkie, Keith W. Perkins, Rex C. Reeve Jr., Stephen E. Robinson, M. Catherine Thomas, and Brent L. Top. I am indebted to Lori Soza, a dedicated and competent secretary and assistant, for her knowledgeable assistance in preparing the manuscript for publication. I acknowledge also the encouragement of Sheri Dew of Deseret Book Company and especially the keen and caring editorial eye of Suzanne Brady; Suzanne has simply made this a better book. Though I am indebted to so many for so much, I alone am responsible for the conclusions drawn from the evidence cited. This book is a private endeavor and thus not an official publication of either The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or Brigham Young University.
