Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

PROLOGUE

Most of us enter upon family life with grand expectations and high hopes. We feel secure that if we simply do our jobs properly——attend church, study the scriptures and pray as individuals and families, hold family home evenings, pay our tithing, love and serve one another and those within our community——happiness and joy will flow into our lives. We teach our children the principles of the gospel, kneel in prayer with them, participate in mother-daughter activities and Pinewood Derbies, and feel confident that in the end we will enjoy the fruits of our labors——that each little boy and each little girl will grow up with the same depth of testimony and the same level of commitment to God and the restored gospel that we as parents or loved ones have.

Most of us anticipate that our little ones will grow up to be faithful and participating Latter-day Saints. We believe that our children will be involved in all of the programs of the Church——Young Women recognition, Eagle Scout awards, seminary graduation, institute of religion enrollment, and so on. When things do not materialize as we had planned and when some of our long-held goals for the children are definitely not being achieved or even pursued, the stark realities of life set in. Life doesn't always turn out exactly as we had planned.

The phenomenon of wandering children and the trail of attendant sorrows are no respecter of persons. They make their way into the homes of rich and poor, active and less active, functional and dysfunctional. They raise their ugly heads in families led by single parents as well as in families presided over by bishops and stake presidents. They take their toll on abusive and negligent mothers and fathers as well as on mothers and fathers of faith, people who are sincerely trying to do what's right.

Many Latter-day Saint families have become intimately acquainted with heartache and suffering and agony and a roller coaster of emotions. They have felt the despair that comes from seeing loved ones violate their covenants, turn away from what they have been taught, and despise what they once loved. Parents cringe as they watch their precious young people close doors of opportunity to themselves through foolish choices. Many mothers and fathers come to know some things quite well——what it means to pour out their souls to God in prayer in behalf of loved ones; how to fast with real intent; the inestimable value of attending the temple in a search for solace; how to love when it seems so natural to hate, to be firm when it would be so much easier to crumble; and how to face each day and keep going through the divine grace or enabling power that the Great Physician promises to those who mourn.

I confess that I do not have the solutions to such vexing problems, but I have wrestled intensely with the questions. I know what it feels like to be haunted by feelings of inadequacy in dealing with my children, to browbeat myself for not being more faithful as a parent on this or that issue, to wonder at weak moments if it's all worth it. I assure you that I would much rather have learned some of the harsh lessons of family life by reading of the experience of others. But there are some things we cannot go around; we must go through. And through it all, through the tears and the toil and the torturous interrogation of the heart, there comes the quiet assurance that the God of heaven knows and cares. He knows perfectly. He cares deeply and profoundly.

Through it all, there comes also a compassion and an empathy for others who mourn. We find ourselves much less prone to judge, much less eager to place blame and assign guilt——largely because we have become more closely acquainted with the hurt of the hurting. Through the process of trying to understand how to act, how not to act, how to feel, how not to feel, what to say, what not to say——through it all, we find comfort and direction from the Holy Spirit and from the scriptures and the words of living oracles. We find principles——doctrinal and practical——that give us hope, provide perspective, and prompt patience. This book deals with some of those principles.

This work is not a collection of child-rearing techniques, a behavior modification manual, or a guide on how to communicate with children. Rather, it is an effort to set forth a theological foundation for hope in family living, especially when our families fall short of the high standard we and the Lord have set for us. More specifically, matters to be discussed include

Â the power that comes from focusing on fundamentals;

Â the challenge of moral agency and the unique pain associated with straying children;

Â the nature, transforming power, and supernal benefits of life within the covenant;

Â the power of the gospel covenant to bind and seal on earth and in heaven; and

Â the power of that covenant to reach out to wandering sheep and restore them to the fold.

One word is central to all that is discussed in this book. That word is power. The gospel of Jesus Christ is "the power of God unto salvation" (Romans 1:16). There is power in the person of Jesus Christ, consummate power in his gospel, inexpressible power in the covenant we make with him through membership in his church and kingdom. Because the family is the central unit in God's eternal plan for the salvation of his children, Satan will draw upon all of the weapons in his insidious arsenal to discredit, dismiss, and dismantle the family. But God is the supreme governor of the universe. He holds all things in his power. At his word and by virtue of his power, we are created, renewed, and redeemed. I have come to know that he will preserve us as members of his royal family if we trust in him and rely upon the merits and mercy and grace of the Holy Messiah. The sheep of his fold may wander for a season, but if we hope on, pray on, and trust in the prophetic promises, the Mediator of the Covenant will work mighty miracles and thereby accomplish his "strange act" through us (D&C 95:4). Of that eternal verity we may rest assured. "Keep all the commandments and covenants by which ye are bound; and I will cause the heavens to shake for your good, and Satan shall tremble and Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish; and Israel shall be saved in mine own due time; and by the keys which I have given shall they be led, and no more be confounded at all" (D&C 35:24-25).
