Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

FIRST THINGS FIRST

It is so very easy in today's busy and complex world to get caught up in the thick of thin things, to become prey to the less important. Programs and procedures begin to take priority over people. Means begin to occupy us more than ends. Making a living, being included in the best social circles, providing the family with nice cars, lovely clothes, or extravagant travel opportunities——these may make life enjoyable and comfortable, but they are not the stuff of which eternal happiness is made. Life is a mission, not a career. We come here to gain experience and to acquire the attributes of godliness. At least as important as knowledge and experience and spiritual growth are relationships. We have been sent to earth to learn to live together in love, to build and perpetuate the family. Indeed, the family is one of the few things that will continue into the eternities.

A Plan of Happiness

It is marvelous beyond expression to know that there is meaning to some of life's madness, that there is purpose to it all. That God our Father does indeed have a plan, a program for the development, growth, and happiness of his children is soothing to the soul. There are times when I simply could not go on if I did not know in my heart that the Almighty is aware of us, aware of our challenges, our pain, and our doubts. "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing," the Savior counsels us in a modern revelation, "and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another" (D&C 90:24). Latter-day Saints know from scripture, through living oracles, and by the still, small voice that we lived before we came here; that we are here not by chance but as a part of a grand and divinely orchestrated plan; and that when our time on earth is finished, we will continue to expand and improve in another sphere. In short, life is eternal. It is meant to be enjoyable and rewarding, but it is also to be lived soberly and godly, because eternal consequences hang in the balance.

People matter more than things. People matter more than schedules and timetables and products. God and Christ work full time in the business of people, and perhaps that primary labor contributes measurably to their fulness of joy. Sometimes when the most important things get crowded out by the least important, the Lord finds a way to jerk us back to reality and focus us on fundamentals. Occasionally that reality check comes through a staggering confrontation with death, the stark realization that we are here on earth for only a brief season. Often it comes through what we call tragedy——an injury, a crippling disease, a severe trauma. And once in a while it comes through incidents much less dramatic but equally direct. What does it profit us if we gain the whole world and then, because of neglect or distraction, forfeit the eternal associations that bring the deepest feelings of fulfillment?

Many years ago I sat on the floor in front of a small bookcase in the dining room of our tiny two-bedroom apartment. I was immersed in reading and referencing and marking; deadlines were crowding in on me. Ironically, I was perusing President David O. McKay's book Gospel Ideals when Angela, my two-and-a-half-year-old daughter, walked over to me and asked me to join her, her one-year-old brother, David, and their mother in some games they were playing on the floor a few feet away. I responded to Angie that I was very busy and couldn't make it. Within three minutes David crawled over and asked: "Dad, you come play?" I called out to my wife at that point: "Shauna, can't you see that what I am doing is important? Could you please keep these children out of my hair until I finish this project?"

I dived back into my research. But then I felt my attention being drawn back to the threesome, almost as if I were being turned about physically. I looked into three pairs of eyes and what I saw was very unsettling——there was hurt and, in Shauna's eyes, at least, a bit of frustration. A voice came into my mind. Whether it was the voice of the Holy Ghost or the voice of conscience, I don't know: it was nevertheless an inner awareness of my duty. It stated simply but boldly: "Brother, behold the plan of salvation!" In that brief instant there came an avalanche of feelings——feelings of perspective, for in a flash I saw and felt things as they really were; feelings of overwhelming love for a trusting wife and adoring children; and yes, feelings of guilt for neglecting the most important people in my life. A rapidly repentant father crawled over to his family and became involved in things that really matter.

In the years since that experience, I have reflected again and again on what I felt that evening. Maybe it was a consuming love for my family, combined with a cold slap in the face, that awakened me momentarily. Other things over the years have served a similar function. Shauna has gotten my attention occasionally when I have chosen to bury myself in a book and ignore the family. She has said simply: "Bob, if you're not careful, you may grow up to be a very intelligent ministering angel." That works, too. I haven't always been the greatest husband and father since that red-letter day in my life, but I have been better. And it is amazing how we can be tutored by the medium of memory.

Our Best for Our Loved Ones

One really ironic thing I have noticed is our frequent unwillingness to be as patient and forgiving with family members as we are with friends, associates, or even strangers. Most of us wouldn't consider publicly insulting a colleague or belittling an acquaintance or slipping into the silent treatment with co-workers at church. But we often do such things to those who matter most to us. Because we desperately want our little ones to be ever so much better than we were, we tend to become impatient with their lack of progress, irritated at their mistakes in judgment, and downright angry about their failings. I have far too often caught myself shaking my head and wondering when the spirit of life and good judgment would descend upon my teenagers, especially when their choices were not as wise as I would have preferred. If the Lord had wanted to put a forty-year-old head on the shoulders of a sixteen-year-old, I suppose he would have done so; instead, he almost always attaches the head (and heart and emotions and hormones) of a sixteen-year-old to a sixteen-year-old.

Jeffrey R. Holland once described a similar painful situation in his own family: "Early in our married life my young family and I were laboring through graduate school at a university in New England. Pat was the Relief Society president in our ward, and I was serving in our stake presidency. I was going to school full-time and teaching half-time. We had two small children then, with little money and lots of pressures.

"One evening I came home from long hours at school, feeling the proverbial weight of the world on my shoulders. Everything seemed to be especially demanding and discouraging and dark. I wondered if the dawn would ever come. Then, as I walked into our small student apartment, there was an unusual silence in the room.

"'What's the trouble?' I asked.

"'Matthew has something he wants to tell you,' Pat said.

"'Matt, what do you have to tell me?' He was quietly playing with his toys in the corner of the room, trying very hard not to hear me. 'Matt,' I said a little louder, 'do you have something to tell me?'

"He stopped playing, but for a moment he didn't look up. Then two enormous, tear-filled brown eyes turned toward me, and with the pain only a five-year-old can know, he said, 'I didn't mind Mommy tonight, and I spoke back to her.' With that he burst into tears, and his entire little body shook with grief. A childish indiscretion had been noted, a painful confession had been offered, the growth of a five-year-old was continuing, and loving reconciliation could have been wonderfully underway.

"Everything might have been just terrific——except for me. If you can imagine such an idiotic thing, I lost my temper. It wasn't that I lost it with Matt——it was with a hundred and one other things on my mind. But he didn't know that, and I wasn't disciplined enough to admit it. He got the whole load of bricks.

"I told him how disappointed I was and how much more I thought I could have expected from him. I sounded like the parental pygmy I was. Then I did what I had never done before in his life: I told him that he was to go straight to bed and that I would not be in to say his prayers with him or to tell him a bedtime story. Muffling his sobs, he obediently went to his bedside, where he knelt——alone——to say his prayers. Then he stained his little pillow with tears his father should have been wiping away.

"If you think the silence upon my arrival was heavy, you should have felt it now. Pat did not say a word. She didn't have to. I felt terrible!

"Later, as we knelt by our own bed, my feeble prayer for blessings upon my family fell back on my ears with a horrible, hollow ring. I wanted to get up off my knees right then and go to Matt and ask his forgiveness, but he was long since peacefully asleep.

"My own relief was not so soon coming, but finally I fell asleep and began to dream, which I seldom do. I dreamed Matt and I were packing two cars for a move. For some reason his mother and baby sister were not present. As we finished I turned to him and said, 'Okay, Matt, you drive one car and I'll drive the other.'

"This five-year-old very obediently crawled up on the seat and tried to grasp the massive steering wheel. I walked over to the other car and started the motor. As I began to pull away, I looked to see how my son was doing. He was trying——oh, how he was trying. He tried to reach the pedals, but he couldn't. He was also turning knobs and pushing buttons, trying to start the motor. He could scarcely be seen over the dashboard, but there staring out at me again were those same immense, tear-filled, beautiful brown eyes. As I pulled away, he cried out, 'Daddy, don't leave me. I don't know how to do it. I'm too little.' And I drove away.

"A short time later, driving down that desert road in my dream, I suddenly realized in one stark, horrifying moment what I had done. I slammed my car to a stop, threw open the door, and started to run as fast as I could. I left car, keys, belongings, and all——and I ran. The pavement was so hot it burned my feet, and tears blinded my straining effort to see this child somewhere on the horizon. I kept running, praying, pleading to be forgiven and to find my boy safe and secure.

"As I rounded a curve, nearly ready to drop from physical and emotional exhaustion, I saw the unfamiliar car I had left Matt to drive. It was pulled carefully off to the side of the road, and he was laughing and playing nearby. An older man was with him, playing and responding to his games. Matt saw me and cried out something like, 'Hi, Dad. We're having fun.' Obviously he had already forgiven and forgotten my terrible transgression against him.

"But I dreaded the older man's gaze, which followed my every move. I tried to say 'Thank you,' but his eyes were filled with sorrow and disappointment. I muttered an awkward apology and the stranger said simply, 'You should not have left him alone to do this difficult thing. It would not have been asked of you.'

"With that, the dream ended, and I shot up-right in bed. My pillow was stained, whether with perspiration or tears I do not know. I threw off the covers and ran to the little metal camp cot that was my son's bed. There on my knees and through my tears I cradled him in my arms and spoke to him while he slept. I told him that every dad makes mistakes but that they don't mean to. I told him it wasn't his fault I had had a bad day. I told him that when boys are five or fifteen, dads sometimes forget and think they are fifty. I told him that I wanted him to be a small boy for a long, long time, because all too soon he would grow up and be a man and wouldn't be playing on the floor with his toys when I came home. I told him that I loved him and his mother and his sister more than anything in the world, and that whatever challenges we had in life, we would face them together. I told him that never again would I withhold my affection or my forgiveness from him, and never, I prayed, would he withhold them from me. I told him I was honored to be his father and that I would try with all my heart to be worthy of such a great responsibility" (On Earth As It Is in Heaven, 165-68).

Many years ago Boyd K. Packer spoke to the youth: "Some day——some day soon for some of you——you are going to have the marvelous experience of learning to love someone else more than you love yourself. This is a crowning achievement in life, yet countless thousands live out there in this world and do not achieve this experience. It does not come, I think, in a courtship or even on a honeymoon; but it is a reward for building this little [family] kingdom. Someday when you hold a little boy or a little girl in your arms and know that he or she belongs to you, this experience may come to you.

"I recall on one occasion, when I was returning from seminary to my home for lunch, that as I drove in, my wife met me in the driveway. I could tell by the expression on her face that something was wrong. 'Cliff has been killed,' she said. 'They want you to come over.' As I hastened around the corner to where Cliff lived with his wife and four sons and his little daughter, I saw Cliff lying in the middle of the highway with a blanket over him. The ambulance was just pulling away with little Colleen. Cliff had been on his way out to the farm and had stopped to cross the street to take little Colleen to her mother who waited on the opposite curb. But the child, as children will, broke from her father's hand and slipped into the street. A large truck was coming. Cliff jumped from the curb and pushed his little daughter from the path of the truck——but he wasn't soon enough.

"A few days later I had the responsibility of talking at the funeral of Cliff and little Colleen. Someone said, 'What a terrible waste. Certainly he ought to have stayed on the curb. He knew the child might have died. But he had four sons and a wife to provide for. What a pathetic waste!' And I estimated that that individual never had had the experience of loving someone more than he loved himself.

"To you who are young, this experience of loving someone more than you love yourself can come, insofar as I know, only through the exercise of the power of creation. Through it you become really Christian, and you know, as few others know, what the word 'Father' means when it is spoken of in the scriptures; and you feel some of the love and concern that He has for us, and you may experience some of the remorse and sorrow that must be His if we fail to accept all that is beautiful and praiseworthy and of good report in this world" (Problems in Teaching the Moral Standard, 10-11).

I have come to know of the truthfulness and import of those words. There are family joys that transcend anything earthly, just as there are family sorrows that tear at the heart and wound the emotions in ways impossible to describe. These feelings, highs and lows, come only to those who love their children more than they love themselves. I would have been tempted to ask that the agony of the lows be removed if I had not comprehended the majesty and supernal joy of the highs. When I have watched helplessly as my little ones experienced deep sorrow or chose foolishly, I have yearned to take their place, take their part, take their pain. I have remembered Moses, who went into the holy mountain to receive God's law. While he was gone, the children of Israel molded a golden calf and gave themselves up to gross wickedness. Moses broke the first set of tablets that contained the higher law and put the idolaters to death. "And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin——; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written" (Exodus 32:31-32). I have learned to feel with Moses his mediational plea: heaven would surely not be heaven without those I love.

Several years ago I knelt beside my father during the closing hours of his life. My dad was a large man and was active, involved, and the life of any social gathering for as long as I could remember. I still recall watching him lead the fast breaks in basketball (he played in a city league and in Church tournaments during those years). I now looked upon a body that had become emaciated and ravaged by mortality, one that was appropriately eager to be laid to rest. As Dad napped for a few moments during those closing hours, I thought of his success in business and of how much he was respected in the community. I thought of his leadership in the Church. He had been my bishop, had sent me on a mission, and then had served for many years in the stake presidency. He had spoken at more funerals and had administered to the sick more often than most of us would do in three lifetimes. It was thus terribly difficult for the family to watch his body succumb to the pull of disease and death, to witness him lose his eyesight and then his strength.

On several occasions over the preceding years the two of us had discussed one of Dad's favorite subjects: the spirit world. Practically every time we got together he wanted to talk about life after death. This occasion was no different. He asked with a yearning in his voice: "Son, do you suppose my dad will meet me? I hope he does. It has been so long since I saw him." There was no fear of death, no dread of the unknown, and even some eagerness to acquire answers to questions he and I had debated for a long time. I thought of his accomplishments——of the friendships he had cultivated, the hundreds of people whose lives he had touched, the difference his life had made. I tried to comment on some of those things, but he would have none of it. He wanted to talk about his family and about my family. Family. Family. That was what he wanted to focus on. He pleaded with me to help Mom take care of my brothers and my sister. He spoke with me at some length about my wife, about how much he loved her, about how delighted he was that I had married her and how thrilled he was that I was so happy. He spoke of each of my children and asked me to convey to them how much their grandfather loved them and what great expectations he had for them.

Among the last things Dad did as I tucked him into bed that night was to pull me close to him and whisper, "Son, I haven't told you often enough how much I love you and how proud I am of you." I assured him that he had told me plenty of times and that there was never any doubt in my mind how he felt. He insisted, though, that I hear it again. We embraced tenderly for the last time. Then, as he lay holding onto time with one hand and eternity with the other, he let go of the former and clung to the latter.

Those moments are precious to me. They are a capstone to a mortal relationship as well as an invitation to renew that relationship when the Lord sees fit to call me to the next sphere. Again and again when I become preoccupied with things, when I am distracted by the ephemeral and the fleeting, I am reminded of what mattered most to Dad: his eternal family.
