Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

WHEN A CHILD WANDERS

For Latter-day Saints who know what matters most and what is and ought to be at the top of our list of priorities, some things hurt much more than others. It hurts to bear our testimonies to friends and loved ones who shun our witness as foolish and absurd. It hurts to see the poverty and abuse and neglect and degradation in society when we know that the world's only hope is the gospel of Jesus Christ. And it hurts when we do our best to bring up our children in light and truth, only to see some of them turn away from that light and choose to walk in darkness. If the greatest joys in life are family joys, then surely the greatest sorrows in life are family sorrows. If no other success in life can compensate for failure in the home, then what can be more painful than having wandering children? If the most important work we will ever do in the Church is that which we do within the walls of our own home, then nothing causes deeper turmoil and soul-searching than having children who stray from the path of truth and righteousness.

Picture a priesthood leader introducing a speaker in sacrament meeting: "We have asked Sister Johnson to speak on the importance of the family because of what a wonderful job she has done in her own family. As you know, all of her children graduated at the top of their high school classes and all have obtained college degrees." Or: "We have asked Brother Hastings to speak to us on the importance of preparing our children for missionary service. Brother Hastings must be doing something right, for all seven of his sons have served faithful missions." Now ponder what those people in the congregation feel whose children have dropped out of high school or have chosen not to serve missions. Yet we are a part of a Church that has very high ideals, and we must never lower the ideal. We take seriously the Master's commandment to be perfect, even though all of us fall short of such a standard. We speak of the importance of eternal marriage, even though some in the congregation may not have married in the temple. We preach of the vital nature of virtue and chastity, even though some in our midst may be in need of repentance. And we will forever hold up the family as the mainstay of society and the salvation of humankind, even though all human families fall short of the eternal ideal.

We have no choice but to declare what is and what should be. We do not lower our vision or dilute our ideals as a concession to a decaying society. And yet, there is much heart-ache among us, much distress over current failures in the home and family, even among the Latter-day Saints. The key is not to surrender our goals but to be more sensitive and solicitous of those who come up short. Not all of our little ones will be above average. Not all of our children will excel academically. Not all of our teenagers will be articulate, handsome, or charismatic. And not all of our posterity will choose the right. The odds are certainly greater that children will turn out properly if parents do their part to live the gospel, teach the gospel, and be active and involved in the Church. But we live in a world of risk; there are no guarantees. We knew that before we came here, and perhaps that is why so many of our spirit brothers and sisters followed Lucifer: "The contention in heaven was——Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he could save them all, and laid his plans before the grand council, who gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 357).

The Joy and the Agony of Agency

I remember very well sitting in a high priests group meeting one Sunday morning. The instructor was delivering a lesson on the plan of salvation and focusing, for the moment, on agency. He had reminded us that there is no mention in scripture of free agency but rather of moral agency (see D&C 101:78). He bore his testimony of the centrality of agency, of how awful things would be if we were coerced to do good, and of how grateful we should be for this divinely bestowed gift. The instructor asked for others in the group to share their own testimonies and feelings of gratitude, which they did for about fifteen minutes. The mood was interrupted quite dramatically when one of the members of the group said, essentially: "Well, that's okay for you folks, and it's fine for me. I'm grateful that I have the right to choose. But to be honest, as far as my family is concerned, sometimes I wish there were no agency. Agency is painful, maybe the most painful thing I can think of. Brethren, I assure you that nothing hurts more than watching your children self-destruct through poor choices."

We were sobered by his comments. I reflected on what the man and his wife had been through over the years. Here was a noble soul, married to a delightful woman after his own good heart. They were not perfect as parents, but it could never be said that they hadn't done their best. They were always at church, held regular family home evenings, and participated in family scripture study and family prayer. Mom and Dad supported their children at school events, athletic events, and cultural events. Several of the children had turned out fine, but a couple of them had serious struggles——drug abuse, dishonesty, and bouts with the law. I had watched over the years as the buffetings of life and the challenges of child rearing had etched their scars into the countenances of these two godly people. I had watched them try to stay positive, try to face what seemed at the time insurmountable hurdles, and I knew something of what they felt. There was no bitterness, no lashing out, no desire to curse God, no tendency to give up and throw in the towel, only resignation to life's opposition and a willingness to keep going, with God's help, in spite of their anguish.

It is inevitable that righteous parents, those who have really tried to lead and guide and walk beside their little ones, will first point the finger of blame at themselves when their hopes for their children do not materialize. "What happened? What did we do wrong? What could we have done differently? Perhaps if our home evenings had been a little more effective, our prayers a little more regular, our family activities more fun, this would not have happened." And so on and so on. Whenever things do not turn out as we planned, we automatically scramble about, frantically searching for answers to hard questions. We know of the promises of the prophets. We know the counsel of the scriptures. "Train up a child in the way he should go," the Bible teaches, "and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (Proverbs 22:6). Thus if one of ours departs from the way of the Lord, the only rational answer seems to be that we did not train him or her in the proper way. What other option is there?

For years I wrestled to understand the meaning of the parable of the ten virgins as recorded in Matthew 25. The message seemed so counter to all that the Master had taught. Why couldn't the wise virgins just share their oil? If each one contributed just a little, I reasoned, perhaps some of the foolish ones could make it to the wedding to meet the bridegroom. And then experience taught me the answer to my query. While I was serving as a priesthood leader, a husband and wife came to see me. They were both distressed about their marriage and family; things seemed to be coming apart in their lives. "How can I help?" I asked. "We need more spirituality in our

Surely all of us could do our jobs better, could teach and train and lead more effectively, could be more patient, more loving, and more exemplary parents. As long as we are human, we will forevermore fall short of what might be. But there is another variable, one over which we do not have complete control. It is agency, the moral agency of our children. One of the shocking realizations in life is that our little ones do not necessarily inherit all of our commitment, our steadfastness, or our tenacity to hold to the iron rod. Nor do they automatically feel about the restored gospel as we do, no matter how avidly we strive to teach, testify, and exemplify Christian living. I was stopped short in a private interview with one of my own teenagers several home," the wife answered. I asked a few questions. "How often do you pray as a family?" They answered that their schedules precluded any kind of family prayer. "Have you been able to hold family home evening?" "Bill and I bowl on Monday nights" was the response. "Do you read the scriptures as a family and as individuals?" The husband answered: "Reading hurts my eyes." "Well, then, how can I help you?" Again the reply: "We want the Spirit in our lives."

It was as though they were saying to me, "Brother Millet, could you reach down into your heart and lend us five years of daily prayer, ten years of regular scripture study, and fifteen years of family spiritual activities?" I couldn't do it. I realized dramatically that there are some things we simply cannot share. Spiritual growth is an individual matter. It is highly personal. As a parent I can bear testimony, live my religion, encourage my children to search and ponder and pray, but in the end the depth of their testimony and the level of their commitment will be largely a product of their own choosing. The exercise of agency can be painful.

Alma the Elder must have agonized as he watched his son Alma seek to destroy the Church. Feelings of personal pain, combined with the piercing embarrassment associated with his own son's flouting of principles of truth, must have resulted in long and sleepless nights. Though the text is silent on this point, if Alma the Elder was a typical parent, the question must have crossed his mind at least once: "How can I remain president of the Church with my family problems? How can I stand before the people, preach righteousness, and call the Saints to repentance, when I cannot control my own son's behavior?" And perhaps he was tortured by the painful thought: "How can I, who am so woefully ineffective with my own son, counsel parents to teach their children and bring them up in light and truth?" Some of us have shared Alma's soul-cries, have experienced the anguish of wanting to do what's right and being called to lead others, only to butt up against the harsh reality of our own wandering child. Alma the Younger must have had similar feelings when his son Corianton forsook the ministry and fell into immoral paths. "Behold, O my son, how great iniquity ye brought upon the Zoramites; for when they saw your conduct they would not believe in my words" (Alma 39:11).

Thankfully God accomplishes his perfect purposes through imperfect people. If only those who had done all things well and who had no personal or family problems were called upon to lead, we would have many fewer leaders in this Church. We all struggle with different things, and the Lord knows about that. The Almighty God himself was not spared the consequences of maintaining moral agency among his sons and daughters; the revelations declare that the heavens wept over the disaffection of Lucifer and one-third of all the spirit sons and daughters of God (see D&C 76:26). As Enoch the seer looked forward in time, he beheld the horrors of the days of Noah and of the consummate wickedness attending the universal flood. "And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains? And Enoch said unto the Lord: How is it that thou canst weep, seeing thou art holy, and from all eternity to all eternity?" It appears that Enoch could not quite grasp why the heavens should weep over the loss of wicked people. After all, he reasoned, God has myriads of creations: "And were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations" (Moses 7:28-30).

And then Enoch learned something about God——that his infinity does not preclude either his immediacy or his intimacy: "And yet thou art there, and thy bosom is there; and also thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever." He learned that God is in the business of people, that men and women are his greatest concern, not because they are objects of creation but because they are his very own children. Note the poignancy of this explanation from a Father filled with tender regard: "Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency; and unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood . . . , and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?" (Moses 7:30, 33, 37). Indeed, what parent, mortal or immortal, does not weep, knowing that his children will suffer? It comes with the turf. We suffer because we care, and the only way to take pain and suffering out of child rearing is to take love out of family relationships.

Judge Not

My wife, Shauna, was talking with a friend one morning when the conversation turned to children. The woman spoke rather unkindly about a family she knew and of the problems some of the daughters had had. "What kind of parents would let their children do such things?" the woman asked very pointedly. My wife timidly suggested that we really ought not make those kinds of judgments. The woman replied, "No, what I mean is, there's no way my children would ever do those things." Shauna responded, "I hope you're right. But I wouldn't say that if I were you. Children can change overnight."

It's so easy to jump to premature (and often inaccurate) conclusions when we know so little and have available so few of the facts. It's natural to attribute motivation, assign intent, and designate guilt when we really have no idea what's going on in the souls of other people. It is likely that few Latter-day Saint parents who bounce their little ones on their lap, read scriptures with them, kneel in prayer with them, and diligently try to embody the principles of the gospel ever suppose that their children could grow up to be indifferent or hostile toward sacred or eternal things. But sometimes things just don't work out as we plan.

We must learn to rejoice with mothers and fathers whose children excel and whose loved ones develop into model citizens. We must learn to feel deep gratitude for the young ones who are not our own but whose lives bless the lives of their parents and grandparents. On the other hand, we must, as a part of our Christian covenant, be "willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and . . . willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort" (Mosiah 18:8-9).

It is a wrenching thing to lose a loved one to death. It is perhaps even more wrenching to lose a loved one to the influences of the world, to watch helplessly as one over whom we have prayed and longed and yearned turns a deaf ear to counsel and wanders away into the mists of darkness.

It seems so natural to show up on the doorstep of a friend whose child has been taken in death and grieve with our friends in their loss. It seems so much more difficult to respond in like fashion when our friend's child has gone inactive, has turned to drugs, or has become immoral. We would never think of criticizing a parent whose baby daughter contracted leukemia and died, but we are tempted to place blame at the door of a parent whose son or daughter breaks the law and seems to have died spiritually.

It is a sin against charity and a crime against human decency to ignore or belittle or speak unkindly——to judge——those whose children stray. I believe God will hold us accountable if we do so. Mormon warned: "Wherefore, take heed, . . . that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil" (Moroni 7:14). Likewise, Alma counseled: "Therefore, . . . see that you are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righ-teously, and do good continually; and if ye do all these things then shall ye receive your reward; yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored unto you again; ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again. For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored" (Alma 41:14-15). Maybe there is not much we can do; we probably cannot turn our neighbor's child around on our own. But we can care. We can hurt with our brothers and sisters. And we can pray for them. That's a start. Catchy clichÃ©s and platitudes seldom bring comfort, but genuine expressions of love and concern do much to ease the burdens of troubled hearts.

We can be Christians, followers of the lowly Nazarene who ate and drank with sinners. We can reach out, welcome people back, and help them feel the warmth and security they once knew. Alma the Younger took a major detour. But he returned and was welcomed back. Corianton left the strait and narrow path for a time, but he came back. He repented sincerely and was allowed to continue his ministry. He labored faithfully thereafter in the Church (see Alma 49:29-30; 63:10). We can be forgiving and allow people to change. If Johnny strays from the path for a few years and disqualifies himself for a mission but eventually returns to the path, we can greet him joyfully. God can forgive him, and so must we. If Jennifer leaves the strait and narrow, loses her virtue, has a baby out of wedlock, but chooses eventually to come back to church, we can rejoice in her return. God can forgive her, and so must we. When people have repented, they want desperately to put the past behind them; we as followers of Christ are under covenant to help them do so. In short, if loved ones wander for a time, miss some glorious opportunities and forfeit some blessings, we can still run to meet them while they are yet a great way off (see Luke 15:20). That they can be forgiven, that they can have their sins remitted, is an indication that they can yet inherit the celestial kingdom. Humble followers of Christ will treat them, and their parents, accordingly.

That spirit is illustrated in an incident related by Elder Boyd K. Packer: "A few years ago, it was my sad privilege to accompany President Kimball, then President of the Twelve, to a distant stake to replace a stake leader who had been excommunicated for a transgression. Our hearts went out to this good man who had done such an unworthy thing. His sorrow and anguish and suffering brought to my mind the phrase 'gall of bitterness.'

"Thereafter, on intermittent occasions, I would receive a call from President Kimball: 'Have you heard from this brother? How is he doing? Have you been in touch with him?' After Brother Kimball became President of the Church, the calls did not cease. They increased in frequency.

"One day I received a call from the President. 'I have been thinking of this brother. Do you think it is too soon to have him baptized?' (Always a question, never a command.) I responded with my feelings, and he said, 'Why don't you see if he could come here to see you? If you feel good about it after an interview, we could proceed.'

"A short time later, I arrived very early at the office. As I left my car I saw President Kimball enter his. He rolled down the window to greet me, and I told him I had good news about our brother. 'He was baptized last night,' I said.

"He motioned for me to get into the car and sit beside him and asked me to tell him all about it. I told him of the interview and that I had concluded by telling our brother very plainly that his baptism must not be a signal that his priesthood blessings would be restored in the foreseeable future. I told him that it would be a long, long time before that would happen.

"President Kimball patted me on the knee in a gentle gesture of correction and said, 'Well, maybe not so long . . .' Soon thereafter the intermittent phone calls began again" (Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled, 118-19).

"God does not look on sin with allowance," the Prophet Joseph Smith explained, "but when men have sinned, there must be allowance made for them.

"All the religious world is boasting of righ-teousness: it is the doctrine of the devil to retard the human mind, and hinder our progress, by filling us with self-righteousness. The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 240-41). "Through the history of the generations of man," President Gordon B. Hinckley declared, "the actions of rebellious children have been ladened with sorrow and heartbreak, but even when there has been rebellion, the strong cords of family life have reached out to encircle the rebellious one" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1991, 95).

There is yet another area in which we must not judge or condemn, and it is a different angle on the same problem. Parents who have had wandering children are more than eager (and grateful) to welcome back the straying one. They may also be a bit impatient with siblings who are not as excited and welcoming as Mom and Dad. Let's face the facts: it's tough for a child who is honestly trying to live his or her religion to watch the rebellious son or daughter destroy the home, chase away the peace of the family, make emotional basket cases of their parents, get all the time and most of the family resources, and still feel loving, accepting, and tender toward the prodigal. It's one thing to preach and teach that we ought to be ever ready to forgive; it's another thing to be able to do so. It usually takes some time for the wounds to heal, and "faithful children" and parents may both need to exercise patience and understanding in the process.

A dear friend of mine shared the following experience. At a time when he and his wife were suffering over a wandering child, he prayed and prayed for the strength and the heart to love his errant son, no matter what. That was terribly difficult, for he desperately wanted this boy to become all that the father knew he could become. He wanted to be honest with his son, so he prepared and waited for a time when he felt his expressions could be heartfelt and genuine. On one occasion he waited up for his son until about two o'clock in the morning, when the son came in. The father said, "Come in, Bill. Let's talk for a moment." The young man back-peddled. "I know I'm late. I know I said I would be in earlier." The father cut him off. "No, no, Bill. That's not what I wanted to talk with you about. I just wanted to tell you that I've missed you. It's been a long time since we sat down and spent a few moments together. Do you have some time right now?" Startled, the son said, "I guess so."

"Bill," the father continued, "I need to tell you something, and it's really important to me that I say just what I'm feeling. I know that for the time being you have chosen to travel another direction, to go in a different path than the rest of the family has chosen to take. I would be lying if I said anything other than it hurts your mom and me deeply to see you go this way. But I've come to realize something in the past few days. As much as I want you to be active and involved in the Church——and I want that more than anything in the world——that decision has to be yours. And so I want you to know even if you should decide that you never again want to be associated with the Church, we'll still love you, love you with all our hearts. You're our son, and you'll always be our son. And nothing will ever change that."

Bill was touched by the honesty of his father and, more especially, by the rich outpouring of a love now devoid of rules and conditions. Through tears, my friend explained that that moment was a turning point in their relationship.

Our family pain may best be faced with perspective, particularly the perspective provided by the great plan of happiness. On occasions when I have been most discouraged by family matters, I have engaged in two essential activities.

First of all, I have spent a great deal of time on my knees. A petition in the Book of Mormon has taken on new meaning for me. Alma and his missionary companions were stunned by the perverseness and apostasy of the Zoramites. After expressing to God his utter disgust with their pride and idolatry, Alma prayed: "O Lord, wilt thou give me strength, that I may bear with mine infirmities. For I am infirm, and such wickedness among this people doth pain my soul. O Lord, my heart is exceedingly sorrowful; wilt thou comfort my soul in Christ" (Alma 31:30-31). Prayer becomes a means of gaining comfort, additional strength to bear up under our burdens, and divine direction in dealing with specific problems.

Second, I have spent many hours in the temple, the site of intersection between heaven and earth, the holy place where we can come unto God. The temple provides perspective on time and eternity. It serves for me as a gentle slap in the face, a sobering reminder of what matters most. I may come into the temple with what seems an unbearable burden——concerns about finances, children, or church matters. I may not leave the temple with any more money in my pocket or even an idea of how to come up with more (though such things do happen). I may not understand any more clearly how to deal with a rebellious youngster (though certain impressions may come). And I may not know exactly who should be called as the Relief Society president or the Scoutmaster (though such knowledge does come to us on occasion). But almost always I leave the temple built up, strengthened, fortified in what must be done. My mind and heart have been refocused on eternal things. Covenants. Ordinances. Family. Sealing power. Righteousness. There is consummate peace to be found in perspective.

The hope of which the scriptures speak is not just wanting good things to happen. Hope is a settled condition, a rest and a peace that allow us to proceed confidently in the midst of turmoil. It comes to us by the power of the Holy Ghost, who is the Comforter. Elder M. Russell Ballard stated: "Many feel helpless to deal with the chaos that seems to prevail in the world. Others anguish over family members who are being carried downstream in a swift, raging current of weakening values and declining moral standards. Children particularly are suffering as society drifts further and further away from the commandments of God.

"Many have even resigned themselves to accept the wickedness and cruelty of the world as being irreparable. They have given up hope. They have decided to quit trying to make the world a better place in which they and their families can live. They have surrendered to despair.

"Admittedly we have ample reason to be deeply concerned because we see no immediate answers to the seemingly unsolvable problems confronting the human family. But regardless of this dark picture, which will ultimately get worse, we must never allow ourselves to give up hope! Moroni, having seen our day, counseled, 'Wherefore, there must be faith; and if there must be faith there must also be hope' (Moroni 10:20)" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1992, 42).

To hold on, to hope on in regard to the family is to face life and its challenges with courage and conviction, recognizing that God is in his heaven and knows of our sufferings. To proceed with hope is to live the gospel the best we can, to trust in the infinite power and never-ending mercy of Jesus Christ, and to surrender our burdens to him. Jesus is the Balm of Gilead. His is the soothing ointment that heals the wounds of the brokenhearted. To a degree, we each have wandered, just as do some of our children. "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way" (Isaiah 53:6). But thanks be to God, "he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows" (Isaiah 53:4). Because he has taken upon him our infirmities, he is filled with mercy and knows how to succor his people according to their individual needs (see Alma 7:12).

Truly, anything upon which Christ places his hand is healed——individual, family, or nation. The Savior may not take away our problems, and he certainly will not shield us from all pain, but he will provide us perspective and strength to bear up under them. As we submit cheerfully and patiently to the will of the Lord, he will "ease the burdens which are put upon your shoulders, that even you cannot feel them upon your backs, . . . that ye may know of a surety that I, the Lord God, do visit my people in their afflictions" (Mosiah 24:14).
