Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

WITHIN THE COVENANT

We are a people of covenant. In fact, whenever our Heavenly Father has had a people on earth to whom he has revealed himself and the truths and powers of salvation, he has always done so through covenant. He promises to make of us "a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people." We promise to abide by the terms and obligations of the covenant, namely, to "shew forth the praises of him who hath called [us] out of darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Peter 2:9). The God of heaven has restored the fulness of his gospel in our day so that his everlasting covenant might be reestablished on earth (see D&C 1:22). Indeed, the gospel of Jesus Christ represents the "new and an everlasting covenant" (D&C 22:1; 45:9; 49:9; 66:2; 133:57): everlasting in that it has been on the earth from the beginning of time; new in that it is restored anew following periods of apostasy. The Savior's commission to an early Latter-day Saint is just as applicable to us who live at the end of the age: "Thou shalt preach the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth in these last days, the covenant which I have sent forth to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel" (D&C 39:11).

A Premortal Covenant People

Central to Latter-day Saint theology is the mind-expanding concept that we lived before we came here; the doctrine of the premortal existence of men and women is fundamental to our faith. Very little of what we do and feel and accomplish in our second estate may be comprehended independent of what we did and who we were in our first estate. Alma teaches us that many of us demonstrated "exceeding faith and good works" in the premortal existence as a preparation for the callings and assignments we would receive here (Alma 13:3).

Following our birth as spirits, being endowed with agency, each of the spirit sons and daughters of God grew and developed and progressed according to our desires for truth and righteousness. "Being subject to law," Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "and having their agency, all the spirits of men, while yet in the Eternal Presence, developed aptitudes, talents, capacities, and abilities of every sort, kind, and degree. During the long expanse of life which then was, an infinite variety of talents and abilities came into being. As the ages rolled, no two spirits remained alike. . . . Abraham and Moses and all of the prophets sought and obtained the talent for spirituality. Mary and Eve were two of the greatest of all the spirit daughters of the Father. The whole house of Israel, known and segregated out from their fellows, was inclined toward spiritual things" (Mortal Messiah, 1:23).

Perhaps the greatest foreordination——based on premortal faithfulness——is foreordination to lineage and family: individuals come to earth through a designated lineage that entitles them to remarkable blessings, but also a lineage that carries with it burdens and responsibilities. As a people, therefore, we enjoy "a type of collective foreordination——a selection of spirits to form an entire favored group or lineage." Yet, "it is a collective foreordination [that] is nonetheless based on individual premortal faithfulness and spiritual capacity" (Life Before, 144). In the words of Elder Melvin J. Ballard, Israel is "a group of souls tested, tried, and proven before they were born into the world. . . . Through this lineage were to come the true and tried souls that had demonstrated their righteousness in the spirit world before they came here" (Melvin J. Ballard, 218-19).

"Remember the days of old," Moses counseled his people, "consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee. When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance" (Deuteronomy 32:7-9). In speaking to the Athenians, the apostle Paul declared: "God that made the world and all things therein, . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:24, 26).

President Harold B. Lee explained: "Those born to the lineage of Jacob, who was later to be called Israel, and his posterity, who were known as the children of Israel, were born into the most illustrious lineage of any of those who came upon the earth as mortal beings.

"All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth [life] was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here?" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1973, 7-8).

It thus appears that the declaration of lineage by patriarchs is as much a statement as to who and what we were as it is who we are now and what we may become. There are those, of course, who believe otherwise, those who propose that premortality has little or nothing to do with mortality, that there is no tie between faithfulness there and lineage and station here; to believe in any other way, they contend, is racist or exclusivistic. In my view, if there is no relationship between the first estate and the second, why should I believe there is any relationship between what I do here and what I will receive hereafter?

Who are we, then? President Lee declared: "You are all the sons and daughters of God. Your spirits were created and lived as organized intelligences before the world was. You have been blessed to have a physical body because of your obedience to certain commandments in that premortal state. You are now born into a family to which you have come, into the nations through which you have come, as a reward for the kind of lives you lived before you came here and at a time in the world's history, as the Apostle Paul taught the men of Athens and as the Lord revealed to Moses, determined by the faithfulness of each of those who lived before this world was created" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1973, 7). And yet coming to earth through a peculiar lineage involves much more than boasting of a blessing; it entails bearing a burden. "Once we know who we are," Elder Russell M. Nelson said, "and the royal lineage of which we are a part, our actions and directions in life will be more appropriate to our inheritance" ("Thanks for the Covenant," 59).

The Covenant in Mortality

Those who come to the earth through the lineage of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob do so with an inner attraction toward light and truth; they have a predisposition to receive the truth and abide by that truth. They may in fact choose in mortality to turn a deaf ear to the message of the gospel or to the principles of righteousness; they may harden their hearts and close their minds and thereby live beneath their spiritual privileges (see Alma 13:4). But if they hearken to the Light of Christ and follow their consciences, they shall, either in this life or in the next, be led to the higher light of the Holy Ghost found in the covenant gospel (see D&C 84:46-48; see also Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 67-68; McConkie, New Witness, 260-61).

Receiving the gospel, the priesthood, and opportunities for eternal reward in this life is no coincidence; we have come to earth at a designated time. The blessings of the covenant are available to us here and now as a part of an eternal plan. On the day of Pentecost, the apostle Peter set forth the principles that those who had been touched by the Spirit must follow in order to be saved: "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call" (Acts 2:38-39). The Prophet Joseph Smith said of that passage from the New Testament: "By this we learn that the promise of the Holy Ghost is made unto as many as those to whom the doctrine of repentance was to be preached, which was unto all nations. And we discover also, that the promise was to extend by lineage; for Peter says, not only unto you, but 'to your children, and to all that are afar off.' From this we infer, that the promise was to continue unto their children's children, and even unto as many as the Lord their God should call" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 81).

To be of the house of Israel, to be of the chosen lineage, and to open oneself to greater light and knowledge and thereby continue the eternal quest is to be possessed of believing blood. "Latter-day Saints need to believe," Elder Loren C. Dunn explained. "They need to take every opportunity to develop faith, both in their own lives and in the lives of others.

"Faith is a part of our heritage. Those who embrace the gospel of Jesus Christ are the blood of Israel, and characteristic of the house of Israel is the ability to believe. Some have referred to it as 'believing blood'" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1981, 35-36). Or, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed: "What then is believing blood? It is the blood that flows in the veins of those who are the literal seed of Abraham——not that the blood itself believes, but that those born in that lineage have both the right and a special spiritual capacity to recognize, receive, and believe the truth. The term is simply a beautiful, a poetic, and a symbolic way of referring to the seed of Abraham to whom the promises were made. It identifies those who developed in preexistence the talent to recognize the truth and to desire righteousness" (New Witness, 38-39).

In short, what we were and what we did greatly affect what we are and what we do now. We cannot escape now who we once were or how and in what manner we previously opened ourselves to the goodness of God and his divine plan. President Joseph F. Smith thus taught that "our knowledge of persons and things before we came here, combined with the divinity awakened within our souls through obedience to the gospel, powerfully affects, in my opinion, all our likes and dislikes, and guides our preferences in the course of this life, provided we give careful heed to the admonitions of the Spirit.

"All those salient truths which come home so forcibly to the head and heart seem but the awakening of the memories of the spirit. Can we know anything here that we did not know before we came? . . . But in coming here, we forgot all, that our agency might be free indeed, to choose good or evil, that we might merit the reward of our own choice and conduct. But by the power of the Spirit, in the redemption of Christ, through obedience, we often catch a spark from the awakened memories of the immortal soul, which lights up our whole being as with the glory of our former home" (Gospel Doctrine, 12-14).

We speak of those who come to earth through the lineage of parents who have been married in the temple as having been "born in the covenant." What a majestic manner in which to describe the situation of those who enter upon life in the covenant gospel. Those who are sealed in the temple to faithful parents are entitled to the very same privileges——the right to inherit and possess, as heirs, as though they had been born in the covenant. There is power in the covenant. There is protection in the covenant. There is direction in the covenant. There is purpose in the covenant. I have watched with much interest over the years as a temple marriage has literally transformed men and women, refined them, and fashioned them into Saints of God. I have watched with similar interest as little children have exulted in the warmth, the security, and the staying power of a home built upon and operated according to covenant. Jesus our Lord is the Mediator of the Covenant, and it is Jesus who places his healing and enabling hand upon husbands and wives, parents and children who are striving to be true to their covenants. "It may be asked," said President Joseph Fielding Smith, "what is the advantage coming to those born under the covenant? Being heirs they have claims on the blessings of the gospel beyond what those not so born are entitled to receive. They may receive a greater guidance, a greater protection, a greater inspiration from the Spirit of the Lord" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:90).

My grandfather joined the Church near New Orleans, Louisiana. He and my grandmother sought to raise my father and his three brothers in the Church. By the time I was born, my father was not active in the Church. My mother was a Methodist, though she loved the Church and its members and enjoyed being a part of the Mormon life. My Uncle Joseph and Aunt Gladys were very instrumental in my mother's baptism and in our activation as a family over the next several years. I can still remember the long drive to the Salt Lake Temple, the excitement Mom and Dad displayed about our family being sealed together, and the feelings of anticipation in my own young heart (I was about eleven).

It is hard for me to put in words the surge of sweet emotion that came into my heart as I saw the Salt Lake Temple for the first time. Something deep within the recesses of my soul whispered that this was a holy setting, and that what was about to take place with my family would have long-lasting effects. I did not understand much of what I saw and heard that day, but the Spirit of the Lord confirmed to me that my family would never again be the same. And so it was. Mom and Dad were kinder to each other and to us. We talked frequently over the years about the continuation of the family in eternity and of the need for each of us to do our part to secure our love and associations forever. I now look back and realize that it was the power of covenant, the new and everlasting covenant, that entered like a fire into our home and into my heart. It had a transforming effect on Mom and Dad; they worked tirelessly and consecrated themselves sincerely to building the kingdom and establishing Zion, both in our home and in the Church. I learned by observation what it meant to give oneself to a cause. I learned what it meant to build a life on covenants and ordinances. In the process, a firm foundation was laid for my own life. The Almighty has truly placed upon me "the testimony of the covenant" (D&C 109:38).

While I was serving as a bishop some years ago, a mother and her two children joined the Church. They were enthusiastic beyond description about their newfound faith and dived in as deeply as they could. The father of the family, however, was not baptized and was not exactly excited about his family's decision. After being in the Church for several months, the mother asked to visit with me. She said, "I think it's time for me to get a divorce. My husband, Fred, not only refuses to get serious about Mormonism but he has now limited my church attendance. He told me yesterday that I could choose which one of the three meetings on Sunday I wanted to attend, but that I was only allowed one hour per week of religion." I didn't know her husband very well, but it seemed that divorce was not the answer. I suggested that she be obedient to her husband for the time being to hold the family together, that she fast and pray regularly for his heart to be softened, and that she do everything in her power to "make home like church." She didn't know what I meant, and so I explained that she ought to be as Christlike and positive and loving as she could genuinely be and show him just how great a difference the gospel of Jesus Christ had made in their lives.

Not much progress seemed to be made in the months that followed. In fact, I remember standing at the pulpit on the day that their eight-year-old was baptized. I was speaking on the importance of entering the Lord's kingdom through baptism and of the vital place of the Holy Ghost in our lives. I turned in the direction of the father of the family as I was bearing my testimony, only to receive the most bitter, angry, and hateful stare I had ever received. The father actually got up before I had finished and stormed out of the chapel. I thought to myself, "If ever there was a rebellious soul in all the world, we have one here. If ever there was a scoundrel rotten to the core, we have one here. This clown doesn't have enough decency to sit through a thirty-minute meeting in order to make his little boy happy. If ever a woman was entitled to a divorce and some peace of mind, we have one here." I am not proud of my feelings on that occasion. To be honest, if anyone had suggested to me that this pitiful excuse for a man would ever amount to anything, I would have laughed. It is perhaps an indication of my lack of judgment, Christianity, and general perception that the right missionaries eventually came to town, touched this man, baptized him, and set him on course. It was then especially sweet to watch him prepare for and receive the ordinances of the temple, return frequently with his sweetheart, and become a new creature in Christ. He was transformed by gospel covenants and ordinances. His family was similarly transformed. Sarcasm was replaced by sweetness. Macho man was replaced by priesthood man, a man of covenant. Whereas before he had ruled his family with an iron hand, he now led lovingly with the rod of iron, the word of God. He is now a gentle and kindly soul who reflects the ways and works of the Master, and a dear and valued friend. There is power in the covenant, consummate power to lift and bless and reorient.

Celestial marriage is so much more than a lovely social custom, so much more than a Mormon tradition. It is a means of perpetuating the everlasting covenant from generation to generation, of linking the Lord's chosen people by sacred ordinance. It is the means whereby "the promises made to the fathers" (D&C 2:2) are realized in the hearts and lives of the children. Covenants are fundamental, and to the degree that Latter-day Saints take seriously the counsel of modern apostles and prophets to simplify, reduce, and prioritize, they take seriously the obligation to focus on covenants.

Those who through no fault of their own are abandoned by a spouse's violation of the covenant or by divorce can through their own faithful obedience anticipate all the blessings of the covenant——if not here, then hereafter. The privilege of eternal marriage may not come again in this sphere, but the powers of the covenant can, like a broad umbrella, shield and protect and embrace the God-fearing. Righ-teousness is the key. Faithfulness is paramount. Our God, who is a God of justice as well as of mercy, knows the hearts of all of us and will not deprive us of eternal privileges because of the sins of others. Further, as President Lorenzo Snow affirmed, "There is no Latter-day Saint who dies after having lived a faithful life who will lose anything because of having failed to do certain things when opportunities were not furnished him or her. In other words, if a young man or a young woman has no opportunity of getting married, and they live faithful lives up to the time of their death, they will have all the blessings, exaltation, and glory that any man or woman will have who had this opportunity and improved it. That is sure and positive" (Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, 138).

"We are . . . children of the covenant," Elder Russell M. Nelson declared. "We have received, as did they of old, the holy priesthood and the everlasting gospel. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are our ancestors. We are of Israel. We have the right to receive the gospel, blessings of the priesthood, and eternal life. Nations of the earth will be blessed by our efforts and by the labors of our posterity. The literal seed of Abraham and those who are gathered into his family by adoption receive these promised blessings——predicated upon acceptance of the Lord and obedience to his commandments" (in Confer-ence Report, Apr. 1995, 42-43).

It is essential that members of the Church, young and old, know that they are the sons and daughters of an Eternal Heavenly Father and, with Christ our Exemplar, heir to all that the Father has. It is also vital that each one of us knows his or her place in the royal family as a literal descendant of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: we are heirs to the promises made to them. The covenants into which we enter in this life are mortal reminders of premortal promises. They point us toward our distant past and prepare us for a glorious future. When our eyes are focused on covenants, our eyes are likewise single to the glory of God. Elder Boyd K. Packer highlighted the importance of being a covenant people:

"Several years ago I installed a stake president in England. . . . He had an unusual sense of direction. He was like a mariner with a sextant who took his bearings from the stars. I met with him each time he came to conference and was impressed that he kept himself and his stake on course.

"Fortunately for me, when it was time for his release, I was assigned to reorganize the stake. It was then that I discovered what that sextant was and how he adjusted it to check his position and get a bearing for himself and for his members.

"He accepted his release, and said: 'I was happy to accept the call to serve as stake president, and I am equally happy to accept my release. I did not serve just because I was under call. I served because I am under covenant. And I can keep my covenants quite as well as a home teacher as I can serving as stake president.'

"This president understood the word covenant.

"While he was neither a scriptorian nor a gospel scholar, he somehow had learned that exaltation is achieved by keeping covenants, not by holding high position.

"The mariner gets his bearing from light coming from celestial bodies——the sun by day, the stars by night. That stake president did not need a mariner's sextant to set his course. In his mind there was a sextant infinitely more refined and precise than any mariner's instrument.

"The spiritual sextant, which each of us has, also functions on the principle of light from celestial sources. Set that sextant in your mind to the word covenant or the word ordinance. The light will come through. Then you can fix your position and set a true course in life" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1987, 26-27).
