Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

THE SEALING AND BINDING POWERS

Elder Boyd K. Packer related the following story: "Some time ago I was counseling a woman who had joined the Church following the breakup of her marriage and the loss of her only child, a boy who was nine years old at the time he passed away. She told me something that I remember very well because it touched me deeply.

"After the separation in her marriage, while she was trying to make a living for herself and her son, he became afflicted with a terminal disease. Some time before he passed away, he became aware of the fact that he was not going to live. His mother said from that time on he had only one thing on his mind: over and over again he would say pleadingly, 'Mama, you won't forget me, will you? I won't be forgotten, will I?' The pleading of a dying youngster speaks somehow for all of us, and expresses our yearning not to be forgotten" (That All May Be Edified, 172).

If in fact the family is the most important unit in time and eternity, we would suppose that God has made provision, from the beginning down into our own day, for its perpetuation and continuation. And so he has. Not one of us will be forgotten, and not one of us need be lost.

The Sealing Power Anciently

After his baptism by water and his quickening by the Spirit, our father Adam "heard a voice out of heaven, saying: Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever; and thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity. Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons. Amen" (Moses 6:66-68). President Ezra Taft Benson explained: "When our Heavenly Father placed Adam and Eve on this earth, He did so with the purpose in mind of teaching them how to regain His presence. Our Father promised a Savior to redeem them from their fallen condition. He gave to them the plan of salvation and told them to teach their children faith in Jesus Christ and repentance. Further, Adam and his posterity were commanded by God to be baptized, to receive the Holy Ghost, and to enter into the order of the Son of God.

"To enter into the order of the Son of God is the equivalent today of entering into the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood, which is only received in the house of the Lord" ("What I Hope You Will Teach Your Children about the Temple," 8).

Abraham wrote that he "sought for the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower of righ-teousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of peace, and desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the commandments of God, I became a rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers" (Abraham 1:2).

Abraham was ordained by Melchizedek and received from the king of Salem the fulness of the holy priesthood (see D&C 84:14; Smith, Words of Joseph Smith, 246). The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings" (Smith, Teachings of Joseph Smith, 322).

That same holy order of God, the power by which men and women are brought into the presence of the Lord, was contained on the first set of tablets that Moses broke when he discovered the wickedness and inability of the Israelites to receive the higher law. Moses was instructed by Jehovah that the second set of tablets "shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them" (JST Exodus 34:1; compare JST Deuteronomy 10:1-2). We assume, knowing of the blessings of the temple among them, that this same authority was held by the Nephites from the beginning, that Lehi and Nephi and Jacob and Alma and their successors enjoyed the fulness of the blessings of the priesthood (see 2 Nephi 5:16; Jacob 1:17; 2:2; Mosiah 2:1; Alma 16:13; 3 Nephi 11:1). The Lord's commendation to Nephi, son of Helaman, for his unwearyingness in declaring the word was followed by this announcement: "Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; and thus shall ye have power among this people" (Helaman 10:7). A half century later and a hemisphere away, the Lord Jesus delivered similar priesthood keys and sealing powers, including the fulness of the priesthood, to Simon Peter and the other apostles (see Matthew 16:13-19; 17:1-8; 18:18; Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 158; Smith, Words of Joseph Smith, 246).

Mormon explained that after the Savior visited the Nephites and established the full program of the kingdom of God, "Behold, it came to pass that the people of Nephi did wax strong, and did multiply exceedingly fast, and became an exceedingly fair and delightsome people. And they were married, and given in marriage, and were blessed according to the multitude of the promises which the Lord had made unto them" (4 Nephi 1:10-11). Those promises, the "promises made to the fathers," surely pertained to eternal marriage in holy temples and the sealing and perpetuation of family units into eternity. That right would have continued until the Nephites sinned against light and were destroyed by the Lamanites.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed that despite periods of apostasy "there was not so much as the twinkling of an eye during the whole so-called pre-Christian Era when the Church of Jesus Christ was not upon the earth, organized basically in the same way it now is. . . . There was always apostolic power. The Melchizedek Priesthood always directed the course of the Aaronic Priesthood. All of the prophets held a position in the hierarchy of the day. Celestial marriage has always existed. Indeed, such is the heart and core of the Abrahamic covenant. Elias and Elijah came to restore this ancient order and to give the sealing power, which gives it eternal efficacy" ("The Bible," 6; see also Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3:85).

The Keys of the Priesthood Restored

That which took place on the Mount of Transfiguration just six months before the Crucifixion has its parallel in the latter-day Church. The winter and spring of 1836 were an era of both pentecost and transfiguration. By early April, bearers of the priesthood had undergone the ordinance of washing and anointing. On Sunday, 3 April 1836, one week after the first dedicatory service of the Kirtland Temple, the Saints were again assembled in the house of the Lord. In the morning Elder Thomas B. Marsh, then president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and Elder David W. Patten were called upon to speak. In the afternoon the First Presidency and the apostles participated in a sacrament service, after which Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery knelt in prayer behind drawn curtains adjacent to the large pulpits on the west side of the main floor of the temple. At that moment a wondrous vision burst upon them, one of the great theophanies of the ages.

Jesus the Christ appeared to the president and assistant president of his restored Church. Our Lord's appearance was but the beginning of the realization of his promise given three years earlier: "And inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the Lord, and do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled, my glory shall rest upon it; yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God" (D&C 97:15-16). The Savior accepted the offering of his Saints——this temple built at great sacrifice——and then expanded their vision of what they had accomplished: "Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house" (D&C 110:9).

"After this vision [of the Savior] closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north" (D&C 110:11). The keys, or directing powers, restored by the ancient lawgiver formalized the work of gathering that had been begun. These keys enabled the Saints to accomplish the directive delivered in September 1830: "And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts" (D&C 29:7). To the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints——the man appointed "to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses" (D&C 107:91)——were given keys to gather modern Israel. Even as Moses led ancient Israel out of Egyptian bondage, so the president of the Church was given keys to lead modern Israel out of the bondage of modern Egypt into Zion.

"After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12). The identity of Elias is not given in the revelation. This heavenly messenger restored the keys necessary to establish the ancient patriarchal order, making Joseph Smith and the faithful Saints who receive celestial marriage heirs to the blessings and "promises made to the fathers"——Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Elias thus restored the power by which eternal families are organized through the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. "As the crowning cause for wonderment," Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, "that God who is no respecter of persons has given a like promise [to that of Abraham and Joseph Smith] to every [member] in the kingdom who has gone to the holy temple and entered into the blessed order of matrimony there performed. Every person married in the temple for time and for all eternity has sealed upon him, conditioned upon his faithfulness, all of the blessings of the ancient patriarchs, including the crowning promise and assurance of eternal increase, which means, literally, a posterity as numerous as the dust particles of the earth" (Millennial Messiah, 264).

"After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi——testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come——to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse" (D&C 110:13-15). Precisely on the day that Elijah's appearance took place, Jews throughout the world were engaged in the celebration of the Passover. Since the time of Malachi——from about 400 or 500 b.c. until now——Jews worldwide have awaited Elijah's coming with anxious anticipation. Elijah did come but not to Jewish homes; he came rather to a synagogue of the Saints and to his legal administrators on earth. There he bestowed keys of inestimable worth.

When Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823 he quoted numerous passages from the Old and New Testaments. The Prophet wrote in his official history that Moroni quoted Malachi 4:5-6 but gave a rendering different from that in the King James Version. Malachi (through whom this promise came), we learn from the Prophet, "had his eye fixed on the restoration of the priesthood" (D&C 128:17). The prophecy began: "Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord" (Joseph Smith-History 1:38; D&C 2:1). Joseph and Oliver had been ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood and been given apostolic power and commission as early as 1829. How was it, then, that Elijah would reveal the priesthood? Simply stated, Elijah was sent in 1836 to reveal, or make known, keys of the priesthood and sealing powers that had not yet been fully understood or were not fully operational in this dispensation, especially in regard to families. Now the power to gather, organize, and seal families was fully functional. Elijah restored the keys whereby families, organized in the patriarchal order through the powers delivered by Elias, could be bound and sealed for eternity.

Three months before his death, Joseph Smith instructed the Latter-day Saints concerning the mission of Elijah: "The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 337). Elijah restored the keys whereby individuals and families, through the blessings of the holy temple, may develop line upon line to the point that they may receive the fulness of the priesthood and thus become kings and queens, priests and priestesses, unto God in the patriarchal order (see Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 323). Through the powers delivered by Elias——the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, the order entered into by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob——eternal families are created, here and hereafter. Through the powers delivered by Elijah, husband and wife may be sealed unto eternal life, for "the power of Elijah is sufficient to make our calling and election sure" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 338).

Elijah came to "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers" whereby the "hearts of the children [should] turn to their fathers" (Joseph Smith-History 1:39; D&C 2:2). The Spirit of the Lord witnesses to faithful Latter-day Saints of the central place of eternal marriage and of the sublime joys associated with the everlasting continuation of the family. Through temples, God's promises to the fathers——the promises pertaining to the gospel, the priesthood, and eternal increase (see Abraham 2:8-11)——are extended to all faithful Saints of all ages. The hearts of the children turn to the ancient fathers because the children are now participants in and recipients of the blessings of the fathers. Being profoundly grateful for such privileges, members of the Church, motivated by the spirit of Elijah, also find their hearts turning to their more immediate fathers and do all within their power through family history research and attendant temple work to ensure that the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are enjoyed by ancestry as well as posterity. "If it were not so [that is, if Elijah had not come], the whole earth would be utterly wasted at [Christ's] coming" (Joseph Smith-History 1:39; D&C 2:3).

Why would the earth be wasted at his coming? Because the earth would not have accomplished its foreordained purpose of establishing on its face a family system patterned after the order of heaven. If there were no sealing powers whereby families could be bound together, then the earth would never "answer the end of its creation" (D&C 49:16). It would be wasted and cursed, for all men and women would be forever without root or branch, without ancestry or posterity. But because Elijah came, all other ordinances for the living and the dead (baptisms, confirmations, ordinations, sealings, and so forth) have real meaning and are of efficacy, virtue, and force in eternity (see Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 172; see also Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:115-28). The ordinances associated with the ministry and bestowal of keys by Moses, Elias, and Elijah, culminating in temples of the Lord, are the capstone blessings of the gospel and the consummation of the Father's work: they provide purpose and perspective for all other gospel principles and ordinances.

As President Ezra Taft Benson explained, "Elijah brought the keys of sealing powers——that power which seals a man to a woman and seals their posterity to them endlessly, that which seals their forefathers to them all the way back to Adam. This is the power and order that Elijah revealed——that same order of priesthood which God gave to Adam and to all the ancient patriarchs which followed after him" ("What I Hope You Will Teach Your Children about the Temple," 10). Elder James E. Faust pointed out: "Perhaps we regard the power bestowed by Elijah as something associated only with formal ordinances performed in sacred places. But these ordinances become dynamic and productive of good only as they reveal themselves in our daily lives. Malachi said that the power of Elijah would turn the hearts of the fathers and the children to each other. The heart is the seat of the emotions and a conduit for revelation (see Malachi 4:5-6). This sealing power thus reveals itself in family relationships, in attributes and virtues developed in a nurturing environment, and in loving service. These are the cords that bind families together, and the priesthood advances their development" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1993, 47).

The priesthood is the power of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of humankind. It is the power by which the worlds were made, the power by which the sick are healed, the lame made to walk, the blind to see, and the dead to rise again. It is the power by which we enter into covenant and the power by which we participate in the saving ordinances. Where the priesthood of God is, there is the kingdom of God.

Elder Boyd K. Packer has written of a remarkable experience regarding the keys of the kingdom, the directing powers by which families are sealed forever. "In 1976 an area general conference was held in Copenhagen, Denmark. Following the closing session, President Kimball expressed a desire to visit the Vor Frue Church, where the Thorvaldsen statues of the Christus and of the Twelve Apostles stand. He had visited this some years before. Others of us had also seen it but some had not, and he felt we should all go there.

"The church was closed for renovation, nevertheless arrangements were quickly made for us to be admitted for a few minutes. There were just a few of us.

"To the front of the church, behind the altar, stands the familiar statue of the Christus with his arms turned forward and somewhat outstretched, the hands showing the imprint of the nails, the wound in his side clearly visible. Along each side stand the statues of the Apostles, Peter at the front on the right side of the church, and the other Apostles in order. It is not a large building, and these beautiful statues make an impressive sight indeed.

"Most of the group were near the rear of the chapel, where the custodian, through an interpreter, was giving some explanation. I stood with President Kimball, Elder Rex Pinegar, and President Bentine, the stake president, before the statue of Peter. In his hand, depicted in marble, is a set of heavy keys. President Kimball pointed to them and explained what they symbolized. Then, in an act I shall never forget, he turned to President Bentine and with unaccustomed sternness pointed his finger at him and said with firm, impressive words, 'I want you to tell every Lutheran in Denmark that they do not hold the keys! I hold the keys! We hold the real keys and we use them every day.'

"This declaration and testimony from the prophet so affected me that I knew I would never forget it——the influence was powerfully spiritual and the impression was physical in its impact as well.

"We walked to the other end of the chapel where the rest of the group were standing. Pointing to the statues, President Kimball said to the kind custodian who was showing us the building, 'These are the dead Apostles. Here we have the living Apostles.' Pointing to me he said, 'Elder Packer is an Apostle.' He designated the others and said, 'Elder Monson and Elder Perry are Apostles, and I am an Apostle. We are the living Apostles. You read about seventies in the New Testament, and here are living seventies, Brother Pinegar and Brother Hales.'

"The custodian, who to that time had shown no particular emotion, suddenly was in tears.

"As we left that little chapel where those impressive sculptures stand, I felt I had taken part in an experience of a lifetime" (Holy Temple, 83-84).

Ours is the day of restitution. Into the ocean of our dispensation flow the rivers and streams of dispensations past. It is necessary in our day and in a time yet future "that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 128:18; compare 112:30-31). The keys of the kingdom of God——restored by such heavenly messengers as John the Baptist, Peter, James, John, Moses, Elias, Elijah, Michael, Raphael, and divers angels (see D&C 128:20-21)——are here on earth to bless humanity. As the capstone to the blessings of the gospel, the powers restored by Elias and Elijah enable us to organize and seal family units for time and all eternity and to make of earth a heaven and of man a god.
