Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

POWER IN THE COVENANT

There is power, consummate power, in the new and everlasting covenant. That power transcends our finite capacity to fully understand an infinite God's eternal plan to save all of those who will be saved. We know so little. In a world that presses for fairness, we too often close our eyes to the tender mercies of a loving Savior. The Master demonstrates his infinite mercy, for example, by refusing to condemn those who were ignorant of the gospel message and its requirements (see 2 Nephi 9:25-26; Mosiah 3:11; Moroni 8:22; D&C 137:7-9), including little children who died before the age of accountability (see Mosiah 3:16; 15:25; Moroni 8:8-12, 22; D&C 29:46-47; 74:7; 137:10). He offers the sublime gift——eternal life——to those laborers who join the work in the vineyard in the eleventh hour, the same gift he offers to those who have labored the entire day (see Matthew 20:1-16).

Expanding Our Vision and Our Hope

The Prophet Joseph Smith called upon us to repent of littleness of soul and broaden our horizons. "It is the constitutional disposition of mankind to set up stakes and set bounds to the works and ways of the Almighty." And he warned: "I say to all those who are disposed to set up stakes for the Almighty, You will come short of the glory of God" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 320, 321). He also said: "Our heavenly Father is more liberal in His views, and boundless in His mercies and blessings, than we are ready to believe or receive." He continued: "The Lord Almighty has . . . so firmly established the dispensation of the fullness of the priesthood in the last days, that all the powers of earth and hell can never prevail against it" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 257, 258).

In speaking at the funeral for Judge Elias Higbee on 13 August 1843, the Prophet stated: "That which hath been hid from before the foundation of the world is revealed to babes and sucklings in the last days. The world is reserved unto burning in the last days. He shall send Elijah the prophet, and he shall reveal the covenants of the fathers in relation to the children, and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers." He referred to the four angels of Revelation 7, described in modern revelation as "four angels sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness" (D&C 77:8; emphasis added). The Prophet then declared: "Four destroying angels holding power over the four quarters of the earth until the servants of God are sealed in their foreheads, which signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure. When a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and mother" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 320-21; emphasis added).

Howard and Martha Coray recorded that same sermon as follows: "God shall send unto them Elijah the prophet and he shall reveal unto them the covenants of the fathers with relation to the children and the covenants of the children in relation to the Fathers that they may have the privilege of entering into the same in order to effect their mutual salvation" (Smith, Words of Joseph Smith, 240; punctuation and spelling standardized). Franklin D. Richards recorded the Prophet's words as follows: "Judge Higbee would say that covenants either there or here must be made in view of eternity. The covenant sealed on the foreheads of the parents secured the children from falling [and] that they shall all sit upon thrones as one with the godhead, joint heirs of God with Jesus Christ" (Smith, Words of Joseph Smith, 241; emphasis added and punctuation and spelling standardized).

What does this mean? To what degree can righteous parents, fathers and mothers who have entered into and kept sacred covenants, affect and effect the salvation of their posterity? President Brigham Young taught: "Let the father and mother, who are members of this Church and kingdom, take a righteous course, and strive with all their might never to do a wrong, but to do good all their lives; if they have one child or one hundred children, if they conduct themselves towards them as they should, binding them to the Lord by their faith and prayers, I care not where those children go, they are bound up to their parents by an everlasting tie, and no power on earth or hell can separate them from their parents in eternity; they will return again to the fountain from whence they sprang" (in Journal of Discourses, 11:215; emphasis added). We think of the sufferings and pleadings of Alma the Elder and his wife and remember the words of the angel to the wandering son: "Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth; therefore, for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the power and authority of God, that the prayers of his servants might be answered according to their faith" (Mosiah 27:14).

William Clayton's account of the Prophet Joseph's funeral address contains the following: "When speaking of the passage 'I will send Elijah the prophet etc.,' he said it should read: 'And he shall turn the hearts of the children to the covenant made with their fathers'" (Smith, Words of Joseph Smith, 241-42; punctuation standardized). We believe that those who are faithful in their first estate come to the earth with certain predispositions to receive and embrace the truth. The Prophet himself declared that those of the house of Israel who come into the Church do so with quiet receptivity to the Spirit of the Lord and an openness to pure intelligence (see Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-50).

Similarly, we have no difficulty speaking of the "spirit of Elijah" reaching out, touching, directing, and impelling individuals to search out their dead and perform the saving ordinances. Why should we have difficulty believing that the power of the covenant will reach out, touch, redirect, and impel the wandering sheep? Could that power be indeed the same spirit of Elijah, the spirit that turns the hearts of the children to the covenant made with their fathers?

Elder Orson F. Whitney taught powerfully: "You parents of the wilful and the wayward! Don't give them up. Don't cast them off. They are not utterly lost. The Shepherd will find his sheep. They were his before they were yours——long before he entrusted them to your care; and you cannot begin to love them as he loves them. They have but strayed in ignorance from the Path of Right, and God is merciful to ignorance. Only the fulness of knowledge brings the fulness of accountability. Our Heavenly Father is far more merciful, infinitely more charitable, than even the best of his servants, and the Everlasting Gospel is mightier in power to save than our narrow finite minds can comprehend.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith declared——and he never taught more comforting doctrine——that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or in the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1929, 110; emphasis added).

In our own day, Elder Boyd K. Packer has provided a comforting context and reaffirmation for the promise to faithful parents: "It is a great challenge to raise a family in the darkening mists of our moral environment.

"We emphasize that the greatest work you will do will be within the walls of your home (see Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, April 1973, p. 130), and that 'no other success can compensate for failure in the home' (see David O. McKay, in Conference Report, April 1935, p. 116).

"The measure of our success as parents, however, will not rest solely on how our children turn out. That judgment would be just only if we could raise our families in a perfectly moral environment, and that now is not possible.

"It is not uncommon for responsible parents to lose one of their children, for a time, to influences over which they have no control. They agonize over rebellious sons and daughters. They are puzzled over why they are so helpless when they have tried so hard to do what they should. It is my conviction that those wicked influences one day will be overruled. . . .

"We cannot overemphasize the value of temple marriage, the binding ties of the sealing ordinance, and the standards of worthiness required of them. When parents keep the covenants they have made at the altar of the temple, their children will be forever bound to them" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1992, 94-95; emphasis added).

Some Questions and Answers

This marvelous doctrine provides hope——a measure of peace and rest and assurance——to all who mourn over their wandering sheep. It is a revealed answer to some of the soul's longings for understanding. And yet there are additional questions that beckon for response. For example:

We all know that even a merciful God will not violate an individual's moral agency, that he will force no man to heaven. Exaltation in the celestial kingdom is reserved for those who choose to go there, not those who are coerced or manipulated into appropriate behavior. We know that the laws of the everlasting covenant cannot violate the principles of justice or the canons of right and wrong. And yet there seems to be, in the sermons and writings of the prophets, the quiet but soul-satisfying message that the alms of the prayers of the righteous do come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth; that righteous parents' loyalty to their covenants will not be overlooked; that no amount of suffering of the faithful in behalf of their posterity will be for naught; and that there is power, remarkable power, in the covenant to save those who will be saved. President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "Those born under the covenant, throughout all eternity, are the children of their parents. Nothing except the unpardonable sin, or sin unto death, can break this tie. If children do not sin as John says [1 John 5:16-17], 'unto death,' the parents may still feel after them and eventually bring them back to them again" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:90). As Elder Packer suggested, it may be that the power of evil in these last days is so oppressive that it chokes or restrains the proper exercise of agency. One day that will change.

The spirit of Elijah does indeed point our minds to those who went before, those who laid the foundation for what we now enjoy. Because Elijah came, we feel prompted and impelled to make available the sweet privileges of the gospel covenant to those who have not been so blessed. At the same time, Elijah's power and blessings pertain to the living. President Harold B. Lee explained that Elijah's mission "applies just as much on this side of the veil as it does on the other side of the veil. . . . So, the hearts of you fathers and mothers must be turned to your children right now, if you have the true spirit of Elijah, and not think that it applies merely to those who are beyond the veil" (Priesthood Genealogy Seminar, 1973).

Yes, there are limits, not necessarily to God's mercy but the extent to which mercy can temper justice. In speaking of very serious sins, President Joseph F. Smith explained that a person can and will be forgiven if he repents: "The blood of Christ will make him free, and will wash him clean, though his sins be as scarlet; but all this will not return to him any loss sustained, nor place him on an equal footing with his neighbor who has kept the commandments of the better law. Nor will it place him in a position where he would have been, had he not committed wrong" (Gospel Doctrine, 374; see also Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness, 310-11). President Joseph Fielding Smith declared that "children born under the covenant, who drift away, are still the children of their parents; and the parents have a claim upon them; and if the children have not sinned away all their rights, the parents may be able to bring them through repentance, into the celestial kingdom, but not to receive the exaltation" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:91). That is why we teach that prevention is far, far better than redemption. Though we rejoice in the cleansing powers of the blood of our Redeemer, we must, as President Harold B. Lee observed, impress the members of the Church "with the awfulness of sin rather than to content ourselves with merely teaching the way of repentance" (Decisions for Successful Living, 88).

Latter-day Saints who have received the ordinances of salvation——including the blessings of the temple endowment and eternal marriage——may press forward in the work of the Lord and with quiet dignity and patient maturity seek to be worthy of gaining the certain assurance of salvation before the end of their mortal lives. But should one not formally receive the more sure word of prophecy in this life, he has the scriptural promise that faithfully enduring to the end——keeping the covenants and commandments from baptism to the end of his life (see Mosiah 18:8-9)——eventuates in the promise of eternal life, whether that promise be received here or hereafter (see D&C 14:7; 53:7; see also 2 Nephi 31:20; Mosiah 5:15). "But blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether in life or in death, for they shall inherit eternal life" (D&C 50:5).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie expressed the following sentiments at the funeral of Elder S. Dilworth Young: "If we die in the faith, that is the same thing as saying that our calling and election has been made sure and that we will go on to eternal reward hereafter. As far as faithful members of the Church are concerned, they have charted a course leading to eternal life. This life is the time that is appointed as a probationary estate for men to prepare to meet God, and as far as faithful people are concerned, if they are in line of their duty, if they are doing what they ought to do, although they may not have been perfect in this sphere, their probation is ended. Now there will be some probation for some other people hereafter. But for the faithful saints of God, now is the time and the day, and their probation is ended with their death" (funeral address, 13 July 1981).

Many years ago while working as a counselor, I met with a single mother who was struggling to rear three teenagers. She came in one afternoon particularly pensive. She said, "I have a big decision to make." She reminded me that her husband had been killed in an automobile accident exactly one year ago. "What's the problem?" I asked. "I need to decide whether to do his temple work," she responded. "Why is that even a problem for you? Didn't you love him?" "Yes," she said. "I adored him. He was a remarkable human being——a terrific father, a loving husband, a scouter in the community, a Little League baseball coach, an all-around great guy." She paused a moment and then added: "But he was not a member of the Church. He was very supportive of me and the children, was a moral and upright man, didn't smoke or drink, but he never took the restored gospel very seriously."

I asked again: "Well, what's the problem? Why don't you do his work?" She replied that one of her teachers had discouraged her from doing so. His words went something like this: "Look, he didn't accept the gospel here, and so he won't accept it hereafter. To go to the temple in his behalf would be a total waste of time." I was stunned but attempted to hold my composure, especially because the teacher she quoted was well known in the community and his word was highly regarded. She asked what I thought. I said: "Oh, I'd probably take a slightly different approach." "What's that?" "I would go to the temple this afternoon if I could," I said. "What do you mean?" she asked. I then explained that we are simply not in a position to judge, to know what's in a person's heart——what someone else feels, believes, knows. We do not really understand what constitutes a valid opportunity to hear the gospel, when the witness of the Spirit has been felt, or whether the message of the Restoration was even presented in a manner that was intelligible or truly inspirational. She had the work done a short time later.

Amulek did teach that the same spirit or disposition we have in this life will be with us in the world to come (see Alma 34:31-35), and the principle is true enough. Continuing in a habitually evil course makes it awfully difficult to change. But is it impossible? We must never deny another person the opportunity to change. People change here. Why can they not change hereafter? President Joseph F. Smith beheld in his vision of the postmortal spirit world how "the chosen messengers went forth to declare the acceptable day of the Lord and proclaim liberty to the captives who were bound, even unto all who would repent of their sins and receive the gospel." Now note this interesting verse: "Thus was the gospel preached to those who had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth, or in transgression, having rejected the prophets" (D&C 138:31-32). This same principle is echoed in the words of President Wilford Woodruff: "I tell you when the prophets and apostles go to preach to those who are shut up in prison, thousands of them will there embrace the Gospel. They know more in that world than they do here" (cited in Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple, 206).

So many things can weigh upon the mind and heart of an individual: pressures and challenges and crosses that only God can see and comprehend. Why does a person reject the gospel? Why does a child wander? Can we see the whole picture? Are we in a position to pass appropriate judgment and close the doors to future recovery and reconciliation? I have a conviction that when a person passes through the veil of death, all those impediments and challenges and crosses that were beyond his or her power to control——abuse, neglect, immoral environment, weighty traditions, etc.——will be torn away like a film. Then perhaps that person shall, as President Woodruff suggested, see and feel things he or she could not see and feel before.

I suppose there will always be those who choose to take license in gospel liberty or who despise the saving grace of our Lord by knowingly violating the laws of God. There is always that risk. There is, however, what I perceive to be a greater risk——that well-meaning, hard-working, and diligent mothers and fathers with straying children may draw false conclusions about themselves and maybe even throw in the towel in despair. To such persons, the prophetic word concerning the consummate power of the covenant is manna to the soul, living water to parched lips. It may also be the case that such doctrine is often more effectively delivered and applied in more intimate settings. Bruce Hafen has written: "I was surprised on one occasion to hear a senior General Authority tell me something in a private conversation that allowed for greater flexibility on a particular issue than I had expected to hear. I told him how valuable I thought it would be if more members of the Church could hear his counsel, because what is said across the desk can so nicely clarify what is said over the pulpit. He replied that private counsel can be adapted to the attitudes and understanding of the person being counseled. If that same counsel were given publicly to an audience that included individuals of insufficient background or commitment, it might appear to give license to those whose needs require not more flexibility, but less" (Broken Heart, 4-5).

Stated bluntly, all of us are guilty of sin. All of us are in need of pardoning mercy. All of us fall short of the divine standard. During a long day of debate with his opponents, Jesus delivered the following parable: "A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. He [the son] answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he [the second son] answered and said, I go, sir: and went not. Whether of them twain did the will of his father?" (Matthew 21:28-31.) One "may wonder why this story does not include a third son who said, 'I will,' and kept his word. Perhaps it is because this story characterizes humanity, and we all fall short (Romans 3:23). Thus Jesus could describe only two kinds of religious people: those who pretend to be obedient but are actually rebels, and those who begin as rebels but repent" (MacArthur, Gospel According to Jesus, 167).

Obviously there are all types and varieties of sin, and some are certainly more serious than others. At the same time, there should be no doubt in any of our hearts that each one of us receives far more of the goodness and grace of heaven than is just. On one occasion I was talking with a colleague about life here and the kinds of rewards that can come to us hereafter. I made some rather flippant comment to this effect: "I just want to get what I deserve." I was startled but instructed by my friend's response: "You had better pray to God that you don't get what you deserve!" Every one of us is and will forevermore be eternal debtors. Indeed, as King Benjamin taught, if we "should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another——I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants" (Mosiah 2:21).

Inasmuch as each of us is a recipient of unending and unmerited grace, how can we, in the spirit of Christian charity——or in the attitude of sane discourse——speak of the Lord's pardoning mercy toward wayward children as unfair? Of course it's unfair! It's all unfair! That a pure and innocent man should suffer and agonize over others' transgressions is not fair. That he who had never taken a backward step should tread the winepress alone, "even the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107; 88:106) and thereby descend below all things (see D&C 88:6), is not fair. That the lowly Nazarene should be subjected to the ignominy and unspeakable torture of crucifixion is patently not fair. But the plan of the Father is not a plan of fairness, at least as we judge fairness from our limited perspective; it is a plan of mercy. The Father and the Son love us in ways that we cannot comprehend. They will do all that is within the bounds of propriety to save as many of the posterity of Adam and Eve as will be saved. President J. Reuben Clark Jr. spoke of the goodness of our God: "I feel that [the Lord] will give that punishment which is the very least that our transgression will justify. . . . I believe that when it comes to making the rewards for our good conduct, he will give the maximum that is possible to give" ("As Ye Sow . . . , " 7-8; see also Clark, Behold the Lamb of God, 98).

There is power in righteousness, power that activates God's covenant with his people, power that binds and seals here and hereafter, power that links the children of Abraham, the children of the covenant, in love and unity. Righteous parents thereby affect generations to come. "Ye are the children of the prophets," the risen Lord declared to the Nephites; "and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. The Father having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and this because ye are the children of the covenant" (3 Nephi 20:25-26).

The pull of the covenant toward righteousness may come from both sides of the veil. The counsel of Elisha the prophet is still timely: "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them" (2 Kings 6:16). My friend and colleague Joseph McConkie told me that his grandfather, Oscar McConkie Sr., said to the family just before his death: "I am going to die. When I die, I shall not cease to love you. I shall not cease to pray for you. I shall not cease to labor in your behalf." President Joseph F. Smith, in a conference address in April 1916 entitled "In the Presence of the Divine," made the following impressive and instructive remarks:

"Sometimes the Lord expands our vision from this point of view and this side of the veil, so that we feel and seem to realize that we can look beyond the thin veil which separates us from that other sphere. If we can see, by the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God and through the words that have been spoken by the holy prophets of God, beyond the veil that separates us from the spirit world, surely those who have passed beyond, can see more clearly through the veil back here to us than it is possible for us to see to them from our sphere of action. I believe we move and have our being in the presence of heavenly messengers and of heavenly beings. We are not separate from them. We begin to realize, more and more fully, as we become acquainted with the principles of the gospel, as they have been revealed anew in this dispensation, that we are closely related to our kindred, to our ancestors, to our friends and associates and co-laborers who have preceded us into the spirit world. We can not forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our hearts, in memory. . . . How much more certain it is and reasonable and consistent to believe that those who have been faithful, who have gone beyond and are still engaged in the work for the salvation of the souls of men, . . . can see us better than we can see them; that they know us better than we know them. They have advanced; we are advancing; we are growing as they have grown; we are reaching the goal that they have attained unto; and therefore, I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever. For now they see the dangers that beset us; they can comprehend, better than ever before, the weaknesses that are liable to mislead us into dark and forbidden paths. They see the temptations and the evils that beset us in life and the proneness of mortal beings to yield to temptation and to wrong doing; hence their solicitude for us, and their love for us, and their desire for our well being, must be greater than that which we feel for ourselves" (in Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 5:6-7).

"Rewards for obedience to the commandments," Elder Russell M. Nelson taught, "are almost beyond mortal comprehension. Here, children of the covenant become a strain of sin-resistant souls. And hereafter, . . . children of the covenant, and 'each generation [will] be linked to the one which went on before . . . [in] the divine family of God' [Joseph Fielding Smith, in Conference Report, Apr. 1965, 10]. Great comfort comes from the knowledge that our loved ones are secured to us through the covenants" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1995, 33-43).
