Robert L. Millet, When a Child Wanders ( 1996)

EPILOGUE

Then drew near unto [Jesus] all the publicans and sinners for to hear him. And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." The Master then delivered three parables of lost things——a lost sheep, a lost coin, and a lost son. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught us how to interpret parables. "I enquire, what was the question which drew out the answer, or caused Jesus to utter the parable. . . . To ascertain its meaning, we must dig up the root and ascertain what it was that drew the saying out of Jesus" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 276-77). Although we may appropriately seek after and supply many applications to a parable, there is only one interpretation. The three parables of lost things in Luke 15 are parables of chastisement. Jesus is there condemning the self-righteousness of those who cannot discern the pride in their own supposed goodness.

The First Parable

"And he spake this parable unto them, saying, What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance" (Luke 15:3-7).

Here is a case of a prized possession that wanders off, on its own, in search of food. We suppose not neglect on the part of the shepherd but rather distraction and inattention on the part of the foolish sheep. The one sheep is precious, worthy of extra effort, worthy of the risk of leaving the ninety and nine for a brief season. Besides, the ninety and nine sheep are just as lost in their own way.

The Prophet explained: "The hundred sheep represent one hundred Sadducees and Pharisees, as though Jesus had said, 'If you Sadducees and Pharisees are in the sheepfold, I have no mission for you; I am sent to look up sheep that are lost; and when I have found them, I will back them up and make joy in heaven.' This represents hunting after a few individuals, or one poor publican, which the Pharisees and Sadducees despised" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 277).

Indeed, when the Good Shepherd has found one that is lost, he lifts and lightens the burdens of the wanderer, takes the weight of sin upon his back, and leads the sheep back to safety within the household of faith. In like manner, those of us who are disciples of Christ are called as undershepherds, as apprentices to the merciful and forgiving One. We are once again reminded of the words of the Prophet Joseph on this matter: "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 241).

The Second Parable

"Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when she hath found it, she calleth her friends and her neighbours together, saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost. Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth" (Luke 15:8-10).

In this second parable, a precious item is lost because of the neglect of the owner. Again, this is a parable of chastisement, an accusation against those who see themselves as perpetually faithful. The Prophet stated: "There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety-and-nine just persons that are so righteous; they [the prideful ones] will be damned anyhow; you cannot save them" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 277-78).

In the parable, the woman's heart seems to be right, her motives pure, her desire to retrieve the lost item genuine. It certainly isn't something she planned to do; unfortunately, it was misplaced. In the same way, a brother or sister may be lost through our neglect: perhaps we weren't regular or consistent in our visits; perhaps we weren't as loving and welcoming as we might have been when he or she came to church; perhaps we weren't as willing to forgive and forget as we should have been. Perhaps the man or woman was too eager to be hurt, too quick to take offense, too open to bruising by an ecclesiastical elbow. Whatever the cause, the undershepherds search and watch and reach out in earnest anticipation that the wandering one may be found. And the angels——including loved ones on both sides of the veil——exult in the reunion.

The Third Parable

The final parable of lost things is the most beloved of the three——the parable of the prodigal son. This parable distills the essence of the Christian message: that men and women who wander from the strait and narrow path may through sincere repentance be welcomed back by the Father into the fold of the royal family. It is a story that might be told of so many of us, a tale of one who left the comfort and security of a righteous home and wandered for a season into forbidden territory. "And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want" (Luke 15:14). Indeed, once wanderers hit bottom, particularly those who have been taught better and have lived for a time in the light, it is fairly common for them to "come to themselves." They realize what they once had; they recognize the famine for the word of truth in their own lives in the present emptiness of their souls; deep within their hearts they begin to long for the sweet peace they once knew. Those who view themselves "in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth" (Mosiah 4:2) feel the need to confess their sins and acknowledge their spiritual bankruptcy before God.

As the prodigal begins the long and arduous return home, while he or she is yet a great way off, the parents, loved ones, or church leaders——no doubt looking down the road regularly and hoping and praying incessantly for a miracle——see signs of progress, be they ever so slight. The arms of family and friends are opened wider, outpourings of compassion and pure love take place, and all rejoice. All, that is, except those who feel in some way cheated or slighted because the returning one is given a robe, a ring, and a fatted calf. "Lo, these many years do I serve thee," the faithful son responds to the joyful father, "neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment: and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends: but as soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf" (Luke 15:29-30). In fact, one application of the parable might be a warning against wandering and the price of sin. And, as we have already noted, prevention is far better than redemption.

Nevertheless, for the Eternal Father to say to one of us "all that I have is thine" in no way precludes any of the rest of us from inheriting and receiving the same reward of eternal life. There is no ceiling on the number of saved beings. If in fact the elder of the sons was true and faithful, we rejoice with him and his parents. We in no way detract from his glory or his eternal attainment by allowing another who was less faithful for a time to repent and come back. Whether we stray out of ignorance (like the lost sheep), out of neglect (like the lost coin), or knowingly (like the prodigal son), the Almighty, who is a concerned Parent as well as our God, stands ready and willing to receive us back and reinstate us in the royal family. "It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found" (Luke 15:32).

This supernal message is echoed in all scripture. If there is a central message that comes through the allegory of Zenos in the Book of Mormon, it is that Israel's God simply will not let Israel go. Jacob comments prophetically on that lengthy allegory: "And how merciful is our God unto us, for he remembereth the house of Israel, both roots and branches; and he stretches forth his hands unto them all the day long. . . . Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I beseech of you in words of soberness that ye would repent, and come with full purpose of heart, and cleave unto God as he cleaveth unto you" (Jacob 6:4-5). What is true of a nation is equally true of individuals. Few of us in this life will through our sins place ourselves beyond the pale of saving grace.

God cherishes each one of us, not simply because we are his children, which is itself a powerful incentive for him to save as many as possible, but also because our Lord and Savior has paid an infinite price for us. We are a peculiar, meaning a purchased, people. We have been redeemed, not through an exchange of corruptible things but instead "with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot" (1 Peter 1:18-19). Something so costly cannot be ignored or treated lightly. "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God; for, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance. And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth! Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people. And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D&C 18:10-16).

A Concluding Testimony

Let us ponder on what we have discussed relative to the power of the gospel covenant to secure and bind families.

The family is the most important unit in time and in eternity. No work, no service, no outside agency or interests can supersede the family in eternal significance. Even though the challenges of this life——including the demands for acclaim, prestige, acquisition of this world's goods——may pull tenaciously and constantly at us, some things simply matter more than others.

Few families in this life are spared the pain of wandering children or other loved ones. There are no greater feelings of helplessness than those associated with witnessing a loved one stray from the path of truth, follow alternate voices, or forsake the covenant life. We anguish, we stew, we pray, and we long for a miracle. Sometimes anguishing parents live to see their children return in this life, live to see the miracle for which they had pleaded for so long. And sometimes parents do not live to see the child return, but they do experience another kind of miracle——the soothing peace of the Prince of Peace, who provides strength, comfort, and divine perspective.

We are a people of covenant. Those who proved faithful in their first estate come to earth through a designated lineage and are heirs of the gospel covenant. Theirs is a predisposition to recognize truth, receive truth, and cleave unto truth.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is the new and everlasting covenant. The power to enter into covenant, as well as to seal and ratify those covenants eternally——the keys of the kingdom of God——have been restored in our day by heavenly messengers. These blessings are available to each of us through the covenants and ordinances of the holy temple.

The Holy One of Israel, who is the Mediator of the covenant, has promised that when a seal is placed upon a father and mother——a seal that comes through faithfulness to their eternal covenants——their children will be bound to them forever. Even if the children stray, the tentacles of the everlasting covenant will feel after them and they shall, either here or hereafter, return to the fold. We do not fully understand all of the implications of this marvelous promise, but we trust in the ransoming and redeeming power of our Lord who is also our Savior.

"God has fulfilled his promises to us," President Lorenzo Snow explained, "and our prospects are grand and glorious. Yes, in the next life we will have our wives, and our sons and daughters. If we do not get them all at once, we will have them some time, for every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess that Jesus is the Christ. You that are mourning about your children straying away will have your sons and your daughters. If you succeed in passing through these trials and afflictions and receive a resurrection, you will, by the power of the Priesthood, work and labor, as the Son of God has, until you get all your sons and daughters in the path of exaltation and glory. This is just as sure as that the sun rose this morning over yonder mountains. Therefore, mourn not because all your sons and daughters do not follow in the path that you have marked out to them, or give heed to your counsels. Inasmuch as we succeed in securing eternal glory, and stand as saviors, and as kings and priests to our God, we will save our posterity. . . . God will have His own way in His own time, and He will accomplish His purposes in the salvation of His sons and daughters. . . . God bless you, brethren and sisters. Do not be discouraged is the word I wish to pass to you; but remember that righteousness and joy in the Holy Ghost is what you and I have the privilege of possessing at all times" (address delivered 6 Oct. 1893; in Stuy, Collected Discourses, 3:364-65; emphasis added).

Several years ago my wife and I were struggling with how best to build faith in all of our children and how to entice wandering souls back into Church activity. A caring colleague, sensing the weight of my burdens, happened into my office one day and asked, "Do you think our heavenly parents wander through the heavens in morose agony over their straying children?" Startled, I thought for a moment and said, "No, I don't think so. I know they feel pain, but I honestly can't picture them living in eternal misery." My friend responded, "Ask yourself why they do not do so, and it will make a difference in your life." I didn't get much work done the rest of the day, because I spent many hours pondering the question. When I arrived home that evening, I asked Shauna to sit down and reflect on the same question. She answered as I had, and then the two of us set about a prayerful quest for the next several days to understand how our Eternal Father and Mother deal with their pain.

In time it began to dawn on us that the Lord knows the end from the beginning and that, as Joseph the Prophet declared, all things——past, present, and future——are and were with him "one eternal 'now'" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 220). Perspective. PERSPECTIVE. That was the answer. God deals with pain through and by virtue of his infinite and perfect perspective. He not only knows what we have done and what we are doing, but he also knows what we will do in the future. If, as the prophets have taught, many who are heirs to the blessings of the covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob will either in time or in eternity be reconciled to the covenant family, then all we need to do for the time being is to seek through fasting and prayer for a portion of our God's perspective——his omniloving patience, his long-suffering, his ever-open arms, and a glimpse of the big picture. Such a perspective will not only serve us well here, in the midst of our sufferings, but it will empower our souls and fashion us into the image of our Master, who is the personification and embodiment of charity, or the pure love of Christ (see Moroni 7:45-48).

Because we are mortal, because we are human, because we cannot see the end from the beginning, when a child wanders we fret and ache and sometimes despair. But there is hope smiling brightly before us, hope that springs from the elevated perspective provided by the power of the gospel covenant. President Gordon B. Hinckley, in addressing the Saints in Great Britain, said: "May you be blessed, each of you. May there be love and peace and gladness in your homes. I leave my blessing upon you. May there be food on your table, clothing on your backs, shelter over your heads and a sense of security and peace and love among your children, precious children every one of them, even those who may have strayed. I hope you don't lose patience with them; I hope you go on praying for them, and I don't hesitate to promise that if you do so, the Lord will touch their hearts and bring them back to you with love and respect and appreciation" (Church News, 2 Sept. 1995, 4).

"There is never a time," the Prophet Joseph Smith observed, "when the spirit is too old to approach God. All are within the reach of pardoning mercy, who have not committed the unpardonable sin" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 191). And so we pray, we fast, we plead, and we implore. And, perhaps most important, we love those who wander, and we never, never give up hope. I testify that there is a God in heaven who is our Eternal Father and that he lives in the family unit; that our Heavenly Father knows us one and all by name and knows perfectly our sorrows and our soul's deepest longings; that Jesus, as the Good Shepherd, will go in search of the lost ones; that the gospel covenant is as broad and deep and penetrating as eternity; and that there are righteous forces at work that are beyond our capacity to perceive or comprehend. I know, with all my heart, that "the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man [or woman] availeth much" (James 5:16), and that both in time and in eternity our God shall wipe away all tears (see Isaiah 25:8; Revelation 7:17; 21:4).

We trust in the power of Christ, the Mediator of the covenant, to forgive, to repair, to renew, and to rekindle the gospel light within the hearts of those who stray for a season. And we take comfort in the Master's promise: "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love" (D&C 6:20).
