Think about your best friend. Do you know your friend really well? Do you know if your friend likes to read or to sing or if he or she is kind to others? Do you spend time together? You probably like to do many of the same things. Even if best friends don’t look alike, they often think alike. Sometimes a good friend lives so far away that you have to write letters or telephone long distance, but you can still be friends.

You have another good friend whom you know a lot about. You know where he was born and what his mother’s name was. You know that he visited the temple when he was 12 years old. You know that when he grew up, he was baptized in the River Jordan by John the Baptist. You probably know many of the stories about his life and what he taught. You know that he loves you. The more you come to know this wonderful friend, Jesus Christ, the more you will understand that he can be your very best friend.

The scriptures are a wonderful place to learn about Jesus Christ. The New Testament tells how he called his Apostles to leave their fishing nets and follow him. They came immediately. Great multitudes of people followed after him. He taught them how to pray and how to treat others kindly. He said that they should be good examples—like lights that shine forth to all people.

One time his disciples were on a boat in the Sea of Galilee. A great storm arose, and they were afraid they would perish. Jesus Christ calmed the winds and the water, and his friends were safe (see Luke 8:22–25). We are also safe in his care.

The Savior also healed the blind so they could see and the lame so they could walk. He comforted those who were sad. He worked these miracles and blessed the people because he loved them.

And just as he loved the people of the New Testament, he loves you. He said, “A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you” (John 13:34). We will come to know the Savior as we keep his commandments, pray to Heavenly Father in his name, learn about him in the scriptures, and love him as he loves us.

1.  Tell or read some of the miracles Jesus Christ performed and display a simple drawing you have made of an object that could represent each miracle, such as: John 2:1–11—changing water into wine (water jug); John 9:1–7—healing the blind man on the Sabbath (an eye); Mark 6:34–44—feeding the 5,000 (two fishes, five loaves); Matthew 8:5–13 [Matt. 8:5–13]—healing the centurion’s servant (Roman helmet); Luke 7:11–15—raising the son of the widow of Nain (tombstone); Matthew 15:29–31 [Matt. 15:29–31]—healing the lame, blind, and dumb (crutch, eye, mouth); Matthew 17:24–27 [Matt. 17:24–27]—finding the tribute coin in the mouth of a fish (coin); Luke 17:11–19a—healing ten lepers (words “thank you”); Matthew 14:22–33 [Matt. 14:22–33]—walking on the water (waves). Clear an area in the room and have the children sit in a circle. Put the drawings in a stack, drawing side down, in the middle of the circle. Have the children pass a beanbag while the pianist plays “Tell Me the Stories of Jesus” (Children’s Songbook, 57). When the music stops, the child holding the beanbag selects a drawing and tells which miracle it represents.

2.  For additional resources on Jesus Christ, see the following Sharing Time articles from the children’s section of the Liahona: “This Is My Beloved Son,” December 1992, 8–9; “I’m Trying to Be Like Jesus,” December 1994, 7–9; “I Believe That Jesus Will Come Again,” September 1995, 10–11.
