# God Is with Us (Isaiah 1-17)

### God Is with Us (Isaiah 1-17)
Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)
 
 

12

GOD IS WITH US (ISAIAH 1-17)

KEITH A. MESERVY

Through the Nephites, the Savior challenged us to search the prophecies of Isaiah with diligence, because his words are so "great" (3 Ne. 23:1). They inspire visions, open vistas, challenge laborers, enlighten thinkers, give courage, instill faith, encourage repentance, inspire compassion, and lead ultimately to God. Thus, says the divine Literary Critic, Isaiah's words are great. 1

Isaiah's ministry overlapped the reigns of "Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah" (Isa. 1:1; approximately 742-700 B.C. 2). He appeared at a point in history when God's work seemed about to collapse. The chosen people had forsaken the Lord to worship idols, and they were imitating the ways of the world and doing wicked things. Both kingdoms, Israel and Judah, consequently felt of God's wrath: citizens of the Northern Kingdom along with many of the Southern Kingdom were carried into Assyrian captivity; the land of promise was made desolate, and so few people remained that Isaiah could lament that had God not left them "a very small remnant," they would have been as Sodom and Gomorrah (Isa. 1:9). The covenant people were not carrying out their mission to bless the nations of the earth and were resisting all of God's efforts to reclaim them.

It was at this point that Isaiah was called to remind the Lord's people of fundamental truths: God knows the end from the beginning, his purposes are fixed, he had known the Israelites from the first and knew how well they would serve his purposes. He would yet fulfill the promises he had made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for in the last days he would reconstitute Israel as his people in their land of promise, and again they would teach all nations about God and his ways. In the meantime, each rising generation would know from reading Isaiah's prophecies why they had been separated from their land and why they must never despair of enjoying the blessings that God had promised their forefathers. Isaiah's vision of God at work in bringing about his just and righteous purposes builds faith and hope in the hearts of his readers, and that has caused his prophecies to be recognized as a magnificent message of consolation.

Isaiah's Call (Isa. 6)

Isaiah's call to be a prophet came in a vision of the Lord in the temple. Standing in the presence of his holy Lord caused him to feel keenly how unworthy he was (Isa. 6:5). But in words reminiscent of the Savior's, his "Here am I; send me" (Isa. 6:8) shows how quickly he responded to whatever call the Lord might give him (cf. Abr. 3:27). The Lord cleansed Isaiah symbolically by using a burning coal to take away his sins (Isa. 6:6-7). Obviously, the searing action was a visionary experience, but Isaiah's personal sense that he had been purified from his sins would have strengthened his own witness that scarlet sins can be made white (Isa 1:18).

Isaiah was introduced to a key aspect of his ministry when he was charged to tell the people, "Hear ye indeed" and "See ye indeed" (Isa. 6:9). But, as the superior reading in the Book of Mormon indicates, "they understood not" and "they perceived not" (2 Ne. 16:9). He was charged to "make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed" (Isa. 6:10). That did not mean, of course, that Isaiah was to make seeing people become blind. The blindness referred to in this book and by Jesus in his ministry refers to people who have eyes to see but who prefer to walk in darkness. When Isaiah provided revelation and light from God for that generation and they chose to walk in darkness, they, not God, inflicted blindness upon themselves (cf. John 9:40-41; see also Alma 29:4-5; D&C 93:31-32, 38-39; John 3:19-20).

Isaiah's generation loved darkness and hated light. He called them "rebellious," "lying" people who refused to "hear the law of the Lord: Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits: Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us" (Isa. 30:9-11; cf. John 12:46). When Isaiah offered them light and they preferred darkness—to be spiritually blind—they were bringing upon themselves God's judgments.

Isaiah and his contemporary Micah were not privileged to work the whitened fields (see Micah 7:1-7); rather, they prepared a fallen people for the judgments at hand. According to the general sense of all scripture, a loving and merciful God encourages sinners to repent and return to him; he encourages rather than discourages repentance and conversion. Thus there must be something wrong with a translation or text that suggests that God wanted the Israelites to fail, so that they would not "see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed" by God (Isa. 6:10).

But after the judgments were meted out, just as surely as foliage returns to a tree when spring returns, so surely will a tenth of the remnant of Israel return (Isa. 6:13). This major theme of Isaiah explains one reason why he gave his son the name of Shear-jashub, "a remnant will return" (Isa. 7:3; 8:18).

The Great Arraignment (Isa. 1)

Leviticus 26 and Deuteronomy 28 through 30 provide the covenant background for understanding all the book of Isaiah. When the Lord gave the land of promise to the Israelites, he promised that they would stay free because he would not permit the sword of the enemy to penetrate their land. But this promise was based on a very big "if": if they would keep the covenant they had made to serve him and keep his commandments (Ex. 24:3-8; Deut. 29, esp. vv. 10-15). If, however, they failed to serve him, he would give the enemy power over them.

In Isaiah's time, when the Israelites were no longer faithful to their covenant commitments, their country had already been overrun by the Assyrians, their land devastated, and their people carried into captivity. Thus Isaiah wondered why they would want to continue in their evil ways and "be stricken any more" (Isa. 1:5; see Lev. 26:14-32, esp. vv. 18, 21, 24, 28).

Isaiah 1 is Israel's great arraignment before God—a courtroom scene in which Israel is the accused and God is the prosecutor and the judge. It introduces us to Isaiah's audience and shows us, especially in verses 21 through 25, what Nephi called "the manner of the Jews," which means the manner of Jewish life. Nephi insisted that the works of the Jews "were works of darkness, and their doings were doings of abominations" (2 Ne. 25:2). Their deeds revealed their evil hearts. Isaiah characterized them as being a "sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward" (Isa. 1:4; see also 1:15; 59:3-7). They were a lying and a violent generation that murdered to satisfy the proud, covetous demands of their hearts. Justice, truth, and equity, all building-blocks of civilization, were personified as being alien to them: "Judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. Yea, truth faileth" (Isa. 59:14-15). Israelites, called to be exemplars and lights to that generation, were negative models (see Isa. 2:5-9; 5:4; 59:1-4; Micah 7:1-4). Consequently, "Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. . . . And when ye spread forth your hands [in prayer], I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear" (Isa. 1:7, 15).

Like Jesus, the prophet-poet Isaiah used metaphor to express his divinely inspired perception of Israel and its needs. In chapter 1, he portrayed Israel as being mortally ill but having neither means nor helpers to provide healing, even while rejecting divine remedies. Again, it was a matter of pride—trusting self-sufficient remedies that were inadequate while excluding divine remedies that would have worked (Isa. 1:5-9; cf. Lev. 26:14-18). They trusted in their own wisdom and power rather than in the living God. They rejected the light and power that came from God while worshipping the silent, impotent idols created in human minds and formed by finite hands. 3 Though idolatrous, they still performed aspects of Mosaic temple worship, causing Isaiah to wonder "to what purpose" they were doing it. Did they think they could walk away from God to live in darkness, to lie and do violent deeds, and then come to God's holy house and perform some rites that would reconcile them to him? "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord" (Isa. 1:11; see vv. 11-14).

Isaiah offered Israel the chance to be healed. His remedies were simple: "Cease to do evil; Learn to do well; seek judgment [i.e., justice], relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow." Then God would come back into their lives: "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool" (Isa. 1:16-18).

Old Testament prophets used the treatment of widows and orphans within the community as a litmus test of how righteous the community itself was (e.g., Isa. 1:23). If society respected the rights of those who were most vulnerable, the society was good. On the other hand, if powerful people bribed the judge, twisted judgment, and overrode the rights of the defenseless to satisfy their own ambitions, then society was in trouble with the God of justice (Isa. 10:1-4). Only Zion-like people, that is, pure-hearted people, dwell in the presence of a pure-in-heart God (see Matt. 5:8; D&C 93:1). This truth was illustrated when Enoch and his people became pure in heart: a pure and holy God came to dwell in their midst (Moses 7:16-19). God is holy and likes company. He called Israel to be holy, promising them that if they would become holy, he would live among them (Lev. 19:2; Ex. 22:31; 25:8; 29:42-46).

In this light, God's sacred covenants with Israel were likened by the prophets to a marriage covenant wherein God and Israel, the marriage partners, were committed by covenant to be faithful to each other, even as a husband and wife are faithful to each other. Thus, Jerusalem, the temple-based center of Israel for the people who had covenanted to love and be faithful to God, was also thought of as God's wife. By Isaiah's time, however, she had broken her vows and was then chasing after her other lovers, the false gods. The once pure-hearted bride had become a harlot (Isa. 1:21). Her inhabitants were murderers, her aristocracy was aligned with the underworld, and her citizens bribed judges, causing her widows and orphans to mourn that justice was no longer attainable (Isa. 1:21-23). But God, looking beyond that day, invited her to repent (Isa. 1:16-18), promising to refine her and purge away her sins. She would yet become "the city of righteousness, the faithful city" (Isa. 1:24-26).

The Day of the Lord (Isa. 2)

People who ignore God and his commandments must somehow be warned that the day of God's judgment is coming. It is the day of the Lord, a day which symbolizes all other times of judgment in history. It is a day when the unrighteous receive their reward, and the worthy receive theirs as well. Thus for some it will be a day of rejoicing, while for others it will be a day of sorrow and regret.

Judgments will begin at the Lord's house (cf. D&C 112:25-26) with the purification of Israel, who will be restored as God's people to their full covenant privileges. Something of that day is described in Isaiah 2 and 3: flashes of light pierce the darkness, leading to the dawning of the day of judgment. After that judgment, Israel will be renewed, as Isaiah described in chapter 4.

While Jerusalem for the present was a harlot (Isa. 1:21), in the day to come God will sanctify her and establish his residence once more in his holy mountain. Then divine light will come from Zion, and all nations will come to gain light, knowledge, and instruction in God's ways: "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isa. 2:2-3).

In that day, the Lord will bring true justice to the world. The image of swords being beaten into plowshares is a powerful metaphor to describe the peace that will exist in the world where "nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more" (Isa. 2:4). That is how it will be when God rules the whole world.

Having painted this idyllic picture of what will be in the Millennium, when God's will is done on earth as it is in heaven, Isaiah invited Israel: "Come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord" (Isa. 2:5). Isaiah knew that his own generation was wicked and that for them, only the prophecies of destruction would be fulfilled. They would experience the great and dreadful day of the Lord in their own time as a foretaste and type of God's judgments at the end of the world. Isaiah frequently spoke of the imminent judgments on his people in the same breath with the last-days judgments on all the world. Each is a type of the other.

The prophet warned that all high and elevated things based on human pride and wisdom will fall. High things, such as mountains, trees, towers, even "lofty looks," will all come down, when God alone is exalted in that day (Isa. 2:7-17). Idols, man's substitute for God, made by human wisdom and human powers out of wood and stone, are among the greatest evidences of human pride. In the day of God's judgment, men will try to conceal their embarrassment at having resorted to such incapable sources (Isa. 2:18-22).

Anarchy, Pride, and Purification (Isa. 3-4)

Isaiah foresaw a time when Jerusalem would lie in ruins and Judah be fallen (Isa. 3:8). The kingdom of Judah would reap as it had sown (Isa. 3:10-11). The leaders would fail in their leadership (Isa. 3:12; cf. Ezek. 34:1-8), and the Lord would hold them responsible for the national tragedy (Isa. 3:13-15; Ezek. 34:9-10). The prophet knew that Zion would be purged of those men and women who had polluted it, just as in the latter days it must be purified by a refining process so the ultimate Zion might be established in righteousness. Isaiah detailed the haughtiness and vanity of Zion's women, who in due time would be stripped of all the external things that had been used to enhance their beauty (Isa. 3:16-24). He foresaw that Jerusalem's men would fall by the sword (Isa. 3:25). The leaders of the people would be taken (Isa. 3:1-4), and conditions would be so anarchic and pathetic that anyone with a suit of clothes would be enlisted to lead, pressed upon with the plea, "Be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand" (Isa. 3:6; see also vv. 7-9). These pitiful circumstances describe well the condition of Jerusalem's citizens after the city's destruction in 587 B.C. The prophet Jeremiah, an eyewitness to Judah's fall, recorded it vividly (Jer. 40-42).

Ultimately, the refining will produce a purified people. Whoever survives—those who "are escaped of Israel," "he that is left in Zion," and "he that remaineth in Jerusalem" (Isa. 4:2-3)—will be "holy" and prepared for the arrival of the Lord, making it possible for God in that day to live in the midst of a pure-in-heart people. 4 Purged by judgments, including the spirit of burning (Isa. 4:4), Zion will be glorious, and its glory will be its defense (Isa. 4:5-6; see D&C 45:66-67, 70; Moses 7:13-17). In that day, each dwelling place and every public building ("assembly") will shine gloriously, showing that God is present wherever his people are, whether they are at home or in their assemblies. How gloriously this prophetic picture compares and contrasts with that special time in Israel's earlier history when God was present in their camp but only in his tabernacle. All citizens of Zion will be holy then (Isa. 4:5-6).

The Parable of the Vineyard (Isa. 5)

Though its perspective is more limited, the parable of the vineyard in Isaiah 5 (vv. 1-7) reminds us of Zenos' allegory recorded in Jacob 5. God, the husbandman, worked to make the lives of his children productive and fruitful. Righteous deeds were the good fruits that came from righteous lives; bitter fruit came from covetous, violent, and lying deeds. The house of Israel was the vineyard, the promised land was the fruitful hill, and Judah was the choice vine ("pleasant plant"; Isa. 5:7). By acquiring good ground (Isa. 5:1), by getting the choicest kind of plants, by bestowing his best work, God, the farmer, believed he could expect to harvest good fruit. In anticipation, he prepared the winepress, set up his watchtower to guard his crop so no one would steal it, and waited for his bountiful harvest. But despite his careful preparation, he harvested bitter-tasting wild grapes (behavior such as murder, violence, and deceit), rather than sweet-tasting fruit. In his amazement he wondered why his effort was so poorly rewarded.

People are not plants; they have agency. So there is no adequate answer for God's question about why his vineyard brought forth wild grapes. When he laments, "What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?" (Isa. 5:4), we see him revealed as a very concerned Father who strives with all the powers at his command to bring good into the lives of his children. Jesus wondered why careless chicks refused to gather under his all-protective wings (Luke 13:34; Matt. 23:37). The allegory of Zenos extends the meaning of Isaiah's allegory by showing that God does not give up his saving work, despite temporary crop failure. Rather, he continues his work until he produces a good crop. Still, Isaiah was left to prophesy the devastation of the land and the end of the nation (Isa. 5:5-6; 6:11-12).

In the rest of chapter 5, Isaiah detailed some of the wickedness of his people. Joining one house to another refers to building up great landed estates by oppressive means, as the context of this prophecy shows. Even the most beautiful of their houses would be "desolate" and "without inhabitant" (Isa. 5:8-9). Contrasting the smallness of their harvest with the large amount of land and seed they had sown, Isaiah showed how much they were missing from their lives by trying to live without God (Isa. 5:10; cf. Lev. 26:14-26). As materialistic and sensual people, they banqueted and paid absolutely no regard to God, and neither did they consider his work (Isa. 5:11-12). Having come to earth to show their obedience to the Lord, they chose rather to show their lack of interest. Indeed, they called "evil good, and good evil"; they placed "darkness for light, and light for darkness"; they were "wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight" (Isa. 5:20-21). Thus they were being carried into captivity and their land was being depopulated, just as Moses had predicted (Isa. 5:24-30; cf. Lev. 26:27-34; Deut. 28:45-50).

The Sign of Deliverance (Isa. 7-8)

God's promise to give Israel power over their enemies if they would serve him and keep his commandments (Lev. 26:6-8; Deut. 28:7) was put to the test as Assyrian dreams of empire rose. The Assyrians would eventually conquer Syria, Palestine, and even Egypt, but those conquests lay in the future as chapters 7 through 10 of Isaiah's record begin. At that point, Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah, king of Israel (Ephraim), became allies and pressured Ahaz, king of Judah, to join their coalition (see Map 9, LDS Bible). When he refused, they agreed to conquer Judah and install someone named ben-Tabeal on Ahaz's throne (Isa. 7:1-6). In this threatening predicament, God tried to teach Ahaz that he should turn to Him for deliverance in times of need.

Not only did Ahaz refuse to believe in the Lord but he even sacrificed his children in his zeal to serve pagan gods. Moreover, he tried to eliminate any faith in Jehovah that remained in Judah by closing Solomon's temple and erecting altars throughout the country for his people to worship other gods (see 2 Chron. 28:2-4, 22-25).

With two enemies allied against him, Ahaz needed powers superior to his own. The Lord stood ready to help. So Isaiah asked Ahaz what kind of sign, either one from heaven or one from earth, would convince him that the hand of the Lord would be manifest in his forthcoming victory (Isa. 7:10-11). But apparently, if God granted Ahaz some kind of personal sign that he might request, Ahaz would be obliged to believe in Jehovah rather than in foreign gods. So Ahaz refused God's gracious offer. It was as though he were saying that nothing the Lord could do would convince him; his mind was made up (Isa. 7:12).

In spite of Ahaz's refusal to put God to the test, the Lord specified his own sign: the fall of Judah's enemies before a special baby, yet to be born, would be old enough to know the difference between good and evil. The two lands feared by Ahaz (Syria and Ephraim) would both lose their kings (Isa. 7:14-16). This sign was given when a baby was born to the prophet Isaiah, as a careful comparison of Isaiah 7:14-16 and 8:1-4 shows.

7:14 Behold, a virgin shall 8:3 And I went unto the prophetess;

conceive, and bear a son and she conceived, and bare a son

7:14 And shall call his name 8:3 Then said the Lord to me, Call

Immanuel [God is with us] his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz [The

 plunder hurries, the spoil hastens]

7:15 Butter and honey shall he eat, 8:3 (No parallel)

that he may know to refuse the evil,

and choose the good

7:16 For before the child shall know 8:4 For before the child shall have

[Hebrew, ki beterem yeda' knowledge [Hebrew, ki beterem

hanna'ar] yeda' hanna'ar]

7:16 To refuse the evil, and choose 8:4 To cry, My father, and my mother

the good

7:16 The land that thou abhorrest 8:4 The riches of Damascus and the

 spoil of Samaria

7:16 Shall be forsaken of both her 8:4 Shall be taken away before the

 kings king of Assyria

From these prophecies we learn that—

1. The birth of a baby is the sign of deliverance (Isa. 7:14; 8:18).

2. The baby is a boy (Isa. 7:14; 8:3).

3. His name is divinely given (Isa. 7:14; 8:3).

4. The name suggests deliverance ("God is with us," or "The plunder hurries, the spoil hastens," meaning the plunder of Judah's enemies is hastening; Isa. 7:14; 8:3).

5. Ahaz's enemies will be overthrown, and their cities will be plundered (Isa. 7:16; 8:4).

6. Both of these results will occur before the baby reaches the age of accountability or cries "Mommy" and "Daddy" (Isa. 7:16; 8:4).

7. What the two kings had determined concerning Jerusalem and its king will not take place, for God will defend Ahaz against this threat (Isa. 7:7-9; 8:4).

From the earliest times, God has used deliverance from specific earthly threats to signify the ultimate deliverance through his Son. "All things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, . . . all things bear record of me" (Moses 6:63). Thus, "many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows showed he unto them, concerning his coming" (Mosiah 3:15). "All things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him" (2 Ne. 11:4). Whenever people sacrificed the blood of the firstlings of their flocks, they typified how God would shed the blood of his Firstling; when they shed the blood of goats and bullocks for remission of sins, they signified how remission of sins would come through the shedding of Christ's blood (Lev. 17:11, 14; Heb. 9:22). When they daubed blood on the posts and lintels of their doors to be saved from the destroying angel (Ex. 12:21-23, 27), they showed how Christ, the real Passover, would save them from death, the ultimate destroying angel (1 Cor. 5:7). When Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness (Num. 21:4-9), they learned that "even so must the Son of man be lifted up: That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life" (John 3:14-15; Hel. 8:14-15).

Thus, within the prophetic context, any act of divine deliverance foreshadows God's ultimate deliverance—salvation. Therefore, there should be no problem in seeing how God used the birth of a baby in Isaiah's time to foretell deliverance for that generation, while focusing attention on the birth of another baby, through whom all the world will be delivered (Isa. 9:6). And Isaiah himself was chosen by the Lord to be the father, just as the faithful witness recorded (Isa. 8:1-3, 18). How honored Isaiah must have felt when his own son was called to typify the birth of God's own Son. "I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts," Isaiah said (Isa. 8:18). Indeed, the Lord's message of deliverance is contained in their names: "Isaiah," Hebrew yesa'yahu, means "Jehovah saves." "Maher-shalal-hash-baz" (Isa. 8:1) represents an earthly deliverance that points to salvation, and "Shear-jashub" (Isa. 7:3) means "a remnant will return."

But, ever the rebel, Ahaz rejected God's deliverance while proudly carrying out his own plan to seek help from the enemy of his enemies, the Assyrian king Tiglath-pileser. He said, "I am thy servant and thy son: come up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up against me" (2 Kgs. 16:7; emphasis added).

Isaiah had warned Ahaz that if he did not believe the Lord, he would not be established (Isa. 7:9). In Moses' day, some had refused to look at the sign by which they could be saved. "Therefore they perished. Now the reason they would not look is because they did not believe that it would heal them" (Alma 33:20). Thus, in Ahaz's day, "the Lord brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; . . . And Tilgath-pilneser [variant spelling] king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not" (2 Chr. 28:19-20), just as Isaiah had predicted (Isa. 7:9). Ahaz needed what God could give. God had offered it. Ahaz had ignored the offer for one of his own devising, but by ignoring God, he suffered the failures he had sought to avoid.

In the sequel, Ahaz's failure to believe in the Lord led to the devastation of his land by the Assyrians, the same source to which he, in his twisted wisdom, had looked for deliverance. In fact, Isaiah said that God sent the Assyrians against his people to humble them (Isa. 10:5-11). The account of this appears in Isaiah 36-37 and 2 Kings 18-19, in which the writer explains: the "king of Assyria came against all the defenced cities of Judah, and took them" (Isa. 36:1). Sennacherib, the Assyrian king, boasted in his own records about how he conquered forty-six fortified cities plus innumerable smaller cities in their environs and carried their inhabitants into captivity. 5 The kingdom of Judah was devastated. Of its cities, only Jerusalem survived.

The Advent of the Messianic King (Isa. 9)

In Isaiah 9 a poem of rejoicing celebrates Israel's future deliverance. "The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined" (Isa. 9:2). The cause of that deliverance would be the baby who would come to reign: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever" (Isa. 9:6-7).

We know that the government was not placed on Christ's shoulders during his first coming, but it will be when he comes the second time to fulfill his complete messianic role. When he came as a baby, it was important for his believers to know what his overall role would be. As Gabriel told Mary, "the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: and . . . of his kingdom there shall be no end" (Luke 1:32-33; reiterated by Zacharias in Luke 1:69-74). Inspired people have always kept Christ's overall ministry in mind to comprehend the full nature of his earthly mission (see Luke 1:33, 68-71).

Isaiah frequently used an interesting phrase when discussing Judah's sins and God's continued acts of judgment against her: "For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still" (Isa. 5:25; 9:12, 17, 21; 10:4). Despite repeated punishments, Isaiah's people refused to repent. This reminds us of the words of Amos, Isaiah's contemporary, when he repeated after a whole series of devastating experiences, "Yet have ye not returned unto me" (Amos 4:6, 8, 11). These phrases imply that God uses judgments as chastening tools to accomplish his divine purpose. As Mormon wrote, "And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him" (Hel. 12:3). 6

"O Assyrian, the Rod of Mine Anger" (Isa. 10)

Judah was the hypocritical nation referred to in Isaiah 10:6. It would be brought down, for "the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled" (Isa. 5:15). In Isaiah 10, we see how God's divine purpose was accomplished, even though the principal agent by which it was done was evil. God used the Assyrians to bring about his judgments on Judah. The Assyrians intended to conquer and plunder (Isa. 10:7-11, 13-14), but God intended to humble his hypocritical, proud, and rebellious people (Isa. 10:5-6). They both intended to devastate Judah, though their reasons differed. Still, God empowered the Assyrians to do it (cf. Deut. 28:47-52).

Ahaz's successor was the faithful king Hezekiah, who vainly tried to turn his people back to God after his father had led them astray (see Isa. 36-37; 2 Kgs. 18-19). The Assyrian king Sennacherib rightly claimed that God had called him to attack Judah (Isa. 36:10). Thus, he "came up against all the defenced [fortified] cities of Judah, and took them" (Isa. 36:1). 7 Isaiah knew by revelation that that would happen: "Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks. And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land" (Isa. 8:7-8). But Sennacherib glorified himself by crediting his mighty armies and superior leaders for his victory over Judah; he boasted, "By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent" (Isa. 10:13).

The Lord had foretold what would happen if the Assyrians took the honor to themselves: "When the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks" (Isa. 10:12). In response to Assyrian arrogance, the Lord asked whether an inanimate tool should brag against the man who works it: "Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith?" (Isa. 10:15). The Lord humbled Sennacherib by devastating his army and preserving Jerusalem intact, in answer to the faith of Hezekiah and his people (Isa. 37:33-37). 8

In chapter 10 (vv. 20-27), Isaiah again referred to the day when a remnant would escape and return, a theme reflected in the name of his son Shear-jashub (Isa. 7:3; 10:21-22).

The Millennium (Isa. 11-12)

A revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants identifies the subject of Isaiah 11:2-5 as the Stem of Jesse and teaches us that he is Jesus Christ (D&C 113:1-2). David was a son of Jesse, and his sons were promised the right to Israel's throne in perpetuity. Identifying Jesus as the Son of David mentioned in these verses shows him to be the legitimate, messianic heir to the throne of Israel.

Isaiah dramatically contrasted the righteous government that the Messiah will establish with those set up by men, whose nature and disposition is to rule unrighteously. He identified some of the characteristics of Christ as our millennial king: with the Spirit of God that leads to "wisdom," "understanding," "counsel," "knowledge," "fear of the Lord," and "quick understanding in the fear of the Lord," he will rule with "equity" (Isa. 11:1-5). With righteousness in the land, the earth, after six thousand years of tension, will finally know peace (see also Moses 7:48-49, 61-64). What a dramatic contrast there is between Isaiah's millennial vision and the happenings of his contemporary world, where human desires went unchecked. For those who long for the day when might does not make right, Isaiah holds out hope.

In the millennial day, men and women will be instructed in divine programs and actions, making the Millennium into God's great finishing school, in which he will prepare his faithful children to rule and reign in the eternities. Nothing will be withheld. They will learn about the powers and dominions of the Gods, how and why they make worlds, and the laws that govern the universe. Thus, as foreseen by Isaiah, the earth will be enveloped in "the knowledge of the Lord," as fully "as the waters cover the sea" (Isa. 11:9; see also D&C 101:25-34; 121:26-32; Jer. 31:31-34; 2 Ne. 27:7-11; Ether 3:21-28; 4:6-8; Rev. 5:1).

The peace that will exist among all creatures on the earth is exciting. Flesh-eating and plant-eating animals will be at peace with each other, because all living creatures in that day will be herbivorous, as they were in the Garden of Eden. Truly, "the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them" (Isa. 11:6; see also 11:6-9; Abr. 4:29-30; D&C 101:26, 29).

In our day, the Church is the kingdom of God that has been established on earth to prepare the world for the coming of God's heavenly kingdom (see D&C 65:1-2, 6). The vision of Isaiah 11 prepares our minds for that coming. Moroni's four-fold repetition of this prophecy to Joseph Smith (JS-H 1:40, 45-46, 49) shows how important it was that he understand what Isaiah was saying, here and in other related scriptures.

We understand Isaiah 11 by turning to modern revelation:

SYMBOL - ISAIAH 11 IDENTIFICATION - D&C 113

Isaiah 11:1 Stem of Jesse D&C 113:1-2 Jesus Christ

Isaiah 11:1 Rod or twig from the stem D&C 113:3-4 Servant of Christ,

descendant of Jesse and Joseph,

blessed with much power

Isaiah 11:10 Root of Jesse D&C 113:5-6 Descendant of Jesse

and Joseph, with a right to the

priesthood and its keys for the

gathering

It appears that Joseph Smith is both the "rod" and the "root" of which Isaiah wrote. The images of the rod in Isaiah 11:1 and the root in Isaiah 11:10 define similar, perhaps identical, roles. Because Joseph Smith is the leading holder of priesthood keys of this dispensation, the man who undertook the work of gathering, who presides over the preparatory work, who has great priesthood power (2 Ne. 3:11; D&C 112:15, 32), and who is a servant of Christ, it is therefore likely that he is both the rod and the root, both of whom are servants in the hands of Christ to carry out crucial work in preparation for his millennial reign on earth. That suggests why it was so important for Joseph Smith (and then all others) to understand this prophecy and to know that God's prophecies are being fulfilled and through what means they are being fulfilled.

Joseph Smith was the first one in this dispensation to receive the keys of the priesthood and the keys of the gathering of Israel (D&C 128:20; 110:11-16). According to revelation, he had a legal right, by lineage, to the blessings of the priesthood (D&C 86:8-10). While he descended from Joseph (as 2 Nephi 3:7, 15 shows), we have no scriptural knowledge of his descent from David, other than what we conclude from these verses. If Joseph Smith had mixed Israelite heritage, as seems totally probable, he could easily have been both of Joseph as well as of Judah, thus fulfilling the prophecy of Isaiah. 9

The gathering of God's people is a major theme of Isaiah 11, because it is a basis on which God's work will succeed in the last days. Joseph Smith testified that the gathering was a matter of greatest importance. 10 Thus, if the stem (Jesus the Christ, whose work is defined in vv. 2-5) is to do his work, then the rod must do his also. The intimate relationship between the two roles is implied in the metaphor of a rod, or better, a "branch" or a "twig," that grows out of the stem. Jesus used a similar metaphor in describing himself and other apostolic servants: "I am the vine, ye are the branches" (John 15:5). The latter-day gathering is the second gathering (Isa. 11:11-12), whereas the first was the gathering of Israel out of Egypt, making Moses the official holder of the gathering keys (see D&C 110:11). Not only will Israel be gathered, but many among the Gentile nations will also join the gathered remnant to learn of God (see Isa. 11:10, 12; 14:1; Jer. 16:14-16). The Church and the restored gospel will be the rallying standard, or "ensign," to which Israel and these others will come (cf. 2 Ne. 6:14; 25:17; 29:1).

It is important to know biblical history in order to understand how significant it is that Judah and Ephraim will be at peace in that day (Isa. 11:12-13). In biblical times, Ephraim, the Northern Kingdom (also called Israel), and Judah, the Southern Kingdom, often fought each other (Isa. 11:13), as we have seen (Isa. 7-8). Things will be otherwise in the Millennium, when they will come together amicably. As the scattered bones of a body will be reunited into one body, so scattered Israelites will become one nation under one king (see Ezek. 37:1-14).

Isaiah 11 (vv. 14-15) shows the Lord's power over Israel's traditional enemies in that coming day. To bring his people home, he will provide the way or means for them to return-a "highway for the remnant of his people" (Isa. 11:16; cf. D&C 133:27). The "highway" metaphor represents the divinely provided means of return. As God provided a "highway" for the first gathering out of Egypt, he will in the last days provide a way for his people to return from their scattering among the nations. Whether it takes a seaway, airway, or roadway to convey his people back home, he will provide it (see D&C 45:9; Isa. 11:15-16). The full gathering and the miraculous means will both be provided in conjunction with the Lord's arrival on the earth. Ephraim, which is gathering first, will take a preparatory role in being ready to administer blessings to his brothers (see D&C 133:25-35; cf. Jer. 31:6-8).

In the millennial day, the song in Isaiah 12 will honor the Lord Jesus Christ, who has worked his wonders and whose great and mighty deeds have been established for the benefit of his covenant children. It rightly follows chapter 11 and forms a fitting conclusion to the marvelous work predicted in that chapter. It praises God for the arrival of his kingdom on earth and expresses Israel's joy in being redeemed, in being in favor with God once more, and in receiving of the rich bounties of his Spirit (Isa. 12:1-6).

The Fall of Babylon (Isa. 13-14)

Isaiah 13 through 23 consists of oracles against the nations: Babylon (Isa. 13:1-14:23), Assyria (Isa. 14:24-27), Philistia (Isa. 14:28-32), Moab (Isa. 15-16), Damascus (Isa. 17:1-3), Israel (Isa. 17:4-14), Ethiopia (Isa. 18), Egypt (Isa. 19), Egypt and Ethiopia (Isa. 20), Babylon (Isa. 21:1-10), Edom (Isa. 21:11-12), Arabia (Isa. 21:13-17), Judah (Isa. 22), and Tyre (Isa. 23). 11 What conditions evoked these messages or how they were delivered is not stated, but they are a meaningful part of the scriptural record. A discussion of their collective purpose and message is found in Chapter 13 of this volume.

Isaiah 13 and 14 constitute for the most part a prophecy against Babylon, beginning with the characteristic phrase, "the burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see" (Isa. 13:1). The term "burden," Hebrew massa', is used frequently in prophetic writing to represent a prophecy of doom.

The city of Babylon was a major power through much of biblical history, though in Isaiah's day it was under the domination of Assyria (see Map 10, LDS Bible). Isaiah prophesied that the city would fall, and he foretold the role of the Medes in the process (Isa. 13:17). Babylon was overthrown in 539 B.C. when Cyrus, king of the Medes and Persians, took the city. It never regained its prominence thereafter.

Though Isaiah's prophecy deals with the fall of a city and its ruler, it deals with a much greater event as well—the fall of the wicked world, its ruler, and all that they represent. In scriptural imagery, Babylon is the enemy of God and the antithesis of Zion, the friend of God. Zion is the chaste, heavenly bride, while Babylon is the wicked, worldly prostitute, the one who entices men away from their love and loyalty to God by promising them all the seductive advantages that the world offers—materialism, power, glory, and sensualism—all of which appeal to one's pride.

Lucifer is the king of Babylon and the arch-rebel who typifies all other rebels. A son of the morning, he aspired to ascend above the stars of God and be like the Most High (Isa. 14:13-14; D&C 76:25-27). With pride and arrogance, he promised to do what God himself would not do—save all men 12—and thus laid claim to God's glory (D&C 29:36-37; Moses 4:1-4). Thus God's heavenly arch-rival became the type or model for all earthly rivals. When Babylon, the wicked world, presumes to fight against God, it follows Satan's model and becomes the antithesis of everything God represents.

It is crucial that the Saints know that Babylon, with all her allurements, will eventually fall, as Isaiah prophesied. That sustains their hopes when they are criticized, persecuted, and hated by all those identified with Babylon because they live so differently from Babylon (see 1 Ne. 22:22-23). 13

Isaiah 13 describes the destruction of the wicked in the day of the Lord (Isa. 13:9; see also 1 Ne. 11:35-36), that great and terrible day spoken of by the prophets. "I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible" (Isa. 13:11). On the Lord's side will be the "sanctified ones," God's all-powerful force before whom no enemy can stand. The sanctified ones are those who "rejoice in [God's] highness" (Isa. 13:3) and who are set apart to his service (Isa. 13:2-5).

In Isaiah 14, the fall of Lucifer is a type for the fall of the king of Babylon. The pride and arrogance of Lucifer, when he rebelled in heaven, provided food for thought anciently, as many nations have stories of war among the gods. Lucifer's pride and fall are alluded to in verses 12 through 14. Likening the fall of the king of Babylon to that of Lucifer evokes images of his arrogance, but it also shows how futile his work will be when it all fails: "Thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit" (Isa. 14:15). The nations will look upon this fall with amazement and disgust (Isa. 14:16-20), "for I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts" (Isa. 14:22). Whatever is not built up by the Lord will fall in those days. Just as surely as Lucifer fell, so also will all kingdoms and powers that are based on pride and rebellion against God (Isa. 14:26-27; cf. 2:10-17).

Prophecies against Moab, Damascus, and Ephraim (Isa. 15-17)

The prophecy against Moab in Isaiah 15 and 16 is typical of others in prophetic writing. It describes the mourning that will prevail in Moab after it is "laid waste" and "brought to silence" (Isa. 15:1). Several cities are mentioned (see Map 9, LDS Bible, for some of them). Moab is condemned for its "pride," "haughtiness," "wrath," and "lies" (Isa. 16:6), for which sins its people will "howl" and "mourn" (Isa. 16:7). The survivors among them will be "very small and feeble" (Isa. 16:14).

The one ray of hope in this oracle is a millennial prophecy, which focuses a messianic contrast on the depravity of the contemporary world. The "extortioner," the "spoiler," and the "oppressors" will be destroyed. But "in mercy" a throne will be established, and one from the tent of David will rule, "judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness" (Isa. 16:4-6; cf. 11:3-5).

Damascus (Syria) and Ephraim (Israel) are the subjects of the prophecy of judgment in Isaiah 17 (chaps. 7 and 8 provide a context for understanding this revelation; see above). Damascus will become "a ruinous heap" (Isa. 17:1). The "glory of Jacob" (the kingdom of Israel) will fade, and his flesh will grow lean, like a harvested field (Isa. 17:4-5). But as in an orchard of harvested olives, two or three remain "in the top of the uppermost bough" and four or five remain in the "outmost" branches (Isa. 17:6). Not only will a remnant survive, but, as Isaiah foretold previously, Shear-jashub, "a remnant will return" (Isa. 7:3; 8:18; 10:21-22).

Conclusion

The Saints do not need to wallow through every one of life's mires to find what is most important to do and to avoid. The Lord tells us how we can succeed with him and how the world, known as Babylon, built on human values and standards, will fail. When Babylon exercises her full usurped powers, the Saints may grow weary, but reading the scriptures by the light of the Spirit will cause them to take heart and endure in faith. They are called to build Zion and oppose Babylon, even when Babylon seems to be all-powerful and ever-present. Since the Lord knows the end from the beginning and his purposes do not fail, members of his Church can find courage to live their lives with faith and hope, looking patiently for that day to come when the Lord, having finished the building of Zion, will dwell among his Saints. How privileged we are to live in a day when we can see prophecies being fulfilled—when we can see the hand of the Lord and his plan being unveiled.

Notes

Keith A. Meservy is professor emeritus of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

 1. Latter-day Saint commentaries on Isaiah include Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982); and Monte S. Nyman, "Great Are the Words of Isaiah" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980). Other helpful (and conservative) commentaries include Edward J. Young, The Book of Isaiah, 3 vols. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1965); and Homer Hailey, A Commentary on Isaiah, with Emphasis on the Messianic Hope (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker, 1985).

 2. A rabbinic tradition dates Isaiah's death to the reign of Hezekiah's son Manasseh, in which case he would have died no earlier than 687 B.C.

 3. See Isa. 44:10-19, especially v. 17. Cf. also chap. 40, in which the majesty, intelligence, and power of God (vv. 1-31) are contrasted with things made by human hands (vv. 19-20). How could God be likened to any of them? (vv. 18-25).

 4. 3 Ne. 10 illustrates how God can cause righteous people to survive when the world around them is being destroyed. See also D&C 35:13-14; 63:34; 101:12; 115:6.

 5. James B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 3d ed. with Supplement (Princeton: Princeton University, 1969), p. 288.

 6. Hel. 12:3 and Lev. 26 show that the divine hand that is stretched out would be stretched out in anger and not in mercy, although an angry hand works to bring about mercy and salvation.

 7. Pritchard, p. 288.

 8. For a fuller discussion, see Chap. 10 of this volume.

 9. President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote, "The Book of Mormon states that Joseph Smith the Prophet was a descendant of Joseph, son of Jacob. By revelation we learn also that he is of the tribe of Ephraim, but it is evident that he also had some Gentile blood in him, for it is written in the Book of Mormon, that it came forth, 'by way of the Gentile' (1 Ne. 13:35, 39), and it came by Joseph Smith. It is reasonable, therefore, to understand that we one and all have come through a mixed relationship, and that the blood of Ephraim and also of Manasseh could be in the veins of many of us, likewise the blood of others of the twelve tribes of Israel, and that none of us had come through the ages with clear exclusive descent from father to son through any one of the tribes." Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957-66), 3:63-64; see also 3:61-63.

 10. See, for example, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 83, 92, 101, 163, 183, 307-8, 310, 312.

 11. Other large collections of prophecies against the nations are found in Jer. 46-51 and Ezek. 25-32. Note how Israel and Judah are included in Isaiah's list.

 12. Smith, Teachings, p. 357.

 13. Isa. 2; 13; 24; and 34 are examples of chapters that deal with the end of the wicked world. See also Ezek. 38-39; Zech. 12; 14; Rev. 11; 16-18; D&C 29:21-22, to cite a few others.

 
 
© 1993 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
