Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

Preface

The Young Gentlemen and Ladies' Relief Society of Nauvoo, the first organization in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for young people, was an outgrowth of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, organized in 1842, and was the predecessor of the Young Ladies' Retrenchment Association.

In January 1843, a group of young men and women gathered at the home of Heber C. Kimball, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, in Nauvoo, Illinois. According to the Times and Seasons, during the course of their conversation the young people lamented "the loose style of their morals—the frivolous manner in which they spent their time—and their too frequent attendance at balls, parties, etc." [^1] Elder Kimball suggested that a more formal meeting of "young ladies and gentlemen" be called so that he could instruct them. At that meeting, which was held at the house of a Brother Billings, Elder Kimball talked about the duties of children to their parents and exhorted the youths to "lay aside their vanity, light-mindedness, pride, and frivolity; and endeavor to show themselves worthy of the religion which they had embraced; advising them to shun evil company . . . and to be obedient to their parents." [^2]

The group voted to meet again the following week. When a schoolroom proved to be too small for the gathering, they moved to the home of Joseph Smith, which also proved to be inadequate for the number who wanted to attend.

The next meeting was held in the same room over the Prophet's store where the Relief Society had been organized in March 1842. The Prophet himself attended the next meeting and addressed the youth. He thanked Elder Kimball for beginning "the good and glorious work" and said, according to one account, that "'when gray hairs should his [Joseph's] temples adorn,' he could look back with pleasure upon the winter of 1843, when he was engaged in promoting the cause of benevolence, and preparing his young friends for the glorious career which awaited them." [^3] He expressed his hope that such meetings would continue and that the young people would follow his teachings.

The gatherings, which became known as the Young People's meetings, continued through February and March. On March 21, the group elected officers and adopted resolutions that began as follows:

"Whereas, The young gentlemen and ladies, citizens of the city of Nauvoo, are desirous of aiding and ameliorating the condition of the poor and of carrying out the principles of charity and benevolence, as taught in the holy Scriptures, therefore, be it resolved, That we form ourselves into a society to be styled the 'Young Gentlemen and Ladies' Relief Society of Nauvoo,' and that we be governed by the following articles. . . . " [^4]

One article called for "a committee of vigilance, consisting of five persons, whose duties it shall be to search out the poor of our city, and make known to the society the wants of those whom they, in their judgment, shall consider most deserving of our assistance." [^5] Other articles established meetings on the last Tuesday of each month, outlined the election and duties of the officers, and set criteria for admittance: a candidate had to be under thirty years of age and of "good moral character." Elders Jedediah M. Grant, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball addressed subsequent meetings.

Joseph Smith did not live to see gray hairs adorn his temples, for he was martyred the following year, on June 27, 1844. Because of increased anti-Mormon sentiment and persecution following the martyrdom, the Saints were forced to leave Nauvoo and to seek refuge in the Great Salt Lake Valley.

More than twenty years later and in another setting some fourteen hundred miles from Nauvoo, the young ladies and gentlemen were again organized, but this time separately. On November 28, 1869, a Sunday evening, President Brigham Young rang the prayer bell to call the women in his family, both young and old, to a meeting in the front parlor of the Lion House. Also invited were President George A. Smith, a counselor in the First Presidency, and his wife, Bathsheba. Following the evening prayer, Brigham told his family:

"All Israel are looking to my family and watching the example set by my wives and children. For this reason I desire to organize my own family first into a society for the promotion of habits of order, thrift, industry, and charity; and above all things I desire them to retrench from their extravagance in dress, in eating and even in speech. The time has come when the sisters must agree to give up their follies of dress and cultivate a modest apparel, a meek deportment, and to set an example worthy of imitation before the people of the world. I am weary of the manner in which our women seek to outdo each other in all the foolish fashions of the world. . . .

"I have long had it in my mind to organize the young ladies of Zion into an association so that they might assist the older members of the Church, their fathers and mothers, in propagating, teaching, and practicing the principles I have been so long teaching. There is need for the young daughters of Israel to get a living testimony of the truth. . . . For this purpose I desire to establish this organization and want my family to lead out in the great work. We are about to organize a retrenchment Association, which I want you all to join, and I want you to vote to retrench in your dress, in your tables, in your speech, wherein you have been guilty of silly, extravagant speeches and light-mindedness of thought. Retrench in everything that is not good and beautiful, not to make yourselves unhappy, but to live so that you may be truly happy in this life and the life to come." [^6]

President Young called upon his wives to express their feelings and asked all present to vote to sustain his proposal to organize his daughters into a retrenchment association. The voting was unanimous. President George A. Smith then testified that Brigham had spoken as a prophet.

President Young asked Eliza R. Snow, one of his wives and the general president of the Relief Society, to assist in organizing the new association. Articles were drawn up, officers were elected, and a name was suggested—the Young Ladies' Department of the Cooperative Retrenchment Association, which was soon shortened to the Young Ladies' Retrenchment Association. Ella Young Empey was elected president, and her sisters Emily Young Clawson, Zina Young Williams, Maria Young Dougall, Caroline Young, Dora Young, and Phebe Young were named as her counselors. Sister Snow wrote the resolutions adopted by the new organization: "Resolved, that realizing ourselves to be . . . daughters of apostles, prophets, and elders of Israel, and, as such, that high responsibilities rest upon us, and that we shall be held accountable to God not only for the privileges we inherit from our fathers, but also for the blessings we enjoy as Latter-day Saints, we feel to unite and . . . uphold and sustain each other in doing good." [^7]

The new Retrenchment Association met regularly that winter. The first ward association was organized in the Nineteenth Ward in Salt Lake City in 1870 after Lona Pratt, a daughter of Parley P. Pratt and a friend of Dora Young, had heard Dora's enthusiastic reports of the new organization and wanted to have a similar one for her friends. At Lona's invitation, a group of young women met at a schoolhouse where she taught and formed an association.

Within a year, scores of Retrenchment Associations were organized in Salt Lake City, Ogden, Provo, Logan, Brigham City, Bountiful, and other communities, usually under the direction of Eliza R. Snow. The association was divided into junior and senior programs, with Sister Snow and Zina D. H. Young, her counselor in the Relief Society, directing the younger girls and Mary Isabella Horne directing the older ones. Each organization was independent because there was not a general presidency nor approved guidelines, but most of them followed the resolutions of the original group.

A similar association for the young men, the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, was organized in 1875. Two years later the Retrenchment Society adopted a companion name and became known as the Young Ladies' National Mutual Improvement Association (known as the YLMIA).

The first stake YLMIA board was organized in 1878 in the Salt Lake Stake, which covered a large part of the Salt Lake Valley. On June 19, 1880, under the direction of President John Taylor, the first general presidency of the Young Ladies' National Mutual Improvement Association was organized, with Elmina Shepard Taylor as president and Margaret Young Taylor and Martha Horne as counselors. Elmina Taylor served for twenty-four years, until her death in 1904.

Nine other general presidents, "keepers of the flame," have served the young women of the Church:

* Martha Horne Tingey, 1904-29 * Ruth May Fox, 1929-37 * Lucy Grant Cannon, 1937-48 * Bertha Stone Reeder, 1948-61 * Florence Smith Jacobsen, 1961-72 * Ruth Hardy Funk, 1972-78 * Elaine Cannon, 1978-84 * Ardeth Greene Kapp, 1984-92 * Janette Callister Hales, 1992-

From the time Brigham Young organized the Young Ladies' Department of the Cooperative Retrenchment Association for his daughters in 1869 to more than a century later when the present name, the Young Women, was designated, the young women's auxiliary has undergone several name changes:

* 1877, Young Ladies' National Mutual Improvement Association * 1904, Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association * 1934, Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association * 1972, Aaronic Priesthood Mutual Improvement Association (Young Women) * 1974, Young Women

The current Young Women program grew from the desires of young women to improve themselves, to develop their talents, to serve others, and to strengthen their testimonies of Jesus Christ. A study of the lives of the ten women who have led the young women of the Church since 1880 reveals how each of these leaders has implemented the original goals into programs for her particular day and how each, working through inspiration from the Lord and often at great personal sacrifice, has helped build his kingdom by serving the young women of Zion.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Times and Seasons, April 1, 1843, 154, as quoted in "An Interesting Outgrowth of the Relief Society in Nauvoo," Relief Society Magazine 4 (March 1917): 123.
[^2] 2. Ibid., 124.
[^3] 3. Ibid., 126.
[^4] 4. Ibid., 127.
[^5] 5. Ibid., 128.
[^6] 6. Marba C. Josephson, History of the YWMIA (Salt Lake City: Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, 1955), 1-2.
[^7] 7. "A Gathering Commitment to the Lord: A History of the Young Women" (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1980).
