Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

1

Elmina Shepard Taylor

1880-1904

At the funeral of Elmina Shepard Taylor, first president of the Church's young women, President Joseph F. Smith commented, "I have known a few men and women in the world who do not seek borrowed light, for the light is in them, and they walk in the light, and they have fellowship with Jesus Christ and their associates. . . . All [Elmina's] thoughts and all her energies were directed in the right channel for the right cause." [^1]

As a young woman, Elmina sought to know the truth and to be baptized by immersion, which she described as the "pattern set by our Savior." Before reading the Book of Mormon, she prayed to know whether or not it was true. Realizing that her life would change dramatically were she to join an unpopular religion, yet unable to "silence [her] convictions," [^2] twenty-five-year-old Elmina was baptized on July 5, 1856. She had implicit faith in the promise, "If you will obey the doctrine, you shall know whether it is of God or man." This faith served her well throughout her life, particularly during the twenty-four years she served as the first general president of the Young Ladies' National Mutual Improvement Association (YLMIA).

A New York Childhood

Anstis Elmina Shepard was born in Middlefield, Otsego County, New York, on September 12, 1830, just a few months after The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized. Her parents, David Spaulding and Rozella Bailey Shepard, staunch members of the Methodist Episcopal Church, were regarded as honest and respectable members of their community. [^3] Before Elmina's birth, they had lost a son, Alfred, who died in infancy; they subsequently had two additional daughters, Ann and Hannah.

Elmina—or Mina, as her family and friends called her—was frail in health but strong in her convictions. Some of her earliest memories were of riding to church in a sleigh in the winter and of reading the Bible with her family. She loved nature and often walked in the woods near her home, stopping occasionally to pray, giving thanks and asking for blessings for her family and herself. [^4] Part of her childhood was spent on her grandparents' farm in a heavily wooded area of upstate New York, which in the summer had a profusion of flowers, maple and cherry trees, streams, and birds.

Elmina attended public school and then Hardwick Academy, where she was awarded a teaching diploma at age sixteen. For several years she taught school in rural areas, receiving payment in the form of board and room at students' homes. Not liking this practice, she found a more lucrative position through her cousin, Kate McLane, who was teaching in southern New York. Her new school in Haverstraw was two hundred miles from Middlefield. Her parents initially forbade her to go; when they finally relented, she set out in midwinter on her first train ride. She and Kate boarded together in a home in Haverstraw, on the west side of the Hudson River not far from New York City. Elmina enjoyed this beautiful setting in the foothills of the Catskill Mountains, with sailboats and steamers plying the river and elegant summer homes of wealthy New Yorkers dotting its banks.

At age twenty, Elmina joined the Methodist church, to which her parents belonged, and for the next five and a half years she worked actively in the church, although she questioned some doctrines and practices. When she posed questions to her minister, especially about baptism by immersion, his answers confused her even more.

Conversion and Marriage

During the four years she lived in Haverstraw, Elmina became friends with John Druce, a trustee of the school. An elder in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, he gave her a copy of the Book of Mormon and other literature, with the admonition, "You know the Bible says 'prove all things; and hold fast that which is good.'" [^5] As she studied, she came to believe, and in 1856 she joined the Church. Reflecting on her conversion, she later said, "When I was confirmed by the laying on of hands I received the testimony of [the gospel's] truth which I have never lost from that day to this." [^6]

Through John Druce, Elmina also met George Hamilton Taylor, a young copper engraver who boarded at the Druce home. He too had been introduced to the gospel by John Druce and had been converted. In his autobiography, George described his early memories of Elmina and her cousin Kate:

"Miss Shepard was of a very lively vivacious disposition, witty, and ever ready at repartee. She was always the favorite whenever the two [Elmina and Kate] were out together and was always able to 'hold her own' (as the saying is) in any company in which she might be placed. Being myself a direct opposite to these characteristics in her, I soon became very much interested in her, and thought that I would be supremely happy if I could get her for a wife. But I was of such a timid, bashful disposition, and so fearful of being refused, that when in the company of both of them, I paid nearly all my attention to Miss McLane. And I carried this to such a length that Miss Shepard thought that I did not care anything for her, while her cousin thought that I was in earnest in giving her seemingly the preference. I did not act thus to deceive Miss McLane, but as a blind to cover my real feelings from Miss Shepard, until I could discover whether there was any prospect of success if I undertook openly to win her." [^7]

When Kate went home for a visit, George was finally able to spend time alone with Elmina and express his true feelings for her. Persistent in his courting, he noted, "It was but a few weeks before I had gained her consent to be my wife." [^8] They were betrothed February 14, 1856. Kate, upon her return, was furious, feeling that both George and Elmina had deceived her, and she soon left Haverstraw. George and Elmina never heard from her again.

When Elmina joined the Church, one school trustee did not want to renew her teaching contract, though another trustee commented that he "did not care whether she was a Catholic, Protestant or Mormon, she had kept the best school they had ever had in that district." [^9]

Elmina and George decided they would not be married until she finished her current teaching contract; she also wanted to visit her grandparents in upstate New York. However, the day before she was to leave, Elders John Taylor and George A. Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles visited the Druce home and urged the couple to marry immediately. And so George and Elmina were married August 31, 1856, by Elder Taylor, and the next morning she set out for her grandparents' home. George followed her there a month later.

The newlyweds, apparently hesitant to tell her grandparents that not only were they now Mormons but they were also married, kept their marriage a secret and were married again at the grandparents' home. George later wrote, "If we had known as much then . . . as we did afterwards, we would not have gone through the [second] ceremony. But however wrong it was from a religious stand point, our motives were good, as we wished to conciliate them, and take away some of the sting of our joining an unpopular people." [^10]

After this second wedding ceremony, the couple traveled to Bloomfield, New Jersey, so George could introduce his bride to his parents. His mother later told him that she herself could not have found a more suitable wife for him. Elmina then traveled to Wisconsin to visit her parents, who had moved there from New York (George, however, did not meet his in-laws for several more years).

George and Elmina lived in Haverstraw for the next two and a half years while they prepared to join the Saints in Salt Lake City. In April 1859 they were finally ready to bid farewell to the small community where, George said, "we had spent so many pleasant years, and where so much had transpired to change the current of our lives." [^11]

The trip to Salt Lake City took five months and involved a variety of modes of travel, including train, steamboat, covered wagon, and on foot. En route to Winter Quarters, near Omaha, Nebraska, they detoured to Ripon, Wisconsin, to visit Elmina's family. The only Latter-day Saint in her family, she related to them a prophecy given to her that they would all be reunited. [^12]

At Winter Quarters, George was initiated into how to handle oxen and a wagon, while Elmina became quickly immersed in housekeeping—her first such experience, since her entire married life they had boarded at a home in Haverstraw. As the couple did not have children, four other people were assigned to their wagon: a young man who was mentally handicapped, an asthmatic English widow, a thirty-year-old German woman who spoke no English, and an older single woman, who, as George described her, "said she was a descendent of the Salem witches, and her looks and actions did not belie her descent." "With this singular crowd we started," he said, "all on foot except Mina, who rode in the well-loaded wagon on the 26th day of June 1859. . . . We were strung along, (60 wagons of us) for over a mile, and the antics of wild cattle, and green drivers, was something to remember for a lifetime." [^13]

Home in the Valley

On the afternoon of September 16, 1859, the pioneer company arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, eighty-two days after leaving Winter Quarters. Other members of the wagon train were met by family members or friends, but George and Elmina knew no one. Desolate and lonely, they sat on the tongue of their wagon until Elder John Taylor and his wife, Maggie, invited them to supper. Another man offered them employment, George as a mill worker and Elmina as a cook, in Big Cottonwood Canyon. A one-room house, shared with another family, came with their jobs. Though Elmina found the filthy building intolerable—the cracks between the logs were so large that mice crawled in every night and ate their shoestrings as well as their food—she cheerfully began cleaning and making improvements. She recalled one terrifying night when she was alone in the cabin during a sudden thunderstorm. George had been detained at the sawmill and could not get word to her, and she lay awake all night, worried about her missing husband and terrified of the thunder and lightning. [^14]

With winter approaching and the mill work completed for the season, Elmina and George next moved to the Sugar House area, about five miles southeast of the temple block in Salt Lake City. But George could find very little work, and they barely scraped through the winter. On April 1, 1860, they made a special trip in the city to be rebaptized (a common practice at the time) and to attend the Endowment House, where they received their endowments and were sealed by Brigham Young. After the ceremony, President Young invited them to dinner at his home.

In hopes of finding better job opportunities, that spring the couple moved closer to the city center. When she saw the dirty two-room home George had rented for them, Elmina cried. But, as before, she started scrubbing and repairing, and George whitewashed the walls with clay. John and Maggie Taylor visited them, and Elder Taylor commented that the Taylors "could make a comfortable home out of any kind of place." [^15]

Since most of George's work was paid in store pay or tithing office goods, he and Elmina began a cottage industry to generate cash. An experienced copper engraver, he cut wood blocks and stamped baby clothes for embroidery, which the couple gave to some of their friends. Word spread, and soon the couple had as much work as they could handle. They also made baby clothes in anticipation of the arrival of their first child, George Shepard Taylor, who was born July 16, 1860.

George worked at a variety of jobs to provide for his family, but most often he made sashes and doors, trading his work for food and materials with which to build his own house. Not long after their second son, Frank David, was born in September 1862, the family moved to their partially completed home. Snow fell before George got the roof on, and all through the winter, Elmina would hold a tallow candle so he could see at night to plane boards by hand and to tongue and groove them to finish the floor. It took them three years to complete the house with plaster and paint. "In the meantime," according to George, "the bugs had got into the adobe walls, and we suffered fearfully, for we could not get at them." [^16] Nevertheless, Elmina, who loved the beauties of nature and missed the lush greenery of the Hudson River Valley, beautified her new home by planting a large flower garden bordered by climbing roses.

A skilled and hard worker, George was in demand and received offers from several businessmen to form a company. Instead, he decided to start his own lumber company. He had machinery, the first in the territory, shipped in from the East. The company prospered the first year and made a significant profit, which George put toward his debt for the machinery. During the winter he stockpiled a large supply of doors and sashes, but disaster struck: the building caught fire and everything, including the machinery, burned. Determined to succeed, George started over, working by hand until the machinery could be salvaged and rebuilt.

During these years, five more children were born to Elmina and George: Lydia Rosella, October 2, 1864; Erminnie Mae, February 9, 1867; Clarence Warren, January 22, 1869; Elmina Mae, August 11, 1871; and Eugene L., January 10, 1874. Lydia Rosella and Erminnie died two days apart, in September 1867, and Eugene died three days after birth, leaving the couple with three sons and a daughter to raise.

The Taylors also welcomed Elmina's parents and her sister Ann, who came to live with them in 1872. This fulfilled the prophecy made to Elmina years before, although none of her family ever joined the Church. The year after they arrived in the valley, her father, mother, and sister became ill with smallpox, which George described as "of the most violent type," and which "seemed to be the greatest trial that we had been subjected to." [^17] Elmina's mother died from the dreaded disease in June 1873; her father and sister eventually recovered.

A Principle Embraced

Twenty years after their marriage, George and Elmina agreed to enter into the practice of plural marriage. Speaking for both Elmina and himself, George wrote in his autobiography, "We had rather [polygamy] were not a principle of our religion, yet we knew the principles we had embraced were true, and as that came from the same source we could not reject it. So we came to the conclusion that as it did not affect us at the present time, and if it ever did, it would be in the distant future, we would not exact, or give any promises in relation to the matter. But [we] would go forward, live our religion, keep the commandments of God, and strive to do right in all things, as far as we knew how, trusting that if the time ever came when we should embrace that principle and practice it, that we should know it and be prepared for it." [^18]

With Elmina's consent, George began courting Lois Louise (Louie) Foote, "stating fairly and squarely, my situation and circumstances and object at the start." [^19] Elmina welcomed her as a sister wife, noting in her diary: "July 4th, 1877, we entered into the celestial order of marriage, and have since all lived under the same roof, and eaten at the same table, ever in the enjoyment of peace and harmony." [^20]

In December 1878 George was called by the First Presidency on a mission to England. In his absence Elmina had to care for her own four children in addition to Louie and her new baby, and also to keep George's lumber business going. She recorded her feelings of loneliness in her diary. On June 24, 1879, she wrote: "Again more than usual shall I miss my dear Husband. I am very lonely tonight." On August 21, 1879: "Someone sang Maggie dear[.] Immediately was I carried back to Haverstraw and the tears sprang to my eyes and my heart gave a great throb. I was sitting by your side, riding up the Long Clove and you were singing it to me with a slight change in words and a heart full of love. While my mind was thus busy Mae looked up in my face and whispered, Papa sings that. So you see every slight event brings to mind our absent loved one." [^21] Martha Horne Tingey said of George and Elmina's close and loving relationship, "Their gentle consideration for each other's feelings, the sincere affection manifested in every little word and act, which is so much more expressive than any loud or special demonstration, was an inspiration." [^22]

In September 1880, after serving in the mission field for nearly three years, George sailed to New York City, where Elmina surprised him by meeting him at the dock. After visiting his family in New Jersey, they returned to Salt Lake City by train.

In 1885, George married his third wife, Ellen Susannah (Nellie) Colebrooke, a widow from England. The following year he, along with many other prominent Latter-day Saint men, was arrested for cohabitation, tried, and sentenced to prison. The Fourteenth Ward held a farewell reception for him before he began serving his six-month sentence. Following his release, he was called to serve as bishop of the ward.

A Beloved Leader

Though she had her hands full with a growing family, particularly while George was in England, Elmina always found time to serve in the Church. When the Fourteenth Ward Relief Society was organized in December 1867, she was selected as secretary, a position she held for twenty-six years. In September 1874, she was called to lead the Young Ladies' Retrenchment Association in her ward. And in 1879, she became first counselor in the Salt Lake Stake Relief Society, a position she held for sixteen years. For several years she served in all three of these positions simultaneously.

Elmina's abilities and willingness to serve were observed by Eliza R. Snow, the general president of the Relief Society. Of one encounter Elmina recorded in her diary in 1879: "Sr. Snow clasped me in her arms and said she always felt like blessing me all over, because I am such a faithful worker in the Kingdom. I fear I do not merit it but will strive to in the future." [^23] Sister Snow herself held several positions simultaneously, having led the Relief Society since its reorganization in the Salt Lake Valley in 1866, the Retrenchment Society (later renamed the Young Ladies' National Mutual Improvement Association) since its organization in 1869, and the Primary since its organization in 1878.

On June 19, 1880, to commemorate Brigham Young's birthday, President John Taylor called a special sisters' conference in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square. The purpose of the meeting was to organize general presidencies and boards for each of these auxiliaries.

At the morning session of the conference, Louie B. Felt was named the president of the Primary Association. Between the morning and afternoon meetings of the conference, Elmina had lunch at the home of Bathsheba W. Smith, who was the treasurer of the Salt Lake Stake Relief Society, with Mary Isabella Horne, the stake Relief Society president, and Sister Snow. Elmina recounted their discussion:

"We were talking of the organization of the Young Ladies' Central Board, and Sister Snow said, 'Have you chosen your counselors?'

"I said, 'Counselors for what?'

"Sister Snow answered, 'We are going to put you in as president of all the [Young Ladies'] associations.'

"'I shall not act,' I replied.

"We ate dinner.

"Sister Snow said, 'Have you chosen them?'

"I said I would not and could not.

"Sister Snow said, 'Well, if you won't, we'll choose them for you.'

"I said, 'Well, if I have to act, I'll choose them myself.'" [^24] At the afternoon meeting of the conference, Elmina was sustained as the first general president of the YLMIA, and Eliza R. Snow was retained as the Relief Society president. As her counselors, Elmina chose Margaret (Maggie) Young Taylor, wife of John Taylor, the first person who befriended her when she arrived in the valley, and twenty-two-year-old Martha Horne, a daughter of Mary Isabella Horne. Louie Wells was called as secretary, and Fannie Young Thatcher as treasurer.

As the new YLMIA president, Elmina was instructed to "find new and surprising ways . . . to teach girls how to develop every gift and grace of true womanhood." [^25] Throughout her term of office, she found it difficult to speak publicly but gathered her courage when faced with the task. She once told her associates, "When young lady officers are asked to preside or to sit upon the stand, they should accept such invitation, no matter if it be a trial." [^26] In her first address as president of the YLMIA, she said: "Our young people should also be ladies and gentlemen, and we should educate them in all the sciences of the day that they may not be behind in any good thing. Mothers, look after your daughters, keep them near you, keep their confidence—that they may be true and faithful, and that our associations may not languish and pine in the future as they have in the past." [^27]

For Elmina, to serve as the first president of the association was a pioneering venture, for the territory was uncharted and untraveled. There were no precedents to follow and no previous experience to rely upon. As Susa Young Gates noted in the History of Y.L.M.I.A., "There was no General Board, no aids, no guides, no magazine nor other publications for their work; no quarterly or yearly conferences nor conventions, either stake or general; no headquarters, not even any regular meetings of the general officers." [^28]

One of Elmina's first challenges was bringing unity and uniformity to the various associations scattered throughout the Church, for each local association had been autonomous, planning its own programs and procedures. The general presidency and board at first decided to meet quarterly, but they soon found it necessary to meet more frequently.

During the first ten years of Elmina's administration, her board often met with the officers of the Salt Lake Stake YLMIA, which had been functioning for a number of years. The more experienced stake leaders shared their insights with the new central board. (The term central board was changed in 1921 to general board, and aids became known as general board members.)

At first the YLMIA program was offered only during the winter months, but as stakes felt the need for a summer program, they were encouraged to submit plans for approval. Classwork involved lessons in theology, literature, domestic science, parliamentary procedure, and good manners.

As YLMIA president, Elmina made hundreds of visits during the first ten years of her presidency, traveling thousands of miles by team and wagon. Her companions often included counselors or board members as well as representatives of the other auxiliary organizations: Eliza R. Snow, general president of the Relief Society; Zina D. H. Young, counselor in the Relief Society presidency; Sarah M. Kimball, general secretary of the Relief Society; Emmeline B. Wells, editor of the Woman's Exponent; Mary Isabella Horne, president of the Salt Lake Stake Relief Society; and Louie B. Felt, Primary general president. The visitors organized new associations, held conferences, gave instructions, and gathered ideas from the field. Elmina was not strong physically and, much to her dismay, at times she could not travel. Other times, she ignored her family's pleas not to travel because of her ill health. Her daughter, Mae Taylor Nystrom, noted, however, that Elmina "always returned home stronger in body and uplifted in spirit." [^29]

To finance the general organization and the travel of its leaders, each YLMIA member was asked to contribute a dime each year to a special fund. At first stakes retained one-fourth of the money collected, but later the whole amount was sent to Salt Lake City to meet increasing costs of the central organization. The stakes then raised their own funds, primarily through fairs and bazaars. Some stakes assessed wards a yearly sum.

Not until January 1888, eight years after they were called to their respective positions, were the members of the YLMIA general presidency set apart. President Wilford Woodruff set apart Elmina. His counselors, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, set apart her counselors, Maria Young Dougall, who had replaced Margaret Taylor as first counselor in 1887, and Martha Horne Tingey. (Martha, who had been single when she was originally called as second counselor, had married Joseph S. Tingey in 1884.) When Louie Wells died in 1887, Mary E. Cook became the general secretary, and Ann M. Cannon, assistant secretary. After Mary moved from Salt Lake City in 1891, Ann replaced her as secretary. Nellie Colebrooke Taylor, Elmina's husband's third wife, served on the central board.

In 1889 Susa Young Gates, a member of the central board who was serving a mission in the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) with her husband, wrote to the First Presidency about publishing a magazine for young women. After conferring with Elmina, who was enthusiastic about the project, the Brethren gave their permission and appointed Susa as editor. The first issue of the monthly Young Woman's Journal appeared in October 1889. A subscription cost one dollar a year. Elmina saw the magazine as a way to communicate more effectively with young women and their leaders.

At first local associations developed their own programs and lessons, but in 1890 the central officers and board outlined a schedule for weekly meetings:

The first guide or manual, with lessons and instructions "to set the young ladies to thinking on definite topics," was published in pamphlet form in 1893. [^31] Three courses of study were included in each year's lessons, one always on theology and the other two on such subjects as history, literature, physical culture, domestic science, physiology, and ethics. [^32] Beginning in 1897, the lessons were published in the Young Woman's Journal.

Another literary effort, traveling libraries, began during Elmina's administration. The concept of traveling libraries was for stakes to collect good books and circulate them among the wards to encourage young women to read.

Unifying the YLMIA

The second decade of Elmina Taylor's administration was marked by the development of uniformity in the programs and the associations. After the Young Woman's Journal was launched, the general presidency had a means of communicating monthly with the wards and stakes. At the beginning of the 1890s, the YLMIA had 300 branches with 8,000 members. By the turn of the century, membership had grown to 485 associations with 20,575 members in the United States, Canada, Mexico, England, New Zealand, and Hawaii.

Elmina presided over the first general YLMIA conference on April 4, 1890, in Salt Lake City, commemorating the tenth anniversary of the organization. [^33] The presidency explained the purpose of YLMIA in the May 1891 Young Woman's Journal: "The aim of the leaders of this movement has been to cultivate every gift and grace of true womanhood, recognizing the fact that it is not the outward appearance but the forces which gather within the soul that go to develop the individual. To this end every effort is made to induce independent thought, study, individuality and progress. Great stress is laid upon the physical well-being of woman." [^34]

The YLMIA joined with the Relief Society in affiliating with the National Council of Women in 1891. Elmina, who was elected an ex-officio vice president, attended several conventions in the East and presided over a meeting on behalf of the YLMIA at the Chicago World's Fair in 1893.

In 1893, Tuesday night was designated as "Mutual" night throughout the Church. One night a month the YLMIA and YMMIA met jointly for speech development. Later, opening exercises, during which the young men and women met together before they separated to classes, were added to the program. In 1896, the YLMIA and YMMIA held their first combined conference in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. This was the beginning of June Conference, an annual event that would continue until 1975. President Joseph F. Smith, a member of the First Presidency, addressed the first conference and said that the women should be as knowledgeable as the men about the gospel.

With the Church becoming an international organization, the word National was dropped from the title of the young ladies' organization in 1904, making its official name the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association.

Elmina was much loved by her co-workers and the girls she served. In July 1894, the Salt Lake Stake YLMIA hosted a surprise party for her, attended by President Lorenzo Snow, several apostles, the YLMIA counselors and general board members, members of the other auxiliary presidencies, and the young women of the Salt Lake Stake. Elmina was indeed surprised, for she thought she was attending a Young Ladies' social. The YLMIA presented her with an album containing tributes from ward presidents.

To commemorate Elmina's birthday, at the 1894 October general conference the YLMIA designated September 12 as Annual Day. Besides honoring Elmina, Annual Day's purpose was to unite the young women in participation in outdoor games and sports. In 1904 Annual Day was held jointly for young men and young women. Seven years later, in 1911, the name was changed to Field Day, and the activity was moved to June to coincide with June Conference.

Unable to travel during her later years because of ill health, Elmina felt she was not doing all she should as YLMIA president and offered to let someone else "more competent," as she termed it, take her place. Though she was so weak that she had to lie on a couch during board meetings, she continued to direct the meetings, listening attentively to the various reports from board members who had visited conferences and conventions. And, as the Young Woman's Journal reported, she "never failed to have a decided opinion on [any subject], and one which every member of her board knew to be inspired." [^35] Elmina received several blessings from the General Authorities. In one blessing given by Elder George Teasdale in May 1899, she was promised "the spirit of life, health, comfort, and peace": "The Lord shall bless thee, heal thee, comfort thee, make thee strong and prolong thy days upon the earth; for thou shalt live upon the earth until thou art satisfied with life, and then thou shalt depart like an innocent child into peaceful sleep." [^36] She attended to YLMIA business up to the day before her death.

Elmina Shepard Taylor died peacefully on December 6, 1904, at the age of seventy-four, having served as general president of the YLMIA for twenty-four and a half years. At her funeral in the Assembly Hall on December 11, a blanket of flowers, representing each of the Young Ladies' groups throughout the Church, covered her casket, along with an American Beauty rose laid by each general board member.

Elmina related well to the young women she served, and in her they found a gracious, faithful Latter-day Saint. An example of the admonition she gave the YLMIA leaders—"to be kind rather than harsh, complimentary rather than critical" [^37]—she always endeavored to follow her convictions: to live by the light she gained as a young woman seeking the truth.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Thomas C. Romney, "Martha Horne Tingey," Instructor, July l950, 198-99.
[^2] Young Woman's Journal 38 (October 1927): 625.
[^3] Emmeline B. Wells, "Martha Jane Horne Tingey," Young Woman's Journal 4 (January 1891): 147.
[^4] Ibid., 150.
[^5] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 287.
[^6] Arnold J. Irvine, "Martha Horne Tingey Directs Affairs of YLMIA for 24 Years," Church News, December 21, 1963, 16.
[^7] Interview with Burton and Joseph Tingey, January 31, 1991. Hereafter cited as Tingey Interview.
[^8] Family Group Sheet of Joseph and Martha Horne Tingey, Archives, LDS Family History Department.
[^9] Romney, "Martha Horne Tingey," 199.
[^10] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 288.
[^11] Ibid., 287.
[^12] Tingey Interview.
[^13] A Century of Sisterhood, 54.
[^14] Tingey Interview.
[^15] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 287.
[^16] Wells, "Martha Jane Horne Tingey," 152.
[^17] Ibid.
[^18] Young Woman's Journal 4 (1892-93): 549.
[^19] A Century of Sisterhood, 32.
[^20] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 95.
[^21] Ibid.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Romney, "Martha Horne Tingey," 199.
[^24] A Century of Sisterhood, 45.
[^25] Ibid., 46.
[^26] Ibid., 50.
[^27] Young Woman's Journal, 40 (May 1929): 311.
[^28] A Century of Sisterhood, 55.
[^29] Tingey Interview.
[^31] Ibid.
[^32] Ibid.
[^33] Ibid.
[^34] Young Woman's Journal 38 (October 1927): 636.
[^35] 35. "A Biographical Sketch," 6.
[^36] 36. Blessing of Elmina S. Taylor, May 16, 1899, by Elder George Teasdale, Elmina S. Taylor Papers, Church Archives.
[^37] 37. Josephson, History of the YWMIA 13.
