Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

2

Martha Horne Tingey

1905-1929

When Martha Jane Horne received her patriarchal blessing as a young woman, she was promised that she would perform a great work among youth. The blessing also revealed that the adversary would seek to prevent her from fulfilling this mission and would even attempt to take her life. However, she was assured that if she put her trust in the Lord and always kept his commandments, she would have the power to overcome the adversary and to successfully perform her work with the youth. [^1] The fulfillment of this blessing is evidenced by the fact that Martha, whose physical health was generally weak, served for forty-eight years in the presidency of the YLMIA—longer than any other YLMIA leader. Family, friends, and co-workers repeatedly acknowledged that her faith and strong spirit gave her the strength to carry out her responsibilities. A tribute by YLMIA board member Emma Goddard, written for Martha's seventieth birthday, typifies how many felt about her. Emma wrote, "I have loved you [Martha] for the fortitude and patience with which you have borne your sorrows." [^2]

Heritage and Childhood

Martha was born October 15, 1857, in Salt Lake City, Utah, to Joseph and Mary Isabella Hales Horne. Both Joseph and Mary Isabella were born in England and immigrated as children, with their families, to Toronto, Ontario, Canada, in the early nineteenth century. They were married in Toronto on May 9, 1836. A month after their marriage, they heard the gospel preached by missionary brothers Orson and Parley P. Pratt. They immediately responded to the truthfulness of the gospel message and were baptized by Orson Hyde on July 6. The following year, the couple joined the Saints in Missouri and eventually moved with them to Nauvoo, Illinois; Winter Quarters, Nebraska; and the Salt Lake Valley.

By the time Martha—or Mattie, as she would be known throughout her life—was born, the Hornes were well established in Salt Lake City. She was the fourteenth child born into this family of fifteen, which included three sets of twins. The Hornes enjoyed entertaining guests in their home, and Mattie, spiritually mature for her age, enjoyed sitting quietly in a corner and listening to the testimonies of those who visited. As a result, she became acquainted with many Church leaders.

A fine seamstress, Mary Isabella taught her daughter to sew and also embroider, an interest Mattie pursued throughout her life. These hours of sewing together and the love both shared for books and music resulted in an especially close relationship, which they maintained as adults.

Mattie's remarkable abilities in speaking and music became evident early in her life. Her talent as a public speaker was noticeable almost as soon as she learned to read. Educated at home by her older sisters and in the ward school, she quickly mastered the alphabet and primer and became an avid reader at a time when books were not readily available—so avid, in fact, that her mother sometimes had to take her books away from her and send her outside to play. Mattie wrote: "I read all the histories and everything else in the Sunday School library as well as all other books that came in my way. I used to read aloud to mother, and to visitors many times, which has been a great benefit to me, and is a practice I would recommend to mothers to encourage in their children." [^3]

As a schoolgirl, Mattie won many awards for her achievements in reading, spelling, and arithmetic. At age eight, she won an award in a speech competition against students from three other schools. Mattie, who had a clear, strong voice and an amazing capacity to memorize long passages, was often asked to stand and recite poems at school. In Sunday School she would recite as many as forty verses from the Bible or Doctrine and Covenants. On one occasion she read a poem at a party given in honor of Eliza R. Snow, then president of the Relief Society, shortly after Eliza's return from the Holy Land. Friends praised Mattie on "the tender sweetness of her tones and the music of her intonation." [^4] That she was so eloquent was especially remarkable because her timid nature was a personal challenge for her. Performing in front of others required a great deal of courage.

Mattie's musical talents became apparent early in her life. She frequently sang in small gatherings, and she joined the ward choir at age fourteen. On January 19, 1877, at age twenty, she was accepted in the Tabernacle Choir. In addition to singing with the choir for fourteen years, she continued to sing in her own and other wards.

Spiritually mature for her age, Mattie had many opportunities to serve in the Church while she was still in her teens. A member of the Salt Lake Fourteenth Ward, she served as a counselor in the Primary. At sixteen, soon after she began attending the Retrenchment Association, she was called to serve as a counselor in the presidency. Two years later she began teaching a Sunday School class of young ladies, with whom she became very close during the nine years she served as their teacher.

After her early schooling at home and in the ward school, Mattie took classes for two years at the University of Deseret (now the University of Utah). An unexpected educational opportunity came in the summer of 1873, when she was sixteen. President Brigham Young and Elder George Q. Cannon invited six young ladies to learn the trade of typesetting. "This was a departure, even for the progressive Mormons," Susa Young Gates, editor of the Young Woman's Journal, wrote of the venture, "and much was said to discourage the innovation." [^5] But Mattie had both the attitude and the aptitude for the job and thus was not surprised to find her name at the top of the list of young women recommended by Brigham Young for the training.

Mattie's typesetting abilities led to a position at the Deseret News, where "she donned a printer's apron over her ankle-length skirt and starched white blouse and learned to pick lead letters from the compartments in the waist-high case and line them up in a compositor's stick. Many scoffed at the idea of young women working in the printing shop of the Deseret News, but Mattie learned to ignore any remarks made to her and take comfort in the fact that her foreman had told her she was one of the best compositors he had." [^6]

Courtship, Marriage, and Family Life

Among those who did not scoff at the young female typesetters was Joseph S. Tingey. Though Joseph worked in another area of the newspaper office, he looked for opportunities to be with Mattie. By 1880 they had become good friends and fond of one another. However, that year their lives took different directions: Joseph left for the British Mission, and Mattie was called on June 19 to serve as a counselor to the first YLMIA general president, Elmina S. Taylor. Mattie continued to work as a typesetter, teach her Sunday School class of young ladies, and sing in the Tabernacle Choir during the first years she served in this new position.

Joseph returned from his mission in 1882 and was pleased to find Mattie still unmarried. Their mutual attraction deepened, and on September 30, 1884, they were married in the Salt Lake Temple. After their marriage, Joseph continued to work at the Deseret News as a printer, but Mattie, who had been employed for ten years, gave up her job in order to stay home and rear a family.

After Mattie gave birth to her first child, Joseph, Jr., on October 28, 1885, she suffered a serious setback in her health. She apparently had a hip problem that was aggravated by childbirth, and she had also dislocated her right kneecap. Her doctor informed her that if she survived these complications, she might never be able to walk again. [^7] While her recovery was slow, it was filled with tender care and frequent priesthood blessings by her husband. Her patriarchal blessing, which had promised her the power to overcome the adversary and successfully perform her work with the youth if she put her trust in the Lord, gave her the faith that she would someday fully recover. Though she had a noticeable limp the rest of her life, she did, in fact, eventually walk again and without a cane. She was able to resume her responsibilities in homemaking, raising a family, and serving in the Church, though she suffered from bouts of ill health the rest of her life.

The Tingeys became the parents of five more children: William, born May 17, 1889; twins Clarence and Clara, born December 18, 1891; twins Weiler and Stafford, born on April 10, 1897 (they died eighteen days later); and Rulon, born November 24, 1899. [^8]

Mattie's priorities clearly placed her family first. "Can you think of any better, broader field of action than that of wife and mother?" she wrote, "or any labor that will reap such a glorious harvest?" [^9] Susa Young Gates noted that Mattie was "devoted to her home and family and [was] known among her associates as a good wife and mother. Martha [had] the unusual quality of system and order, so that all her tasks fell into line as well-drilled soldiers." [^10]

While her children were young, Mattie relied heavily upon her husband, Joseph, for comfort and support. "[Their] union has been very congenial and one of mutual helpfulness," wrote Susa Young Gates. "Brother Tingey's liberal character is an example of what a man can do, as a husband, father and Elder in Israel, without in any way hindering the development of a gifted wife." [^11]

Joseph and Mattie were well-matched and happy in their marriage. Life for members of the Tingey family was likewise happy, testifying to the fact that Joseph and Mattie managed to maintain a stable family relationship in spite of Mattie's travel and other responsibilities with the YLMIA and Joseph's own responsibilities as a bishop. All of the children remembered their home as a place of peace. [^12]

Gospel teachings were important in the Tingey home. One Sunday, when the boys wanted to know why they couldn't play baseball, Mattie reminded them that her sons "never put themselves among a pleasure-loving group on Sunday." [^13]

Mattie had her own ideas about how her sons should leave on their missions: she believed they should leave from and return to their home. Clarence remembered that she would hug each of her sons and then wave from the doorway, rather than going to the train station for good-byes. When each of the missionaries returned, she waited for them at home with bread baking in the oven. [^14]

Twenty-four Years as a Counselor

When twenty-two-year-old Mattie was called in 1880 to serve as Elmina Taylor's second counselor in the YLMIA presidency, she could not have guessed she would remain in that position for twenty-four years. Elmina, a close friend of Mattie's mother, had known Mattie for many years and was well aware of her strong spiritual nature, her intellect, and her talents in speech and music. The strength of Mattie's gifts outweighed any disadvantages incident to her youth and lack of experience.

In the presidency, Mattie bridged a peculiar gap: the women she served with were close to the age of her mother, while the young women in the program were close to her own age. This occasionally presented a problem for her. For example, although dancing had always been an appropriate part of pioneer recreation, the waltz and round dance were discouraged in 1883. Still single, she loved to dance and identified with the feelings and interests of the youth. However, her service in the YLMIA presidency put her in contact with the thinking of adult women. Her youthful viewpoint no doubt influenced the leaders, while at the same time the leaders' mature viewpoint tempered her enthusiasm. Obedient, she refrained from encouraging the waltz and the round dance. But time was on her side, for these dances eventually gained general acceptance and won their way into the YLMIA program during her administration.

As Mattie matured with marriage and motherhood, her strengths blossomed. "Mrs. Tingey is always a convincing speaker, and at times pours forth her soul in the true language of eloquence," Susa Young Gates wrote of her. "She has a dignified manner, and is quiet in speech, though aggressive in her opinions. She has the prudence to restrain speech, when silence is golden. If asked to name the most marked trait in Mrs. Tingey's character, the answer would be, sincerity, genuineness." [^15]

Though for several years her health problems prevented her from traveling, Mattie became a well-known spokeswoman for the YLMIA. When she was finally well enough to travel outside the Salt Lake Valley, she bore a strong testimony of "the power of healing manifested in her behalf through the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood." [^16]

In October 1888 Mattie spoke at a conference of the Young Men's and Young Ladies' associations in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Emmeline B. Wells, editor of the Woman's Exponent, wrote of this occasion: "Mrs. Tingey made an eloquent speech that attracted the attention of the large congregation assembled there; in fact, she seemed fairly to outdo herself, and her earnest words thrilled the hearts of the audience and produced a telling if not a lasting effect." [^17]

In a speech at the Congress of Women held during the 1893 World's Fair at Chicago, Mattie shared her vision of womanhood: "Let woman prepare herself to stand side by side, shoulder to shoulder with her husband in all the affairs of life, to be a wise counselor and helpmeet unto him, as her Creator designed she should be. . . . Woman herself is beginning to feel that she is an intelligence, with talents that it is her duty to develop and use for the advancement and elevation of the human family. This feeling is gradually but steadily growing; it is being felt throughout the world, and it will continue to grow until it becomes a power in the earth." [^18]

As a counselor, Mattie was a strong spokesman for the YLMIA. For example, when Annual Day was instituted in 1894 as a day for the young women to join with their parents in "relaxing amusement," she encouraged the young women to bring a dime to donate to the general YLMIA fund. "It is not only the dime but the heart of the girls we want," said Mattie. "They should be educated to the principle that it is a privilege to pay." [^19]

General President of the YLMIA

In 1904, shortly after Elmina S. Taylor died, Mattie was called to serve as president of the YLMIA. When President Joseph F. Smith set her apart to preside over the YLMIA, he pronounced a blessing upon her, promising her she would have health and strength to perform her labors. A comment written by Susa Young Gates testified to the fulfillment of that blessing: "For years her [Mattie's] health had been of the most precarious nature, but from the day when she came by faith and will-power to take her place after the funeral of her leader Sister Taylor, Sister Tingey has rarely been absent at any of the many and taxing councils of her Board." [^20]

Mattie's choice of counselors helped make the fulfillment of this blessing possible. Ruth May Fox, healthy and vigorous, became first counselor. Her energy allowed her to travel to areas outside of Salt Lake City. She not only served with Mattie for the entire twenty-four years of her presidency, but also succeeded her as the president of the YLMIA in 1929. Mae Taylor Nystrom, Harvard-educated daughter of Elmina Taylor, served as second counselor for eighteen years and gave invaluable loyalty and support to Mattie. Following Mae's release in 1923, Lucy Grant Cannon became second counselor. Young and capable, Lucy willingly helped Mattie shoulder the burdens of the presidency for the remaining six years of her administration. Her ability to drive a car became a valuable asset during this time when few families owned a car and few women knew how to drive.

On August 25, 1905, only four months after Mattie was called to serve as YLMIA president, her mother, Mary Isabella Horne, died at the age of eighty-seven. Mattie felt a void in her life without her mother and the close forty-eight-year relationship she had had with her, first as an obedient daughter, next as an eager student, later as a close friend, and finally as a co-worker in the Church, with Mary Isabella a member of the Relief Society general board and Mattie in the presidency of the YLMIA. Often others had noticed the similarities between the two women and described them in comments such as these by Susa Young Gates: "Mrs. Tingey inherit[ed] her mother's firm, wise temperament," and "She [Mattie] is rather small in stature, with the same gentle but firm voice and manner which were so much a part of her mother." [^21]

One of Mattie's first goals as YLMIA president was "to visit every stake in the Church and to look upon the inspiring faces of the young women wherever they are gathered under the Mutual banner." [^22] During the first five years of her administration, she visited YLMIA members and leaders in Oregon, Wyoming, and Idaho, Canada, and Mexico. Mattie's love for the young ladies of the Church motivated her to do whatever needed to be done. "My heart is with the Mutual Improvement work," she said in an address. "I love the youth of Zion. I am anxious . . . that they may become a mighty army for righteousness in the kingdom of God." [^23]

At the start of her administration, Mattie held board meetings every three months in a small room in the Constitution Building at 30 South Main Street in downtown Salt Lake City. But it wasn't long before Bathsheba W. Smith of the Relief Society and May Anderson of the Primary met with Mattie to discuss a proposed Women's Building to be built at 40 North Main, opposite the east gate of the Salt Lake Temple. The auxiliary presidents became united in their resolve to cooperate in this venture. In 1908, the plans for the building were changed to include the offices of the Presiding Bishop, and subsequently the name was changed to the Bishop's Building. When Bathsheba Smith heard the news, she reportedly fainted. However, by the time the building was completed in 1909, the Relief Society, YLMIA, and Primary leaders were happy to move into their new offices.

By then, the YLMIA had grown considerably, and it became necessary to hold weekly board meetings. Since Mattie and her husband did not own a car, for many years she rode a streetcar nearly three miles to and from her home at Eighteenth South and Main Street to the downtown office. Typical of her determination, she walked to the streetcar stop, despite her limp, and used the commuting time to read, make notes, and write speeches.

Changes in the Programs

Dramatic changes took place in the class structure for young women during Mattie's administration. Originally there were only two class divisions—the Senior and the Junior classes. After studying the Camp Fire Girls' program, YLMIA leaders developed the Beehive program in 1913. Among the things the young women had to do to advance in the Beehive program were such things as "sleep out-of-doors or with wide open windows; refrain from candy, chewing gum, sundaes, and sodas for at least two months; and, know the proper use of hot and cold baths." [^24] Advancement from the Beehive class included a variety of requirements: "Pick 800 pounds of cherries or their equivalent in any six days; without help or advice, care for and harness a team at least five times; drive 50 miles in one season; and care successfully for a hive of bees for one season and know their habits." [^25]

Over time, the Senior class was divided into Seniors and Advanced Seniors. Then a Junior class was added, with the rose as its symbol. In 1924 Ruth May Fox suggested that the Senior Girls be called Gleaners in honor of Ruth in the Bible. Music, elocution, literature, history, science, and systematic reading became the focus of study. Lessons on the Book of Mormon were published in the Young Woman's Journal for summer study. By 1910, twenty-five Mutual events were scheduled per year—fifteen class periods when lessons were presented, and ten class periods for debates, orations, and lectures.

To encourage young women to focus on a particular aspect of the gospel, a yearly slogan was approved, beginning in 1914. Among these were "We stand for a weekly home evening," 1915; "We stand for service to God and country," 1918; "We stand for a pure life through clean thought and action," 1922; "We stand for an individual test of the divinity of Jesus Christ," 1925; and "We stand for a testimony of the divine mission of Joseph Smith," 1926.

Music, drama, dance, and speech programs grew during Mattie's administration. In 1920, the first MIA-sponsored roadshows were written and performed by the Salt Lake and Ensign stakes. Young men and young women sang and danced in these lively mini-plays and then traveled with sets and costumes to another ward building within the stake to perform again for a new audience. Within a short time, roadshows were a popular activity Churchwide. The young women also learned such skills as shadow embroidery (stitching sheer fabric over embroidery) and canning. Camping took on a high profile, and by 1922 four stakes had rented land in Big Cottonwood Canyon east of Salt Lake City and built a summer home for young women at Brighton. Over the next five years, more than 4,500 young women enjoyed the facility.

In 1923, the First Presidency gave responsibility for overseeing the entire recreational program of the Church to the two Mutual Improvement Associations. June Conference in Salt Lake City was one of the yearly highlights for both workers and young women in YLMIA. Other activities focused on service projects, such as rolling bandages and collecting money for the Red Cross during World War I. In 1920 the YLMIA received permission from President Heber J. Grant to turn the Beehive House into a home for young women from out of town.

YLMIA leaders chose gold and green as the Mutual colors in 1922. "Youth is life's springtime," they said, "and springtime is always gloriously green and growing . . . and gold—[is] the color of . . . the sun." From then on, Gold and Green Balls became part of the MIA dance program.

One of the highlights of Mattie's presidency took place in 1925 when the YLMIA and the YMMIA celebrated YMMIA's Golden Jubilee. The motto for the celebration was "The glory of God is intelligence," which remained as the motto for the two organizations for many years thereafter.

During Mattie's nearly fifty years of service in the YLMIA, she saw it grow from a membership of fewer than four thousand young women to more than fifty thousand. An example of gentle leadership and of patience in disciplining her spirit, she constantly encouraged the young women to do the same. "Daughters of Zion, hold yourselves high," she told them. "Maintain your dignity and self-respect." [^26]

Mattie was released on March 28, 1929, at age seventy-two. Usually silent on a subject unless she felt strongly about it, she voiced a request to the co-workers helping her clean out her desk. "Don't change the name from Young Ladies to Young Women until after I die," she said. [^27]

Joy in Family

During most of Mattie's administration and afterwards, family maintained its high priority. As Joseph and Mattie's children married and had their families, grandchildren became frequent visitors at the Tingey home. "Not only did I have a 'rocking' grandmother, but I had a 'rocking and singing' grandmother," remembers Eugenia Tingey Hurlin, daughter of Mattie's son William. "I can remember her singing 'The Story of Cock Robin' to me as I sat curled up on her lap." [^28]

Family gatherings at the Tingey home were festive, with lots of children, laughter, and good food. "The adults would be in the parlor playing parlor games," remembers grandson Burton S. Tingey, "and we would be in the living room playing games. Some of our games were loud and wild like Crack-the-Whip, but Grandmother let us laugh and have a good time." [^29] The Tingey home had a curving banister from the second floor to the first. "No splinters! That banister was smooth," remembers another grandson, Joseph Tingey. "Most of us grandchildren loved the thrill of sliding down that banister. And I don't ever remember Grandmother scolding us." [^30]

Joseph and Mattie dearly loved their grandchildren, and the closeness of their family circle included all of them. Mattie was especially grateful for the support of her children and grandchildren when Joseph, her companion of forty-four years, died of pneumonia on July 25, 1925. After his death, Mattie's daughter, Clara, provided comfort and support to her mother. Her other children, grandchildren, and friends also helped care for her and brought happiness into her life. "All the grandchildren remember Grandmother's warm and loving welcome when we came to visit her," said grandson Burton, "even in her later years when she didn't feel well. And I'll never forget Grandmother's kitchen with its large, well-stocked pantry. Grandmother and Aunt Clara kept it filled with foods that seemed to amaze me as a child." [^31]

Six months before Mattie's death, her children and grandchildren gathered at her home for her eightieth birthday celebration. "I will never forget the impressive, chauffeured automobile that stopped in front of Grandmother's house that afternoon," remembers granddaughter Eugenia. "Out of the car stepped President Heber J. Grant and both of his counselors. Of course we were shoost into the kitchen, but I can remember peeking around the comer at Grandmother, who was laughing and visiting with the First Presidency in the parlor." [^32]

Mattie died on March 11, 1938, at the age of eighty. General board member Jennie K. Mangum summed up Mattie's life when she paid her this tribute: "It is one thing to share one's money and it is better still to share one's love, but to share one's courage with those who lack faith, and who sometimes falter, or who have slipped and lose heart in the struggle—could anything be more splendid and helpful than this?" [^33]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ruth May Fox, "My Story," privately published, December 1973. Except as noted, all quotations are from this 91-page document, which is on file in the Church Archives.
[^2] Lucile C. Reading, "Ruth's Hikes," Children's Friend, November 1969, 23.
[^3] Letter of Vida Fox Clawson to Emily Clawson Wright, January 28, 1943, copy in possession of author, Janet Peterson.
[^4] Letter of Feramorz Y. Fox to Emily Clawson Wright, February 9, 1943, copy in possession of author, Janet Peterson.
[^5] Personal interview with Jean Cannon Willis, November 21, 1990.
[^6] Personal interview with George I. Cannon, November 21, 1990.
[^7] Elsie T. Brandley, "Ruth May Fox," Young Woman's Journal 40 (May 1929): 313.
[^8] Family Group Sheet of Joseph and Martha Horne Tingey, Archives, LDS Family History Department.
[^9] Romney, "Martha Horne Tingey," 199.
[^10] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 288.
[^11] Ibid., 287.
[^12] Tingey Interview.
[^13] A Century of Sisterhood, 54.
[^14] Tingey Interview.
[^15] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 287.
[^16] Wells, "Martha Jane Horne Tingey," 152.
[^17] Ibid.
[^18] Young Woman's Journal 4 (1892-93): 549.
[^19] A Century of Sisterhood, 32.
[^20] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 95.
[^21] Ibid.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Romney, "Martha Horne Tingey," 199.
[^24] A Century of Sisterhood, 45.
[^25] Ibid., 46.
[^26] Ibid., 50.
[^27] Young Woman's Journal, 40 (May 1929): 311.
[^28] A Century of Sisterhood, 55.
[^29] Tingey Interview.
[^30] Ibid.
[^31] Ibid.
[^32] Ibid.
[^33] Ibid.
