Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

3

Ruth May Fox

1929-1937

Seventy-seven-year-old Ruth May Fox climbed Independence Rock and looked for her name. She had climbed the large granite outcropping along the pioneer trail in Wyoming some sixty-four years earlier when, as a young girl, she had walked most of the way to the Salt Lake Valley, She found her name still legible—Ruth May, 1867. Ruth, whose life spanned more than a century and who was both a pioneer and a modern woman, was a remarkable example to the young women of the Church of faith, commitment, and enduring to the end.

A Trying Childhood

Ruth May was born November 16, 1853, in Wiltshire, England, the first child of James and Mary Ann Harding May. Five months after her birth, her parents joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. When Ruth was just sixteen months old, her mother died in childbirth along with her baby. Mary Ann's last words to James were, "Take care of Ruth."

Although James could not care for Ruth by himself, he was anxious for her to grow up in a Latter-day Saint home. Occasionally he had her stay with relatives, but most often he arranged for Church members to take care of her. Because none of these arrangements lasted very long, Ruth stayed in numerous homes before she was eight years old. This frequent moving interrupted her schooling. Her longest and last stay was with her Grandmother and Grandfather May. Then her father, who had visited her frequently, took her to Yorkshire, where he was working as a weaver. Her grandmother's parting words to James were, "She's a bad maid, she's a bad maid." Ruth, always inquisitive, had apparently tried her grandmother's patience by taking a bite out of a china saucer, catching her hair on fire with a candle, stepping in front of an oncoming train, and asking for beefsteak and beer for dinner. [^1]

But James, who always saw the good in Ruth, was very proud of his pretty eight-year-old daughter, who could recite poetry and verses from the Bible. He especially enjoyed hearing her recite for friends the sixth chapter of Ephesians, which begins, "Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right." (Ephesians 6:1.)

In Yorkshire, James and Ruth boarded at the home of a Latter-day Saint woman, Mary Saxton. A handsome widower, James could easily have remarried earlier, but his primary concern was in finding a new wife who would be kind to Ruth. He found such a person in Mary Saxton, who had left an abusive husband. They became engaged, and James emigrated to America in March 1865 to earn enough money to send for her, her daughter, Clara, and Ruth. Six months later he sent them funds for their ship passage. Ruth was excited about the prospects of a new home in a new land. She recalled, "It is a real sensation to board a vessel and gradually pull out of the dock, see the waving of handkerchiefs, and watch the receding shore." She and Clara experienced seasickness for only a few days, but Mary, whom Ruth now called Mother, was sick the whole way.

When the ship docked at Castle Gardens in New York harbor three weeks later and they disembarked, Ruth was thrilled to hear her father's voice through the crowd on the dock, "There she is with her dear little face." James and Mary Thompson Saxton married as soon as they arrived at their new home in Manayunk, Pennsylvania, a manufacturing town near Philadelphia. Ruth said of her new mother, "She was a splendid housekeeper, neat and thrifty. She proved to be a good wife and mother, and my debt to her is great indeed."

Ruth and Clara immediately went to work in the cotton mill where James was employed. The young girls had to defend themselves against the other mill girls who wanted them to use snuff. One day Ruth's dress got caught in the rollers. She ripped her dress in order to avoid injury and then began to cry—not because of the danger she had narrowly escaped, but because her dress was ruined. One of the workmen consoled her, saying, "Don't cry. There is lots of new clothes in America."

The May family soon moved to Philadelphia, where James found another job. For four months Mary was bedridden with rheumatism, so the twelve-year-old girls did all the housework, cooking, and washing. When she recovered, the girls worked in other homes as live-in help. During this period Ruth saw her family only on Sundays and missed them terribly. James was the branch president in Philadelphia, and missionaries often visited the family. To Ruth, "The fact that they had come from Zion as missionaries made them look more like angels than men."

The May family's hard work and thrift finally paid off, for in July 1867, James felt they were ready to go to Zion. Their train trip from Philadelphia to North Platte, Nebraska, took nine days. An unexpected day's stay at Niagara Falls was for Ruth "a glorious treat." That contrasted to the night they spent on the Missouri River on a cattle boat, about which Ruth commented, "You may be sure there was bellowing a plenty, but what did that matter? We were on our way to Zion."

When the family arrived at North Platte, they were disappointed to find their departure for Utah delayed a month. Not only would the delay increase their chances of getting caught in snow, but it also meant having to stretch their meager resources another month. James had only enough money to buy one yoke of oxen but not a wagon. He found a man who had a wagon but only one yoke of oxen, so they teamed up, with James driving as his contribution for the use of the wagon. The combined families meant that fourteen men, women, and children had to put all their possessions in the one wagon for the trek to Salt Lake City with sixty other wagons. Since the family that owned the wagon had first rights to any remaining space on it, Ruth, then thirteen years old, had to walk nearly all the way to the valley. Luckily, other families occasionally offered her a ride, making room for her in their already crowded wagons. With a strong sense of adventure, Ruth later wrote:

"One crack of [the captain's] whip on the tent or wagon cover, whether at 3 A.M. or 5 A.M. meant 'roll out.' Killing snakes, plodding through the burning sands, wading streams, climbing mountains with sometimes an Indian scare, a threatened food shortage, sickness, sore feet, and a snow storm at South Pass, which detained us two or three days, were trifles. . . . But withal we could still sing:

"We may get wet a little When we have a shower of rain; The heat may skin our noses, But they'll soon get well again; And when we think of Zion's land We'll forget the wet and pain. So get up my lads, gee, whoa, Push on, my lads, hi, ho, For there's none can lead a life Like we merry Mormons do."

At the Sweetwater River in Wyoming, Ruth thought that the willow and cherry trees lining the banks of the river, with the valley opening out beyond, were the most beautiful sight she had ever beheld. Ahead was Independence Rock, a granite landmark on which passers-by often painted or chiseled their names or messages for those to follow. Though she was tired, she eagerly climbed the rock and chiseled her name: Ruth May, 1867. [^2] From the top of the rock, she could see to the east the route they had traveled and to the west the one they had yet to travel.

The Mays reached the valley in October 1867, getting their first glimpse of the valley desert at twilight. Ruth's first response was, "Did we come all this way for that?" Then, she later said, "This, however, was my first and last disappointment." The next morning the family attended general conference in the not-quite-completed tabernacle. A few days later James found a job as a carder in one of Brigham Young's businesses, the Deseret Woolen Mill, at the mouth of Parley's Canyon about eight miles from downtown Salt Lake City. They found a home to rent but had to crowd into one room of the two-room dwelling until the occupant of the other room could relocate. After only six months' attendance at school, Ruth and Clara went to work in the same factory as their father so that the family could buy a home as soon as possible.

For Ruth, life was not all work and no play, for she claimed she "did not lack for amusement." She wrote: "We often gathered at Brother James Cummings' home, the largest one in the little village, to spend the evening in song, reading, dialogues, forfeit games, mock weddings, and even dancing to comb and jew's-harp music. Sometimes our family was invited to a dance at Mill Creek and reminded to bring a candle along. Neither heat nor cold, dust nor mud mattered. Crossing creeks on poles was one of the feats we had to learn to do."

When Ruth was sixteen, she and her father went to work at a mill in Ogden, forty miles north of Salt Lake City. Of this experience she said: "The work was not the all-important thing to me. A sixteen-year-old girl coming from the city into a little country district at that time created quite a stir among the male fraternity; beaus were plentiful, and I assure you I had a good time." After working at the mill for seven months, Ruth returned to Salt Lake City and attended school for four more months. Except for some correspondence courses she took later in her life and one English class at the University of Utah, this was the end of Ruth's formal education.

Marriage and Family Life

In 1872 Ruth met Jesse W. Fox, Jr., a surveyor. They were married May 8, 1873, at the Endowment House by President Daniel H. Wells, a member of the First Presidency. Ruth was then nineteen and Jesse twenty. Following the wedding, the newlyweds rode in an open carriage to Jesse's parents' home for a family celebration. He had had a special three-tiered wedding cake made for the occasion; it was decorated with two foxes and six little foxes to represent himself, Ruth, and their future children. His prediction was only half right, for they eventually had twelve children. Ruth brought with her all of her possessions in one small trunk and $1.50 in cash.

Though deeply in love, Ruth and Jesse, like all newlyweds, had to adjust to each other's style of living. At her father's home Ruth had been accustomed to having three meals a day at regular times. Jesse, however, was more easygoing and wasn't punctual about meals. She said, "I had to discipline myself, which was not always easy as I had a quick temper and a strong sense of justice."

The couple lived with his family for six months, then moved into the home next door, where their first child, Jesse May, was born April 14, 1874. Shortly after Jesse's birth, the two homes were torn down and replaced by a larger one, where the extended family all lived together. During the next few years the family moved several times. In 1875, Jesse was called on a mission to New York; however, he was recalled three months later to help his father survey the Utah Southern Railway. A daughter, Eliza May, was born during his absence, on January 10, 1876, and was six weeks old when her father returned home. She died two years later. George James was born July 15, 1877, and Ruth Clare, August 22, 1879. While the first four Fox children were each born in a different home, the next eight were all born in the same home at 261 West Second South: Feramorz Young, September 28, 1881; Hyrum Lester, November 14, 1883; Esther Vida, December 30, 1885; Frank Harding, December 5, 1887; Lucy Beryl, January 5, 1890; Leonard Grant, February 25, 1892; Florence Marie, January 30, 1894; and Emmeline Blanche, September 14, 1896.

Ruth was a devoted mother, but she was also aware of her own shortcomings and constantly tried to improve, as this excerpt from her life story indicates: "Our children were as good as most and better than some. They had a normal dislike for home chores and an irrepressible fondness of play. They brought their friends to join in outdoor games and we often invited them to join us at the long table in our dining room, where there were places at first for eight and soon for twelve to fifteen. There was mischief always in process, and at times tempers flared. I can't blame my children too much for their quarrels, as I was myself quick with sharp words and could not always count ten when provoked. I had been brought up in the English tradition of family discipline and applied the flat of my hand or a switch when I thought it necessary. I improved in self-restraint through the years, or else grew weary of the continued and fruitless effort to impose on my children my own standards of conduct. Though my first children got more whippings, I don't see that they are any nearer perfection than those that came later and escaped with fewer and lighter punishments."

She was undoubtedly hard on herself in assessing her mothering skills, for her daughter Vida remembered how Ruth wove the gospel into everyday happenings. When she cooked, she would stop what she was doing and say to her children, "Isn't it wonderful that an angel came to the Prophet and brought him the Golden Plates?" She taught her children to work: the girls helped with housework, and the boys took care of the chickens, horses, and cows. Vida also remembered her mother's homemaking skills:

"One of my most vivid memories of mother is at the sewing machine, where she pedaled and hummed hymns constantly. She was a very good sewer. I remember some lovely things she made for me, and I also remember her staying up till one in the morning making a dress for me to wear to a Sunday School Dance. . . . Another vivid picture is mother on Saturday morning. She used to make dozens of pies on Saturday—she tried to make enough to last over Monday night dessert—but I think she had a hard time because everyone of us used to bring someone home to Sunday dinner. . . . We always had two kinds of pie so that we could take our choice. I used to take a little of each." [^3]

Once Ruth's son George and a neighbor boy, after reading adventure stories, took their ponies and rifles and ran away from home. They were not found until late in the night. George's brother Feramorz (Fera) recalled the incident:

"I think some of us experienced the most touching and impressive family circle that evening in all our lifetime at home. Mother gathered us around the fireplace of the living room and proceeded in the most kindly way to express her regret that any of her children would wish to leave home. . . . In the most kindly way she said to George, her message undoubtedly being meant for all of us, that whenever he got ready to leave home, he would not have to sneak away. There were tears in the eyes of all as she said, 'Next time let me know; we'll have a good dinner before you leave; I'll get together a basket of good food, and I'll walk the first mile with you.' Later in the big bedroom where four or five of us slept in two beds George said, with choking voice, 'Gee, that was worse than a licking.'" [^4]

Jesse provided well for his large family, and during the first twenty years of their marriage the Foxes prospered. They were able to add a second story to their home and made plans to build a three-story dream home. Jesse also owned a farm located on the west side of the valley. Then in 1888, without consulting Ruth, he married a second wife, Rosemary Johnson. Five years later, during the Panic of 1893, he lost his dry goods business and eventually their home. Overcome with shock and depression, he went to bed for several days. Ruth handled the failure with equanimity. Until she married Jesse, she had known only humble circumstances, and her nature was such that she overcame sorrow and disappointment quickly. Although she said her heart was heavy, she tried to make the best of their circumstances and even hummed as she worked around the home. This irritated Jesse, who said, "By the great horn spoon, Polly, how can you sing at a time like this?"

Adjusting to their new circumstances, Ruth dismissed her hired help, gave increased responsibilities to her children, and rented out rooms. Jesse did not lose the farm, so the Foxes always had sufficient food to eat. Ruth felt they were comparatively well off, for she saw numerous people, including families, waiting in long lines for free soup and bread at a soup kitchen near their home. Earlier, in a patriarchal blessing from John Smith, the presiding patriarch, she had been told: "It shall be thy lot to feed the hungry and administer to the wants of the afflicted." The Fox home on West Second South was near the railroad depot, and many hungry, unemployed men knocked at Ruth's home to ask for food. "There must have been a mark on our front gate," she recalled, "for scarcely a week passed in those dismal days when some man did not ask for food. No one was ever turned away from the door, and it was not uncommon to see two and occasionally three at one time eating in our kitchen." Ruth invited one elderly man, who had no family in Utah, to live in the quarters of their former hired hand and fed him in exchange for odd jobs which, she said, she gave him "to remove the bitter taste of outright charity." Another woman, whose family left her when she joined the Church and who had been Ruth's laundry help, came to Ruth's home and told her, "Polly, I've come to stay until I die." Ruth took care of her until she died several months later.

When her son Fera became ill and could not do much physical labor, Ruth bought (with money raised by Jesse) a rundown rooming house for him to manage. She described purchasing "everything in the place, including bed-bugs, cockroaches, and roomers for less than $300.00." Several family members, including Ruth, helped Fera by making beds, filling lamps, emptying slop jars, and sweeping.

Ruth sorrowed deeply when her youngest daughter, Emmeline, died in 1914 of scarlet fever at age fourteen. Two years later her father suffered a debilitating stroke. So that she could be close to him during the day, she rented a home for him and for herself near the YLMIA offices, where she obtained work as a typist. She and Jesse no longer lived together, since he had a home with his second wife, but she took care of him during his two serious illnesses, the second one resulting in his death on December 12, 1928.

Illnesses and deaths in her family and financial losses and hardships caused Ruth to sum up her adversities philosophically: "Life brings some hard lessons. The sturdiest plants are not grown under glass, and strength of character is not derived from the avoidance of problems."

Personal Growth and Service to Others

Intermixed with raising her large family, running her home, and working at the YLMIA offices, Ruth was highly involved in community activities and church callings. She also wrote poetry and prose. From her childhood on, she loved to recite and write poetry. At age fifteen she wrote a poem about the martyrdom of Joseph Smith. Throughout her life, she wrote poetry for self-expression, to honor friends on special occasions, and to offer condolences. Her poetry began appearing in print in 1891, making her eligible to join the Press Club, a women's literary organization. She later was elected president. In 1923 the YLMIA general board published May Blossoms, a volume of her poems.

Ruth was also a member of the Reapers' Club, organized by Emmeline B. Wells for the "social and intellectual development" of women. Acutely aware of her limited schooling, she taught herself by reading, taking home-study courses, and observing language spoken by educated people. Sister Wells, fifth general president of the Relief Society and editor of the Woman's Exponent, had an enormous effect on Ruth's life. "No other woman had so great an influence as she in shaping my life," said Ruth. "I became her devoted disciple and she in turn loved me as a daughter. I named after her my last child, Emmeline Blanche, born September 14, 1896, when Sister Wells was the center of my orbit of public activities. For many years subsequently she had much to do with my progress."

Following Emmeline's example, Ruth became active in the woman's suffrage movement. Although women in Utah had had the right to vote since 1870, the passage of the Edmunds-Tucker Law by the U.S. Congress in 1886 rescinded those rights. When the Utah Territorial Woman Suffrage Association was organized in 1893, Emmeline became president and Ruth, treasurer. They had the opportunity to meet Susan B. Anthony when the national suffrage leader came to Utah to speak.

While most of the women working for suffrage were Democrats, Emmeline declared herself a Republican, as did Ruth, in direct opposition to her husband, Jesse, a staunch Democrat. The peak of Ruth's political activity was the year 1895, when she helped campaign for the ratification of the Utah State constitution, which included suffrage for women.

As chairman of the Ladies' Republican Club in Salt Lake City, Ruth helped organize similar clubs throughout the territory. When she and Emmeline traveled to Brigham City to organize a club, they were met at the depot with a salute of cannons. After Utah became a state in 1896, the first governor, Heber M. Wells, appointed Ruth to the board of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society, on which she served for eight years.

Ruth received her first Church calling at age seventeen when Bishop George H. Taylor of the Fourteenth Ward called her to teach Sunday School. When the Fourteenth Ward Primary was organized in 1879, the president, Clara C. Cannon, selected Ruth as her first counselor, a position she held for the next nineteen years under three presidents.

In 1895 she was called as president of the ward YLMIA, a position she held for three years simultaneously with her Primary calling. She was released from Primary in 1898 when she was appointed to the YLMIA general board, but continued to serve as ward YLMIA president until 1904. Of her calling to the general board, Ruth said, "Thus began the most important Church responsibility of my entire life, a calling that was to continue for thirty-nine years, and that would give me opportunity for growth and service far beyond my fondest dreams." In 1902, she also became a guide on Temple Square, serving until 1929, when she became the YLMIA general president.

From the time Ruth was a young girl, she had been taught to respect the priesthood. She described her attitude toward Church leaders as "reverential." When she was called to the general board, she found she "was much too self-effacing for [her] own good," and she missed an important assignment because of it. She was scheduled to attend an MIA conference in Rexburg, Idaho, following stake conference and the cornerstone-laying of Ricks College. She rode to Rexburg on the same train as President Joseph F. Smith and Elders George Q. Cannon, Rudger Clawson, and Seymour B. Young. But, she said, "Being the only woman and lacking nerve to invite the attention of the brethren, I kept pretty much to myself on the over-night train ride." When the train stopped at Idaho Falls, many Saints greeted it with flags and flowers. Ruth was embarrassed when President Smith told someone to give her some flowers because "she's a good . . . worker." In Rexburg she again held back and let the Brethren go with the crowds. She asked directions to the home of Sister Ricks, the YLMIA president, and a man who was going that way gave her a ride in his buggy. She was puzzled when she found no one at home. Then she heard singing some distance away. She walked toward the sound and found that a meeting was in session at an open-air bowery. It was the MIA conference she had come to attend. The meeting had been worked in between the stake conference sessions to avoid conflict with a circus coming to town, and she had missed it! "The brethren . . . never let me get out of their sight again until we reached home," she said.

Carrying On

When the YLMIA was reorganized in April 1905, following the death of Elmina S. Taylor, Martha Horne Tingey was called to serve as president and Ruth May Fox became her first counselor. They served together for twenty-four years. Martha was released on March 28, 1929, because of ill health, and Ruth was called to be the general president. Since she was then seventy-five years old, she was somewhat surprised at the call. She mentioned her concern to President Heber J. Grant, and he handed her the following poem:

Age is a quality of mind; If your dreams you've left behind, If hope is cold; If you no longer look ahead, If your ambition's fires are dead— Then you are old. But if from life you take the best, And if in life you keep the zest, If love you hold; No matter how the years go by, No matter how the birthdays fly— You are not old.

Ruth chose Lucy Grant Cannon as first counselor, Clarissa A. Beesley as second counselor, and Elsie Hogan as secretary. When President Grant set Ruth apart as YLMIA president, he blessed her that she would have "the same vigor of body and of mind in the future" that she enjoyed in the past and "great joy, peace and happiness."

At Ruth's first June Conference in 1929, two announcements were made: a summer camping program for all MIA girls and the merging of the Young Woman's Journal with the Improvement Era, beginning with the November issue. That October a stock market crash sent the United States into what became known as the Great Depression. Ruth, vividly remembering the Panic of 1893, resolved to help strengthen young girls and women for the coming economic adversity.

The year 1930 saw the centennial celebration of the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That year the YLMIA and YMMIA chose as their June Conference theme "Onward with Mormon Ideals," suggesting that young people build on the foundations laid by their ancestors and carry on the work of the Church. That idea took root in Ruth's mind, and she wrote the words to a new anthem, titled "Carry On," which Alfred M. Durham set to music:

Firm as the mountains around us, Stalwart and brave we stand On the rock our fathers planted For us in this goodly land— The rock of honor and virtue, Of faith in the living God. They raised his banner triumphant— Over the desert sod. Chorus And we hear the desert singing: Carry on, carry on, carry on! Hills and vales and mountains ringing: Carry on, carry on, carry on! Holding aloft our colors, We march in the glorious dawn. O youth of the noble birthright, Carry on, carry on, carry on! We'll build on the rock they planted A palace to the King. Into its shining corridors, Our songs of praise we'll bring, For the heritage they left us, Not of gold or of worldly wealth, But a blessing everlasting Of love and joy and health.

At the Sunday evening session of conference on June 8, the main floor of the Tabernacle was filled with young people who sang "Carry On," and when they reached the climax of the chorus, they waved gold and green programs. Ruth commented, "To say I was thrilled to hear an army of young men and women vocalizing the pledge to continue the work of their noble fathers is to express my feelings mildly."

The Lion House, which Brigham Young had built for his wives and children, housed the LDS High School until 1931, when it was turned over to the YLMIA as a social and learning center where young women could attend book reviews and classes in writing, speech, charm, and religion. In 1934 the YLMIA was renamed the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association (YWMIA) to parallel the name of the young men's organization, the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association.

The traveling libraries that Ruth helped organize as a board member in 1898 continued throughout her administration and increased to more than three thousand volumes. She felt that an organization dedicated to personal improvement should provide worthwhile reading materials for its members. Stake MIAs had the responsibility of purchasing and circulating books among the wards. Later, when public and school libraries were well established, the YLMIA discontinued the traveling libraries and began publishing lists of recommended books for its members.

When Ruth became president of her ward young women's organization in 1895, the YLMIA churchwide had 15,000 members in 400 wards. When she was released as general president in 1937, there were 70,000 YWMIA members in 1,000 wards, illustrating, as Ruth said, "the nature and magnitude of the task of the general officers and boards in planning lesson work and other activities for this immense organization and in providing necessary overall supervision and direction." The general officers' contact with local members and officers came mainly through the annual June Conference and visits to stake conferences. Ruth noted that she visited "most, if not all, of the stakes of Zion, including those in Canada, Mexico, and Hawaii." She and Albert E. Bowen, the YMMIA superintendent, conducted the first auxiliary conference held outside the continental United States, in Hawaii in 1935. One of Ruth's co-workers remarked that after a lengthy and arduous trip to visit stakes, she (the co-worker) often had to rest in bed for a day. "Well, maybe someday I'll come to that," responded Ruth, who was twenty-seven years older than her colleague.

Ruth's creativity and keen memory never dwindled as she grew older. On one occasion when the combined YWMIA and YMMIA presidencies hosted a dinner honoring Mutual workers, she recited a lengthy poem. After she sat down, a man sitting next to her said, "I would like a copy of that poem." She responded, "I'm sorry I don't have a copy I can give you; I made it up just now." [^5]

Once the Music Committee, under the chairmanship of Ruth Hardy Funk and Roy M. Darley, asked Ruth to write another song that would have the stirring effect of "Carry On." She wrote lyrics and gave them to Crawford Gates to set to music. He lost the words, and when Sister Funk apologized to Ruth for the loss, she said, "Don't worry about that," and then repeated the words of "In Triumph We Shall Sing" from memory. [^6]

In 1937 Ruth traveled to England with her daughter Vida Fox Clawson for the centenary of the British Mission. Sailing on the same ship were President Heber J. Grant and his counselor, J. Reuben Clark, Jr. President Grant asked Ruth to speak at several of the meetings in Lancashire and Preston. For Ruth, the highlight of the trip was a meeting attended by five hundred Saints on the banks of the River Ribble in Preston, where the first baptisms in the British Isles had taken place one hundred years earlier. When Ruth bore her testimony, according to Amy Brown Lyman, who was then serving as president of the auxiliaries in the European Mission, "she gave such an eloquent and stirring address that it thrilled the souls and touched the hearts of all of us who had the good fortune to be in attendance, and brought tears to the eyes of many." Ruth characterized the experience as "the crowning event in my long life of Church service."

Ruth had her first hospital stay at age eighty-two. A few years later, when she tripped on a rug and broke her hip, her family got her a wheelchair, but she used it very little and gave it to someone else who she felt needed it more than she did.

Release and Twenty More Years

As Ruth's eighty-fourth birthday approached, she seriously considered asking for a release from the YWMIA, for she thought, "it seems hardly appropriate for a woman in her eighties to be head of an organization emphasizing the word young in its title." She wrote to President Heber J. Grant, not asking for a release but indicating she would accept whatever decision the Brethren made. Just a few days before her birthday, on November 3, 1937, President Grant extended a release to her and her counselors and board. Asked by the new president, Lucy Grant Cannon, to address members of the outgoing board, Ruth expressed her love and assured them that she would live up to the promise given in her patriarchal blessing decades earlier that her last days would be her best days.

Ruth enjoyed twenty more years and filled her life with meaningful experiences. She became more involved in Relief Society and Gospel Doctrine classes, attended the temple regularly, and frequently spoke at MIA and fireside groups until her vision and hearing began to fail. She immersed herself in learning Braille but found she was happier and more successful in learning through a talking-book machine. She claimed she read more after she turned eighty-four than before. She also spent much of her time with her ever-growing family. President Grant, in his last few years, took a daily excursion in his car with his wife and usually invited two or three homebound widows, often including Ruth, to accompany them.

When her oldest son, Jesse, turned fifty, she gave him a family dinner, and as each of her remaining ten children reached that age, she held similar parties. In turn, Ruth's birthdays were celebrated enthusiastically by her family and friends. When she turned one hundred in 1953, the YWMIA honored her at a reception at the Beehive House during June Conference. She found that the older she got, the more she became a celebrity in the community. She wryly noted, "I am sure I would have missed much of my local importance had I arrived in Salt Lake two years after instead of two years before the completion of the railroad. Being a pre-railroad pioneer would alone have brought me some notice on special anniversaries, but only my long years of service in MIA could have opened the doors of the famous Beehive House for four grand birthday celebrations." These four celebrations, honoring her on her eighty-fifth, ninetieth, ninety-fifth, and one hundredth birthdays, were attended by members of the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, and other Church leaders, city and state officials, and family and friends. Ruth commented, "That I deserve such honor is hard to understand."

Ruth continued to bear strong testimony. "Ever since I could understand, the gospel has meant everything to me," she said. "It has been my very breath, my mantle of protection against temptation, my consolation in sorrow, my joy and glory throughout all my days, and my hope of eternal life. 'The Kingdom of God or nothing' has been my motto."

When Ruth consulted a doctor about what she described as an "occasional feeling of faintness," he suggested that she drink a cup of coffee every morning. That advice did not set well with her. "I was ninety-two years of age," she commented, "and had by precept and example taught the importance of the 'Word of Wisdom' to my children and grandchildren, and in public addresses to thousands of Church members. I decided that living a few more years was not nearly as important as my example to posterity, and I have not followed the doctor's prescription." A week before she died, she asked her daughter Florence, with whom she was living, "Isn't this Fast Day? You'll be sure to pay my tithing, won't you?"

Ruth May Fox died April 12, 1958, at the age of one hundred and four. At her funeral on April 15, President J. Reuben Clark of the First Presidency and Clarissa A. Beesley, her counselor in the YWMIA, spoke, and seventy-five of her grandchildren and great-grandchildren sang "Carry On."

Ruth May Fox served the young women of the Church for nearly four decades as a member of the general board, as a counselor in the general presidency, and as the general president. Throughout a century of living, she never wavered from the principles she believed in and her unquestioning faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ. She credited her experiences (which she said were "far beyond my fondest dreams") and her youth and vigor to the Lord, who, she said, "has always done better for me than I could have done for myself." [^7]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Personal interview with George I. Cannon, Jean Cannon Willis, and H. Stanley Cannon, November 21, 1990; hereafter cited as Cannon et al. Interview.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] Mary Connelly Kimball, "Lucy Grant Cannon," Young Woman's Journal 34 (August 1923): 475.
[^4] Frances Grant Bennett, Glimpses of a Mormon Family (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1968), 2.
[^5] Cannon et al. Interview.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Ronald W. Walker, "Heber J. Grant," in Presidents of the Church, ed. Leonard J. Arrington (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), 235.
