Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

4

Lucy Grant Cannon

1937-1948

"May I help you?" Lucy Grant Cannon asked a frantic young mother at the Union Pacific depot in Salt Lake City.

"My train isn't leaving for another twelve hours, and I have no place to go," answered the woman, who was holding a crying baby while a screaming toddler tugged at her dress.

"Come, I'll take you home," said Lucy.

Once home, Lucy fed the little family and then encouraged the mother to take a nap. While the woman slept, Lucy gave the children a bath and washed their clothes. Later that afternoon, she took the rested, happier family back to the train depot. [^1]

This incident is typical of Lucy's compassion toward others and her genuine goodness. "I don't know how else you would describe my mother," remembers George Ivins Cannon, Lucy's son. "She was just a good woman. I can remember her saying, 'I may not be brilliant, but I can be good.' And she was." [^2]

"The Blessing of Faith"

Lucy was born October 22, 1880, in Salt Lake City, the second daughter of Heber J. Grant, who later became the seventh president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and Lucy Stringham.

In the spring of 1881, six-month-old Lucy developed whooping cough and soon lay near death. After her frantic parents had done all they could do, her father called John Rowberry, their stake patriarch, to give the dying baby a blessing. In this blessing Patriarch Rowberry said: "I seal upon thee the blessing of life and strength to thy body that thou shalt grow up to perfection in all of thy parts and become a mother in Israel in due time, and the Spirit of the Most High shall rest upon thee. Thou shalt bear in mind the instructions of thy mother and appreciate the counsel and blessing of thy father and I seal upon thee the blessing of faith to be healed when thou art sick and rebuke the disease that is now preying upon thee. Thou shalt receive strength and animation to thy lungs. Thou shalt be healed of this affliction." [^3] This blessing was fulfilled, for Lucy recovered from the illness that nearly claimed her life. Yet there would be other times when she would need to call upon her faith to be healed, including a second encounter with death.

When Lucy was two years old, her father was called on October 16, 1882, to serve as a member of the Church's Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Lucy, nicknamed "Lutie" by her immediate family and a few close friends to avoid confusion between her and her mother, enjoyed the advantages of being part of a prominent Salt Lake City family at the turn of the century. Her father, an astute businessman in banking, insurance, and business, used this background for the benefit of the Church.

The Grant family lived in the Salt Lake City Thirteenth Ward—the same ward in which her parents had grown up. Heber and Lucy, who had been married on November 1, 1877, eventually became the parents of six children: Susan Rachel, Lucy, Florence, Edith, Anna, and Heber, their only son, who died at age seven. During this time of plural marriage, the Grant family continued to grow as Heber married Huldah Augusta Winters on May 26, 1884, and Emily Harris Wells the next day. Augusta became the mother of one daughter, Mary. Five children were born to Emily: Martha Deseret (Dessie), Grace, Daniel Wells (who died at age four), Emily, and Frances.

"We were a large family—all girls," Frances later recalled. "There had been two boys, both of whom had died in childhood, whereas ten girls survived." [^4] These ten girls formed the core of the family. "I always felt that there couldn't have been ten sisters who loved each other more than these ten sisters," said Lucy's son George, who enjoyed his nine aunts and numerous cousins. [^5] Harmony and fun abounded among the members of this large family. "I don't think any of us felt that there was a differentiation between us," added Stan, another of Lucy's sons. "We were just as likely to go into their home as they were to come into ours. We were just one big family." [^6]

Heber, a gentle father, often said, "They will only be children once, and I want them to get as much pleasure as they can out of life as they go along." [^7] One of the favorite activities of his children and grandchildren was taking afternoon rides with him. His car held six people, and he would not leave until it was full. He often invited widows and homebound individuals as well as family members and their friends on his afternoon excursions.

A Year of Tragedy

Major changes occurred in thirteen-year-old Lucy's life in 1893: her mother's death; her own near death from diphtheria; and a change of the family's life-style as a result of the financial Panic of 1893.

Lucy's mother had suffered with ill health for almost three years before her death on January 3, 1893, at age thirty-eight. Lucy had been aware of her mother's failing health over the years, but when her father called the children into the bedroom and told them that their mother was dying, she could not accept the situation. She pled with him to heal her mother and brought some consecrated oil from another room for him to use. After Heber blessed his wife and dedicated her to the Lord, young Lucy, distraught, ran from the house.

Heber prayed that the Lord would bless his daughter with peace. Unaware of her father's prayer for her, Lucy knelt down and prayed for her mother's health to return. "Instantly a voice, not an audible one, but one that seemed to speak to my whole being, said, 'In the death of your mother the will of the Lord will be done,'" Lucy later wrote of the experience. "Immediately I was a changed child. I felt reconciled and almost happy." [^8] Her mother died a few hours later, and the peace that filled Lutie allowed her to comfort her younger brother.

Heber's mother, Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant, was living with the Grant family at the time of her daughter-in-law's death. A placid, faithful woman who was both aged and deaf, Grandmother Grant provided comfort to the grieving family. "Whatever comes it will all come out right in the end," she said. [^9] Though Rachel and Lutie assumed many household responsibilities, Grandmother Grant needed additional help to care for the six children, whose ages ranged from fourteen to four. Everyone was grateful when Heber's second wife, Augusta, and her daughter, Mary, moved in with them to help care for the family.

"Lutie . . . appreciated the loving care of Augusta W. Grant," Mary Kimball later wrote. "It was said that one could not tell that these were not her own children so kind and considerate was she of their welfare." [^10] Shortly after his wife's death, Heber took his three oldest daughters, Rachel, Lucy, and Florence, on a trip to Chicago, New York, Boston, and Washington, D.C., hoping to help them adjust to their mother's death. The younger children remained at home with Grandmother Grant and Aunt Augusta. While in Washington, D.C., Rachel and Lucy contracted diphtheria. Lucy's pulse-rate dropped to twenty-eight beats a minute, and the doctors thought she would die. Elder Grant wrote of the events that followed:

"I was kneeling supplicating the Lord to spare her [Lutie's] life, pleading with him not to allow the additional sorrow to come to me of one of my children dying while I was away from home. I was shedding bitter tears, when the inspiration came that if I would send out for President George Q. Cannon and Bishop Hiram B. Clawson, who were then in Washington [D.C.], they could rebuke the disease, and that my daughter would live. I thanked the Lord for this manifestation and shed tears of gratitude that my daughter's life was to be spared. . . . President Cannon in his prayer rebuked the destroyer and announced that Lutie would live to be a mother." [^11]

Lucy was healed and was able to return to Utah with her father and sisters.

The Panic of 1893 greatly affected the Grant family. Heber, a successful banker, developer, and promoter before the panic, experienced a dramatic change in income. Debts immediately replaced luxuries. The family rallied around him, and those who were able went to work. As the oldest children, Rachel and Lucy helped assume the burden of the household chores and even some of the debts. They also helped out in their father's office. "It was the greatest satisfaction of our young lives to feel that we were helping him by caring for ourselves and in that way sharing his heavy burden of debt," Lucy recalled. [^12]

Having their Grandmother Grant living with them gave the girls a greater sense of security and stability. Heber's widowed mother had raised him alone, supporting herself by working as a seamstress and taking in boarders. Originally from a well-to-do Eastern family, she lost her inheritance when she joined the Church. She gradually began to lose her hearing as a young woman, and by the time she was forty-six, she had become almost completely deaf. She lived a quiet but happy life. "One good thing about being deaf is that I don't have to hear the bad things," she claimed. [^13] Every afternoon, she put on a starched white apron trimmed with lace and came downstairs to visit and eat dinner. Her immaculate rooms in the Grant home were a peaceful retreat for the girls, whom she taught to sew and cook. She and Lucy developed an especially close relationship during this time. Lucy, who often studied in her grandmother's room, may have developed some of her placid nature from their association. One of her school friends once said, "Calm, serene, untroubled—such adjectives must have been coined to describe Lutie. I was never very good at spelling after I met Lutie, for I invariably spelled 'tranquility'—'tranqui-"lutie"'—for that is the effect she produced." [^14]

Aunt Augusta, a schoolteacher and a patron of the arts, brought culture, such as attending the symphony and plays, to the family. Music played an important part in the Grant home. When Lucy was unable to attend school for an entire school year due to ill health, she turned to music and books. The Grant daughters loved to sing. When Florence and Edith were in their teens, their father took them to one of the finest vocal teachers in the country for lessons. Though the teacher was primarily interested in operatic voices, he agreed to listen to each girl sing. Afterwards he said he had never heard sweeter voices, but he agreed to give lessons only to Edith, since she was the one with an operatic voice. However, Lucy often sang with Florence at church, social functions, and funerals. She also played the piano, as did several of her sisters.

Nasturtiums, Marriage, and Family

George Jenkins Cannon loved Lucy from the first time he saw her in the classrooms of LDS High School. A son of Abraham Cannon, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the oldest grandson of George Q. Cannon, the man who had blessed twelve-year-old Lucy in Washington, D.C., when she suffered from diphtheria, George grew up on a farm in southwest Salt Lake City near the Jordan River.

At fourteen, George often gathered bouquets of nasturtiums from his Grandfather Cannon's greenhouse, took them to school, and left them on Lucy's desk. When Lucy found the flowers, she would ask her best friend Grace Cannon, who was George's aunt, "Who put those flowers on my desk?" Grace would smile and say, "George did, of course." Lucy would smell the flowers and say, "Oh, he's so bashful. Why can't he give them to me instead of running away?" [^15]

Though most of their courting was done as part of a large group, George and Lucy eventually began to date, but often as a threesome—George, Lucy, and George's best friend, Tracy Y. Cannon, who helped George carry on the conversation. This continued until George went on his mission. "When others saw him talking to mother after he received his mission call," said Jean Cannon Willis, Lucy's daughter, "everybody thought that he was asking her to wait for him. But he was only asking if he could write to her. He was too shy to ask for a commitment." [^16]

The couple corresponded while George served a mission in Germany. He received quite a surprise when he returned home, for Lucy had been called as one of the first single women in the Church to serve a full-time mission. Before she left, he asked her to marry him after her mission, and she accepted. She served in the Western States Mission, headquartered in Denver.

Lucy returned from her mission in April 1902, and she and George were married in the Salt Lake Temple on June 26. At their outdoor wedding reception, the newlyweds stood on a small second-floor balcony while the Tabernacle Choir (of which Lucy was a member) serenaded them.

For most of their married life, Lucy and George lived with and cared for other family members. This pattern began immediately, for they moved in with Grandmother Grant to help care for her and for Lucy's three younger sisters—Florence, Edith, and Anna—while Elder Grant and his wife Augusta went to Japan to open the Japanese Mission. After they returned, George and Lucy moved into a home of their own and invited Grandmother Grant to come live with them. They cared for her until her death on January 27, 1909, seven years later.

Elder Grant took his wife Emily and three of her daughters—Dessie, Emily, and Frances—with him to England when he was called to preside over the European Mission. Upon their return, he built Emily her "dream house," but she was able to live in it only briefly. She died of cancer on May 25, 1908.

In 1918, after the death of her husband, George's mother moved in with the Cannons. Once again Lucy and her family willingly made room for an elderly relative; Grandmother Cannon lived with them for twenty-three years.

Continuing the close ties they had developed as children, Lucy and her sisters chose to live near each other as adults. Three members of the Grant family lived next door to each other in Salt Lake City—Heber J. Grant on the corner of "A" Street and Second Avenue, his daughter Florence Smith and her family next door to him, and Lucy Cannon next to Florence. Others of the ten sisters—Mary, Rachel, Frances, Dessie, and Anna—lived nearby. Emily's grandson, Truman G. Madsen, enjoyed growing up in this neighborhood because the children "had refrigerator privileges in any of the aunts' houses." [^17]

The gardens around George and Lucy's home always had nasturtiums blooming in the summer, and a nasturtium bouquet on the dining room table or mantle was a reminder of the days when bashful George had "wooed" Lucy anonymously with flowers in school. [^18] George worked in the insurance business, eventually becoming executive vice-president of Beneficial Life Insurance Company. With no living sons, Heber J. Grant had a father-son relationship with his sons-in-law.

In a patriarchal blessing, Lucy was promised she would have sons and daughters. Her first baby, Rachel, was born April 17, 1903, and Irene was born March 20, 1906. After Florence's birth January 16, 1909, the doctor told Lucy she should never have another baby. Lucy subsequently underwent several operations incident to childbearing before giving birth to another daughter, Jean, on June 17, 1917. She and George finally had a son, George Ivins, who was born March 9, 1920. But Lucy's blessing had promised sons, so she tried again. Her next baby was a daughter, Lucy Grant, born April 19, 1922. At last she gave birth to a second son, Heber Stanley, who was born June 20, 1925. Lucy felt that her blessing had been fulfilled.

Music, which had been a part of Lucy's life since her childhood, continued to be important to her and her family. The Cannons always had a grand piano and their children learned to play it. "I remember Mother singing early every morning while she did the washing down in the basement," George recalls. "We had a three-story house, including the basement, but we could hear her even up in the bedrooms. She was our alarm clock." Jean remembers that her mother used to have the children sing before they went to school every morning. "We listened to the opera every Saturday and the Philharmonic orchestra every Sunday," Stan says. And "Sunday evenings before we went to bed, we listened to 'The Spoken Word' broadcast from Temple Square." [^19]

The Cannons had a cabin at Brighton in Big Cottonwood Canyon, east of Salt Lake City. Lucy used to take her children, their friends, and their cousins to the cabin for the summer months. In later years, after she was called to serve in the MIA, she would often sign award certificates and read the young women's manuals during those visits to the cabin. [^20]

Caring for others always came naturally to Lucy. She welcomed those in need into her home, took food to the sick, remembered birthdays and other special occasions, and provided a listening ear and words of encouragement. She was a marvelous cook, according to her children. "We were always carting pea soup and breadsticks or candy to someone," remembers her son George. "That was our life, carrying food to anyone who was sick or lonely and then going out later to pick up the pots and pans." [^21]

Lucy also showed her concern for others through the written word. Every Monday she layered onionskin paper with carbon paper until she had enough copies for every family member away from home, then rolled the papers into the carriage of a typewriter on a table in an alcove off her dining room. She began her letters with the words "Dear Grant Clan," and once or twice a day throughout the week, she would add a few lines of news or inspiration. Her daughter Jean has copies of most of the twenty-two hundred letters Lucy wrote. [^22]

Lucy loved to entertain. After her father, Heber J. Grant, was sustained as president of the Church on November 23, 1918, he often asked Lucy and George to help him entertain. "From the alcove in my dining room I could look over into Aunt Lucy's dining room and see who she was entertaining," recalls Lucy's niece, Florence Smith Jacobsen, who became the sixth YWMIA general president. "Aunt Lucy often entertained General Authorities or other dignitaries for her father on general conference weekends. And all our big family birthday parties were held in Aunt Lucy's and Uncle George's basement. My cousins and I always served the food and had a wonderful time." [^23]

Service in the YWMIA

At age eighteen, Lucy was called to be the president of the Thirteenth Ward YLMIA and began what would be twenty-five years of service with the young women. When she returned from her mission in 1902, she was called again to serve in the YLMIA. Over the next several years she was a member of ward and stake YLMIA presidencies.

Martha H. Tingey was YLMIA president when Lucy was called to the general board on October 8, 1916. Lucy was assigned to a committee to provide a program for sixteen- and seventeen-year-old girls, whom they called Intermediate Girls. By February 1922, there were seventy-one Intermediate groups with 1,011 girls in twenty-two stakes. On July 5, 1922, the name was changed to Junior Girls.

When it became necessary for President Tingey's second counselor, Mae Taylor Nystrom, to be released, Lucy was called to replace her on July 15, 1923. This presidency served against the historical backdrop of the lavish life-style of the "roaring twenties." A strong economy created a comfortable setting for many, with smoking and drinking becoming common in radio programs and motion pictures, and many people adopting a worldly way of life. Girls bobbed their hair, wore loose dresses, and were called "flappers." Among the precautions the new YLMIA presidency took to guide LDS girls was a four-year study designed to preview films and make recommendations.

Lucy willingly did whatever she could to help Sister Tingey and the other YLMIA leaders, and that included driving them around town. Her son George adds a humorous note to this subject: "Mother was such a tiny little lady that she couldn't see over the engine of the car. She had to look between the steering wheel and the hood in order to see." [^24]

Her years of service on the general level of MIA coincided with her early years of motherhood. "The general board members were just like part of our family because they visited our home so often," Jean remembers, "but we never resented mother's church work or felt that she put it before us." [^25] "Mother used to take my sister Lucy and me to her meetings," said Stan, "and we'd be in the back being tended and doing crafts. Sometimes she would involve us in doing little jobs so we felt like we were helping." [^26] Lucy was especially close to Clarissa Beesley, whose niece Virginia married Stan Cannon.

June Conference was a time when all of Lucy's children were able to help her. Neighbors shared their flowers to decorate the stand in the Tabernacle, and the day before conference, the Cannon children would go around the neighborhood to gather the flowers, which they put into big tubs of water in the basement. The next morning, the entire family would load the flowers and baskets that they had saved throughout the year into the car and take them to the Tabernacle, where they arranged the bouquets right on the platform.

In March 1929 Martha Tingey was released as president of the YLMIA, and the new president, Ruth May Fox, selected Lucy as first counselor and Clarissa A. Beesley as second. That year George Cannon was also called to serve in a stake presidency. Elsie Talmage Brandley, in her History of the YLMIA, described Lucy during this period: "Deeply religious, unselfish, and obedient, she carries about her no atmosphere of sanctimony, but transmits the abundant faith which is hers into beautiful living, and demonstrates every day the loveliness of true and vital spirituality. Her goodness engenders in others a desire to do good. . . . To many girls in the MIA both now and in the years gone by, Sister Lucy Cannon stands as a light, illuminating the path that leads toward salvation. She is very good, very lovable, and very happy, harboring within her heart a love for all humanity, and unwavering assurance of the divinity of the gospel of Jesus Christ." [^27]

At June Conference in 1929, the new presidency announced the merging of the Young Woman's Journal and the Improvement Era. When the first issue of the new Improvement Era was published in October, the YLMIA threw a "wedding party" complete with wedding cake to celebrate. However, a few days later the festive spirit was dampened when the stock market crashed with dire consequences for the entire nation. In contrast to the comfortable life-style of the 1920s, the depression years of the 1930s were filled with hard financial times for nearly everyone. All three members of the YLMIA presidency had lived through a similar depression during the Panic of 1893. Whenever they spoke, they shared their experiences and the solutions they had found at that time.

One of Lucy's major accomplishments during her twenty-five years in the general YLMIA presidency took place in 1930-1931: the renovation of the Lion House, which had been used as part of the LDS High School. She had the vision and the determination to make it a successful social and educational center for Salt Lake City. She even involved her younger children in the project—they grew sweet-potato vines in glass jars at home for the Lion House windowsills and helped their mother arrange the furniture. At the reopening celebration of the Lion House, Lucy's son George played the piano as the musical background.

In the book History of the YWMIA, Marba C. Josephson described the newly renovated building: "In addition to providing cafeteria privileges, [the home] provided rooms for social parties; restroom accommodations for girls and women; organized classes in dressmaking, handicrafts, literature, cooking, English, storytelling; a lunchroom where girls brought their lunches and enjoyed a brief period of relaxation during the midday; reading rooms; and interest through the restoration of one or two of the historic rooms to their original condition." [^28]

During the following years, Lucy faced a painful personal challenge at home: her daughter Florence was dying from cancer. Lucy wrote the feelings of her heart in her weekly family letter: "A mother when she sees her offspring suffer would willingly change places, she feels she could bear it probably better because perchance she has suffered before, she has felt the pains of travail in bringing that child into the world, and she could bear the pain again and again for its sake. But Mary [the mother of Christ] did stand at the foot of the cross, and undoubtedly called upon her God for help for strength to witness that death struggle of her beloved son, and God did give her strength . . . and in that hour of suffering her soul was purified as suffering and sorrow can purify the soul. . . . And so in this way I talked to myself.

"This experience has been a hallowed one, I am a better woman from having passed through it. I feel more keenly for those who suffer. . . . I would not ask that I did not have this experience. I would not call my daughter back if I could. . . . Sorrow and joy[,] two of the great factors that come into life to make it real[,] have been experienced by us in having and losing this lovely daughter." [^29] Florence died on March 19, 1933.

The following year, an important change for the young women's organization took place: the name Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association was changed to Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association.

President of the YWMIA

In October 1937, after serving together for more than eight years, Ruth May Fox and her counselors were released, and Lucy Grant Cannon, at age fifty-seven, became the new YWMIA president. Lucy's choice of counselors and executive secretary resulted in a diverse but strong presidency. First counselor Helen Spencer Williams, a granddaughter of Brigham Young, was a strong creative thinker and writer with the ability to communicate warmth and love to others, while second counselor Verna Wright Goddard was a dynamic speaker, personal counselor, and problem solver. Clarissa Beesley became the executive secretary and organized the YWMIA office with businesslike efficiency. Six years later, on May 17, 1944, Helen Williams was released because of health problems; Verna Goddard became first counselor, and Lucy T. Anderson second counselor.

When Lucy Grant Cannon became YWMIA general president, the Great Depression still hung heavy over America and much of the world, and war loomed on the horizon. She was well aware of the difficulties facing her as leader of more than seventy-six thousand young women worldwide, but as a woman of faith, she accepted the challenge. During her administration, the YWMIA program grew strong. Each class had its own lesson manual, code, and symbol—the beehive for Beehive girls, the rose for the Junior class, and a sheaf of wheat for Gleaners. The Golden Gleaner award was established as the highest YWMIA award, and special interest groups, nicknamed "Spingro," were organized for adults over age twenty-three.

Against the backdrop of the Depression and threat of war, members of the YLMIA found diversion in roadshows filled with music and dancing. The influence of this golden time of radio and movies carried over into the YLMIA programs, with talent numbers becoming part of the opening exercises. Quartets became popular, and the jitterbug was allowed at dances.

War became a reality for Americans on December 7, 1941, when Japanese planes bombed Pearl Harbor. The 1942 MIA theme reflected the times: "Be strong and of good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest." (Joshua 1:9.) With the war, young Latter-day Saints were affected by worldly influences such as cheek-to-cheek dancing; dark red lipstick and nail polish, bare legs, and "snood" netting over long hair for the girls; and, "Zoot suits" for the boys. [^30] Standards were posted at the entrances of ward recreation halls for MIA activities, requesting appropriate dress, appropriate dancing, and adherence to the Word of Wisdom.

Leaders began to strongly emphasize the importance of a temple marriage in lessons, articles, talks, and yearly standards nights. At June Conference, a "Clean Life" program focused on moral purity. Signatures of young people who vowed to "attain cleanliness of thought" were collected from around the world, bound into four volumes, and presented to President Grant. [^31]

The war took its toll in other areas. The 1944 Diamond Jubilee celebration was minimized with scaled-down activities. When paper shortages limited the publication of manuals, the general presidency and board began communicating with MIA leaders through the Improvement Era. Gas-rationing forced a reduction in travel for leaders on the general level and a curtailment of ward activities that required members to travel long distances. Since the number of young women in the wards greatly outnumbered the number of young men, the YWMIA dance committee came up with the idea of a "One for Two" dance—one boy dancing with two girls. It didn't catch on—but all-girl dances at dance festivals did.

During the war years, Lucy became aware that many young women and their mothers needed to go to work and many had to leave their hometowns to find work. The YWMIA organized a "Big Sister" program, where local leaders were counseled to take special interest in out-of-town girls. The Beehive House continued to be used as a residence for girls who came to Salt Lake City to find work.

On May 14, 1945, a few days after the war in Europe ended, Lucy's father, President Grant, died. In her newsletter of May 15, she told family members, "Altho tears stream down my cheeks as I write, they are not tears of grief for him, but tears of grief for those of us who have loved and lost a great and good father, grandfather, husband, and friend." [^32]

Four months later, fighting ceased in the Pacific. After nearly four years of war, America was again at peace. The joyous spirit of peacetime was captured by three thousand dancers at a dance festival held at the Saltair resort on the shores of the Great Salt Lake the following June.

In 1947, Utah celebrated the one hundredth anniversary of the pioneers' entry into the Salt Lake Valley, and Lucy oversaw the celebration among more than 104,000 members of the YWMIA throughout the Church, with such events as square dancing, parades, and reenactments of the pioneer trek. This centennial focus contributed to a happy ending to Lucy Grant Cannon's administration.

After YWMIA

At general conference in April 1948, after serving as general president of YWMIA for ten and a half years; Lucy Grant Cannon was released.

Someone once asked Lucy what she would ask for if she had to live her life over again. "I would request better health," she reportedly answered. [^33] Prior to her release from the YWMIA, she had begun to suffer from Meniere's Syndrome, an inner-ear disease that causes dizziness, and throughout her life she had many health problems. But she never complained; in fact, she loved life and truly enjoyed it. In her "retirement years" she continued to find ways to serve. For several years she tended her grandchildren so her daughter Jean could teach Primary. She still took food or candy to those in need, wrote letters to her extended family, enjoyed fine music and literature, and studied the scriptures. And as she began to wear out after a lifetime of service, others served and cared for her.

After George's death at eighty-five, on April 2, 1965, the Cannon children regularly cared for their mother. Irene and her husband, Tom Lloyd, moved in with Lucy, and the other children came on a regular basis to help with her care. Completely bedridden for the last six months of her life, she bore her illness with patience and often thanked those who cared for her. On May 28, 1966, she died at age eighty-five.

"Happiness comes from within; it is a state of mind," Lucy wrote in the Young Woman's Journal in a statement that seems to sum up her own life. "One has to have experience with sorrow and pain in order to feel happiness in joy and health. To gain experience is one of the great objects of life, and the way in which one accepts the various situations of life shows progress or retrogression." [^34] Lucy found happiness as she accepted the challenges of her own life. Though she did not have vigorous health, she used her limited physical strength to serve the Lord, her family, and her friends. Her faith sustained her through personal challenges and in service to young women.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "I Remember Sister Reeder," collection of tributes, in possession of Oertel Aadnesen Riley Hoit.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] Diary of Bertha Julia Stone Reeder, in possession of Oertel Aadnesen Riley Hoit, n.d.
[^4] Bertha Stone Reeder Oral History, 1974, James H. Moyle Oral History Program, Church Archives, 2.
[^5] Telephone interview with Oertel A. Hoit, November 21, 1990.
[^6] Personal interview with Grant C. Aadnesen, November 19, 1990.
[^7] Telephone interview with Oertel A. Hoit.
[^8] Letter from Charles E. Peterson to Oertel A. Hoit, January 10, 1983.
[^9] Personal interview with Grant C. Aadnesen.
[^10] Telephone interview with Helena Larson Allen, November 15, 1990.
[^11] Telephone interview with Oertel A. Hoit.
[^12] Blessing given to Bertha S. Reeder, December 29, 1941, by President David O. McKay, Salt Lake City, Utah; copy in possession of Oertel A. Hoit.
[^13] Diary of Bertha Julia Stone Reeder.
[^14] Bertha Stone Reeder Oral History, 15.
[^15] Letter from Kenneth W. Porter to Oertel A. Hoit, December 31, 1982.
[^16] Bertha Stone Reeder Oral History, 8.
[^17] Ibid., 17.
[^18] Ibid., 7.
[^19] Diary of Bertha Julia Stone Reeder.
[^20] Ruth Hardy Funk Oral History, 1979, Church Archives, James H. Moyle Oral History Program, 31.
[^21] "If I Were in My Teens," Improvement Era, June 1954, 470.
[^22] Transcription of funeral service of Bertha Reeder Richards, December 30, 1982.
[^23] Bertha Stone Reeder Oral History, 41.
[^24] Ibid., 32.
[^25] As quoted by Verda Mae Christensen in telephone interview with author, Janet Peterson, January 13, 1992.
[^26] Ibid.
[^27] Bertha Stone Reeder Oral History, 34.
[^28] Transcription of funeral service.
[^29] Ibid.
[^30] "I Remember Sister Reeder."
[^31] Diary of Bertha Julia Stone Reeder.
[^32] Bertha Stone Reeder Oral History, 9.
[^33] Cannon et al. Interview.
[^34] Lucy Grant Cannon, "Experience," Young Woman's Journal 40 (August 1929): 410.
