Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

6

Florence Smith Jacobsen [^1]

1961-1972

Late one night in August 1965, Florence Jacobsen looked around the Joseph Smith Sr. home in Palmyra, New York, with others who had helped her refurbish it. Every detail was perfect. The windows, enlarged by later residents of the house, had been restored to their smaller size. Each original shrunken random-width board in the wooden floor had been moved over to fill in the cracks. New tongue-in-groove boards had been fashioned and used to fill in the space left from sliding over the original boards. Shingles similar to the ones used in the early 1830s had even replaced the modern shingles on the roof. From the rocking chair in the parlor to the handmade candles in each room, everything was consistent with the time period when the Smiths lived there.

"Let's light all the candles and walk through the home," Florence suggested. The warm glow of flickering light filled each room as she and the others lit the candles and turned off the electric lights. "It was like going back in time," she remembers. "We climbed the stairs, and I wondered how many times my great-grandfather Hyrum Smith, who helped build the house, had gone up and down those stairs. We walked slowly from room to room and imagined the Smiths living there—eating and sleeping and going through all the joy and the trauma surrounding that significant time in their lives. We sat in the parlor and envisioned the excitement that must have filled that room when young Joseph sent his sister Sophronia over to the original log cabin, where Hyrum and his wife Jerusha then lived, to get a box in which to place the plates he had received from the angel Moroni at the Hill Cumorah."

For Florence Jacobsen, who knows that care to meticulous detail can help recreate a setting that can take us back in time so we can experience history, such is the reward of refurbishing or restoring a home.

A Rich Heritage

Florence Smith Jacobsen is the granddaughter of two presidents of the Church, Heber J. Grant and Joseph F. Smith. She grew up in Salt Lake City on Eighth Avenue between A and B streets, surrounded by extended family. Her parents, Willard Richards and Florence Grant Smith, were the parents of six sons and two daughters: Willard Grant, Florence, Richards Grant, Briant Grant, Heber Joseph, Howard Grant, Sarah Ellen, and Paul Grant. Florence quickly became known as "Sis" to avoid confusion with her mother. Aunt Lutie—Lucy Grant Cannon, Florence's aunt and the fourth general president of the YWMIA—lived next door. President Grant lived on the other side of the Smiths. Several of Florence's aunts, uncles, and cousins lived in homes scattered throughout the surrounding blocks.

During Florence's childhood and her early married life, one of her two grandfathers served as president of the Church first, Joseph F. Smith, and then, after President Smith's death, Heber J. Grant.

"I remember as a young child visiting Grandfather Smith in his home in the Beehive House," she says. "He used to lift me up on his knee and open a desk drawer and give me some candy mints or candy-coated almonds to eat. He was the kindest man I have ever known as his eyes radiated kindness." [^2]

When Heber J. Grant became president of the Church, he chose to remain in his home rather than move to the Beehive House, which had previously been the president's official residence. As a result, Florence spent much of her childhood with him. She clearly remembers him "picking out the melody of Church hymns on the piano and loudly singing the songs." [^3]

Life in the Smith household was busy and happy for Florence, the eldest daughter. Her father, a gentle man, had been protective and supportive of his own mother, and after he married, he treated his wife with the same solicitude. "There were eight of us children, and father had us so organized that the job never got too big for my mother," she said in a magazine interview. "He'd have us up at six o'clock calling, 'It's a beautiful morning! Time to get up.' And we all knew what we were supposed to do. . . . I never saw my mother scrub a floor. My father or my brothers always did it." [^4]

From the time Florence was two until she was fifteen, her father served in the bishopric. He was also an officer at Zions Saving Bank and Trust Company. But though he was busy, he spent Saturdays with his children, usually taking them on tours of sites in and around the Salt Lake Valley. Sometimes they walked and sometimes they rode in a Stearns-Knight open touring car. "Father always told us the history of the places we visited," she remembers. "Then he'd bring us home and take all the boys and neighborhood kids to the Deseret Gym. Mother and I usually baked cookies or made candy. Then Father would buy Morrison meat pies and a quart of gravy on his way home and we'd have that for dinner. Those were happy memories."

Birthdays and Christmas were big family events, usually celebrated with dinner parties in the basement of Lucy Grant Cannon's home. The family would eat at a long table made of wooden planks on trestles. For Christmas, there were homemade gifts for everyone, and a Christmas tree decorated with taffy-filled cornucopias for visiting children.

A summer home in Emigration Canyon east of Salt Lake City served as a retreat for the extended Grant and Smith families. Florence and her cousins dug a stage out of the side of the mountain and performed their own plays. Sometimes they used Aunt Lucy's cabin in nearby Big Cottonwood Canyon.

Florence remembers tender moments as her parents shared stories from the lives of their ancestors. Her interest in Church history grew as she learned of these ancestors, most of whom had been leaders in the Church since its restoration in 1830. One of her favorites is her great-grandmother, Mary Fielding Smith, widow of Hyrum Smith. "The lives of my ancestors influenced me as much as anything else," she says. "I always wanted to be a stalwart like Mary Fielding, who was a little English lady, but very proper and, extremely courageous."

Having her grandfathers serve as president of the Church brought Church history and its buildings and artifacts into Florence's everyday life. She still remembers her feelings when she visited the Beehive House, where her Grandfather Smith lived, and her realization that Brigham Young had built this home and made many of its furnishings. Similar feelings filled her when she visited the home of Mary Fielding Smith.

"I have always been interested in things of historical significance," she once said in a newspaper interview. "Even when I was a little girl, if I saw a chair that belonged to a person from the past, I revered it, and I felt it was a privilege to see it. . . . For example, a flour barrel in one corner of the Lion House is a family heirloom. It came across the plains tied onto the Longstroth family wagon [Florence's second great-grandparents]. . . . I feel a part of these people and feel like it's a great privilege to be involved in these things to help preserve the past and pass it on to future generations." [^5]

College, Career, and Courtship

Florence attended LDS High School on the same block as the Church Administration Building in downtown Salt Lake City. When she was fifteen, she took sewing lessons at the Lion House, which was then used by students of the high school for some classes. Possessing a natural gift for sewing and an eye for good design, she learned to make hats on a hat block, to crochet beaded bags, and to make lace.

After graduating from high school in 1930, Florence attended the University of Utah, where she developed her talents in fashion design, interior design, and architectural design as a home economics major. "I took historical architecture," she says. "My thesis was on historical fashions, and it was totally illustrated in color. I have been terrifically interested in it all my life."

When Florence signed up for a geology class at the university and went on a field trip, she found more than knowledge about geology—she met her future husband, Theodore C. Jacobsen. The class visited a large sandbar that had built up when the Great Salt Lake was much higher than it is today. Ted noticed Florence, who was climbing the sandy bar with her best friend and cousin, Edna Boyle.

"I wanted to be introduced to Florence," remembers Ted. "I knew Edna, so I climbed up behind them and pulled at their feet just a little bit so it was hard for them to get to the top. Finally Edna introduced me. I invited Florence to a fraternity party that night, but we didn't have a very good time. I thought I should ask her out one more time to make up for the first date, and that was when I became interested in her." [^6]

Five years older than Florence, Ted Jacobsen was born in San Francisco. His father, Soren N. Jacobsen, had come alone as a boy of nineteen from Denmark to America to find work as a millwright (combination carpenter and mechanic). Once in America, he kept moving westward, eventually finding his way to Salt Lake City, where he met Anna M. Jensen, a convert to the Church from Norway. They married and moved to San Francisco, where he used his carpentry skills to help rebuild the city after the earthquake and fire of 1906. He also joined the Church, and the family moved back to Salt Lake City. [^7]

Ted served a mission in Denmark. When he returned, he began studying engineering at the University of Utah and was active in a fraternity. Since Florence was vice president of her sorority, they were part of a close group of students who dated and attended parties together.

During the summers, Florence worked at the Utah Home Fire Insurance Company, typing and answering the telephone. After graduation in 1934, she got a job at the Salt Lake Knit company, where she soon became a pattern maker, a job requiring exacting skills. (Even now, she can still cut out a dress freehand.) She excelled in the work and was soon designing dresses.

Florence was fortunate to have been able to attend college and then get a good job during those early years of the Great Depression. She remembers the day when the effects of the Depression hit the Smith home. On that day Willard Smith gathered his family around the kitchen table and told them he and the other bank officers had made a difficult decision that afternoon. They could either retain full salaries and let half of the employees go or cut their own salaries and retain all the employees. They voted to cut their own salaries and preserve the jobs for others.

"It was tough," says Florence. "There were eight children, and two of my brothers were on missions and I was in college. My father said we were all going to have to pitch in and get jobs as well as cut back. I can remember making my clothes over and even taking mother's old clothes and redoing them. In fact, I once won first prize for taking an old velvet dress of mother's and making it into a formal for me."

The Smiths helped their hired girl find another job, and then the children divided up the housework. Florence's jobs included putting up all the lunches, cleaning the upstairs bathroom and her own bedroom, and dusting the living room, dining room, and alcove. On Saturdays, she ironed shirts for her father and brothers.

As difficult as things were for the Smiths, they were better off financially than many families. Florence remembers finding copies of hundreds of letters among her father's things after he died indicating that he had often personally loaned money to people when the bank couldn't give them a loan because they had no collateral—five hundred dollars to one, a thousand to another. This illustration of her father's generosity has served as a powerful example for Florence throughout her life.

Florence and Ted courted for more than two years. Ted remembers one of their dates that had a surprise ending: "My friend and I took our dates tobogganing once. As I took Florence down those steep hills from the 'U' on the hill near the University of Utah, we built up terrific speed. My friend and his date were right behind us. The snowbanks were very high on the streets and we couldn't stop when we came to the road so we took a ten-foot drop. Both of our dates ended up unconscious and slightly injured." [^8]

During the Depression, Ted quit school and went to work with his father, a contractor, whenever a job was available. While working on a building at Utah State Agricultural College in Logan, he finished his final year of engineering and graduated—nine interruption-filled years after he had started his college studies at the University of Utah. During these separations, he and Florence continued their courtship by correspondence.

Marriage and Family Life

Ted and Florence were married by President Heber J. Grant in the Salt Lake Temple on September 23, 1935. Their wedding breakfast was held at the Lion House, which had been recently redecorated by Florence's Aunt Lucy. The newly married couple lived for several months in Evanston, Wyoming, while Ted completed a contracting job building a new high school. Meanwhile, they bought a home in Salt Lake City on Harvard Avenue, through the block from Ted's parents. His father remodeled the home for them while they were in Evanston.

Florence and Ted's first child, Stephen Smith Jacobsen, was born May 28, 1938. Constant dehydration from the summer heat threatened his life, so Florence, her mother, and Stephen spent most of the hot summer in the Smiths' cabin in the higher elevation of Emigration Canyon, which was twenty degrees cooler than the Salt Lake Valley. Three years later, on October 1, 1941, Alan Smith Jacobsen was born; and four years after that, on November 20, 1945, Heber Smith Jacobsen joined the family.

As a contractor, Ted usually had to work half a day on Saturday. This was a difficult adjustment for Florence, who had such fond memories of her Saturday-morning adventures with her own father. But as the boys got a little older, Ted could see how important family outings were to them, and one Saturday he took his family fishing on the Snake River in Idaho. Florence and the three boys fished from the shore while Ted, in chest-high waders, walked into the river. Suddenly he stepped into deep water and disappeared right before Florence's eyes. "It was the most horrifying experience of my life," she remembers. "I thought 'He's gone! I'm a widow!' But miraculously, Ted was able to take off the waders and surface again. I said to him, 'Honey, I don't care if you ever take off Saturday again.'"

Despite this fearful moment, the Jacobsens continued to enjoy fishing together, and in 1961 they bought a cabin on Hebgen Lake in Montana near Yellowstone National Park. An excellent fisherman and cook, Florence, who isn't afraid of hard work, would clean the pans in which they cooked fish over an open fire by scrubbing them with sand until her hands were red.

The family enjoyed a few weeks at the ocean every summer at the family home on Balboa Island off the coast of California. The children loved fishing, swimming, water skiing, and lying in the sun. As they got older, they worked summers with Ted in his construction business. During these years, Ted served as bishopric counselor and then bishop of the Bonneville Ward. Florence became active in church, school, and community organizations, such as PTA, Red Cross, Cancer Society, and the University of Utah, and had a keen interest in politics.

Woven through Florence's executive skills is her love of and skill in homemaking. As a young mother, she often made costumes for various activities. She also excelled at knitting and needlepoint and in interior decorating. Christmas, always a special time during her childhood, retained its "larger than life" status in the Jacobsen home. Even today, handmade gifts, the preferred presents, make Christmas a year-round project, as she crochets afghans, stitches needlepoint pin cushions, or sews counted cross-stitch pictures and stores them in the family's "Christmas closet." Tradition surrounds the menus for the Christmas Eve dinner with relatives, the Christmas morning breakfast with the family, and a large dinner on December 26 for extended family. Her Aunt Lucy taught her how to make fondant and dip chocolates, and delicious homemade candies have long been an important part of her entertaining. "I love to be at a social gathering with Florence, and hear her happy laughter across the room," said Ted. "That has been one of my secret feelings about her. She has such a lovely laugh, and it gives me a good feeling to hear it." [^9]

Another of Florence's gifts is an ability to keep track of details and to organize people and events. A needlepoint cover encases her address book, which is filled with names, addresses, and phone numbers of hundreds of friends and acquaintances and a list of the clubs and groups to which she belongs. She keeps records of the names of everyone to whom she gives or from whom she receives a Christmas present or card. Family photographs, awards, and newspaper clippings fill neat scrapbooks. While serving as general president of YWMIA, she listed the name of every person who helped with June Conference, and to each she sent a handwritten thank-you note. She also keeps an updated list of every talk she gives and where she gives it.

Missionary Service and an Unexpected Call

In 1955, when the Jacobsen boys were teenagers, Ted was called to serve as president of the Eastern States Mission, and the family moved to New York City. They lived in the mission home at 973 Fifth Avenue, across the street from the Metropolitan Museum of Art and Central Park. Her years in the mission field proved to be an influential period in the development of Florence's leadership skills. She served as mission Relief Society president and vice chairman of the mission auxiliary board, and helped to write manuals and publish a monthly bulletin for each auxiliary. She also gained an understanding of the many challenges that Church members face in the mission field.

Soon after her return from New York in 1959, Florence was called to serve on the YWMIA general board. President Bertha S. Reeder assigned her to the Gleaner committee. Calling upon her experience in the mission field, Florence served as co-chairman of a committee to write a manual of activities and lessons for use by families who were isolated from other members. Then the concept was expanded, and a manual was prepared for a small MIA comprised of two or three families who lived in closer proximity. "I think those books were some of the best ever produced in the Church," she said. "They helped isolated families feel included as part of the larger Church program."

Years of Challenges and Rewards

Always an excellent hostess and cook, Florence rarely experienced a failure when hosting a dinner party. One notable exception was the day she was called to serve as general president of the YWMIA. Two of her sons, Stephen and Alan, had been activated with the Utah National Guard in the Berlin Crisis of 1961, and she had planned a going-away dinner for them on a Friday evening in late September. That afternoon President David O. McKay called her to his office and asked her to serve as general president of the YWMIA. She accepted, but she was stunned at the call and unable to think of anything else when she returned home to finish preparing dinner. Her sons realized that something was unusual when the food didn't taste quite right, but she could not tell them of her new calling yet.

At general conference on October 1, 1961, Bertha Reeder and her counselors, Emily Bennett and LaRue Longden, were released as the YWMIA presidency. Florence S. Jacobsen was sustained as the general president of the YWMIA, with Margaret Romney Jackson and Dorothy Porter Holt as her counselors. As the presidency set out to lead 300,000 young women, they sometimes ended up in Bertha's living room, asking for help and counsel. "Bertha would answer our questions," says Florence, "then she'd laugh and say, 'There's nothing to it. You'll be fine. Say your prayers and you'll be blessed."'

"It is my prayer that we can be so dedicated that not one single girl in this great Church will be forgotten," Florence declared at the area conference at Manchester, England, August 28, 1971. [^10] This concern for the individual was of primary importance for her and her counselors and their large general board, which fluctuated between fifty-eight and seventy members. Their years of service were filled with preparations for dance and music festivals, roadshows, parent and youth programs, new manuals, leadership training, youth conferences, and many other responsibilities, but underlying it all was a concern for the individual. Young women learned to keep personal record books, worked toward yearly Individual Awards as part of the girls' program, and served in class presidencies.

Though Florence was usually caught up in far-reaching YWMIA programs and restoration projects, she took time to meet and encourage "the one," often on a private and individual basis. When the presidency visited Japan for an area conference, they met Miyuki Uchida, a seventeen-year-old Laurel whose face had been severely burned in an accident when she was a baby. They made arrangements for her to come to America for plastic surgery. Laurels in many areas held service projects known as "Miyuki Days" to raise money for her transportation and surgery. The only Latter-day Saint in her family, Miyuki came to Salt Lake City and lived with Margaret Jackson for eight months while a local plastic surgeon reconstructed her face. [^11]

During these years of miniskirts and other signs of youth rebellion, dress standards took on a high priority in the MIA. In talks, seminars, and youth conferences, leaders reinforced the principle of modesty in dress and actions. Counselor Dorothy Holt remembers a testimony meeting at a youth conference where a young lady said that she had planned on wearing miniskirts as soon as she left home for college in the fall, but now, after hearing the counsel of the YWMIA, she had decided to maintain more modest dress standards. [^12]

Florence had seen how the Church's programs for young men, such as annual Explorer conferences, had taught her sons responsibility and independence, and she wanted the same kinds of experiences for the young women. As a result, a general Laurel conference was held in 1970 on the Brigham Young University campus. It was planned as a teaching conference to help the young women learn leadership skills. A steering committee of five Laurels was called to head the conference, with other committees of Laurels selected for various activities and programs. Florence and members of the general board worked with these committees, encouraging them to pray as they worked through their plans step by step and to consider how the young women would react to each part of their program.

Each stake and mission in the United States and Canada was invited to send five second-year Laurels and one leader to the week-long conference. The three thousand young women who attended were then asked to plan and conduct similar conferences in their own areas. "I still have mothers and young women call and say, 'That Laurel conference changed my life,'" Florence says. "President Harold B. Lee was one of the speakers, and he said that the conference was 'inspired and one of the finest things that's ever happened in our church.'"

Under Florence's direction, the YWMIA camp and other activity programs continued to grow. Each year, activities surrounding June Conference became the crown jewels of the YWMIA year. Excitement filled the air as thousands of youth leaders attended parent-youth programs, theme presentations, Improvement Era and M Men and Gleaner banquets, camp programs, arts festivals, and general and department sessions.

In addition to the programs for the Beehive, Mia Maid, Laurel, and Gleaner classes, the YWMIA was responsible with the YMMIA for the Young Marrieds program and for activities and classwork for Special Interests (single adults over twenty-five). The general superintendent of YMMIA served as general manager of the Improvement Era, and Florence was the associate general manager. A joint general board committee oversaw magazine subscription drives in wards, stakes, and missions. The executives and members of the two boards also helped to organize the Mormon Youth Symphony and to establish an outdoor theater on the site of the future Church Office Building, across Main Street from Temple Square, where performances of Promised Valley were presented on summer evenings. Later the Lyric Theater in downtown Salt Lake City was renovated and renamed Promised Valley Playhouse, and the musical moved to an indoor theater that also was used for other Church-sponsored productions.

Restoring the Past

When Florence became YWMIA president, she had no idea that the YWMIA was responsible for the operation of the Lion House until she saw her budget. Noting that only the cafeteria was in the black, she suggested that the home be restored for use as a social center. But soon she learned that there were plans to tear it down. With all the tenacity of her great-grandmother Mary Fielding Smith, she said that she'd "be out there sitting in front of the bulldozer" if it were torn down. Apparently, many others felt the same way because eventually the thinking changed on the subject. it was decided that the Lion House would be restored, under the direction of Florence Jacobsen.

The home was closed for five years for major reconstruction and renovation. Florence insisted that every detail of the furnishings be absolutely authentic. The original carpets in the home in the 1800s had been woven with seventeen colors. When she learned that modern-day looms could weave only twelve colors, she negotiated with the carpet manufacturer to hire five extra weavers to hand-lay the additional colors.

Finally the restoration was completed and the home was nearly ready to reopen. "I can remember when Florence invited all the board members down to the Lion House to help clean it," says Helena Allen, YWMIA secretary during Florence's administration. "All of us, including Florence, washed windows and cleaned every corner of that entire building." [^13] At the grand reopening in 1968, board members, wearing pioneer dresses, helped direct guests from room to room and downstairs to the cafeteria, now renamed the Lion House Pantry.

In the middle of the Lion House renovation project, Florence was asked in April 1966 to redecorate the Joseph Smith Sr. home near Palmyra, New York, in time for the Hill Cumorah Pageant in August. She was thrilled. The Hill Cumorah area was part of the Eastern States Mission, and when she had visited the home while living in New York, she had recognized that work needed to be done on it. Now she welcomed the opportunity to help make it authentic to the early 1800s, when the Smiths had lived there. Completing the project under a tight deadline while also planning and carrying out June Conference presented enormous challenges, but Florence, with the help of Margaret Jackson and others, pitched in and completed the assignment in time for the pageant.

When the YWMIA observed its centennial worldwide in 1969, a major focal point for the celebration was the Lion House, where Brigham Young had rung a prayer bell to call his daughters together to form the Retrenchment Association in 1869. In honor of the centennial, Florence placed a prayer bell in a niche in the front hall of the newly restored home, and a YWMIA history, featuring collages of historical photographs, was published. At June Conference, young women dressed in costumes of many nationalities participated in special all-girl productions at the dance festival; and drama presentations, camp programs, sports events, banquets, testimony meetings, receptions, and other activities centered around the centennial theme.

During her years as YWMIA president, Florence served as a member of the Church Arts and Sites committee under the direction of Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve. Committee members reviewed letters from persons who wished to donate artifacts, furniture, even homes to the Church. Elder Petersen would read each letter and then ask if the committee members thought they should accept the donation.

"I always answered yes," Florence recalls. "Someone would ask, 'Where are we going to store it?' and I'd say, 'In the basement of the Bureau of Information on Temple Square.' Since Ted was the director of Temple Square during those years, I had ready access to the bureau basement."

Florence enjoyed using her talents to improve anyplace where she lived or worked, including the mission home in New York City and the YWMIA offices. Before she was released as president of the YWMIA in 1972, she had been involved with the restoration or refurbishing of the Wilford Woodruff and Brigham Young homes in Nauvoo, Illinois, and the Peter Whitmer home in Fayette, New York, in addition to the Lion House and the Joseph Smith Sr. home.

A Close Friendship

As president of the YWMIA, Florence was a member of the National Council of Women (NCW) and of the International Council of Women (ICW). And as general president of the Relief Society, Belle S. Spafford was also a member of the two councils. They both enjoyed serving on committees and participating in meetings of the groups. Florence served on the ICW Child and Family committee from 1965 to 1973, and in 1966 she and Sister Spafford were official delegates from the NCW to the eighteenth triennial conference of the ICW in Tehran, Iran. In 1970 they attended the annual convention of ICW in Bangkok, taking with them a display of 120 items of Native American art. From 1974 to 1976 Sister Spafford served as president and Florence as third vice president of the NCW. After their terms were over, they were asked to rewrite the NCW constitution and bylaws.

The two auxiliary presidents traveled together often in connection with their church responsibilities. In 1962, they visited the ten stakes in England, Scotland, Holland, Germany, and Switzerland and held Relief Society and YWMIA conventions. "We all felt that the greatest frontier in the Church for MIA, is in the mission field," Florence said. [^14]

Later, in honor of Sister Spafford, Florence helped establish the Belle S. Spafford Endowed Chair in the Graduate School of Social Work at the University of Utah.

A New Career

At a special meeting in the Church Administration Building on November 9, 1972, the YWMIA general presidency and board were released. For six months after her release, Florence busied herself with furnishing a condominium in Palm Springs, California, that she and Ted had recently purchased. Her mother went to California with her (her father had died earlier), and the two women enjoyed the warm sunshine and trips to Los Angeles to visit Florence's sister, Sarah.

During this time Florence had no idea that another career loomed on the horizon, an opportunity as demanding as YWMIA president. Then one day in April 1973, she received a call from President Harold B. Lee, who asked if she would be willing to return to Salt Lake City and become Church curator. She accepted. Plunging into her new position, she set out to inventory and catalog the Church's art, historical possessions, and buildings; arrange for copyrights and security for these valuable works; and work out ways to handle additional donations. She gathered a corps of volunteers to help her, and soon she was able to hire curators who specialized in such areas as architecture, historical art, and art conservation. Eventually, she supervised thirty-eight employees, and her title was changed to director of Historic Arts and Sites.

Over the years, Florence directed the organization of the jumbled collections in underground storerooms on Temple Square and made sure that artwork and other irreplaceable artifacts were cleaned, cataloged, and stored in climate-controlled areas. One need soon became apparent: a museum in which to display some of the artifacts and art so that members and nonmembers could enjoy them. Her dream was fulfilled with construction of the Museum of Church History and Art on West Temple, across the street from the west gate of Temple Square. Her goals also included museum accreditation, uniform computer systems among museums and major historians in the state, and an effective loan policy. As a result, some treasures owned by the Church have been placed on permanent loan to museums throughout the world.

In 1976, when the U.S. Bicentennial was observed, Florence oversaw the development of an exhibit on the early Mormon pioneers for the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. The pioneers were of interest to the Smithsonian because as a people with their own government, society, educational system, currency, and military, they represented well the theme of the Bicentennial display, "We the People." As with other projects she conceived and directed, Florence achieved a high level of excellence with this exhibit.

"This is a lady whose life has made a difference," says Richard Oman, a curator at the museum in Salt Lake City, "and it has had a major impact on the Church. Her gift was creating institutions. With a very fast learning curve and an ability to adjust rapidly to new situations, Florence could make decisions easily and quickly. By surrounding herself with educated, capable people, she had access to the best advice possible. This was a lady capable of growth and change. She was a tigress for a good idea—a very eloquent tigress." [^15]

Florence continued to supervise the restoration of many Church buildings, including the Promised Valley Playhouse and Brigham Young Forest Farmhouse in Salt Lake City; the E. B. Grandin building in Palmyra, New York; the Brigham Young home in St. George, Utah, and the Jacob Hamblin home in nearby Santa Clara; the Pine Valley Chapel north of St. George; the Newell K. Whitney store in Kirtland, Ohio; and the interior of the Manti Temple.

Through the years Florence has received numerous awards and honors. In October 1968 she received the National Council of Women "Woman of Conscience" award for her service to youth and her "efforts to promote respect for the rights and freedoms of others." [^16] Students at Ricks College in Rexburg, Idaho, selected her to receive their Exemplary Womanhood Award in 1974, and BYU women students gave her a similar award in 1980. Others have included a special award of recognition from the Church at a Master M Man and Golden Gleaner program in 1973, a silver plate in appreciation for her devotion to the youth of the Church; [^17] and the 1989 Utah Museum Association Award of Merit.

Instilling the Past in the Future

Florence Jacobsen's strong feelings toward heritage and family have ensured her willingness to invest time and energy into the well-being of her grandchildren and nieces and nephews. She is concerned about those who face serious challenges and looks for ways to help them. She refuses to lose hope in their future. [^18]

"You can really tie the living of the gospel in the tradition of the family," she said in a newspaper interview. "I've started the young women on needlepoint pieces, trying to teach them the art young pioneer girls were required to learn when they did samplers. On their eighth birthday, I have given each of the girls a piece of antique jewelry that I got from one of my grandmothers. I have written letters telling how I received these pieces and how much I treasured them. I instructed the girls that whenever they are tempted to do anything wrong, the jewelry should remind them they were not to come to any kind of wrong-doing." [^19]

"Florence is like her father, a perfectionist with unlimited energy," Ted observes. "She has made good use of the years of her life." [^20] Few have accomplished as much with their lives as has she. A devoted wife, mother, and homemaker, she has served extensively in the Church, in the community, and in the National and International Councils of Women, and in preserving the past she dearly loves. Florence Jacobsen is an example of the good one person can do when she is committed to a cause and uses her talents to bring that cause to fruition.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Except as noted, all quotations by Ruth Hardy Funk and details of her life are taken from Ruth Hardy Funk Oral History (1979, James H. Moyle Oral History Program, Church Archives), and from personal interviews with Ruth Hardy Funk, conducted by Janet Peterson, October 30, 1990, and May 15, 1991.
[^2] Jeane Woolfenden, "There's Always the Promise of Morning," New Era, May 1977, 29.
[^3] Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake; The Life of George Reynolds (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992).
[^4] Telephone interview with Marcus C. Funk, January 8, 1991.
[^5] Telephone interview with Jennie Jo Funk Emery, May 16, 1991.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Telephone interview with Nancy Funk Pulsipher, May 17, 1991.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Telephone interview with Marcus C. Funk, January 8, 1991.
[^10] Telephone interview with Allyson Funk Gurney, January 8, 1991.
[^11] Telephone interview with Marcus C. Funk, January 8, 1991.
[^12] Telephone interview with Hortense Child Smith, January 9, 1991. (A widow, Hortense married Elder Eldred G. Smith, Patriarch to the Church, in 1978.)
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Ardeth G. Kapp Oral History, James H. Moyle Church History Program, Church Archives, 84.
[^15] "The Aaronic Priesthood MIA," Ensign, July 1973, 80-81.
[^16] Ardeth G. Kapp Oral History, 90.
[^17] Quoted in ibid., 104.
[^18] Ibid., 107.
[^19] Ibid., 112-13.
[^20] Telephone interview with Hortense Child Smith, January 9, 1991.
