Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

7

Ruth Hardy Funk [^1]

1972-1978

At the closing session of the 1975 June Conference in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, when MIA leaders traditionally sang "Carry On," the conductor passed his baton to Ruth Hardy Funk, general president of the Young Women, to lead the song. He told the audience, "Because of her great love for youth and her dedication to them, we feel it only fitting that she conduct this song at this special time." She stepped to the conductor's stand and with fervor led the congregation in singing "O youth of the noble birthright, / Carry on, carry on, carry on." [^2] That experience typified the focus of Ruth Funk's life—music and youth, along with love and devotion to her family.

Ancestry and Early Life

Ruth's maternal grandfather, George Reynolds, was born in 1842 in the Marylebone district of London. When he was nine years old, his grandmother's maid, a Mormon, began taking the boy to meetings of the Paddington Branch of the Church. Almost immediately he accepted the missionaries' teachings as true, and he pleaded with his parents to allow him to be baptized. They refused. Though he was discouraged, George continued to attend meetings in secret whenever he could. His parents, hoping that he would forget the Church, sent him to live with relatives in Paris when he was twelve. He returned to London about two years later and began attending a different branch of the Church. There, at age fourteen, he was baptized and confirmed—to the intense displeasure of his parents. At nineteen, George became a full-time missionary in London, and four years later, in 1865, he emigrated to Utah. A fine writer, he was secretary to five presidents of the Church, beginning with Brigham Young. Later in his life, he compiled the Concordance to the Book of Mormon and served as a member of the First Council of the Seventy. [^3]

George Reynolds's third wife, Mary Goold, also an English convert, was Ruth's grandmother. Ruth, as the second oldest grandchild, was close to Mary and remembered that she was "always the Relief Society president." Mary instilled in Ruth her great reverence for life and beautiful things—especially roses—and a deep and abiding faith in the Savior.

Ruth's paternal grandparents, Thomas Henry and Mary Ann Jenkins Hardy, were from second-generation Latter-day Saint Welsh mining families who were hardworking but fun-loving. Music was, according to Ruth, "an important part of their lives." The night before her great-grandfather Jenkins died at age eighty-six, he won a waltz contest at Saltair, a resort west of Salt Lake City on the shores of the Great Salt Lake. Later, Ruth's grandfather Hardy became winter caretaker at Saltair, and she remembers spending Christmas afternoons roller-skating on the dance floor of the pavilion there.

Though the Hardys were not active in the Church, Mary Ann encouraged Fred, their oldest child, to go to church and take his four younger sisters. Ruth described him as having been "born with an impassioned testimony and devotion to the Lord." He became a dentist, a semiprofessional baseball player, and a fine musician.

Fred Hardy grew up in the Nineteenth Ward in Salt Lake City, as did Polly Reynolds, the daughter of George and Mary Goold Reynolds. Polly waited for Fred while he served a mission to England. When he returned, they married the day before he left for dental school at Northwestern University in Chicago. Since Polly, the second of nine children, helped support her mother and younger brothers and sisters by teaching school, she stayed home until the beginning of the next school year before joining him in Chicago. Ruth, Fred and Polly's first child, was born February 11, 1917, in Chicago. When Fred completed dental school, the family returned to Salt Lake City.

Ruth, who grew up in an environment where she was unconditionally loved and encouraged to develop her abilities, has described her childhood as "truly exceptional." The oldest of four children and the only girl, she inherited her passion for music from her father. Her earliest childhood recollection is of her mother telling her, "When you see your daddy coming, start winding up the phonograph." Ruth usually put on her father's favorite recording, of Caruso singing Pagliacci. He had a good tenor voice and would burst into singing whatever was playing when he entered the house. He never called his children to dinner or to go to church; rather, he signaled them by playing the piano.

Ruth began her piano studies at the age of six. Her father promised her that as soon as she could play Mendelssohn's "Rondo Capriccioso," he would buy her a grand piano. By the time she was twelve, Ruth earned her piano by playing not only the Mendolssohn piece at her first solo recital, but fifteen other pieces as well.

As Ruth grew up, she often arose at four o'clock to practice. Many times her mother pleaded with her to stop so she could get ready for school. As much as she loved practicing, Ruth was "bored stiff" with scales. But knowing they were essential to technical development, she devised a method of reading a book propped on the piano while playing scales and exercises. As a child, she especially loved the works of Chopin, Beethoven, and Mozart. Later she became enchanted with Debussy and the Impressionistic composers. After she started teaching piano herself, she was enraptured with Bach, Prokofiev, and Khatchaturian.

Polly and Fred enjoyed hearing Ruth play, and Ruth admitted to "always finding the right time to play," including after dinner when the dishes needed to be done or when other work was waiting. She also found that her piano playing got her out of taking a sewing class in high school. She put off taking sewing, something she did not like or do well, until her senior year. Then, because the sewing room was right next to the choir room, the choral teacher would borrow her every day to accompany the choir. At the end of the semester, Ruth had not even begun her required sewing project. The very strict sewing teacher never allowed students to work on their projects outside of class, but she made an exception in Ruth's case. She handed her the untouched fabric and told her to bring the project back completed—and she didn't care who did it. Ruth's mother, an excellent seamstress, did a beautiful job on the project, and when Ruth handed the completed item to her teacher and started to explain that her mother had done it, the teacher interrupted her and said, "I don't care. I don't even want to know who did it. I couldn't bear to have you in my class another semester. You will receive a D-minus."

Polly, a keenly intellectual woman, a scholar of the scriptures, and an artist, demanded excellence of herself and of her children. Ruth was not as fastidious as her mother and would rather get housework over with and go on to something more enticing. Once when she hurried through scrubbing the kitchen floor and only swiped the middle, her mother threw a bucket of water on the floor. By the time Ruth mopped the water out of all the corners, she knew what it meant to clean a floor thoroughly. Her fondest memories of her mother were the many hours they spent together as she drove Polly, who didn't drive, to the temple, to YLMIA general board meetings, to give book reviews of Jesus the Christ, shopping, and to other appointments. "My understanding and love of the gospel and for all of God's children were molded during these driving hours," she said.

Ruth's three brothers were all born at home. She was only two years old when Frederick was born, but she vividly remembers the events surrounding the births of Howard and Grant. She was the first one to hold the babies when her aunt Millie Martsen, the midwife, brought them from the bedroom where they were born.

Ruth enjoyed the influence of her aunt Alice Louise Reynolds, a professor of English at Brigham Young University, an editor of the Relief Society Magazine, and a member of the Relief Society general board. Although Alice lived in Provo, she often shared Ruth's room in the Hardy home whenever she was in Salt Lake. In Alice, Ruth found a stimulating companion who shared great literature with her, sent her postcards from her world travels, and introduced her to fascinating people.

Some Difficult Decisions

Because Ruth's musical prowess often put her into adult circles, she felt comfortable in the company of people older than she. When musicians and pianists visited Salt Lake City, she frequently performed for them in her own home, her teacher's studio, or various other settings. One renowned pianist, Leopold Godowsky, heard her play when she was in high school and suggested that she go to New York to continue her musical studies and train to become a concert pianist. Her father, greatly concerned about Ruth's future, consulted with Tracy Y. Cannon, chairman of the Church music committee and a close family friend. One Sunday the Hardy family and Brother Cannon fasted and prayed about the problem. Ruth, who was very close to her father, told him, "Daddy, no one but my Heavenly Father loves me more than you and Mother. No one else better knows how much I love music. I want you to make the decision." Her mother offered the prayer to end the fast. Then, while Polly and Ruth were preparing dinner in the kitchen, Fred and Brother Cannon consulted in the living room.

"I was beautifully and gently told by my father that our Heavenly Father had other things in mind for me than the pursuit of a career that could take on a dimension that could swallow up the more important opportunities I would be given," Ruth recalled. "He said I should remain in Salt Lake and continue my musical education but that I should not pursue a concert career. . . . The Lord knew I couldn't handle both that and the other major experiences that he wanted me to have. In no way can anything in music compare with motherhood and serving the Lord and knowing his scriptures and his doctrine. I feel I was guided by inspiration and I am grateful. Now the answer isn't going to be the same for everybody. Some women can and do manage it. I wouldn't ever suggest the fact that this was what the Lord wanted for anybody else but me. He knew my obsession."

Ruth decided to attend the University of Utah and to major in music education. She performed extensively as a soloist and as an accompanist and found time for involvement in other activities, such as serving as a class officer, as president of her sorority, and on various committees and councils.

Ruth fell in love with and became engaged to a friend from high school, a fine violinist with whom she spent many hours playing concertos and sonatas. They shared intellectual and cultural interests—but not religious beliefs. While Ruth was in California accompanying the Male Glee Club on a concert tour, she received word from her parents that she was to take the next train home: her grandmother Hardy was dying and wanted to see her. Her father met her at the depot and drove her directly to see her grandmother, who had been in a coma for two days. When Ruth entered the bedroom and spoke, her grandmother opened her eyes and said, "Ruth, you can never be happy marrying your young man. He will never hold the priesthood." Those were her last words. Later, Ruth broke off her engagement.

Music played an important part in Ruth's meeting her future husband. When she played a solo on the university's homecoming assembly, Marcus Christopher Funk noticed her and asked a friend who she was. He called her for a date, but they were not able to get together for two months. Their first date was to the senior class prom. That night, Ruth said, "by the time I was at the foot of our street, I knew. I really knew. He just personified everything that I had dreamed of." Marcus felt the same way. "Both of us knew that something very special had happened," he recalled, "and we moved forward with our relationship quite fast." [^4]

Ruth accepted Marcus's ring a month later but didn't tell her parents for another month, fearing they would think she was in love on the rebound. She graduated from the University of Utah in June 1938. Since she and Marcus planned to marry in December and she would be accompanying Marcus in pursuit of his degree in dental surgery, she sought a half-year teaching position. The only one she could find was with a first-grade class whose teacher had become ill. She taught seventy-five children in two separate sessions each day.

At that time, the school district had a policy that allowed each teacher to decide whether she would accept a physically impaired child in her class. The parents of such a child brought their son to Ruth's class. "I was young," she said. "I didn't know a thing about handicapped children, but I remember looking at him and thinking, 'How can I turn him down? How can you say no?' I said, 'Of course I'll take him.'"

The boy had many physical problems, but Ruth's response to him was one of love. She said, "For reasons I really can't know, except the influence of the Spirit of the Lord and my continuous love of everything that breathes, which I think I inherited from my father, I loved him. I loved him right from the beginning." Because she loved him, the other first-graders responded positively and rejoiced in his accomplishments. "I learned the great lesson that one of the reasons God gives us the handicapped is to help to refine the souls of those of us who care for and teach and nurture children. We all have handicaps and must be our brother's keeper."

Marriage and Family

On December 31, 1938, Ruth and Marcus were married in the Salt Lake Temple, and they left by train that night for Washington, D.C., where he would take predental chemistry courses. Within a week after arriving in Washington, Ruth had a job as a substitute teacher. She left at eight in the morning and came home at six, walking several miles each way to save money. Marcus attended school from four in the afternoon to eleven at night, then worked from midnight until six in the morning at the Federal Reserve Bank. "Literally we did not see each other, except on Sundays," Ruth said. "Most of our early honeymooning was done by notes that we left here and there, which was a unique way to start a marriage, and I wouldn't recommend it to anyone." Marcus taught Sunday School in their Washington ward, and Ruth served on the stake Primary board.

Although the newlyweds had few pieces of furniture, they bought an old upright piano for twenty-five dollars. When they moved to Chicago the next fall so Marcus could attend dental school at Northwestern University in Chicago, the first item they purchased for their new apartment was a used piano.

Since teaching jobs at that time were scarce, with preference given to men and to single-parent mothers, Ruth applied for a job that required typing. She had never taken a typing course, but she believed that her years of practicing the piano would help prepare her to take the typing test. For two weeks she practiced typing as diligently as she had ever practiced the piano, and she got the job over eighty other applicants. She later became office manager for a staff of twenty-five.

Ruth was called as a counselor in the YWMIA presidency of the Chicago Stake, which at that time extended to Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Fort Wayne, Indiana; and Rockford, Illinois. Since her previous church callings had involved music and activities, this position gave her broader experience in Church administration.

Marcus was a senior in dental school when Pearl Harbor was attacked in December 1941 and the United States entered World War II. As a member of the Navy Reserve, he was able to complete his studies before reporting for active duty. He was assigned to the Marines, first in San Diego, California, and then at Camp Pendleton, near the town of Fallbrook. By then Ruth found out she was pregnant—something she had longed for during their four years of marriage. Because they could not obtain adequate housing, she returned home to Salt Lake City. Their first daughter, Nancy Ruth, was born July 11, 1943. Three months later, Marcus was able to get a weekend pass to come home to give her a name and a blessing.

Ruth and Nancy joined Marcus for six months before he was sent overseas on a cruiser, the Louisville. His ship was attacked twice by Japanese planes. During one of those attacks, a group of men with whom he had been conversing only seconds before were all killed. Unknowingly he had moved away just in time, and his life was spared.

While Marcus was on active duty, Ruth and Nancy returned to Salt Lake City, where Ruth was able to find an apartment in the tight housing market. At Marcus's instruction, she also bought a dental practice for him before he returned to Utah, since office space was nearly impossible to find. When the family was reunited, once more their first purchase was a piano for Ruth—this time a grand. Though Marcus had little interest in music, he wanted Ruth to be happy. She also needed a piano to teach lessons.

The Funks' second daughter, Allyson Marie, was born April 24, 1947. Five days later Lucy Grant Cannon, YWMIA general president, and her two counselors visited Ruth and called her to serve on the general board. Ruth's mother, Polly, had been on the general board for the past eighteen years, so mother and daughter would serve together.

Ruth was assigned to the music committee and to the Junior Girls committee, which developed the lesson manuals as well as the rose symbol for girls sixteen through eighteen years of age. She accompanied the June Conference music and dance festivals. When Lucy Grant Cannon was released in 1948, all the board members were released as well. The new YWMIA president, Bertha Stone Reeder, called Ruth to her board but requested that Polly assist Ruth by helping care for her children.

Ruth and Tabernacle organist Roy M. Darley, representing the YMMIA, comprised the music committee, which gave them numerous assignments to fill: writing or reviewing the yearly music supplement; providing music for June Conference; submitting music for the monthly Leader magazine, which was sent to stake MIA officers; and teaching basic music skills through lessons in the manual and in training sessions.

Bertha Reeder believed that everyone who wanted to participate in the June Conference music festival should be given that opportunity. Although the logistics and rehearsals were more complicated than for previous 400-participant festivals, three thousand singers filled the choir seats and balcony of the Tabernacle for June Conference in 1949. "It was glorious," according to Ruth. "The Lord really had a hand in it. We couldn't have done it ourselves. It was humanly impossible for what was done to have been done. It was totally in the Lord's hands, and Roy and I were able to be his instruments."

Family Support

Ruth and Marcus spent two years designing a home and were ready to break ground when the Korean War broke out in 1950. Since Marcus, the senior reserve dental officer in Utah was subject to being called up, the Funks decided against building and bought their first and only home in Salt Lake City. George Hardy (Judd), their son, was born May 10, 1951, and six years later, on July 31, 1957, Jennie Jo was born. The four children all studied and excelled in music, each specializing on a different instrument or in voice: Nancy, cello; Allyson, violin; Judd, voice; and Jennie Jo, piano. Ruth continued teaching piano, and one of Jennie Jo's favorite memories as a child was "waking up on Saturday morning to the music of one of Mother's students, even though it was often at six o'clock in the morning." [^5]

Because of the importance Ruth and Marcus placed on family activities, they were the last ones in the neighborhood to acquire a television set. But, in tune with their philosophy of activity, they were among the first to buy a boat. According to Jennie Jo, their trips to Lake Powell in southern Utah were "tops, the absolutely best family excursions." [^6] The family also enjoyed outings in canyons and parks in the Salt Lake City area. Nancy remembered, "My mother never did anything in the ordinary way; she did everything with a flair. Our birthday parties were always wonderful, creative events that had a theme around which everything was planned." [^7]

Nevertheless, Ruth's church and civic commitments frequently kept her away from home and her children. Her mother arrived every Wednesday at noon, the day of general board meeting, to take over for her. The only other person who cared for the Funk children besides their mother and grandmother was their nanny, Edla Olson, whom Ruth described as "a gift from God," though Ruth later admitted that "having me away so much was harder on my children than I realized."

When Nancy, the eldest daughter, was old enough, she was responsible for preparing dinner on general board meeting nights. She said, "I always had a great sense of pride at the contribution my mother was making. For a number of years I participated in the June Conference music festivals, playing my cello in the orchestra. I also enjoyed my associations with Mother's co-workers and friends." [^8]

Marcus, supportive of Ruth and the extra efforts she always put into her assignments, told his children, "I am not a bit surprised at her callings. I knew when I married her that she wasn't an ordinary woman." [^9] The Funks' daughter Allyson said, "I missed not having my mother home, but I never once heard my father murmur or complain about her assignments"—whether they were meetings at Church headquarters or trips to the field throughout the world. "My father was extremely loyal to my mother," she continued. "He wasn't the bottlewasher or housekeeper support—because we had Mrs. Olson who took care of those things—but he supported Mom by encouraging her and never complaining." [^10] "It was really no sacrifice," Marcus said. "I was serving through her. I always liked the old saying, 'He also serves who only stands and waits.'" [^11]

A New Calling

As chairmen of the MIA music committee, Ruth and George I. Cannon, Lucy Grant Cannon's son, coproduced Papa and the Playhouse, a musical commemorating the one-hundredth anniversary of the Salt Lake Theater, for the 1962 June Conference. As with all her endeavors, Ruth worked with energy and enthusiasm on this production. She had more time than most people, for throughout her adult years she found she needed only about four to five hours of sleep a night. She said about her seemingly endless capacity to work, "Every morning I'd wake up with pure excitement about what the day might hold and with hopes that there would be surprises along the way. I guess that's why I've needed so little sleep, because I could hardly wait to wake up to see what was going to happen that day. I've always had the excitement for the dawn and the promises of life, even when it comes to some of the most horrendous challenges. I just love challenges." She also realized that not being a concert pianist or vocal performer suited her well, for she said, "I'm really the happiest when I am behind the scenes seeing people maximize their talents."

Following the 1962 conference, Elder Marion G. Romney called her on the telephone and changed her assignment from the MIA music committee to the Church correlation committee. Ruth's response was, "What in the world is correlation?" Elder Romney invited her to an orientation meeting at which Elder Harold B. Lee discussed the work of correlation. Ruth was assigned to the adult correlation committee, one of three committees formed to address the needs of children, youth, and adults. All curriculum and printed materials would be correlated and evaluated through these committees so that there was continuity, completeness, and unity in gospel teaching. For the next ten years, Ruth served first on the adult, then on the youth correlation committee. She participated in the refocusing of instructional design and development. With her organizational skills, she developed a visible framework to chart lesson topics and sequence in the curriculum.

While Ruth was serving in the demanding correlation assignment, she also found herself returning to schoolteaching. She had not planned to return to teaching, but in 1966, with her children in school, she agreed to teach junior high school choral classes for a friend who was to have surgery. She ended up teaching the entire year, and the next year she substituted for another choral director.

In 1969, Lorraine Bowman, the choral director at East High and Ruth's longtime friend on the general board, was killed in an automobile accident. Called to substitute as choral director, Ruth planned to teach only until another teacher was hired, but she found that teaching high school music was "an immediate love affair. I don't know when the spirit of affirmation was more pronounced. Here again, I was able to see this generation with their extraordinary ability to make decisions, to be leaders, to care for one another, to govern themselves. I had noticed the apathy of youth and their disinterest in things unless they were truly meaningfully involved."

Each day Ruth taught five hundred students, most of whom wanted to be involved in music activities. But she also saw a group of problem students hanging out in the halls. She invited their leader to play his guitar for her and to bring his friends, and she began giving up her free period to work with them. The boys played their guitars well, so she had them play for her choral groups and in assembly programs, providing for most of them their first success in high school. She maintained contact with many of the boys after they graduated. She recalls, "It was a privilege to work with those kids and see the unfailing spark of divinity that's in every human being, if you just reach far enough and accept them on their terms until they finally trust you and know you really do like them."

A Call from a Prophet

One night Ruth had a dream that was repeated three times. In her dream, she said, "the new freeway was being built east of us, and I dreamt that I saw President Lee trying to move these enormous boulders. I was trying to help him move the boulders so the freeway could be built."

On October 27, 1972, she received a phone call at school from her husband, who told her that President Harold B. Lee wanted to meet with them after school that day. When they met in President Lee's office, he talked about the challenges of youth, particularly in the Church, and the need to strengthen the family and to develop strong youth prepared to serve in the Lord's kingdom. He then called Ruth to serve as president of the Aaronic Priesthood MIA Young Women, which would replace what had long been known as the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association.

Ruth chose Hortense Hogan Child as first counselor and Ardeth Greene Kapp as second counselor. Ruth and Hortense had been close friends since 1949, when they met as members of the YWMIA general board. In fact, Hortense said that they were so much alike that they could share shoes and eyeglasses. Once Hortense had forgotten to change her shoes before driving to Church headquarters and still had on an old paint-splattered pair. She had to give a report at an important meeting that day, so Ruth traded shoes with her. Another time Ruth had forgotten her glasses and was asked by President Harold B. Lee, then a member of the First Presidency, to accompany the opening song at a meeting. As she walked up the aisle with her music in hand, she took Hortense's glasses off her nose, put them on, and played the hymn. [^12]

Ruth, Hortense, and Ardeth had served together on the correlation committees. "Our greatest growth as far as understanding the gospel came during that time," according to Hortense. [^13] Ardeth said of their correlation experience, "It helped [us] see the whole Church organization, rather than a segment of the organization. . . . It helped [us] see the Church in relation to the whole world, rather than just the Wasatch Front, as we were preparing material. As we reviewed materials, I could see an increased emphasis on scriptural preparation in all the materials that were being written, which made what we were doing more than just a program." [^14]

On November 9, 1972, the First Presidency announced the organization of the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA, which would have responsibility for single adults over the age of eighteen, and the Aaronic Priesthood MIA, which would have responsibility for youths ages twelve to eighteen. The Presiding Bishopric would preside over the Aaronic Priesthood, assisted by the Aaronic Priesthood MIA Young Men's and Young Women's presidencies and boards. Ruth Funk and her counselors would be responsible for programs of the Young Women, and Robert L. Backman was appointed to head the Young Men. Presiding Bishop Victor L. Brown explained, "The MIA under this reorganization becomes part of the priesthood and is no longer an auxiliary." [^15] At the general conference priesthood session in April 1973, the changes were explained to the stake, ward, and mission leaders.

As Young Women general president, Ruth had the opportunity to implement, with divine guidance, the concept of peer leadership. "Teaching was a laboratory and a workshop for me," she said, "to test the theories that I believed in, but I didn't know it at the time." As a schoolteacher, she had turned over significant responsibilities to her students because she believed in young people and what they could do. Both the Young Men's and Young Women's presidencies believed that the youth should serve in leadership capacities, with adults playing supporting roles. Explaining the concept, Ruth said, "You give them the opportunity to perform and to expand and magnify what gifts they have, but the leader is there ever present to help them become what they can become. You don't become anything by hearing about it; you become by doing it."

President Lee had indicated in an informal meeting with the Young Women general presidency that the concept of youth leadership would take at least five years to implement. [^16] The years of Ruth's administration were a time for sorting out processes and establishing procedures for restructuring the organization and providing adequate training for and communicating with local leaders in order to establish the concept of youth leadership. The foundation was being laid for future administrations of Young Women presidents.

At the 1973 June Conference, a new guidebook for Aaronic Priesthood MIA leadership was introduced, outlining the structure and method by which the youth would lead themselves, assisted by adult leaders. This was a priesthood conference rather than an auxiliary conference, with President Lee conducting.

Over the next few years the organizational structure continued to be refined. In 1974, the Aaronic Priesthood MIA organization was restructured under the direction of the new Church president, Spencer W. Kimball. The Aaronic Priesthood MIA was separated into two organizations: the Aaronic Priesthood, with Rulon G. Craven as director, and the Young Women, under general president Ruth Funk. Two years later Elder Marion D. Hanks of the First Quorum of the Seventy was assigned to work with the Young Women, replacing the Presiding Bishopric. And in April 1977, the name Young Men was adopted, with Neil D. Schaerrer called as general president.

Under the new programs, communication from the general level to the local level underwent several changes. Bulletins to the field were eliminated, handbooks were trimmed, and travel was cut back so that the general board and presidency did not conduct as many training meetings as in the past. Communications to the field were sent through the Presiding Bishopric's office to the local priesthood leaders, who then passed information on to the auxiliary leaders, and stake leaders took greater responsibility in training ward leaders.

At the 1975 June Conference, a heritage arts festival was held, and each local unit was encouraged to present a similar program the next year. The First Presidency also announced that June Conference would be discontinued and replaced by regional conferences in order, as President Kimball said, to "take the program to the people." [^17] To encourage local units to become more self-reliant in meeting their own needs, scripts and musical programs produced on the general level were no longer printed and sent out. At first many stake and ward leaders felt they couldn't produce their own programs, but they soon found their efforts not only effective but, according to one leader, "better than June Conference." Ardeth Kapp observed as she traveled around the Church that the program of youth assuming greater leadership roles was beginning to work effectively in areas where the concept was understood and practiced. [^18]

During Ruth Funk's administration, the Young Womanhood Recognition program, emphasizing inner growth, goal setting, service, and accountability, replaced the girls' program. In 1974, the general presidency published "Behold Thy Handmaiden," which introduced six areas of focus for young women: spiritual awareness, homemaking arts, service and compassion, recreation and the world of nature, cultural arts and education, and personal and social refinement. Each girl who worked on goals she set in her own "My Personal Progress" booklet received a yearly certificate of progress. Laurels, at the end of their first year and as a culmination of their years in Young Women, were eligible to receive the Young Womanhood Recognition award by meeting standards of personal worthiness, attendance at church meetings, and achieving two goals in each area of focus for each year of membership in the Young Women program.

Because of Ruth's great interest in music, the Young Women published a songbook, Songs of the Heart, to provide music that was both uplifting and appealing. Three manuals were also published for the Beehive, Mia Maid, and Laurel age groups.

In December 1977, Ruth discussed with President Spencer W. Kimball the possibility of having a meeting, similar to general priesthood meetings, for the young women of the Church. Preparations continued through the first half of the year for that historic meeting, which was scheduled to be held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in September 1978. That May President Kimball called Ruth into his office and expressed his gratitude for all that she and her counselors in the Young Women presidency had done during the five and a half years they had served and said they were now to be released. The releases were publicly announced July 12.

Following their release, Ardeth Kapp wrote in her journal, "I think of the great and noble women that I have been privileged to work with, of whom it will be said, when the history of the Young Women from 1972 to 1978 is opened and read, 'Who else could have sustained the trauma of three major organizational changes, three changes of the Young Men's presidency, three changes of location, and three changes of priesthood advisors or managing directors?'" [^19]

Hortense Child, Ruth's counselor and friend for more than forty years, said of Ruth: "The things I admire most about her are her absolute and complete optimism, her unconditional love, her capacity for insight into people, and her great efforts for service toward each and every one that comes along. She is totally dedicated to doing good. She has also contributed greatly to the culture of the Church with her elevation of music and her sensitivity to the cultural heritage of the Church." [^20]

Released but Not Retired

After the Funk children grew up, married, and began having children, Ruth and Marcus added a room on the back of their home to provide additional space for family gatherings. Family activities have remained important to the Funks, just as they were when their four children were growing up. Now the family circle has expanded with the grandchildren.

"My children have loved going to their grandmother's house because she gets involved with them and plays games with them," says Nancy. "When they were young, one of the activities they enjoyed most was dancing around her living room while she played the piano. If they wanted to be butterflies, she would play butterfly music. If they wanted to be ogres, she would play ogre music. She has always been very interested in her grandchildren and what is going on in their lives." [^21] On each grandchild's birthday, Ruth takes the child on a "Grandma date." They go to a restaurant selected by the child, and then they go shopping so the birthday honoree can choose a special present. When a grandchild acquires a driver's license, Ruth drives to that young adult's home and asks the new driver to take her for a ride.

In addition to family activities, Ruth has found other ways to serve. Soon after her release from Young Women, she was called as the spiritual living teacher in her ward's Relief Society. For the sesquicentennial of the Church in 1980, she and George I. Cannon coproduced Zion, a musical production. In 1983, George, then serving as Ruth's stake president, asked her to direct Zion in the Parley's Stake; 40 percent of the stake members participated. For the 140th anniversary of Relief Society in 1982, Barbara B. Smith, general president of the Relief Society, asked Ruth to serve as coordinator for a series of concerts, featuring outstanding LDS women, in Salt Lake City, Dallas, Washington, D.C., and Oakland and Los Angeles, California.

Throughout Ruth's life, she has been involved in community service with such organizations as PTA, the Cancer Society, American Red Cross, United Fund, Utah Symphony Guild, American Association of Women, National Federation of Music, Music Circle, Piano Club, and University of Utah Alumni Association. For fifteen years she was on the board of directors of Promised Valley Playhouse. She was an elected delegate from Utah to the 1977 International Women's Year convention in Houston, Texas, and served on the National and International Councils of Women. She was chairman of the Governor's Commission on the Status of Women, and has been a member of the board of directors of Bonneville International Corporation. For eight years she served as a member and then as chairman of the Utah State Board of Education.

Ruth has received many honors and awards, including the 1991 Distinguished Alumnus Award from the University of Utah, Woman of Achievement from the Utah Federation of Business and Professional Women, Distinguished Service to Public Education, Kiwanis Teacher of the Month, and Bonneville International Corporation Presidential Citation for Excellence.

Marcus retired from his dental practice in 1985, and both he and Ruth have suffered in recent years from a series of health problems. Ruth became blind in one eye and has macro-degeneration and a cataract in the other eye and glaucoma in both of them, which she termed as "her greatest trial." "We laugh about who is supposed to take care of whom," she says.

In spite of her visual difficulties, Ruth, with her usual undaunted spirit, still approaches life with enthusiasm and determination. In October 1990, she and her daughter Allyson, along with her brother Grant, visited areas where her ancestors lived in England because, as Ruth said, "Genealogy is one of the things I haven't done."

"I marvel as I look back at the divine orchestration of my life," she reflects. I really do believe that the Lord customizes our experiences according to our needs. The gospel is the vehicle whereby almost every life you touch is touched and changed in some miraculous sort of way for good if you allow the Holy Ghost to lead you. But I think you have to give up your own independence and become totally dependent on the Lord to maximize your ultimate blessings or to be able to give ultimately to anyone. I feel the Lord expects us to go as far as we can with what he has given us. But I know that I cannot do what I need to do or must do until I finally come to him in total dependence."

Ruth Hardy Funk's life has been filled with music and young people through her family life, her professional work, and her church callings. Because she has willingly redirected her talents and followed the course she believes the Lord wants for her, she has truly been an instrument in his hands.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Except as noted, all quotations by Elaine Cannon and details of her life are taken from Elaine Cannon Oral History (1979-1990, James H. Moyle Oral History Program, Church Archives), personal interviews with Elaine Cannon conducted by LaRene Gaunt on October 8 and December 12, 1990, and June 25, 1991; and a written statement of Elaine Cannon, dated July 1991.
[^2] Anthony J. Cannon, "A Tribute to Elaine Cannon." Copy in possession of LaRene Gaunt.
[^3] "'Let Me Soar,' Women Counseled," Church News, October 17, 1981, 3.
[^4] Elaine Cannon, The Summer of My Content (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 61.
[^5] Minnie Egan Anderson, "Elaine Winifred Anderson Cannon," 1950. Copy in possession of author, LaRene Gaunt.
[^6] Cannon, The Summer of My Content, 8.
[^7] Interview with Tony Cannon, March 5, 1991.
[^8] Interview with D. James Cannon, April 16, 1991.
[^9] Interview with Tony Cannon, March 5, 1991.
[^10] Interview with James Q. Cannon, April 19, 1991.
[^11] Susan Cannon McOmber to LaRene Gaunt, June 1991.
[^12] Lynne Hollstein, "Preparation Began Early for New YW President," Church News, July 22, 1978, 4.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Interview with Tony Cannon, March 5, 1991.
[^15] Susan Cannon McOmber to LaRene Gaunt, June 1991.
[^16] Interview with Marion D. Hanks, March 8, 1991.
[^17] Interview with D. James Cannon, April 16, 1991.
[^18] Cannon, The Summer of My Content, 75-76.
[^19] Interview with Marion D. Hanks, March 8, 1991.
[^20] Elaine Cannon, Life-One to a Customer (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1981), 93.
[^21] Interview with Winnifred Jardine, January 28, 1991.
