Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

8

Elaine Cannon [^1]

1978-1984

The mixer whirred as Elaine Cannon stood in her kitchen one March afternoon making a cake for her wedding anniversary. Unable to hear the screams of her little girls over the sounds of the mixer, she felt the prompting of the Holy Ghost telling her to go to the pond. Immediately, she ran out of the house to a deep pond near their home. When she reached it, she found three-year-old Susan with her arms through the fence holding on to four-year-old Christine's hand. Christine had slipped on the soft spring snow as she tried to get a ball that had bounced onto the rough rocks at the pond's edge. Though Christine suffered scratches and cuts, Elaine saved her from drowning. [^2]

Listening to the Spirit has always been important to Elaine Anderson Cannon, eighth general president of the Young Women, whether she is facing a challenge in her personal life or facing an audience of eager young women in her public life. "I have cultivated my relationship with the Holy Ghost," she says. "I have yearned after guidance, warning, and inspiration from him. I have watched for it and heeded it. Promptings from the Spirit have been one of the great blessings of my life."

"Let Me Soar!" [^3]

Filled with a hearty love for life and people, Elaine found magic in the Capitol Hill neighborhood in which she grew up in Salt Lake City. She was born April 9, 1922, the second child of Aldon J. and Minnie Egan Anderson. She had an older brother, Aldon, Jr., and a younger brother and sister, Lowell and Nadine. Her childhood was filled with riding the stone lions on the stairs of the Utah State Capitol in the long, warm shadows of a late summer evening, leading childish parades over steep neighborhood hills, directing costumed pageants in her garage on a hot afternoon, and counting the stars in a moonless winter sky. The simple experiences of life on Capitol Hill grew into significant lessons of life that gave her wisdom and optimism even as a child. From the capitol gardener who showed her that plants always turned toward the light, she learned to look to the giver of life; and from a bitter woman who unjustly criticized her, she learned about hate and hypocrisy. She emerged from her childhood ready to soar skyward.

Elaine had to look no further than her parents and grandparents for examples of spirituality. Her paternal grandmother, Elise Holter, embraced the gospel in Norway when she was seventeen years old and immigrated to Salt Lake City, where she met and married a young Swedish inventor, Per Anderson. They became the parents of ten children.

Elaine's mother was a descendant of faithful Latter-day Saint pioneers, including Ezra Taft Benson, Sr., who was ordained an apostle in 1846, and Major Howard Egan, a pony express rider. Her maternal grandparents, Horace and Evaline Benson Egan, reared their family of seven children in Idaho and Utah.

Minnie Egan Anderson, Elaine's mother, was as comfortable feeding a hobo on her back porch during the Depression as she was serving on the YWMIA general board. "I learned to drink deeply of life from my mother," Elaine has written. "Mother used to give us a hug and remark, 'The teachers have you all winter. Come summer, you're mine.'" [^4] The children enjoyed a wide variety of activities with their mother each summer. They cooked breakfast over a campfire, learned how to swim in the Great Salt Lake without inhaling the salt water, and held summer Primary in their garage while the Capitol Hill Ward meetinghouse was under construction.

According to Minnie, Elaine had a mania in her early years for organizing clubs—sewing clubs, athletic clubs, and social clubs. "I was never surprised to see Elaine coming home from school leading several little girls, who then came trooping into our living room, ready to have a club meeting. The organization would take place in a most formal manner. Officers were always elected, then Elaine would give a talk. The peculiar thing about the election was that somehow Elaine was always chosen president and her best friend was always made secretary. Elaine kept a separate notebook filled with meticulous notes for each club." [^5]

Elaine recalls her wonder that her mother constantly worked to improve herself, including teaching herself how to play the piano and violin and to speak French. Minnie provided her children with a wide range of opportunities—not only formal training in speech, but also exposure to art, music, and drama.

Elaine and her father also shared a close relationship. "My father thought everything we children did was marvelous," she says. "You can imagine what that did to build confidence in me as a young girl! There was love, love, love. I became comfortable praying to my Heavenly Father very early because I felt my earthly father and my Heavenly Father must be very much alike."

One of the many lessons Elaine learned from her father came as a result of her innocent childhood mistake of painting the petals of an oleander that had been a gift from her grandmother. She later wrote of the incident and the lesson she learned from it: "'One cannot improve on God,' Daddy declared emphatically. . . . The oleander died, of course, but Daddy's counsel lives in me yet. A chair can be repainted to cover past damages, but a living, growing thing can be spoiled forever through witless tampering. And that goes for people as well as plants." [^6]

An ability to get along with people and a talent for writing both surfaced early in Elaine's life. In junior high school she was instrumental in starting a school paper. During her senior year she started writing a high school report for the Salt Lake Telegram. This was the beginning of her long career as a daily newspaper columnist—three years for the Telegram and more than twenty-five years for the Deseret News.

Elaine entered the University of Utah in the fall of 1939, majoring in sociology. Charismatic and fun, she was busy and popular in college, even being named the "Dream Girl" of a fraternity. She served as president of the Associated Women Students and of Chi Omega sorority, was a member of the University of Utah women's vocal sextet, and was elected to Mortar Board and Beehive honor societies.

Her activities were not all centered around academics and work. Her leadership skills were put to use in the University Ward as president of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, where she shared her dynamic gifts of optimism and spirituality. She was campus columnist for the university's paper, the Daily Utah Chronicle, and continued to write and serve as assistant woman's editor for the Telegram.

"Because of my column in the society section, I had free tickets to everything," Elaine says, describing one of the perks of her newspaper work. "This was the era of the Big Bands. Since money was tight during these late Depression and early World War II years, friends would say 'Let's call Elaine.' They did and we'd go to Saltair, Lagoon, the Starlight Gardens of Hotel Utah, or the Rainbow," some of the most popular dance halls in the area. Although she had many beaux, it was D. James Cannon who won her heart.

Marriage and Family Life

When Jim Cannon met Elaine, he was a student at the University of Utah and a fraternity brother of Elaine's brother Aldon. A son of Sylvester Q. Cannon, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve who had previously served as Presiding Bishop, and Winifred I. Saville, Jim spent his early years in the Cannon farm area on the west side of Salt Lake City. After he graduated from the University of Utah in 1940, he served a mission to Hawaii. Though he and Elaine had known each other for five years, they didn't date seriously until after he returned from his mission. They were married in the Salt Lake Temple on Thursday, March 25, 1943, between quarters of Elaine's senior year. The following Monday, she became editor of the society and women's pages of the Deseret News, a job she held for a year and a half. Two months after her marriage, she graduated from the University of Utah.

Jim and Elaine had six children, two sons and four daughters. Their four oldest children, James, Carla, Christine, and Susan, were born at about fourteen-month intervals. Holly joined the family two years after Susan, and Anthony was born four years later. "My children are stalwarts, but I can't take credit for that," Elaine says. "They are choice spirits. My children are stars in their own sphere." However, she and Jim are happy to take credit for strict upbringing and for striving to enrich their children's lives through gospel, cultural, and service-oriented experiences. Both Jim's career in public relations and Elaine's career as a journalist brought rich dimensions of the world to their family.

"As a child, I can remember that dinner time was a time for interesting conversation," recalls Tony. "We didn't talk about surface or shallow kinds of things either. Dad was good about asking us what we thought about news events or teaching us about the holidays in detail. He was also good with facts and quizzes. When we'd go on trips, for example, he'd ask us the name of the longest river or the highest mountain in Utah." [^7]

Holidays provided a time for fun and for teaching moments. On Memorial Day the family would visit the cemetery in the morning and then go on a picnic. On July 24, they would go to the Days of '47 parade downtown, then visit "This Is the Place Monument" to honor the pioneers who had arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on that day in 1847. Even moving into a new home had its own traditions. Whenever the family moved, they had family prayer and dedicated their home. Each person took a turn in the prayer to express his or her hopes and what he or she wanted to accomplish while living in this home. After Christine's near drowning, the Cannons were grateful that they had dedicated not only their home but also the pond that no one would lose his or her life in it.

Family conversations, happy summers at Elaine's parents' cabin on Hebgen Lake near Yellowstone National Park, and a mutual love and respect for one another helped keep the family close. These relationships have aided them as they have met challenges. Jim's unsuccessful political campaigns for Utah governor in 1964 and Salt Lake City mayor in 1967 put great demands on the family in terms of time, money, and stress. Though the political climate was not favorable for him, the family learned to pull together. "Elaine was a brick through it all," Jim says. "I had to take a leave of absence from my job as director of the state travel commission both times I made a political bid, so I had no income during that time." [^8] Tony remembers that each family member was involved in the campaigns and that Jim and Elaine "helped the rest of us through even though it was probably harder on them than it was on us." [^9]

Jim and Elaine have always supported one another. "Jim has been a great blessing to me," she says. "He has turned me loose when opportunities have come my way, and he has been an insightful priesthood support. He says, 'Sure, you can do it.'" In turn, she consistently supported him during the times he served as a bishop and on the high councils of two stakes, and in other church, community, and business-related activities. Her church callings during the early years of their marriage utilized her energy and creativity as a member of a stake YWMIA board and as director for several roadshows. They also shared parental responsibilities. Often Jim played with the children, taking them on sleigh rides or helping them build snowmen during the day, and singing them to sleep at night. When Elaine was sewing or cooking, she enjoyed having her children read or talk to her, and she took turns reading to them too.

"Mom was a loyal parent," remembers Jamie. "She listened to us and wanted to know how we perceived experiences and how we felt, not just what we did. Yet she was a stern taskmaster with high expectations for us." [^10]

Elaine's excellent skills with people and her firm relationship with Christ have added a strong spiritual dimension to her mothering. "My mother is the most highly spiritual woman I know," says her daughter Susan. "She turns to the gospel for answers at every juncture. She lives it every day and applies its principles in every situation. As a mother she was absolutely firm in her commitment to do it the Lord's way. She gave us, therefore, the greatest gift a mother can give—she loved us enough to thoroughly teach us the gospel of Jesus Christ." [^11]

Writing and Mothering

"I stayed home with my children when they were small," Elaine says, "but I never missed a daily column in twenty-five years. I used to get up at 4:00 A.M. and write my column before the baby's six o'clock feeding." [^12] In 1947, when she had three small children, she began writing a Deseret News column, "Hi Tales," for teenagers. All of her children remember the continuous rolls of paper with attached triplicate carbons on which she typed her columns, "I remember her tearing off chunks of it," says Jamie. "Then we would jump in the car and race down to the old Richards Street entrance of the Deseret News. My job was to run it up to the third floor because Mom couldn't always find a parking place." [^13]

"Some of my earliest memories are of sitting on Mom's lap while she was typing," says Tony. "I remember watching her hands fly over the keyboard. And I loved drawing with her dark number two pencils while she was working. In spite of the fact that she was very involved with things like that, she was good about making time for us. I never felt slighted." [^14]

Opportunities came often to talented Elaine, and somehow she managed to juggle them all. In 1949 she began her first weekly television show, which lasted for many years. She worked as a freelance reporter for Seventeen and Better Homes and Gardens. As a columnist for the Deseret News, she often interviewed celebrities who came to town.

When Elaine came up with the idea of having an annual back-to-school fashion show for young women, she was a busy young mother of three and still writing her daily column, and her husband was serving as a bishop. "Seminar for Sallies," as the fashion show was known, was sponsored by the Deseret News and attracted more than one thousand young people that first year, in August 1948. The annual production featured skits on topics of interest to teenagers and young women modeling back-to-school fashions. Elaine was involved with every detail, from writing the script to building the scenery and narrating the show. Eventually the program included young men, and the name was changed to "Seminar for Sallies and Sams." Similar seminars were produced in other Utah cities, in Idaho, and as far away as Halifax, Vancouver, Boston, and London. The last one was produced in 1970, twenty-three years after the program began.

Awards and honors began to come to Elaine also, including an appointment as a delegate to the White House Conference on Children and Youth, a citation from Seventeen for her work with youth, and first-place honors in writing and editing competitions sponsored by the National Federation of Press Women.

Though Elaine's activities and writings gave her a high profile in the community, she was able to maintain a balance in her home between being a wife and mother and having a career. After she entertained, the children would entertain their friends the next day while the linen, candles, and flowers were still in place; thus, when they helped her prepare for her parties, they were getting things ready for their parties too.

Elaine recognized that while many demands were placed on her during these mothering years, they also allowed her to help with the family finances. "I think the Lord knew I could be trusted to keep my family first," she says. "You can't maintain a heavy schedule unless your heart is in the right place, or you'll end up with broken hearts."

Elaine's busy life took on new dimensions in 1959 when she, her mother, and her brother Aldon opened a fabric store, The Dressmaker. They specialized in selling fine fabrics, buttons, braids, and yarns, including many imported items that were new to Salt Lake City. This venture was an extension of a talent Elaine had for decorating or redecorating. "A new facelift on the walls and furniture lifted mother's spirits," according to her daughter Susan. "She did all the paper hanging, painting, and upholstering herself. We have all learned to do the same—to make the most out of what we have to work with." [^15]

The same year The Dressmaker opened, Elaine also became the associate editor of a new "Era of Youth" section in the Improvement Era. Elder Marion D. Hanks, at that time a member of the First Council of the Seventy, was the editor of the monthly section. As a team, they motivated the youth of the Church with the written word in the colorful and dynamic "Era of Youth." Elaine, with her sparkle and vibrant love of people, and Elder Hanks, with his distinctively resonant speaking voice and teaching ability, captivated audiences wherever they spoke.

The popularity of the section over the next ten years grew steadily, and eventually it led to an entire magazine for youth—the New Era. Elaine, who had ties with Seventeen, made arrangements for those involved in planning the new magazine to visit publishers of several youth magazines in New York City, where they saw what the world was doing for young people and why the Church needed an alternative voice. "Probably the one person in the world who did the most to perpetuate a magazine for youth was Elaine Cannon," Elder Hanks recalls. "Because of her, we were well prepared when we made our presentation [for a new magazine] to President Spencer W. Kimball, then the President of the Quorum of the Twelve." [^16]

After listening to the group's presentation, Elaine says, "President Kimball put his fist down and said, 'Let's do it and I'll get the first subscription'" In 1971 the Church began publishing the New Era for young people.

Elaine gave up her daily newspaper column to help to establish the New Era. She also was called to serve as the national advisor to women for the LDS Student Association. As part of that assignment, she helped to establish a sorority for college-age women, Lambda Delta Sigma, while Rolfe Kerr, the executive secretary of LDSSA, directed the establishment of a fraternity for college-age men, Sigma Gamma Chi.

Always interested in women's issues, Elaine attended the International Women's Conference in Houston, Texas, in 1976 with Florence S. Jacobsen and Young Women president Ruth Hardy Funk. Unrest filled many women as America struggled with the decision of whether or not to pass the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) to the Constitution. "Elaine was very strong for women's understanding of their potentiality," remembers Jim. "She believed in the God-given roles of priesthood and womanhood and spent a lot of time presenting this viewpoint to others." [^17]

A Helping Friend

In her book The Summer of My Content, published in 1976, Elaine wrote of a turning point in her lifelong commitment to Christ:

"At seventeen I felt very grown-up. I was about to have my patriarchal blessing. . . . The night before my appointment with Patriarch Jones I felt a strong need to gather myself together with Heavenly Father. I went quickly out the screened door and stood there for a time listening to the summers of my youth sift by on the night song of the crickets. Then I felt once again the pull of the stars. Shyly at first I lay down on my back on prickly grass as I had done so often as a child. Once again I took a deep breath and turned my face skyward. . . . I studied the heavens, finding the familiar constellations, getting placement with the North Star. Then finally, the mind-stretching, soul-searing experience of being lifted into the universe—almost into the presence of God—set my heart to pounding. My prayers that night got through. The witness of the Spirit that God lives and cares and was mindful of little me warmed me to tears." [^18]

"Elaine is truly a disciple of Christ," says Elder Hanks, who has been friends with her since they were in junior high school. "She was very popular in high school and college—the president of nearly everything and the queen of the ball—but these things are really secondary to her commitment to the Lord. She is a true servant and has always lived that way." [^19]

This spiritual depth would ultimately become apparent in her writing, her speaking, and her leadership style. "I have been to Gethsemane and Galilee," she said in 1981. "I have bowed my head at Golgotha. I have wept in the Garden Tomb near Jerusalem. I have studied the scriptural accounts and heard the testimonies of prophets. And I have my own witness as well—Christ lives!" [^20]

Elaine's relationship with people usually works on two levels: "let's have fun" and "let's talk." "She won't miss anything that's exciting," says Winnifred Jardine, a former food editor for the Deseret News and Elaine's longtime friend. "She loves life and makes it fun for everybody around her. Her charisma intrigues and fascinates everyone. All eyes are drawn to her in any kind of a group. Yet she never comes to anything empty handed; she always contributes to every good time." [^21]

"People were always coming to the house for counsel," remembers Holly. "Even after their life crisis passed, they sought her as a friend. Household help, egg man, milk man, grocer, cleaners, the church maintenance person—all became mother's friends. They were important to her." [^22]

"You can't say I'm an expert at anything except at loving people," Elaine claims. "I'm so interested in people, and I do ache for everybody who is suffering." In one of her books she wrote, "People always have affected me deeply one way or the other, chilling or warming my sensitive soul either by their suffering or their joy, or mine." [^23] She has lived her life immersed in the lives of other people and their joys and challenges. She is not only an optimist herself, but a weaver of optimism and hope into the lives of others.

One of Jim and Elaine Cannon's most painful challenges was the death of Jamie's wife Christine Jacobsen Cannon, who died of cancer in January 1975, leaving Jamie and three small sons. "Mom helped us in two ways," says Jamie. "She cared for our sons for several months when Christine was in the hospital, and she constantly slipped me notes or cards with gems of insight from her endless supply of quotes. These really helped me keep an eternal perspective on everything that was happening to us. And beyond that, it was Mom who eventually introduced me to Becky, my new wife." [^24]

Leader of Young Women

Through the years, most of Elaine's service in the Church centered around youth and writing. She served in YWMIA ward and stake presidencies, on the YWMIA general board, and on the Church's correlation and instructional development committees. She wrote lessons for gospel doctrine and Relief Society manuals, organized productions presented at June Conference, and was co-chair of the Church's American Bicentennial committee and executive secretary of the Church's sesquicentennial celebration. Yet she was still surprised that she would be called as Young Women president at the age of fifty-six. She quipped that "it was like getting pregnant at fifty." [^25] But it was the combination of her love for and understanding of young people and her strong testimony that qualified her for this calling as much as her experience and organizational skills.

Strong impressions prepared her for the call five weeks before it came. When she told President Spencer W. Kimball of this spiritual preparation, she recalls, he said, "This is a gift. Always remember it is the Lord who wants you in this calling, not just me. This spiritual preparation is a gift, and there will be times when this knowledge will be a blessing to you."

On July 12, 1978, the First Presidency officially announced Elaine's appointment as president of the Young Women, with Arlene B. Darger and Norma B. Smith as her counselors. She pledged to rely upon the Lord as she made decisions for the Young Women, explaining, "I am very much aware that this is not my program, and so I must always try to know what the Lord wants me to do." [^26]

Elaine and her counselors were in charge of the first general women's meeting, held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in September 1978. The general presidents of the Relief Society and Primary were invited to speak, and a chorus of girls, young women, and women sang. "It was an exciting giant step forward, underlining the specific and inspired continuum of woman's place in the Church," Elaine said.

Under Elaine's leadership, the general board was reduced from sixty members to twelve. "Every board member had a daughter of Young Women age," recalls Winnifred Jardine, one of the board members. "The young women served as ad hoc members of the board and were used as a sounding board." [^27] To make full use of the smaller board, each member was given an area of responsibility and worked with women who were called as needed to help plan and direct the various programs.

"Prepare to Perform" became the leadership theme for the YWMIA board. At their weekly meetings they were taught out of the scriptures by General Authorities, received training from experts in communications, and learned international protocol, all designed to help them to effectively present themselves and the gospel throughout the world.

"Elaine is a great administrator and a complex personality," says counselor Norma Smith. "Some days she was at her efficient best, some days at her spiritual best, some days at her fun-loving best, and some days at her compassionate best, but most days she was all these and more." [^28]

Under Elaine's leadership, the board continued working toward the goal of simplifying the Young Women program, yet building upon traditions from the past, such as reinstituting the singing of "Carry On," popular in the YWMIA since Ruth May Fox wrote the lyrics in 1930, and the practice of repeating the spiritual theme each week. Special activities often grew out of gospel principles. For the sesquicentennial of the Church in 1980, each young woman was invited to create her own personal banner. This activity, like many of the things that happened during Elaine's administration, was inspired by one of her childhood experiences. One June morning, when she was sixteen, she had climbed Ensign Peak north of her home on the northern edge of Salt Lake City alone and looked down upon her neighborhood. She later described her feelings:

"This day my aloneness was exhilarating as I made my way to the top. . . . I sat looking down at the houses I knew so well and at their people beginning to stir with the sun. . . . I watched the achingly familiar scenes as an extension of myself. Yet, it was like being God, seeing the whole picture. Seeing but not being seen. . . . In 1847 Brigham Young had raised an ensign to the Lord on this peak, according to the plaque on top. Well, I raised my own that day and came down from the mount determined to be useful." [^29]

When the Young Women made their banners, they too had to think about their standards before God as they painted, appliquÃ©d, or embroidered onto their banners designs that represented the beliefs that guided their lives and their feelings for the Lord. One thousand young women dressed in white and carrying their banners mounted on tall staffs marched in Salt Lake City's Days of '47 parade. Local units throughout the Church had their own banner events.

"Elaine has an incredible will to carry on in the grand style," says Laurel Bailey, her personal secretary for many years. "She simply will not be less than what she is at her best." [^30]

A longtime advocate of spiritual growth for young people, Elaine was pleased when the consolidated meeting schedule, adopted churchwide in 1980, provided a time for young women to attend church at the same time as the Aaronic Priesthood classes were held and to have comparable spiritual lessons. Flexibility in the design of the new manuals allowed each teacher to prayerfully choose those lessons that seemed most applicable to the concerns and needs of the members of her class. Special weekday activities, which encouraged service, grew out of the Sunday instruction.

On a general Church level, other changes were developing during Elaine's administration. The three presidencies of the Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary began holding joint meetings and traveling together on assignments to the field. Another change involved the alignment of some procedures involving the programs for young women and young men. For example, bishops began to interview young women as they turned twelve and to advance them from Primary to Young Women at that time, just as boys reaching twelve moved on to the Aaronic Priesthood and the Young Men's program.

For Elaine, people have always been more important than programs. When she was twelve, she wrote in her journal, "I want to remember experiences that I am having at this age, so I will know how to help young women when I grow up." [^31]

Always very much in demand as a youth speaker, she often spoke at firesides, standards nights, and youth conferences. "Elaine is a real presence," observes Elder Hanks. "She has this rare combination of abilities—intelligence, perception, and sensitivity—but it is her total effect that is so powerful. As Young Women president, she radiated a genuine concern, interest, and love for the young women. Her leadership was inspired and she had the ability to excite them. The young women used to flock around her like the Pied Piper, and so did the leaders. It was an honor to be a friend of Elaine Cannon." [^32]

Jamie noted a change in his mother after she began to visit young women outside the United States, particularly in underdeveloped countries. "Mom recognized the challenges in the lives of these young women and how different they were from young women growing up in affluent American homes," says Jamie. "She developed a great desire to have the Young Women's program be spiritually rewarding for all the young women. I think that really affected the way she approached the program." [^33]

Leaders of the Relief Society and the Young Women had long been active in both the National Council of Women and the International Council of Women. Carrying on this tradition, Elaine served a two-year term as a vice-president of the five-million-member NCW/USA. She was honored in 1984 at the NCW's awards ceremony for "her ability to communicate with young people and their families without losing her role as representative of old-fashioned, solid values." [^34]

As a leader of the home economics committee of the International Council of Women, Elaine had many opportunities to suggest gospel principles as solutions to worldwide problems. For instance, at a workshop in Korea where the problems of abortion, family break-up, and venereal disease were discussed, she suggested chastity as a solution. The reaction of the committee members was blank stares. When one woman asked, "What's chastity?" Elaine obligingly provided a definition. [^35] "I didn't directly try to sell the Church, but I did hard-sell the principles of the gospel," she says. "They are the answers to the world's problems." [^36]

Life after Young Women

After Elaine was released as president of the Young Women on April 7, 1984, her life did not slow down—it only changed direction. She found more time to write, though her writing had never really stopped. She has written more than thirty books on subjects ranging from adversity to writing your life story. She has written text for coloring books, baptism books for eight-year-olds, and motivational books for young adults. She maintains that she is not a gifted writer, but has simply been blessed by the Lord with ideas and rich life experiences. She still often gets up at four o'clock to write, and readily acknowledges that she is a hard worker and that she "simply loves it."

Twenty-five grandchildren, including two sets of identical twins, are also a big part of Elaine's life. Her relationship with them alternates between cheerful moments filled with laughter and serious moments filled with spiritual insights. For example, one night as Elaine and her grandson Peter sat watching the stars, Peter asked, "Are the stars there every time it gets dark, even if I can't see them?" She assured him that they were, even behind the clouds. "Darkness isn't so bad, is it?" she said, adding, "If you know the stars are there." [^37]

"Attitude in adversity turns hopeless to hopeful," Elaine said in a general women's meeting in 1982. [^38] She spoke from experience. All her life, she has been plagued with a wide variety of health problems, yet she has found the strength to cheerfully move ahead with her life. At seventeen she won a jitterbug contest shortly after an appendectomy—and despite the fact that she had a drain tube in her. Pain from imbedded teeth didn't keep her from being in the school play, and serious foot surgery didn't stop her from school activities—it only slowed her down.

From the constant stomachaches she suffered as a child to the rare disease of the arteries she battles now, nothing has dimmed her optimism. Through surgeries, infections, a cracked vertebra in her neck, heart problems, and a variety of other physical ailments, she has continued to laugh, raise her family, inspire friends, work hard, and lead and comfort others. "When I ask her how she is feeling," according to Jim, "she always answers 'I'll be better tomorrow.'" [^39]

"These are nuisances for me," adds Elaine, who on several occasions took a portable typewriter with her to the hospital so she could meet deadline schedules. "I'm a lively person who won't stay down. I have finally come to believe that I have been blessed having these challenges. They have increased my humility, my empathy for others, and my faith in Christ. I've had a couple of close calls, but I have had priesthood blessings that literally saved my life."

"With an apparent inability to whimper, Elaine meets her challenges with dignity and integrity," Elder Hanks says. "I believe she copes with her pain through faith, an indomitable will, and incredible courage. She will not be defeated." [^40]

Shortly before Elaine's release as general president of Young Women, Jim had a heart attack. Three years later, as they were preparing to move to St. George in southern Utah, he suffered a stroke, which was followed by additional strokes, and he has had to be confined to a wheelchair.

For more than a year Elaine and Jim's second daughter, Christine, suffered from a rare disease that required long hospital stays. Elaine traveled between St. George and Salt Lake City often so she could be with her and help to care for her two children, Abby and Jake. Elaine often did a "blessing count" with her daughter to help her remember all the good things she still had in life. With her mother at her bedside, Christine died in December 1991. She was buried in the Salt Lake City cemetery beside Jamie's wife Christine Jacobsen Cannon, who also died as a young mother.

After Elaine and Jim moved to St. George, Carla visited them about once a month to help them with errands and chores. She and Elaine enjoyed planning a garden that would survive in that desert setting and spent many happy hours visiting nurseries in search of flowering plants and the right ground cover for the slope behind the house. "These joyful memories will stay with me forever," Carla said. "Children don't often have the chance to see their parents from this new perspective." [^41]

Throughout her life Elaine has been an avid journal keeper. She is fond of saying, "A life recorded is a life twice lived." [^42] In recent years she and Jim have compiled their personal histories, and they have encouraged their children and grandchildren to record their experiences and feelings in journals.

In 1981 at a Young Women conference in Germany, Elaine spoke to the theme "You Can Soar." Her words summarize her life: "You can soar if you find out who you are and why you are here. There are two important days in a woman's life: the day she is born and the day she finds out why. I firmly believe there is something each one of us must do. If we don't do it, it doesn't get done. It's such an exciting thing to prepare oneself to make a difference in the world."

Elaine Cannon has made a difference in the world. She has filled the air with laughter, mended broken hearts, inspired family and friends, led young women, and written words of encouragement. She knows why she is here, she is doing what she must do, and she herself has soared.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Except as noted, all quotations by Ardeth Greene Kapp are taken from Ardeth G. Kapp Oral History (James H. Moyle Oral History Program, Church Archives), and from an interview with Ardeth Greene Kapp, conducted by Janet Peterson on August 6, 1990.
[^2] Ardeth G. Kapp, "Stand Up, Lead Out," New Era, November 1985, 23.
[^3] Janet Peterson, "Friend to Friend," Friend, July 1985, 7.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Karen T. Arnesen, "Ardeth Greene Kapp: A Prairie Girl, a Young Woman Still," Ensign, September 1985, 36.
[^6] Peterson, "Friend to Friend," 6.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Ardeth G. Kapp, "Young Women Striving Together," Ensign, November 1984, 96-97.
[^9] Arnesen, "Ardeth Greene Kapp," 36.
[^10] Telephone interview with Heber B. Kapp, January 11, 1991.
[^11] Personal interview with Jayne B. Malan, May 22, 1991.
[^12] Telephone interview with Heber B. Kapp, January 11, 1991.
[^13] Arnesen, "Ardeth Greene Kapp," 37.
[^14] Ardeth G. Kapp, "Just the Two of Us-for Now," Ensign, February 1989, 21.
[^15] Ardeth G. Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 127-28.
[^16] Kapp, "Just the Two of Us-for Now," 23.
[^17] Telephone interview with Shirley G. Burnham, January 10, 1991.
[^18] Telephone interview with Sharon G. Larsen, January 14, 1991.
[^19] Telephone interview with Shelly Larsen, January 19, 1991.
[^20] Arnesen, "Ardeth Greene Kapp," 38.
[^21] Written statement of Maurine J. Turley, May 31, 1991.
[^22] Personal interview with Patricia T. Holland, April 24, 1991.
[^23] Elaine L. Jack, "I Will Go and Do," Ensign, May 1990, 78.
[^24] Personal interview with Carolyn J. Rasmus, September 26, 1990.
[^25] Personal interview with Janette C. Hales, April 18, 1991.
[^26] Personal interview with Patricia T. Holland, April 14, 1991.
[^27] Personal interview with Jayne B. Malan, May 22, 1991.
[^28] Written statement of Norma B. Smith, April 1991.
[^29] Cannon, The Summer of My Content, 75.
[^30] Interview with Laurel Bailey, January 25, 1991.
[^31] Hollstein, "Preparation Began Early for New YW President."
[^32] Interview with Marion D. Hanks, March 8, 1991.
[^33] Interview with James Q. Cannon, April 19, 1991.
[^34] "Aim Was Family Improvement," Church News, December 2, 1984, 10.
[^35] This People, March 1983, 55.
[^36] Ibid.
[^37] Elaine Cannon, "A Wonderful Adventure," New Era, April 1983, 12.
[^38] 38. Elaine Cannon, "Reach for Joy," Ensign, May 1982, 95.
[^39] 39. Interview with D. James Cannon, April 16, 1991.
[^40] 40. Interview with Marion D. Hanks, March 8, 1991.
[^41] 41. Written statement of Carla Cannon, March 1991.
[^42] 42. Cannon, Life-One to a Customer, 94.
