Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

9

Ardeth Greene Kapp [^1]

1984-1992

In November 1985, early in her administration as ninth general president of Young Women, Ardeth Greene Kapp addressed the young women and said: "I see the crest of a great wave forming, As I look back over the history of the young women in the Church, I marvel at each swell of accomplishment. Yet I see a wave forming that will move across the earth, reaching every continent and every shore. I call upon you to stand with me to prepare to take your place in a great forward movement among the young women of the Church—a movement in which you are destined to shape history and participate in the fulfillment of prophecy." [^2]

Sister Kapp stood at the crest of a great forward movement in the history of the Young Women. She led out in a sure direction because she is a woman of vision.

Strong Roots and a Memorable Childhood

Ardeth Kapp's ancestors settled in southern Alberta, Canada, as a direct result of their faith and commitment to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Her paternal great-great-grandfather, John Portineus Greene, married Rhoda Young, Brigham Young's sister. John was a close friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith and served as the marshal in Nauvoo, Illinois. Evan Melbourne Greene, her great-grandfather, married Susan Kent Young, a niece of Brigham Young. He assisted in building the Kirtland Temple, attended the School of the Prophets, and was present when section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants, a revelation on the priesthood, was given to Joseph Smith. Daniel Kent Greene, Ardeth's grandfather, married after returning from a mission and settled in Aetna, Alberta, Canada. In 1913, he plowed the first furrow to break ground for the Alberta Temple in Cardston.

Ardeth's maternal great-great-grandparents, Jeremiah and Sarah Studevant Leavitt, moved from New Hampshire to Quebec, Canada, in the early 1800s. There they heard of the restored gospel, but they were not baptized until they moved to Kirtland, Ohio. The Leavitts began their exodus from Nauvoo to the Salt Lake Valley in 1846, farming along the way to replenish their food supply. Jeremiah died in Iowa, and Sarah and her children continued the journey to Utah. Ardeth's great-grandfather, Thomas R. Leavitt, and her grandfather, Edwin Jenkins Leavitt, helped settle southern Alberta in 1890.

Ardeth Greene was born in Cardston March 19, 1931, the third child of Edwin (Ted) Kent and Julia (June) Leavitt Greene. Her older sister, Uvada, died as an infant. She has an older brother, Gordon Kay, and two younger sisters, Sharon and Shirley Mae. "My father and mother were yoked together as a great team," Ardeth says. "They had differences, but great strengths and a unity in purpose that has had a profound impact on my life."

The Greene family suffered the effects of the Great Depression, as did many other families in the Cardston area. Ted sold all but eighty acres of his land, and the family moved from the farm to the town of Glenwood, ten miles northwest of Cardston on the vast Canadian prairie. To help the family economy, June opened a one-room general store that, as Ardeth remembers, "had everything from mousetraps to English bone china to vinegar to ready-to-wear dresses to overalls and rubber boots and a gas pump." As soon as Ardeth was tall enough to see over the counter, she helped her mother in the store.

"My mom ran this little store with all the dignity and the professionalism that you would expect in the finest store in the country," Ardeth remembers. "No matter what the weather was, she opened the store on time. No matter what the circumstances were, she never closed a minute early for fear a customer would come. She treated every customer with the same dignity you would expect for the most important person. Many of our customers were the Indians from the Blood Indian Reservation and residents from the Hutterite colony, besides all of the farmers and people in the surrounding community.

"The thing I remember most about my mom was that when people would come in and didn't have money to pay for their groceries, she would let them charge them until they got their paychecks. The Indians often didn't get their checks until the end of the month, but she carried them. She loved children and would keep track of the ones who came into the store and send them notes and cards. She was unbelievably patient while the children took ever so long selecting their penny candies from the wide variety available."

June was not, by circumstance or nature, the "traditional kind of mother," according to Ardeth. "I don't ever remember that she had hot cookies in the oven when I came home from school, but I remember that I worked beside her and that I saw her put store-bought cookies into the bags of people who couldn't afford them. I don't remember her reading stories to me, but I remember that she started the first lending library in our town of 300 people. Mother loved to read and bought a few good books and loaned them out for ten cents a book. Many people were able to read good books because she started a lending library. I learned to love to read.

"I don't remember that my mom closed the store to come to our school plays, but I remember that she was instrumental in influencing the school district to get some very good teachers in our school and to organize people to get music teachers to come from neighboring towns.

"Mom wasn't one who went with us on camping trips; it wasn't her style. But she was the one who promoted the Glenwood band, and from our little town we had a band that played in very prestigious parades, like the Calgary Stampede. She brought dignity and importance as a leader in a little town. She wasn't the traditional kind of mom, but she was the best kind of mom for me. From her I learned loyalty, dependability, industry, and endurance."

June and Ardeth looked very much alike and even sounded alike. "If there was ever anything that was hard for us during my teenage years," Ardeth recalls, "it was that we didn't get along as I thought all mothers and daughters did. We went to mothers-and-daughters conferences, and I would sit there thinking that every other mother and daughter were getting along wonderfully except us. Then I learned later that it was not unusual for mothers and daughters to have differences during the teenage years."

Ardeth grew up surrounded by grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins. Her grandmother Leavitt lived across the street, and her grandmother Greene lived with Ardeth's family. The latter was an especially significant influence on Ardeth, who recalled "seeing her through the door acrack, kneeling by her bed praying. Every time she went to the temple, as I recall, she washed and ironed her temple clothes. She was always reading her scriptures and singing the hymns and smelled like lilac perfume."

The young people in Glenwood created their own entertainment, which included horseback riding, camping, holding dances, and putting on three-act plays. According to Ardeth, "When we were on stage, we thought we were the best performers they had—and we were, because we were all they had! And, of course, half the audience was family! Even so, it was fun to hear the applause." [^3]

Because of frequent sickness, Ardeth struggled academically in school. As an incentive for her to do well, her father, who was then serving as a bishop, promised her that for her twelfth birthday he would take her with him to general conference in Salt Lake City. "Going to Salt Lake City seemed like going to the end of the world!" she exclaims. "I remember going to that conference and sitting up in the balcony on the north side and seeing the General Authorities and realizing that they were real people." [^4]

Some Lessons Learned

Ardeth and her father were very close and understood each other. They spent a lot of time together on the farm, where Ardeth learned of his love for the soil and his deep reverence for life and for planting and harvesting. "Every moment with him was a teaching moment," she says. "Most of the valuable lessons, and unquestionably the lessons that gave me the greatest confidence, were outside of the classroom."

Whenever Ted had a certain look on his face, Ardeth knew he was going to teach her a lesson. One morning he said he would teach her how to jump the irrigation ditch. He put his shovel in the middle of the ditch to use as like a vaulting pole and jumped back and forth across the ditch, then handed her the shovel. Ardeth was apprehensive about the endeavor and asked, "Dad, what if I don't make it?"

He explained, "Then you'll be in the middle."

"And if I am?"

"You'll still have to get to the other side. If you keep your eye on the other side and give it all you've got, then you'll make it."

Later that day at lunch, Ted quizzed Ardeth on what she had learned. When she replied that she had learned to jump the ditch, he said, "There will be a lot of ditches to jump in your life, and many that you'll have to jump alone. If you give it all you've got and keep your eye on the other side, you'll make it."

Helping her father build a fence taught Ardeth to keep her eye on the horizon so she would not get "discouraged by looking just at the here and now." [^5] He taught that the ringing of the school bell should remind her of her inner bell, her conscience, and that she should always try to be where she was supposed to be.

During the cold Canadian winters, Ardeth got up in the mornings at the same time her father did, in order to kindle the fire. "We would stand there freezing until we got it going," she recalled. "Dad used to tell me that that chore was like faith—you have to put the wood in first to get the heat, because if you stand around to get the heat before you put in the wood, you'll never get warm." [^6]

Her father was, according to Ardeth, "very, very strong on obedience and felt that it was the most important principle. He never questioned any instruction or guidance that was given by Church leaders. He obeyed any directive they gave, and he instilled that desire to obey in his family. I remember Dad as being a strong disciplinarian, but he always tempered his discipline with love and concern. Once when he spanked me, he cried. But he felt that he had to execute the discipline in order to teach me obedience. I remember thinking then that it hurt him worse than it hurt me." [^7]

One evening while attending a Sunday School party, Ardeth looked at her watch and realized that she was supposed to be home. When she heard a knock at the door, she knew who it was—her father. "I was horrified," she said; "my dad had come after me. I felt humiliated in front of my friends. I thought I wanted to die. I was not pleasant with my dad; disobedience never makes one pleasant."

A few years later, she was grateful when her father came for her after a dance. She and several of her friends were driving home in a blizzard when their car stalled. Wind chill lowered the temperature to forty degrees below zero, As they soberly contemplated their plight, one friend asked Ardeth, "How long do you think it will be before your dad will get here?" It wasn't long. "This time," she said, "I was pleasant with my dad—pleasant and very grateful." [^8]

Love and Marriage

One evening when Ardeth was in high school, her father asked her to stay home from a dance to fix dinner for the missionaries because her mother was in the hospital. Ardeth really wanted to go to the dance, but she was obedient to her father and prepared the meal. Elder Heber Kapp was one of the missionaries who ate dinner that evening with the Greene family. "There was something about his countenance that made me feel he was just good," Ardeth recalled. "And I had a yearning to be the kind of person someone like him would want to be with. He inspired me to be my best self." [^9]

During the next year, Ardeth and Elder Kapp exchanged a few letters. However, they did not get well acquainted until after Heber completed his mission and they were each living in Provo, Utah. During her junior year in high school, Ardeth had a mastoid operation and missed a lot of school. Since many classes in the small Glenwood High School were only taught alternate years, she would have to wait another year to take those classes and would not be able to finish high school with her classmates. So, with her parents' permission, she went to Provo, Utah, and lived in a basement apartment with five college girls while she completed her senior year at Brigham Young High School.

"I remember feeling in my heart that my parents were giving me one more chance to do well in school, and so I felt like I just couldn't let them down," she says. "I came to school with some great uncertainties, and I probably prayed harder than I ever had before. Having prayed and done what I should, at the end of the school year I was elected representative girl of the high school. For me in that setting at that age, I felt that it was a direct answer to prayer. I felt that the Lord had heard my prayers and understood my desire to do right and just made it possible. For me it wasn't a matter of popularity; it was an answer to prayer. I really studied and did my best. I studied every available minute in the library and was one of the valedictorians after having struggled through school. I felt in my heart that in answer to my prayers, the Lord unlocked my mind."

That year, in March 1949, Heber Kapp, the missionary who had come to dinner at the Greene home in Glenwood, completed his mission, returned to his home in Ogden, Utah, and then enrolled at Brigham Young University. In Provo he looked up Ardeth, and they started dating. Of their courtship, Heber said that he was impressed by her "radiant happiness and her optimism in spite of what the situation might be. She could always see the good." [^10] Ardeth and Heber became engaged the summer after Ardeth graduated from Brigham Young High. She attended BYU for one quarter and then, because her mother was not well, went home to help with the store and the family. The couple were married the following summer, on June 28, 1950, in the Alberta Temple.

Heber's mother was a widow with nine children and very little money. Heber and his brother served their missions at the same time, supported by their mother's faith and the generosity of relatives and ward members. She died of tuberculosis shortly before Ardeth and Heber were married. To help them get started in their marriage, they borrowed some money from his grandfather. One of their first obligations as newlyweds was helping to pay his mother's hospital and funeral expenses.

Getting an education was important to both Heber and Ardeth. Heber planned to pursue a teaching career, so he enrolled for classes at Weber College, a two-year institution in Ogden. Ardeth took a cosmetology course at Weber, thinking that the training would enable her to help support them while Heber completed his education. However, she went to work instead at a clothing store, then at the telephone company in Ogden. When Heber transferred to the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, Ardeth transferred to the Salt Lake telephone office.

The couple bought their first home in Kearns, a suburb southwest of the city. Ardeth was immediately called to be the ward YWMIA president, and Heber, the activity counselor in the stake YMMIA. They also taught the parent and youth class—"the only ones that didn't have a family," Ardeth says, "but they listened to us and thought we knew. Going to a movie and eating out would cut into people's budgets too much. We had dances every week and everybody came. We'd go to each other's homes after and visit and nobody had any furniture. The activity of the Mutual was our whole social life."

After Heber graduated from the University of Utah, the Kapps decided to go to southern California, where teachers' wages were higher. There Heber taught school and Ardeth worked at a phone company. When they attended their new ward in Lakewood for the first time, the bishop introduced himself and said, "You look like Mutual people." They were both given callings in the MIA, and within a few weeks, Ardeth was called as ward YWMIA president.

A year later, the Kapps returned to Utah and rented an apartment in Bountiful, a few miles north of Salt Lake City. Before their boxes were unpacked, the bishop of the Bountiful Third Ward visited them and called Ardeth to be president of the YWMIA. Heber found a teaching job, and Ardeth returned to work at the telephone company in Salt Lake City. When she and several co-workers noticed that some people in their office were depressed or unhappy, they formed the Sunshine Club and cheered up the whole office by leaving notes and complimenting and building up their associates. [^11]

Building Strong Foundations

It was during this period that Heber and Ardeth began building the first of the seven homes they would eventually build in Bountiful. Novices as builders, they learned as they went by finding a home under construction and observing how certain stages of building, such as plumbing, wiring, or sheetrocking, were done. Ardeth said, "The excitement of building a home is more than just a house to live in. It is envisioning something in your mind; it's creating it on paper and negotiating with each other about what you like and what you don't like. With that visualization, then you begin to make it become a reality. There is a spirit about a home when you experience the process and seek answers on how to build it. It's a wonderful, wonderful bonding experience together because it's an accomplishment. With the Lord's help we did it.

"We are both strong individuals with strong personalities, but we resolved that if it came to a decision when we had a difference of opinion, Heber would have sway on the outside of the house and I would have sway on the inside. We both got what we wanted. It always seemed that as we looked at our budget, vast amounts of money went into concrete and wiring, and then when the house was all built, I didn't have all the money I would like for furnishings. But in the process I learned that you have to build a strong foundation, and you have to pay the price to make it sound and make it stable. You can add the extras later, but if you don't have a strong foundation, you don't have anything. There were a lot of analogies in the building process."

For years, Heber and Ardeth had dreamed of building on a lot they had purchased in Centerville, a small community north of Bountiful. They had even drawn plans for their home and built a small model of it. Then Heber was called to serve on the stake high council by Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. When he told Elder Kimball that he and Ardeth planned to begin building on their lot in Centerville soon, Elder Kimball responded, "Accept the call, and everything will work out."

A month later the Kapps were ready to start building their home in Centerville. Heber recalled that when he broke the news to his stake president, "the stake president looked at me and said, 'I didn't call you to the high council. You'd better talk to the Lord.'" After discussion and prayer, Heber and Ardeth decided to sell the lot. [^12]

"When we sold the lot, we thought we were saying good-bye to our dream," Ardeth remembered. "Land within our stake boundaries was too expensive. But within weeks we heard of some property in our stake that we could buy for a similar price. We bought the lot and soon had our home finished. The whole experience reminded me that we receive no witness until after the trial of our faith." [^13]

Ardeth worked for the phone company for ten years, advancing from a service representative to training instructor and business office supervisor. At the time, women were not given top-level management positions, and she realized she would not have any more significant promotions. At the same time, she was also trying to understand her role in life, since it did not appear that she would become a mother. In March 1961 she returned to Glenwood for her aunt's funeral, and as she stood at the gravesite on a bitterly cold, windy day, she thought of how fleeting life is and how little time there is to make a difference. She felt impressed to return to school.

That spring Ardeth enrolled at the University of Utah. Though she was working full-time, serving in the YWMIA, and helping Heber build another house, she completed the requirements for a degree in elementary education in three years and graduated cum laude in 1964. She began teaching at a school near her home in Bountiful. The following year the dean of the College of Education at BYU asked her to supervise student teachers, an unusual assignment for a second-year teacher. The next year she wrote and produced two instructional television series, but she preferred working with students directly and returned to the classroom. In 1970, when BYU offered her a full-time faculty position supervising student teachers, she returned to the campus to work and to complete the requirements for a master's degree in curriculum development. That subject would prove particularly helpful when she was later called to serve with the Church's correlation committee and the Young Women.

"A Quarter of a Million Prayers"

When Ardeth was growing up, she dreamed of living in a small white house with a picket fence and having lots of children. She and Heber greatly desired children, prayed for them, sought the best medical expertise as well as spiritual counsel, yet were not able to have children. For months, then years, they wrestled with this disappointment.

Ardeth said, "I will forever remember the day a child new to our neighborhood knocked on our door and asked if our children could come out to play. I explained to him, as to others young and old, for the thousandth time, that we didn't have any children. This little boy squinted his innocent face in a quizzical look and asked the question that I had not dared put into words, 'If you are not a mother, then what are you?'" [^14]

When Heber was called to be bishop, Ardeth realized that their childlessness was not because of unrighteousness. She related how she found peace after the trial of her faith:

"We were alone with each other at a motel in St. George, Utah, one Thanksgiving time when all our relatives were with their families. Early in the morning, I lay in bed thinking. I remember my heart crying out as I anticipated Christmas approaching. And although we could share in the joy and excitement of our nieces and nephews, it wasn't like having our own children with stockings to hang. The whole thing seemed to me to be unfair. I felt a darkness and a despondency settle over me, and I did what I'd learned to do over the years. I got on my knees and prayed for insight.

"My answer came when I opened the scriptures to Doctrine and Covenants 88:67-68: 'And if your eye be single to my glory [and remember, God's glory is to help 'to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man' (Moses 1:39)], your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will.'

"I don't know how long it will be for others who have similar longings. For us it was years. But one day we did gain an eternal perspective, and we felt peace, not pain; hope, not despair. I would have liked so much to have received that insight years before, but I know that had that happened, I would have been deprived of the growth that comes from being comforted by the witness of the Spirit after the trial of my faith." [^15]

One statement Heber made became "like a beacon in the dark" to Ardeth. "Speaking I think by inspiration from the Lord," she said, "the patriarch of our family said to me, 'You need not possess children to love them. Loving is not synonymous with possessing, and possessing is not necessarily loving. The world is filled with people to be loved, guided, taught, lifted, and inspired.'" [^16]

Over the years, Ardeth has nurtured, guided, loved, and taught many people. When her sisters, Sharon and Shirley, were attending Brigham Young University, they would look to Heber and Ardeth for a boost whenever they needed one, according to Shirley. "As an adult, when I occasionally have those doldrum times, I give Ardie a phone call, and it's enough to pick me up to push on." [^17]

Sharon lived with the Kapps for three years after she graduated from college. When Sharon's car broke down one afternoon, Ardeth loaned her her own car, asking that she bring it back by four because she had an appointment. Sharon forgot and didn't return until six o'clock. When she walked in the house, she found a cake on the table with a note that said, "I know you must have been having a wonderful time. I love you." [^18]

Today Sharon's family lives near the Kapps, and her two children, Shelly and Kent, have been particularly close to their aunt. "My little brother and I call the Kapps 'Mama Ardie' and 'Papa Heber,'" Shelly said. "It's been wonderful to have another mom to go and talk to, another wonderful person to turn to. What an example of dedicating your life to the Lord! She has sacrificed her life—everything she does is in service to the Lord. It helps me put in perspective some of the desires and wants that I have." [^19]

Neighborhood children have enjoyed the cookie drawer in Ardeth's kitchen, while teenagers have often stopped by to chat or to discuss problems with the Kapps. As a ward and stake Young Women leader, Ardeth focused her attention on individual girls who she felt needed her. After she was called to serve as general president of the Young Women, she commented, "And now, after a quarter of a million prayers for children, I have responsibility for a nearly a quarter million young women. I never expected such results." [^20]

Ardeth has always enjoyed expressing herself in her journals and wondered if she could write for publication. Heber encouraged her by purchasing a roll-top desk and writing materials. "I'll provide the materials," he told her, "and I'll help you provide the time. I'll do the things that take your time." He also made a wager as to whether she could get a book written before he could build the next house. She won the wager. Her first book, Miracles in Pinafores and Blue Jeans, was published in 1977 and became an LDS bestseller.

Since then she has published several other books, including The Gentle Touch, All Kinds of Mothers, Echoes from My Prairie, More Miracles in Pinafores and Blue Jeans, The Light and the Life (with Judith S. Smith), I Walk by Faith, The Rising Generation, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend, and The Joy of the Journey. She received Deseret Book's Excellence in Writing award in 1991. She has also published numerous articles in Church periodicals.

"Sometimes when I sit down to write I can hardly wait to get it out to see what it is that I have written," she commented. "Louisa Lula Greene Richards, the first editor of the Woman's Exponent, was my great-aunt. Sometimes when I'm writing I wonder if I inherited anything from her. My father was an incredible writer. He never published anything, but his journals are just like reading Mark Twain. He was so colorful and so vivid. My sisters write well, and my brother writes well. I think we lived in an environment where feelings were deep; we had a sensitivity to feelings."

Preparation for the Presidency

After serving as YWMIA president in three different wards, Ardeth had the opportunity to be a Mia Maid and a Laurel leader in her Bountiful ward. She related well to the young women, and they responded with nearly one hundred percent participation. When a few complained that because of homework and part-time jobs, they didn't have time for MIA activities, Ardeth told them she was in school also, worked full-time, and still made time for her MIA responsibilities.

In 1967 Ardeth was called to serve on the Church's youth correlation committee. When she reviewed lesson materials for young women, she concluded that they needed to be taught "matters of eternal consequence" at an earlier age, they needed Sunday instruction, their lessons should be uniquely LDS, and the scope and sequence of the curriculum needed to be evaluated. Her assignment was changed in 1971 to the newly organized curriculum development committee, where her graduate work in curriculum development was especially beneficial.

One day in October 1972, Heber and Ardeth were in the process of building another home when President Harold B. Lee's secretary called and asked if they could meet with President Lee the next morning. After a sleepless night, they met with him in his office, and he extended a call to Ardeth to serve as second counselor to Ruth Hardy Funk, the seventh general president of Young Women. Hortense H. Child was called as the first counselor.

On the Monday before Thanksgiving, Heber and Ardeth moved into their new home, and two days later Ardeth left for England on a three-week assignment. The announcement of the change of presidency had not yet reached England, and when she stepped off the plane, she could sense the disappointment of the Young Women leaders. "Isn't Sister [Florence] Jacobsen coming?" they asked. Ardeth's sense of humor helped overcome the difficult moment, for she responded, "if you feel bad about it, how do you think I feel?" The women all laughed and welcomed Ardeth warmly.

During the six years Ardeth served in the general presidency, many major organizational changes took place, the name of the organization was changed, and the offices were housed in three different locations. The emphasis of the presidency was to give young people more opportunities to develop leadership skills.

As second counselor, Ardeth was executive representative to the Beehive committee and to the sports and camp programs. Her background in curriculum development was again beneficial as she helped evaluate the curriculum for young women. By 1977, new, scripturally oriented manuals for the Beehive, Mia Maid, and Laurel classes were introduced. She also helped to oversee the production of The Activity Book, a joint undertaking of the Young Women and Young Men.

At the time Ardeth was called to serve in the general presidency, her parents, Ted and June Greene, were serving on a mission in England, where June fell and broke her hip and shoulder. When they returned, they moved into a basement apartment that Heber had built especially for them in the Kapps' new home. In February 1978, Ted Greene, who had been very active until then, doing seventy-five push-ups on his seventy-fifth birthday, was diagnosed with cancer. Ardeth was torn between needing to be at home with her parents and needing to be at the Young Women's office. Adding to this dilemma, she also received the impression that Heber would be called to be stake president.

In May, while she and Heber were vacationing in Arizona and contemplating their future, Ardeth called the office and learned that Ruth Funk wanted to see her just as soon as she returned. When they met on Mother's Day, Ruth informed her they were to be released. Ardeth returned home and told her father she would be given an honorable release. "That's all you could ask for," he responded, with tears in his eyes. "That's all I ask for, an honorable release." A week later, Heber was called as president of their stake, and five months later, on October 20, 1978, her father passed away. Her mother died on October 10, 1981.

In July 1978, immediately after her release from the Young Women presidency was announced, Ardeth received a call as Laurel adviser in her ward, which she described as "just a glorious experience." She subsequently served on the Church's instructional development writing committee. She also became a popular speaker at BYU education weeks, at "Know Your Religion" lecture programs, and at numerous stake and ward events. But the assignment she said she enjoyed most was supporting her husband as stake president.

A Woman of Vision

President Gordon B. Hinckley extended a call to Ardeth to serve as Young Women general president on April 6, 1984, the day before general conference. "He told me," said Ardeth, "that this was a very significant time, for this was a time when we were seeing great things happen in the lives of young women and that they would rise up and be a mighty force for righteousness."

Her counselors and general board were not called until several months later. During that period, Ardeth obtained a new set of scriptures and read the scriptures with young women in mind.

"That was a very crucial and valuable time for me," she remembered. "It was a time when I, in a sense, went to the mountain. I remember keeping a separate journal, which I called the small plates, of any insight or inspiration that I thought was relevant to the calling. When you have an assignment like that, there are a thousand things that you would like to ask for. You would like to ask for wisdom, people skills, righteousness. You want to be all that you should be, and you are painfully aware of the things that you are not. Sometimes I thought, 'Oh, I wish I could remember this; I wish I could remember that.' Then a thought came to me one time as I was pondering: 'I know that my Redeemer lives.' I thought, if I can know that and know that I can receive his direction, then I can look to other people for the other things I don't know. I felt that if I could have one gift during the time I would serve, the one I would most desire would be vision. If I could have a vision of what we were to accomplish and how to do it, then others with skills and ability could make it happen. But a president needs to have the vision."

Ardeth selected as her counselors Patricia Terry Holland and Maurine Johnson Turley. When Sister Holland was released in 1986, Jayne Broadbent Malan was called as a counselor. Elaine Low Jack became a counselor in 1987, replacing Sister Turley. In March 1990, Sister Jack was sustained as the Relief Society general president, and Janette Callister Hales replaced her as a counselor in Young Women.

Having gained a vision of where she should lead the young women of the Church, Ardeth worked faithfully and tirelessly to carry it out. After the presidency and board were organized, they discussed the needs of young women in the 1980s and addressed the questions of identity, direction, and purpose. "We went through a rather lengthy and soul-searching process, seeking to know what would be best for young women today," Ardeth said. "From that process, the Young Women Values—faith, divine nature, individual worth, knowledge, choice and accountability, good works, and integrity—were developed. The vision we had was that every young woman should be prepared to make and keep sacred covenants and to receive the ordinances of the temple.

"We determined that we would start with the first ordinance, baptism, so the first part of the Young Women theme is a statement of our baptismal covenant: 'We will stand as witnesses of God at all times, in all things, and in all places.' That's the foundation. It wasn't until later that we recognized there was a direct correlation between proclaiming the gospel, which is to stand as a witness for Christ; perfecting the saints, which is to live by the Young Women Values; and redeeming the dead, which is to prepare for temple ordinances. This is a foundation, just like building a house. If you don't have the foundation in place, then young women are under the pressure and storms of our day. I think that preparation for our young women today is as crucial as or more crucial than the preparation of the young pioneers who came across the plains. The tests are different. In many ways, they are more severe, more intense."

The values were introduced during the 1985 Young Women satellite broadcast, which Ardeth describes as "a landmark, historic event." The general board also produced and published a new personal progress book for the young women; introduced a mission statement and symbol for each of the three age-groups; and developed a new logo, a torch with the motto "Stand for truth and righteousness," representing the light of Christ and inviting all young women to be bearers of the torch by keeping the commandments.

In 1987, for the first worldwide celebration of the Young Women, each young woman throughout the world was invited to write her testimony on a piece of paper, attach it to a balloon, and launch her balloon at a special program in her area. "What we wanted to have happen was to establish a worldwide sisterhood," Ardeth said. "That happened. It was an incredible thing, with young women all over the world a part of it, sending their testimonies to the world. The second worldwide celebration, the bell ringing in 1989, was a renewal of history. But more than that, it was setting in place a symbol of the ringing of the bell, which was related to listening to the Spirit and a recommitment to follow the prophet."

Ardeth subscribes to the proverb "Where there is no vision, the people perish." (Proverbs 29:18.) She believes that leaders must give people a vision of who they are and why they do what they do, and she conveys that vision through her own leadership style and through training others to be leaders. She also believes that individuals cannot do the work of the Lord unless they continually study the word of the Lord. Thus, members of her board devoted thirty to forty-five minutes of their weekly board meetings to studying the scriptures.

Obedient to the direction of the Brethren, Ardeth believes in priesthood power and authority and teaches that there is only one organizational channel, the priesthood channel. Maurine Turley said, "She taught her counselors and board members the importance of the priesthood line and that we are a resource to the priesthood leadership. She always taught Young Women leaders to honor their priesthood leaders and to follow their direction." [^21]

Ardeth's leadership style, according to Patricia Holland, enables others to grow. "No one is better than Ardeth in developing leadership because she is so wonderful in giving encouragement and praise. She delegated significant responsibilities to her counselors, and we were accountable for them. She just let go and trusted us." [^22] When Elaine Jack was called to serve as the Relief Society general president in March 1990, she paid tribute to Ardeth, declaring, "She has tutored me, encouraged me, and allowed me to grow." [^23]

Ardeth has always found time for people. Carolyn J. Rasmus, her administrative assistant, recalled that once after a BYU football game, when Ardeth was in a hurry to get to another event, "People seeing her called out, 'Sister Kapp, Sister Kapp,' and she stopped to talk with them as if she had all the time in the world. I have never seen her annoyed or impatient. Over and over again I have seen her be nothing but generous and lifting and building to people." [^24]

Ardeth carried on what she termed "a ministry by mail" with young women who wrote to her, responding to every letter written to her by thousands of them. She also ministered one-on-one. Janette Hales observed that Ardeth often asked local leaders to identify a young woman who had a special need and then went with the local leader and often a youth leader to visit that individual. "I think that was one of the most tender and gentle things she did. She inspired people with problems to see their potential," Janette said. "In some cases, I don't think they knew who she was, but they felt her spirit. Sister Kapp always asked if she could pray with the young woman in her home, then bore a strong testimony of the girl's divine potential. She described it as 'being on the Lord's errand.'" [^25]

Through training seminars and the Young Women Leadership Guidebook (1990) and Young Women Leadership Video (1991), Ardeth trained many leaders and many young women themselves. "One thing I hope our administration will be remembered for," she said, "was changing the mindset from saying 'What shall we do?' to the question 'What do we want to have happen?'—so that we're not focusing on activities but looking at outcomes."

Ardeth has a keen sense of humor and an ability to laugh. Patricia Holland said, "I'm never around her more than five minutes before she has me laughing. She's either just had a funny experience or has a funny story to tell. She's willing at her own expense to be funny. That's one of the things that endears her to you." [^26]

Jayne Malan noted, "We really have fun in social situations. But even in social situations Ardeth is always looking at the principle of why are we doing this—is it to develop sisterhood or to build team unity? She has a marvelous sense of humor and a good sense of timing. In fact, I think her sense of timing goes right along with her leadership—she is so visionary." [^27]

Heber totally supported Ardeth in her calling, helping with grocery shopping, household chores, and cooking. She was sometimes concerned about the amount of time she was away from home, but he urged her to do every possible assignment, saying, "You won't have this calling forever, and when the time comes to be released, you won't have one regret if you have given it all you have. Don't hold back; just give every ounce of energy, and when you are released you'll know you've done the best you could."

Ardeth has received many honors, including the Lambda Delta Sigma Elect Lady Award (1986); Collegium Aesculapium Humanitarian Award from the Brigham Young Academy of Medicine (1989); Utah-California Women Heritage Award (1990); and Exemplary Womanhood Award from the BYU Student Association (1990). Her community involvement has included serving on the Bountiful City Citizens Planning Commission for development of library and educational services and on a University of Utah Graduate School advisory council subcommittee to develop a high school curriculum on parenting. She has also served on the Board of Trustees for the Church Educational System, on boards of directors for Deseret Gymnasium and Deseret Book Company, and as a member of the National Coalition Against Pornography.

A New Mission to Serve

On January 3, 1992, Heber received a call to serve as a mission president. Ardeth was released as general president of the Young Women at general conference on April 4, and in July they began presiding over the Canada Vancouver Mission. There she continues to bless lives and to provide vision.

Ardeth Greene Kapp learned the lesson of obedience early in her life—obedience to her parents, obedience to the priesthood, obedience to the Spirit, and obedience to the Lord. She overcame unfulfilled expectations and turned her heart to nurturing and serving others. Throughout her life and throughout her service as the general president of the Young Women, she sought to know the Lord's will and to carry it out. She is indeed a woman of vision.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Except as noted, all quotations by Janette Hales and details of her life are taken from personal interviews conducted by Janet Peterson on April 8 and 20 and May 11, 1992, and a written statement of Janette Hales dated June 23, 1992.
[^2] Sheridan R. Sheffield, "Quest for Learning Is Her Trademark," Church News, April 18, 1992, 6.
[^3] "New Young Women General Presidency Called," Ensign, May 1992, 106.
[^4] Telephone interview with Jane Hales Ricks, May 12, 1992.
[^5] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^6] Telephone interview with Jane Hales Ricks, May 12, 1992.
[^7] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^8] Telephone interview with Karen Hales Parkinson, May 12, 1992.
[^9] Telephone interview with Jane Hales Ricks, May 12, 1992.
[^10] Written statement of Karol Gleave, May 5, 1992.
[^11] Telephone interview with Mary Hales, May 12, 1992.
[^12] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^13] Telephone interview with Mary Alice Collins, May 11, 1992.
[^14] Telephone interview with Ann Edwards Cannon, May 21, 1992.
[^15] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^16] Telephone interview with Thomas C. Hales, May 6, 1992.
[^17] Janette C. Hales, "You Are Not Alone," Ensign, May 1992, 79.
[^18] Telephone interview with Virginia H. Pearce, May 26, 1992.
[^19] Written statement of Ardeth G. Kapp, May 14, 1992.
[^20] Telephone interview with Mary Hales, May 12, 1992.
[^21] Personal interview with Carolyn J. Rasmus, May 14, 1992.
[^22] Telephone interview with Patricia P. Pinegar, May 19, 1992.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] Telephone interview with Virginia H. Pearce, May 26, 1992.
[^25] Hales, "You Are Not Alone," 80.
[^26] Written statement of Ardeth G. Kapp, May 14, 1992.
[^27] Personal interview with Carolyn J. Rasmus, May 14, 1992. 1993
