Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Keepers of the Flame ( 1993)

10

Janette Callister Hales [^1]

1992-

When Janette Callister Hales was a young girl, she loved to go to the carnival that periodically stopped in her hometown of Spanish Fork, Utah. The pink cotton candy, cold root beer, Ferris wheel, merry-go-round, and games of skill were a dazzling array of attractions for young Janette—and she was always eager for one more ride or one more treat.

One year when the carnival was in town for the Twenty-fourth of July, Janette's father handed her a silver dollar and said, "Here, go enjoy yourself and buy whatever you want." When carnival items cost a nickel or a dime, a silver dollar represented a small fortune to an eight-year-old.

I remember going with my girlfriends to the carnival," Janette said. I priced everything—cotton candy, the rides—and I figured out how many of each thing I could get for my dollar. At the end of the day, I came home with my dollar. I hadn't spent any of it. I realized that it was my dollar, and all of a sudden that had more value because it represented choice. By keeping the dollar, I still had the choice. Once it was gone, the choice was gone."

Throughout her life, Janette has always placed a high value on her right, as well as the rights of others, to choose. This valuing of choice has shaped her relationships with people: she facilitates growth in others through her nurturing attitude, her wise counsel, and her ability to help people realize the consequences of their choices.

Strong Family Ties

Janette was born June 7, 1933, in Springville, Utah, to Thomas Leonard and Hannah Carrick Callister. The third child in the family—she has two older sisters, Colleen and Marilyn she was named Janette after her paternal grandmother, Janetta. Three other children were born into the family: Geraldine, Thomas John (who died at age five), and EnaMarie (who died in infancy). The family lived in Spanish Fork, a small farming community ten miles south of Provo.

Thomas's parents, Thomas and Janetta Crellin Callister, had emigrated to the United States from the Isle of Man in the 1890s. The lure of the new country and opportunities for farming and mining brought them west to Santaquin, Utah, twenty-two miles south of Provo. Janetta, a staunch Presbyterian, attended church, even though she had to travel to Provo to find a congregation. When their son Thomas was eighteen, the Callisters moved to Provo. Neither he nor his parents joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Janette's maternal grandmother, Ena Gudmundson, joined the Church as a young girl, along with her family in Vestmannaeyjar, Iceland. Since there wasn't enough money to allow the whole family to immigrate to Utah together at that time, Ena stayed behind and came with another family in 1886, when she was twelve. After arriving in Utah, she worked in a shoe factory and did housework. Janette's grandfather, John James Carrick, came to the United States from England in 1888. He and Ena were married in 1895. His work as a miner took them to Hiawatha, a small town in eastern Utah. They then moved to Canada for about a year to find work during a mining slump. There Janette's mother, Hannah, was born.

When John and Ena Carrick returned to Utah, Ena felt that a mining community wasn't a healthy environment for children, so the family purchased a small farm in Mapleton, eight miles south of Provo. John worked in the mines during the week and came home on weekends. Ena raised raspberries and milked cows and also became a practical nurse.

Janette, who still feels "strong ties to her Icelandic heritage," was greatly influenced by her grandmother Carrick. "I felt that my grandmother could do anything, although she never learned to read and write in English. As a practical nurse, she would stay with women when they had their babies. She would be there to assist with the delivery and then stay ten days and care for the newborn and the mother and cook for the family. For years, even when I was in college, I regularly met people who said my grandmother had taken care of them.

"One memorable thing about my grandmother was her hearty laugh. I remember how secure I would feel when I could hear her laughing. I was about eight years old when my grandfather died, and so my grandmother became even more a part of all our family occasions. When there were babies born in our family or extra hands were needed, Grandma was always there. I slept with her when she stayed with us, and periodically I would spend a few days in her home. She always had her hands busy. She taught me to crochet. Since she was left-handed, I would watch what she would do, then I would have to move away and reverse her instructions in my mind because I was right-handed."

Janette grew up in a secure and loving home with parents who made her feel that she could do whatever she wanted to do. "My father was such a good man," said Janette, "and so respected by others for his integrity. I guess I idolized my dad. He sang and always whistled a tune as he came up the walk and into the house. He was witty and loved to tease as well as to stimulate a good debate."

An experience that profoundly affected Janette and her family began one day when she was in the third grade. "I remember Grandma Carrick being there to get us off to school," she recalled. "It was unusual for my mother not to be in the kitchen fixing breakfast. I was told only that she was upstairs. Grandma hurried us out the door much earlier than usual. Later that morning, my father came running out on to the playground at my elementary school with a smile from ear to ear and announced that I had a new baby brother. I don't remember ever seeing my parents happier. My father had no brothers and had longed for a son and someone to carry on his family name. The baby was named Thomas John Callister after his two grandfathers. Although Tommy was born jaundiced, it was many weeks before my parents realized that he was not developing as a normal child. His rigid responses and inability to reach for a toy led my family to realize only years later that he had a type of cerebral palsy. Medical science at that time never made a clear diagnosis. Tommy was subject to infections and died at the age of five.

"It was during this period that I learned the most about a mother's unconditional love. Although my parents sought in vain for medical answers that would improve his condition, I watched my mother work tirelessly to provide warmth, food, and happiness to a child who never learned to sit, feed himself, or even be able to pick up a toy. This was a setting in which I learned much about sensitivity, caring, and compassion. These were war years and a time of stress for most families, but it was a period when I saw motherhood nobly modeled. My parents sold two building lots adjacent to our home, which my mother had always gardened, in order to have money to bury two children."

Though her father was not a member of the Church and her mother did not attend church at that time, Janette occasionally went to Primary with her friends. I was passing off the Articles of Faith at the home of the Primary president," she recounted. "After I finished, she took my hand and asked me, 'Wouldn't you like to be baptized?'" [^2] She was baptized shortly before her eleventh birthday, on the same day as her sister Geri, who was eight. Her parents supported her decision, Janette said. "They'd always taught gospel principles in our home. . . . They taught me to be kind, honest, and loving, and they supported me in everything I ever did." [^3] With her parents' encouragement, Janette attended church meetings on Sundays with her friends. Her father frequently chauffeured her and her friends to various church functions.

Caring leaders also played a great role in Janette's life. I remember being influenced positively by caring adults," she said. "Part of that was being in a small community; part was the Church as well. There were always people extending themselves for me. I always had parts in plays and in things that were happening at church. Throughout my school years I participated in student government and in many other activities."

When Janette reached high school, her MIA attendance was sporadic, since she worked in the evenings at the local movie theater. After she graduated from high school, she worked during the day and was called as the YWMIA secretary. She developed a close relationship with the other leaders and advisers.

Following her father's advice that she should learn "how to do something," Janette learned accounting, shorthand, and typing. But she also felt she wanted something more. She looked to the example of her sister Colleen, who was the first member of their extended family to graduate from college.

A Turning Point

Janette, an outstanding student in high school, received a scholarship to Brigham Young University—twenty-five dollars for tuition for one quarter. It was, she said, a "bleak time" for her when she turned the scholarship over to the alternate because she did not have enough money to pay for her other expenses. "I was only eighteen, yet I thought my life was over," she said. When her friends went off to college, she worked for a family doctor in Spanish Fork at a twelve-bed hospital and learned many new skills. She recalled doing "everything from developing X-rays to blood tests to filling out birth certificates and giving bed baths as well as doing the billing and accounting for the doctor's practice and the hospital."

The next fall Janette enrolled at BYU and thought she would be very fortunate if her savings carried her through the year. Housing was scarce in Provo, but she managed to find a room over a garage to share with a high school friend. After two quarters, her roommate dropped out of school and went home, but Janette had found a part-time job and renewed her commitment to stay in school. "That was a real turning point in my life," she said. "I really began to work hard academically. I was invited to join the freshman honor society and was also invited to join a social unit. I started to make new friends. I also started to feel what a mature adult life was, and an extended view of the possibilities started to come." She decided to major in clothing and textiles, partly because of the sewing expertise she learned from her mother.

During her second year of college, Janette roomed with seven other girls in a small house off-campus. They got up each morning at 6:30—even though some of them didn't have classes until ten o'clock—for family prayer and breakfast and then met again at night for dinner. One roommate commented after the group had missed a day or two of praying together, "Things just don't go right when we don't have prayer." For Janette, this became a strong family situation. "That environment was a really good influence on me as I attended weekly devotionals and took religion classes. I made some strong commitments in terms of life-style and the future by the time I finished my sophomore year."

Marriage and Motherhood

A mutual friend introduced Janette to a young man who had recently returned from a mission in England, Robert H. Hales. He was well known at BYU and had been selected as one of the "Ten Most Preferred Men on Campus." Their paths crossed occasionally and Janette admired him secretly, but it was not until she was a sophomore and Bob was a student at the University of Utah College of Medicine that they began dating. Because of Bob's demanding studies, their dates were few and far between. In the spring of 1955, after a year's courtship, they became engaged. Janette admired Bob's ambition, willingness to work hard, and natural leadership abilities. "Material things were of little importance to him," she said, "but experience and opportunity really were. He opened a new world of adventure for me." She had planned to run for president of the BYU Associated Women Students and had had her photograph taken for her campaign. Instead, she used the picture for her engagement photo. She and Bob were married June 29, 1955, in the Salt Lake Temple.

Janette worked as a secretary/accountant at the Wheelwright Lithographing Company to help her husband through school. Ann, their first daughter, was born in 1956, as her father entered his last year of medical school. Following graduation, the young family moved to San Antonio, Texas, where Bob had a medical internship at Lackland Air Force Base. They planned on being in Texas only a year and were short on money, so they didn't buy an air conditioner—the only military family they knew that didn't have one. Janette was pregnant with their second child, Thomas, and Bob's work schedule was often intense—every day and every other night. She found herself uncomfortably hot, lonely, and frustrated. Bob would come home and say, "Why don't you just go shopping and buy you something?" Her reply was, "Where will I wear it?" She described this experience as "a real growing-up year for me. I was very naive. It was just part of my going from a childish expectation to a more mature, realistic view."

Activity in the Church helped Janette adjust to being away from her family in Utah and to her role as a military doctor's wife. She served as a counselor in both the Relief Society presidency and the YWMIA presidency in their branch. The family's stay in San Antonio extended through a second hot summer, for after Bob completed his internship, he was invited to attend the school of aviation medicine at Randolph Air Force Base.

Bob's next assignment was as a flight surgeon at Mitchell Air Force Base on Long Island, near New York City. Janette especially enjoyed this period of their lives. "That was like a paid vacation for me and was the only time in our married life that we had 'normal hours,'" she recalled. "We assumed that we would live in the West someday, so we took advantage of everything. We went to Washington, D.C., Boston, Palmyra, and New York City. Through the USO we could get free tickets to Broadway plays when they were near the end of their runs. Bob's uncle, David J. Wilson, was a judge of the Customs Court in New York, and his aunt, Mary Wilson, included me in a lot of her social activities. I had some wonderful opportunities."

The Haleses attended the Uniondale Ward, where Janette served as a Laurel leader and chorister in the MIA, and Bob taught Sunday School and served as president of the elders quorum.

After living in New York for two years, the family moved to San Francisco, where Bob began his residency in ophthalmology at the University of California Medical Center. As soon as they attended church in San Francisco's Sunset Ward, Janette was asked to be Primary president. "That period of my life changed me the most as far as spiritual growth and commitment," she said. "I think I extended myself more in church callings and leadership. I had some spiritual experiences that really changed me. If I were to relate to that 'mighty change of heart' that Alma talks about, I think it came during that period. Prior to that, I felt totally committed and that I had a testimony, but now there was a change. The gospel became more personal to me." Seeking to finish her degree in home economics, she learned that the only classes she could take by correspondence were religion classes. "I have a tremendous reverence for the scriptures that goes back to that period," she commented.

Jane, Janette and Bob's third child, was born in San Francisco in 1962. The following year, the family returned to Provo, where Bob set up a solo practice. Janette remembered this as an exciting time, in spite of the severity of that first winter, an old car that had to be jump-started every morning, and the financial uncertainty of a new medical practice. Two more daughters joined the family: Karen in 1965 and Mary in 1967. The children all helped at the office, cleaning it "almost as soon as they could walk" and later doing the billing. Working with their father helped keep the family united.

Family Traditions

When Bob was growing up, his father, Wayne B. Hales, a physics professor at BYU, taught summer school classes at Aspen Grove, a university-owned family camp in nearby Provo Canyon. Bob loved those mountains and wanted to have a cabin where the family could spend time together. Although their five children slept in two small bedrooms in the Hales home in Provo, Bob and Janette purchased a canyon lot. "I dragged my feet in buying the lot, but building a summer home became a strong source of family unity," said Janette. Bob especially liked to hike to the top of nearby Mount Timpanogos, and he would often take the children and their friends along. Janette hiked to the top only once; she preferred staying at the cabin to prepare dinner for the returning hikers. Jane Hales Ricks has happy memories of the family gathering at the cabin to listen to general conference. That tradition always included her mother fixing her "Sundance Special" breakfast: an English muffin with broiled cheese, Canadian bacon, and an egg "over lightly." [^4]

Seeking knowledge has been a strong Hales family tradition. Janette used to study college catalogs just for the fun of contemplating what she would take if she had the time and means. When her youngest child, Mary, was a year old, Janette received a bachelor's degree in clothing and textiles from BYU—having finished her senior year over a period of thirteen years.

Bob's mother, Belle, had died the year the Haleses returned to Provo, so Grandfather Hales frequently ate dinner with the family, often bringing a stack of books for the children. Besides Bob's medical discussions at the dinner table, the children heard lessons about the physical world from their grandfather.

Janette was very close to her father-in-law, Wayne Hales. "He was an ideal to me in a religious sense, yet he allowed me to be myself," she said. "I would sometimes question him on things, and he would say to me, 'Janette, you ask hard questions.' I felt that he loved me totally. We had a very caring relationship. He was so appreciative of the mothering kinds of things I did—like fixing him a bowl of hot cereal. He made me feel as if I were just wonderful." During his final illness, Janette helped care for him. She had taken a class on care of the terminally ill and determined that no matter what it took on her part, she wanted to do all she could to make it a "good occasion" for him. They became even closer during this experience. He died in 1980.

"Dad Hales was a great influence on the children. His desire for learning just infused his life," said Janette. "He gave a lesson every time a cloud went overhead. My children were all good students, and I don't ever remember taking responsibility for their schoolwork. One of Ann's junior high teachers asked me one day, 'How do you get your children to study so much?' That was the time I was trying to graduate, so studying is just what we did. It was a way of life for all of us."

Ann received degrees in nursing and law; Tom has a Ph.D. in math and teaches at the University of Chicago; Jane completed medical school and works part-time at the BYU Health Center; Karen obtained a master's degree in organizational behavior, has taught Japanese and math at a private school, and is pursuing a degree in education at Columbia Teachers College; and Mary is pursuing a degree in dietetics. "My mother always had a very practical view of education," said Ann. "She saw education as a means of increasing our abilities and as a way of preparing us to help other people. She did not have an ivory tower approach of education for its own sake." [^5]

Music has been another family tradition, partly because of Janette's unfulfilled desire to have music lessons when she was young. She can now play hymns on the piano, thanks to practicing done while she waited for people. "The more I waited, the better I played," she mused. "When I would get dinner ready and be waiting for Bob to come home from the office—and his hours were not always predictable—I practiced instead of getting frustrated." Ann learned to play the piano, Tom the clarinet and oboe, Jane the flute, Karen the violin, and Mary the cello. Jane sometimes resisted practicing and would ask, "How long do I have to play the flute?" Her mother would reply, "You don't have to play the flute. If you would rather vacuum two hours a day, you don't have to practice." [^6]

By the time the children reached high school, Janette felt that it was their choice whether to continue with music lessons. Ann, who was quite accomplished on the piano, decided that she wanted to diversify how she spent her time, so she chose to spend less time practicing. "Mom always expressed her faith in our ability to make choices," she said, "and she always let us make our choices and learn from the consequences. I see her in a mentor role, facilitating people to grow." [^7]

"Mother never tried to put us in a mold of what she thought we should be," according to Karen Hales Parkinson. "Rather, she supported us and helped us discover the realities of our quests." When Janette went shopping with Karen for patterns and fabric, she would allow Karen to select the color and design she wanted, and though Karen's choices were sometimes outlandish, her mother always found a way to make the outfit look attractive. [^8] "Mom never regulated our lives, but let our best selves come out," Jane said. She also noted that her mother disciplined with hugs, not reprimands. When Jane broke her expensive new tennis racket and finally found the courage to show it to her mother, Janette responded by hugging her and saying it was all right. [^9]

Janette took up tennis when she was nearly forty years old. A neighbor, the tennis coach at BYU, offered to teach tennis to the women in the neighborhood. Janette said, "We showed up for our first lesson in the worst garb you could imagine—long pants and the wrong kind of shoes, but Wayne Pearce made us believe that we could play. I particularly felt that I had some natural ability. It was just contagious for me. Then as I played people who were a little younger, a little faster, and had more experience, it began to be not so much fun. I remember going home one day and saying maybe I should be spending my time on other things. I think that's how we often justify quitting—we always have something else that's more valuable. The selection of an alternative activity wasn't the point. The point was, when it got hard I wanted to quit. My daughter Jane said, 'Why don't you wait until you get good and then decide whether to quit?'"

Janette did not quit. She has played tennis several times a week for the past twenty years, and she and Jane once played in a league together. Karol S. Gleave, Janette's tennis partner for fifteen years, commented, "Janette is aggressive and competitive on the tennis court, which makes her a lot of fun to play with. She feels that playing tennis helps to keep balance in her life." [^10] "People on the tennis court know I'm very competitive," Janette agreed. "Competition at its best is a form of cooperation. If you want to grow you have to push on something. Muscles have to have something to push on to grow."

Although she and Bob worked closely together as husband and wife, Janette maintained a strong sense of her own identity apart from being a wife or mother. "I was always aware of my parents doing things together, but it was important to my mother to have her own identity from her own efforts," her daughter Mary said. "She was quite independent." [^11] Janette discovered that as she did things for herself, such as playing tennis, she could allow her children to have their successes and she could have hers. "I believe that mothers make a real mistake by requiring their children to meet the mother's needs," she explained. "It's a real burden for a child."

Not only did Janette encourage her own children to grow by helping them examine the consequences of their choices and by providing resources to develop potential, but she has also provided such opportunities to many others as well. Having been raised with limited resources, she is sensitive to the needs of others and likes to encourage people to keep working. For many years she has maintained a checking account called the "Janette C. Hales Special Fund." She sends small checks and letters to encourage young people to continue developing their talents. "There is no plan to it," she said. "I just do it when the Spirit tells me."

Over the years she and Bob acquired a fine collection of paintings by Utah artists. By purchasing works of some artists who were at the time not well-known, they encouraged further artistic development. When Dan Ricks, Jane's husband, was looking for a job the summer before he started medical school, Janette suggested that if he wanted to wash windows, she would set him up in business. She supplied him with a ladder, squeegees, cleaning supplies, and an instruction book and let him practice on her windows. Dan did well financially, and the experience also increased his desire to go to school so he wouldn't have to wash windows the rest of his life.

Friendships and Service

"Because my own parents didn't participate in church, friendships have been really important to me," remarked Janette. "Friends are like additional family. I have very close friendships, and they seem really necessary." She maintains many friendships developed over the years and enjoys planning reunions with her San Antonio friends, New York friends, San Francisco friends, and college roommates. She is close to her tennis partners, neighbors, and ward members. According to her daughter Ann, her "excellent people skills and her ability to help people reach their potential" have endeared her to many people. [^12]

Mary Alice Collins, Janette's next-door neighbor for over twenty years, said, "We have a fabulous neighborhood. Five families on our street have children about the same ages, and so we have raised them together. The children have felt that they could go to any of the adults for help. My youngest daughter and her friend had missed the school bus several times, so one morning when they had missed it again, they felt hesitant to face their mothers, so they went to Janette's house and asked her to drive them to school—which she did. Janette is a wonderful cook and invited all the neighborhood children to her home one day for scones. She has provided fun games for neighborhood parties, made a video of the neighborhood, and written words for a neighborhood song." [^13] Ann Edwards Cannon, who grew up in that neighborhood and was a friend of Ann Hales, stated, "Janette was genuinely friendly to her children's friends. Whenever I went to their home, I felt very invited." [^14]

Janette and Bob both lived their philosophy of extending service beyond the family circle. A Hales family joke was, "Whatever Dad wasn't president of, Mom was." [^15] While Bob served as a bishop and then as a counselor in the stake presidency, Janette served as president of the Utah County Medical Auxiliary, as a PTA president, and as a member of the curriculum committee of the Provo School District. In the Church, she served as gospel doctrine teacher, Young Women adviser and counselor, an instructor at the Missionary Training Center, and ward Relief Society president. The latter experience had a particularly profound effect upon her, she said. "My heart was so full of love for everyone in the ward. Women that I hadn't thought of being my best friends—I loved every one of them. I committed Thursdays to doing Relief Society visits. When I woke up each Thursday morning, names came into my head and I knew exactly where to go and what to do. It was a wonderful process."

"A Good Life Ahead"

The youngest of the Hales children, Mary, was preparing to serve a mission when Bob noticed swelling in his knee and shortness of breath. He scheduled an appointment for an examination on his day off. Janette returned home from playing tennis and found a note on the kitchen table to go to the hospital. There she learned that Bob had a malignant tumor that had spread throughout his body. "At that point, my world fell apart," she said. "Yet I felt I had some experiences that helped prepare me for Bob's death. We were able to talk through everything. He was able to be at home until just two days before he died. He handled it so courageously himself." Bob died in March 1988, just four weeks after being diagnosed with cancer.

Shortly after Bob's death, Janette put her arms around Karen and Mary, who were still at home, and told them, "I just know we have a good life ahead. I know we will be happy. I know there will be compensations." Thomas C. Hales said, "It was when my dad died that I first really saw the strengths of my mom. Until then, they were so much of a team that I never really thought to assess the strengths of my mom versus the strengths of my dad. A number of people who were grieving the loss of a spouse talked to my mother. She saw that many had stopped growing, and she was determined not to let that happen to her." [^16]

Janette found herself doing a lot of walking at that time and thinking a lot about youth. One day she told a neighbor, "If I ever have a chance to work with young people again, I will be so much more patient, so much more gentle, and so much more loving. . . . I will do all in my power to encourage young people to prepare for the future." [^17]

Five months after Bob's death, Janette was called to the Primary general board. Virginia H. Pearce, a fellow board member, observed that as she and Janette served on a committee to prepare training materials for stake leaders, Janette was reluctant to impose policies but rather focused on principles, adding, "She is very willing to trust other people and to let them grow. She feels that life is a process, not a product." [^18]

Prior to his illness, Bob had encouraged Janette to get involved in politics. Just weeks after his death, she read in the newspaper that her state representative was moving from the area, so she filed to run for the legislature. She was appointed by Governor Norman Bangerter to fill the vacancy in the state legislature, then was elected to the Utah State House of Representatives in the November general election. "I love the process of free government," she said. "It is a problem-solving process, when people with diverse opinions and backgrounds work together. What you're really trying to do is combine needs and resources in such a way that growth can take place—economic growth or educational growth, for instance." She served for one term; in 1990, the next election year, she withdrew her name for reelection when she was called to serve in the general presidency of Young Women.

When Elaine L. Jack was released as a counselor in the Young Women general presidency in March 1990 and was sustained as the general president of the Relief Society, Janette Hales was called to serve as second counselor to Ardeth G. Kapp.

"Although I was not well acquainted with Janette at the time I requested that she be called to serve as my counselor in the Young Women general presidency, I felt drawn to her in a spiritual sense," Ardeth recalled. "I had a great desire to become acquainted with her. I felt that I could learn from her, and she had much to give. As we began working together, immediately a sense of trust was developed for her loyalty, her judgment, her sensitivity, and her wise and gentle counsel. She has the ability to weigh carefully and speak clearly. Void of pride and any selfish motives, she is free to be true to her own convictions while showing deep respect for another's point of view. Her genuine reverence for the uniqueness and value of each individual is ever apparent. In matters of principle, she stands firm. In matters of practice, she demonstrates wise judgment." [^19]

Janette has an unusual ability to analyze situations and to respond wisely. "As I was growing up, my friends all thought I was so wise," her daughter Mary said. "When we talked about problems, I just repeated the answers my mother had given me when we had discussed those same issues earlier." [^20]

When one of the secretaries at the Young Women office was hospitalized on Secretaries' Day, Carolyn Rasmus, administrative assistant for the Young Women president, asked Janette if she should put "Happy Secretaries' Day" on the card accompanying the flowers the office was sending. Janette responded, "We probably shouldn't impose how a person should feel in the hospital. Let's write 'It's Secretaries' Day. We're thinking of you, and we care about you.'" "That was a real lesson for me," Carolyn commented. "That is wisdom." [^21]

Janette had served earlier as a counselor to Patricia Pinegar in a Relief Society presidency in their Provo ward. Patricia said, "Whenever I am in the same room with Janette Hales, I take notes—whether she's teaching a gospel doctrine lesson, giving a talk in sacrament meeting, or conducting a meeting. She has such wonderful wisdom; it is profound in its simplicity." [^22]

Tenth General President of Young Women

Janette served as a counselor in the Young Women general presidency for two years; then another significant change occurred in her life. Ardeth Kapp's husband, Heber, was called in early 1992 to serve as a mission president, necessitating Ardeth's release as general president. Janette Hales was selected to succeed her.

"I had some experiences of preparation before President Thomas S. Monson extended the call to me to serve as Young Women general president," Janette recalled. "Those experiences had given me a feeling of being overwhelmed with self-doubt. One morning when I had been feeling discouraged, I was driving past Temple Square and looked over at the tabernacle and thought of all that had happened to me in the past four years. My life had changed so much. When my daughter Mary said that her bishop wanted her to be a Sunday School teacher and that she didn't feel like a teacher, I said, 'You're not yet, Mary, but you will be.' I thought, I'm not this and I'm not that, but I'm not all I'm going to be. We're not finished until we get to the end of our lives. All of a sudden I had a wonderful optimistic feeling and the cloud was gone."

Between the time she received the call and the announcement at general conference in April, she had an experience that was reaffirming to her:

"I woke up one night and thought of Enos praying. He was taking on a new responsibility as his father, Jacob, had entrusted him with the plates. [See Jacob 7:27.] His experience had real meaning as to how I felt about being able to do what I had been called to do.

"'There came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed.

"'And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away. And I said: Lord, how is it done?

"'And he said unto me: Because of thy faith in Christ, whom thou hast never before heard nor seen. And many years pass away before he shall manifest himself in the flesh; wherefore, go to, thy faith hath made thee whole.

"'Now it came to pass that when I heard these words I began to feel a desire for the welfare of my brethren.' [Enos 1: 5-9.]

"I realized that faith helps us overcome our deficits whether they are sins or other feelings of inadequacy. We really become who we become because of the gift of the Atonement. And thinking of the welfare of others makes us other-oriented instead of self-oriented. What has the Savior asked us to do but to love one another and to serve one another?"

On April 4, 1992, Janette was sustained as the tenth general president of the Young Women. She chose Virginia Hinckley Pearce and Patricia Peterson Pinegar as her counselors. At the time of their calling, the new presidency had responsibility for nearly half a million young women residing in 138 nations and territories.

"Janette works in an atmosphere of peace and calmness," said Patricia Pinegar. "She says, 'We can do this. You can do this.' She allows us time to learn and to grow and to take these callings one step at a time. She gives me confidence that I can serve as her counselor." [^23]

"Janette is so right for the time," according to Virginia Pearce. "Young women leaders need to do for their young women what Janette is doing for us in allowing us to grow. She gives us assignments without imposing her expectations on what the outcome should be. One feels so responsible to that trust." [^24]

When the presidency met together for the first time, Janette discussed scriptures that had to do with heart. "If I had one theme, it is the great need to touch people's hearts with the spirit of the gospel," she remarked. "The last verse of Malachi states, 'He shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers.' [Malachi 4:6.] I had always thought of that scripture in terms of family history. But now I also think about it in terms of turning the hearts of the adults to the youth and the hearts of the youth to the adults and making an environment of love." In the April 1992 general conference, in her first address as Young Women general president, she challenged, "To every adult member of the Church, may I suggest that you learn the names of the young people in your ward or branch and call them by name. Encourage them in their work efforts. Recognize them for the good things they do. They need our support, and we need theirs." [^25]

Ardeth Kapp observed of her successor: "Janette speaks of and demonstrates four points she uses to give direction to her life: (1) prepare carefully, (2) communicate honestly, (3) have courage to represent whomever you have been asked to represent, and (4) be obedient. Her lifetime preparation has prepared her well for the remarkable service that she will perform in building the kingdom and blessing the lives of women, older and younger." [^26]

"Because of Janette's great respect for individuals, she wants to reach out and make a difference in people's lives personally," stated Carolyn Rasmus. "For her, the real work is one on one, in the opportunity to talk heart to heart and to listen heart to heart. I believe her greatest contribution will be in the quiet ways she reaches out and touches hearts." [^27]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Except as noted, all quotations by Janette Hales and details of her life are taken from personal interviews conducted by Janet Peterson on April 8 and 20 and May 11, 1992, and a written statement of Janette Hales dated June 23, 1992.
[^2] Sheridan R. Sheffield, "Quest for Learning Is Her Trademark," Church News, April 18, 1992, 6.
[^3] "New Young Women General Presidency Called," Ensign, May 1992, 106.
[^4] Telephone interview with Jane Hales Ricks, May 12, 1992.
[^5] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^6] Telephone interview with Jane Hales Ricks, May 12, 1992.
[^7] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^8] Telephone interview with Karen Hales Parkinson, May 12, 1992.
[^9] Telephone interview with Jane Hales Ricks, May 12, 1992.
[^10] Written statement of Karol Gleave, May 5, 1992.
[^11] Telephone interview with Mary Hales, May 12, 1992.
[^12] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^13] Telephone interview with Mary Alice Collins, May 11, 1992.
[^14] Telephone interview with Ann Edwards Cannon, May 21, 1992.
[^15] Telephone interview with Ann Hales Nevers, April 29, 1992.
[^16] Telephone interview with Thomas C. Hales, May 6, 1992.
[^17] Janette C. Hales, "You Are Not Alone," Ensign, May 1992, 79.
[^18] Telephone interview with Virginia H. Pearce, May 26, 1992.
[^19] Written statement of Ardeth G. Kapp, May 14, 1992.
[^20] Telephone interview with Mary Hales, May 12, 1992.
[^21] Personal interview with Carolyn J. Rasmus, May 14, 1992.
[^22] Telephone interview with Patricia P. Pinegar, May 19, 1992.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] Telephone interview with Virginia H. Pearce, May 26, 1992.
[^25] Hales, "You Are Not Alone," 80.
[^26] Written statement of Ardeth G. Kapp, May 14, 1992.
[^27] Personal interview with Carolyn J. Rasmus, May 14, 1992. 1993
