Heavenly Father has given us many more blessings than we know about. When we learn and think about His blessings, we can better understand how much He loves us.

He has given us the opportunity to have a body and come to earth. He has given us challenges to help us grow spiritually. And He sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to atone for our sins and to die for us. If we are faithful and keep His commandments, repent when we do something wrong, and serve each other and Him, we can live with Him again someday in the celestial kingdom.

Heavenly Father knows and loves each of us. He hears and answers our prayers. And He helps us and guides us through the Holy Ghost, prophets, parents, and Church leaders and teachers.

The Book of Mormon prophet Lehi knew Heavenly Father’s love. Lehi tried to tell the people of Jerusalem about Heavenly Father and how much He wanted them to be obedient and repent of their sins so they could someday live with Him again. But the people mocked him and threatened to kill him.

The Lord told Lehi to leave these wicked people. He said that He would direct Lehi and his family to a promised land—a wonderful place where they could live in peace as long as they were faithful. So Lehi took his family and the things they would need—food, seeds, tents, and tools—and went into the wilderness. After they left, the Lord told Lehi that his family would need the scriptures and that his sons would need wives. So Lehi’s sons returned to Jerusalem. They brought back the brass plates and Ishmael and his family of daughters.

The Lord also provided an instrument called the Liahona to guide Lehi. When his people were obedient, it showed them where to go and taught them more about the ways of the Lord; when they were disobedient, it didn’t work. The Lord blessed Lehi and Sariah, his wife, with two more children. He also taught Lehi’s son Nephi how to build a ship, and He protected Nephi from his brothers when they turned against him.

Even when Lehi and his people sailed across the sea, the Lord guided Lehi and helped him. Because He loved Lehi, the Lord blessed him. Heavenly Father loves and blesses each of us, too. Like Lehi, we should remember to thank Him for His blessings, keep His commandments, and love Him.
