A couple of weeks ago, my friend’s 12-year-old sister passed away. Mili had suffered brain damage at birth. She never spoke or walked or did things for herself.

I helped care for Mili for a long time. When I was notified of her death, I couldn’t be comforted. Then I remembered learning that when we are resurrected and return to the presence of the Lord, we enjoy perfect health and have a perfect understanding. This knowledge comforted me greatly.

I wanted to console her family, but I didn’t know how to share the peace I felt with them—especially since they are not members of the Church. Then it came to me to look in the Liahona. I randomly chose an issue, and the First Presidency Message was “The Faith of a Child,” by President Thomas S. Monson (see Liahona, August 1998, 2–6). He told of the death of a 10-year-old girl. He spoke of Jesus Christ’s beautiful message: “Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God” (Mark 10:14). It was exactly what I needed. I found a way to express consolation to her family.

I’m extremely grateful and happy to be a Latter-day Saint and to be able to read the Liahona (Spanish).

Gabriela Espeche,
Dorrego Ward, Guaymallen Argentina Stake

Editors’ note: We invite you to inform us of your concerns and suggestions regarding the Liahona. Please send letters, articles, and ideas to Liahona, 50 East North Temple Street, Salt Lake City, UT 84150-3223, USA; or e-mail to liahona@ldschurch.org.

While we welcome your feedback and submissions, we do receive many letters and e-mails unrelated to our responsibilities with the Liahona. For instance, we are often asked to help contact members living in other countries or to provide special materials for lessons or talks. We would be delighted to accommodate all these requests, but doing so would hinder us in performing our primary responsibility, which is to produce a quality magazine that is both informative and spiritually uplifting. We therefore ask that you limit your communications to those topics related to the Liahona. We always welcome letters for the Comment page, answers to questions posed in the Questions and Answers section, accounts of faith-affirming experiences, and insightful articles about gospel principles. Your local leaders are better prepared to direct you to resources and help you with other matters.
