My home teacher Val Riggs was our bishop and later our stake president. He directed the local institute of religion. He was ready to retire and return to his home in Utah, USA, but he told me he wasn’t going to leave until I got married in the temple.

“Well, you’re going to be here forever,” I told him. “I don’t know if that’s ever going to happen.”

“Oh, yes, it’s going to happen,” he would reply.

He had faith in me and never gave up on me. He would even call me while I was working. I’m like, “President, I’m on the air!” And he would say, “My wife is making cookies. We’re coming over tonight!”

He stayed in Baton Rouge throughout my return to church and watched over my spiritual growth. When the recession hit in 2008, he was the first person I called.

“President Riggs,” I said, “I lost my job at the radio station!”

“Great!” he replied.

“Great?” I responded.

“You’re going to be OK,” he told me.

When I called my visiting teacher, she also said, “Great!”

Why were they excited that I had lost my job? Because whenever they would talk to me, they could hear my struggle. I had one foot in the Church and one foot in the world. Losing my job turned into a great blessing. It helped me get both feet in the Church.

I had been inactive. I had been in an abusive relationship. I had it really tough as a young person. I was praying for my life and trying to hold on.

People would say, “Oh, you get to meet celebrities, you get to travel, you get to do this, you get to do that.” But that wasn’t peace. That wasn’t success.

The Savior’s peace is like no other. Coming back to church is what gave me peace. Getting married in the temple is success. Having an eternal family is the life.

When the Lord has a plan, He has a plan, though it may not be your plan. After I lost my job, my eyes started to open and things changed for me. President Riggs stayed, and he watched over my growth. My testimony is really strong on ministering. It’s important not to give up on someone. Ministering is what brought me back.

I met my husband, Dustin, at a Gladys Knight event when she came down with her choir. He and his parents were the best examples for me. They helped me gain a better testimony, and my mother-in-law helped mold me into the person I am today. She and my mom are my rocks. President Riggs was right: my temple marriage did happen—in 2009 in the Baton Rouge Louisiana Temple.

Today I run my own nonprofit organization for young girls. I used to be Young Women president, and I brought the tools and structure and everything we learn in church to my organization. I let the Lord lead and guide.

The girls in my organization remind me of myself as a young person—just trying to find their way in life. They’re smart, talented, and a little rough around the edges. I can totally relate to them. I understand the things they say. Maybe that’s why I was working in the hip-hop industry.

Every year we have one of the largest youth conferences in our area for girls. We bring in speakers, and I use my pool of connections to bring in celebrities. Over 800 girls attend. We have inspiring lessons, and we give the girls love and guidance on making responsible choices.

I try to guide these young ladies with Christlike love. I know their struggles. We laugh together, we cry together, and we serve the community together. I share stories about my life.

“Don’t make the mistakes I made,” I tell them. “I know what you’re going through, but with faith, prayer, love, and spiritual guidance, you can overcome the world.”

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="148793543" id="aside1_p1">You can submit your own article, ideas, or feedback at <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/liahona">liahona.ChurchofJesusChrist.org</a>. We can’t wait to hear from you!</p> [/SIDEBAR]
