In the Old Testament, Hannah tells us that “the Lord is a God of knowledge” (1 Samuel 2:3). And modern revelation shows us that this is still true today. God has given us the instruction to “seek … out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith” (Doctrine and Covenants 88:118).

But when we talk about seeking learning or knowledge, we don’t just mean the four-year-college-degree type of education (although that does apply)—it’s so much more than that! Seeking knowledge includes formal education, other specialty training, gospel learning, and informal learning.

There’s a reason the Church owns universities, sponsors an online higher education program (BYU–Pathway Worldwide) and has a gospel learning program for young adults (institute of religion)—it’s because, as Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles explains, “For members of the Church, education is not merely a good idea—it’s a commandment.”

Since the early days of the Church, education has been a high priority. When the Saints settled in Kirtland, Ohio, in the 1830s, they started educational institutions like the School of the Prophets (primarily used to prepare missionaries), a School for the Elders, a Hebrew school, a high school, and most importantly, the Kirtland Temple, whose purpose was to be “a house of learning” (Doctrine and Covenants 109:8). Later, in Nauvoo, they established the University of the City of Nauvoo, the Nauvoo Seminary, and private and public schools. They firmly believed that “gaining knowledge, both secular and sacred, was a noble pursuit.”

As the Saints moved west, they continued to build schools or academies in their settlements. But they were so eager to learn that they held classes in people’s houses, in tents, or even outside. President George A. Smith (1817–75), First Counselor in the First Presidency, recorded how the first settlers in Iron County, Utah, gathered around a campfire in the freezing temperatures of February to listen to his lecture on English grammar, passing around a grammar book among themselves because it was the only one they had.

This kind of enthusiasm for learning is our legacy as members of the Church! Prophets and other Church leaders have continually encouraged us to get an education. President Russell M. Nelson has taught:

“Because of our sacred regard for each human intellect, we consider the obtaining of an education to be a religious responsibility. …

“So my counsel … is to continue your education wherever you are, whatever your interest and opportunity, however you determine you can best serve your family and society.”

There are lots of reasons to pursue education: it helps us understand more about the people and the world around us, and it will enable us to teach our children, serve in the Church and the community, and provide for ourselves and our families. As President Gordon B. Hinckley (1910–2008) taught:

“You have a mandate from the Lord to educate your minds and your hearts and your hands. The Lord has said, ‘Teach ye diligently … of things both in heaven and in the earth … ; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—that ye may be prepared in all things’ (Doctrine and Covenants 88:78–80).

“The Lord wants you to train your minds and hands to become an influence for good as you go forward with your lives. … Your education will strengthen your service in the Church.”

As important as education in a classroom is, our spiritual education is even more vital to our journey in mortality.

When he was serving as the commissioner of the Church Educational System, Elder Kim B. Clark, an emeritus General Authority Seventy, said:

“The most important knowledge you need to acquire is knowledge of the things of God. …

“Putting spiritual knowledge first in your mind and in your heart ensures that you will rely on the Lord and the Holy Spirit in your learning, that you will see everything you study in the light of His gospel, and that you will continue to learn deeply all through your lives.”

Today we have so many resources available to help us in our pursuit of gospel learning. Not only do we have the scriptures and words of living prophets available to us, but we also have Come, Follow Me, general conference, Sunday School classes, and home evening, all of which are opportunities for regular gospel learning. Sacred temples are also meant to instruct us in God’s ways.

Young adults can also take advantage of the Church’s institute of religion program, which includes courses on everything from the scriptures to Church history to help with living a productive life. Participating in institute can help you become a better scholar of the scriptures, give you opportunities to make friends, and, if you’re also a college or university student, bring balance to your secular learning.

As we give spiritual learning priority in our lives, we will be blessed with “revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that [we may] know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal” (Doctrine and Covenants 42:61).

In all our learning—secular or spiritual—there is one piece of knowledge that we should seek above everything else. Elder Michael John U. Teh of the Seventy taught: “We need to recognize that knowing the Savior is the most important pursuit of our lives. It should take priority over anything else.”

The scriptures teach the same thing:

“Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ” (2 Peter 3:18).

“True knowledge … is the knowledge of their Redeemer” (Helaman 15:13).

“This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent” (John 17:3).

As we set aside time to truly come to know Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, we will be better able to become more like Them. And doing so will also help us find meaning and purpose as we go throughout life. President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985) explained, “Of all the treasures of knowledge, the most truly vital is the knowledge of God, of his existence, his powers, his love, and his promises.”

As young adults, we should pursue and take advantage of every opportunity to seek learning and gain an education—both in school and in the gospel. Comparing education to being prepared with oil in our lamps (see Matthew 25:1–13), Sister Mary N. Cook, former First Counselor in the Young Women General Presidency, taught: “The time is now for you to diligently apply yourselves to increasing your spiritual knowledge—drop by drop—through prayer, scripture study, and obedience. The time is now to pursue your education—drop by drop.”

Remember that Heavenly Father has commanded us to seek learning. And being able to learn is a true gift from Him. If formal education feels out of reach, you can pray for guidance and direction.

Lifelong learning can be one of the most fulfilling aspects of our lives. If we invest in our learning now, we’ll cultivate a pattern of lifelong learning that will help us become better parents to our children, better employees for our employers, better citizens of our community, better servants to our fellow men and women, and better disciples of Christ.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="148793904" id="aside1_p1">Find more articles for young adults in <em><span class="legacy-cross-ref" data-legacy-href="../../../../https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/magazines/ya-weekly">YA Weekly</span></em>, located in the Gospel Library under Magazines or Adults &gt; Young Adults.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
