Boys and girls and adults, too, share in the anticipation of Christmas gifts. Parents find joy in the delight and wonder reflected in the shining faces of their children opening presents and enjoying the newness and pleasure of their gifts. It is this boundless spirit of giving and receiving that makes Christmas such a happy occasion. For our gifts, in small measure, are a token of our appreciation for that most glorious gift of all—Heavenly Father’s only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, our Saviour.

Beyond the excitement of unwrapping presents and the excited chatter of families are deeper feelings of gratitude because of Him whose birthday we celebrate each Christmas season. When in a quiet moment we think of the humble circumstances associated with Jesus’ birth and of His life and teachings, we remember that the gifts of the Spirit are the most important ones of all. For it was the Savior Himself who set the supreme example of giving. He permitted His life to be sacrificed so that everyone, no matter who they are, will have an opportunity to return to our Heavenly Father if they live good lives and are obedient to Jesus’ teachings. What a magnificent and generous gift!

If we would give a worthy gift to the Savior, none would be more acceptable than our effort to be like Him. We can show love and sincere kindness to all we meet. We can be understanding of differences in other people. We can comfort those who are ill or grieving. And we can have the faith of young Nephi who said, “I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them.” (1 Ne. 3:7.)

Sometime before Christmas Day is over, you might suggest that your family gather together and read again from the book of Luke chapter 2 about that marvelous night nearly two thousand years ago when … unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.—Luke 2:11

Dear boys and girls everywhere, we hope you realize the depth of love and the breadth of concern that our Savior has for each one of us, and that we have for you too. And at this Christmas season we express again that love and concern and our sincere wishes for a joyous Christmas and a blessing-filled new year.

Spencer W. Kimball

N. Eldon Tanner

Marion G. Romney
