The following pages have at least the merit of being addressed to a subject of living interest to the American people. Perhaps with the single exception of the labor problem, the Mormon problem is the most important question before the people of our country at the present time. It is a problem which has thus far been unsolvable by the moralist, the statesman, and the politician. It still remains a Puzzle. No feasible plan has yet been hit upon for getting rid of it.

From the past failures to solve it, it would seem that the problem has either not been studied from the proper standpoint, or has been misunderstood. Accordingly, we instituted a careful study of the problem in all its different phases, and endeavored to conduct our investigation in a fair and impartial manner. In doing so we consulted the leading authorities, both Mormon and non-Mormon, and must here acknowledge our indebtedness especially to “New Light on Mormonism,” by Mrs. Ellen E. Dickinson; “Illiteracy and Mormonism,” by Henry Randall Waite; Professor Coyner’s “Handbook on Mormonism;” Schaff-Herzog’s “Encyclopædia of Religious Knowledge;” and back files of the Independent, Christian Union, and Deseret News—all of which were freely used in the preparation of this volume.

It has the merit of being the product of about two years’ careful thought and research. Most of the writings on Mormonism at the present day are the result of a few days’ study of the subject on the field of Utah; but, apart from the insufficient time which such authors devote to the study of so knotty a problem, their minds are very apt to be warped by the people among whom their lot is cast during their short visit there, and they almost inevitably present a one-sided view of the question.

Thus, some have fallen into the hands of the Mormons; and they have returned from Utah delighted, and let fall from their lips naught but encomiums for the priesthood and apologies for the Mormon system. Many of our legislators have in this way been the dupes of the Mormon priesthood. On this subject the much-lamented Mary Clemmer wrote the following pungent lines:

“Legislators constantly passing to and from California find Salt Lake City a most attractive stopping-place. The Mormon hierarchy, sly, cunning, astute, to the last limit of human nature, is ever sharply on the lookout for these potent summer visitors. ‘Prophets’ and ‘apostles’ board every train of cars that enters Utah bearing an important traveller. The freedom of the city, the hospitality of the show ‘happy families,’ who are never taken by surprise on an off-day of misery, is lavished upon the ingenuous guest.... The facts impressed upon his senses, as well as his understanding, are those of great industry, thrift, wealth, prosperity—of shrewd men and of seemingly happy women. Indeed, their supreme occupation while with him is to prove to him that they are happy, while the men are equally busy in spreading before him the vast resources of both the Church and the Territory. This man, who is one of many men whose voice and vote tells upon human affairs, leaves the Territory at last deeply in debt personally for favors received and mentally somewhat dazed by the material profitableness of a religious system that he wishes to denounce, but does not pretend to understand.”

On the other hand, many have fallen into the hands of bitter non-Mormons during their brief stay in Utah; and their minds have been filled with horrible stories of the brutalities and crimes of the Mormon people. They have returned disgusted, and have uttered harsh tirades against the whole Mormon system and all who believe in it, declaring that it should be utterly exterminated, even by the sword. Of their utterances and writings the official organ of the Mormon Church, the Deseret News, in its issue of July 21st, 1886, reasonably complains. It says: “Salt Lake City is not Utah, and conversation with a little knot of anti-Mormons does not impart much accurate information on ‘Mormonism.’ The books that are written by tourists who come in by the cars, take a hack, a ride around town, a sniff at the lake, a glance at the Temple, and a guess at the situation, and who make up their data from other publications and the yarns of persons who take delight in filling up travellers with blood-curdling Munchausenisms, are not likely to correct the public mind on a subject about which there is more misinformation than almost any other.... And these books are not any less reliable than the remarks and tales and remedies that fall from the lips of men who spend a few weeks in a given locality in one Utah town, and then go to the world and air their great experience and knowledge about the ‘Mormons’ through ‘a protracted residence in Utah.’”

It was our desire to avoid both Scylla and Charybdis—to treat the subject with an unbiased mind—to get the real facts, and then propound, if possible, a solution to the problem. We have not been in actual contact either with Mormons or non-Mormons. We have not been on the field of Utah at all, and believe that the value of this volume as an impartial study is thereby greatly enhanced. Furthermore, while we have avoided the narrow views of the subject which would almost inevitably have resulted from a personal visit to Utah, we have been in communication both with leading Mormons and non-Mormons on the field, and have in that way acquired all the reliable information which could have been obtained by a long residence there.

The result of our long and careful study, which was prosecuted while we were engaged in regular pastoral duties, was first given to the members of our own congregation in a series of lectures on week-day evenings; and while they have since then been enlarged and carefully revised, they still have the free oratorical style which, though inexcusable in a work prepared exclusively for publication, may be pardoned in an oral lecture.

The solution of the “Mormon Puzzle” to which we have arrived is given forth with the firm conviction that it is practicable, and if carried out in its various parts would peaceably overcome all the bad qualities belonging to Mormonism, which are the sole cause of the puzzle now before the people of our country. Nevertheless, we do not anticipate for our views the indorsement of the extremists on either side; but we believe they will commend themselves to the fair-minded people of our land; at least, it is hoped that all minds open to conviction may find something in these pages worthy of their serious thought. We only ask that the reader may adopt the precept of Bacon: “Read not to contradict and confute; nor to believe and take for granted; but to weigh and consider.”

The Author. Presbyterian Parsonage, Elkton, Md.
