THE RELIGIOUS PUZZLE (continued).

Mormon Doctrines—Their idea of God—Plurality of gods—Mormon Sunday-school hymn concerning Smith—The pre-existence of souls—The doctrine of Polygamy—Practised on the plea of self-sacrifice and ambition—Necessity of preaching their gospel to all—Preaching to the dead—Baptismal regeneration—Baptism for the dead—Mormon priesthood necessary to salvation—Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthoods—Mormon Endowments—Blood Atonement—Doctrine of “The Fulness of Times.”

Having thus considered the sources of Mormon doctrine—the ways in which God has revealed His will and purposes unto them—let us consider in the second place some of their

II. Doctrines and Practices.

One of the standard Mormon works is called a “Key to the Science of Theology,” written by Parley P. Pratt, who, while he lived, was one of the Twelve Apostles. It is now used as a text-book among the people. In confirmation of the statement that they hold grossly corporeal ideas concerning God, it says: “God has an organized individual tabernacle embodied in material form and composed of material substance, in the likeness of man, and possessing every organ, limb, and physical part that man possesses.”

Christ, too, is believed to have been the offspring of the material union on the plains of Palestine of God and the Virgin Mary. Yet Christ is believed to have had a previous existence, and His worship is enjoined as Lord of all. The Holy Ghost, or Paraclete, is also material. Thus do they lower the divinity to humanity instead of lifting up humanity to the divinity.

Though there is one God supreme, there are many other beings entitled to the name because possessed of the attributes of God, such as creative power. All these gods were once men, and all men are potential gods. The book of Parley Pratt, already quoted, says: “It will be recollected that the last chapter recognizes a family of gods, or, in other words, a species of beings who have physical tabernacles of flesh and bones in the form of man, but so constructed as to be capable of eternal life.... A general assembly, quorum, or grand council of the gods, with their president at their head, constitute the designing and creating power.... Wisdom inspires the gods to multiply their species and to lay the foundation for all the forms of life to increase in numbers, and for each to enjoy himself in the sphere to which he is adapted.”

Adam is said to be the god of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ the god of Joseph Smith, and Joseph Smith the god of this generation. They teach their children that Joseph Smith is their god, and their little ones hear more of him than they do of Jesus. Even in their hymns is this great error taught. I will give one of the hymns found in their “Primary Hymn-Book,” which is sung by the children in the Mormon Sunday-schools, called by them “Primary Associations.” It is as follows:

“The seer, the seer, Joseph the seer! I’ll sing of the Prophet ever dear; His equal now cannot be found By searching the wide world around. With gods he soared in the realms of day, And men he taught the heavenly way. The earthly Sun, the Heavenly Sun! I love to dwell on his memory dear; The chosen of God and the friend of man— He brought the Priesthood back again; He gazed on the past; on the present, too, And opened the heavenly world to view. “Of noble seed, of heavenly birth, He came to bless the sons of earth. With keys by the Almighty given He opened the full rich stores of heaven. O’er the world that was wrapt in sable night, Like the sun he spread his golden light. He strove, oh, how he strove to stay The stream of crime in its reckless way; With a mighty mind and a noble aim, He urged the wayward to reclaim; ’Mid the foaming billows of angry strife He stood at the helm of the ship of life. The Saints, the Saints, his only pride! For them he lived, for them he died. Their joys were his—their sorrows, too; He loved the Saints and he loved Nauvoo. Unchanged by death, with a Saviour’s love He pleads their cause in the courts above. The seer, the seer, Joseph the seer! Oh, how I love his memory dear The just and wise, the pure and free, A father he was and is to me. Let friends now rage in their dark hour, No matter—he is beyond their power. “He’s free! He’s free! the Prophet’s free! He is where he will ever be Beyond the reach of mobs and strife. He rests unharmed, in endless life; His home’s in the sky, he dwells with the gods, Far from the furious rage of mobs. He died, he died for those he loved— He reigns, he reigns in the realms above! He waits with the just who have gone before To welcome the saints to Zion’s shore. Shout, shout, ye Saints! this boon is given— We’ll meet our martyred seer in heaven.”

Thus are the Mormon children early taught to think of Joseph Smith as their Saviour, and as divine. Brigham Young, too, was regarded as God by some of his followers even before his death; and no doubt before long, when they forget to some extent his misdeeds that have been brought to light since his death, they will deify him as well as Joseph Smith. Indeed, they teach that all Mormons may, by obedience and holiness, become gods in the celestial world, and people and rule a kingdom forever. Helped by polygamy, men may become makers of worlds like this, of which Adam was the fashioner; and in those worlds their posterity become the creatures over whom they bear sway.

All men lived before they were born. They existed for ages as spirits, waiting eagerly for fleshly tabernacles; and multitudes of these spirits are now waiting, desiring to come to earth; for it is only by the way of the flesh that they can reach the final bliss of their perfected being, and therefore it is a work of great benevolence to provide earthly bodies into which they may come to dwell.

Thus do the Mormons have as one of the underlying principles of this abominable practice one of the grandest sentiments of humanity—self-sacrifice for the sake of others. It is that sentiment which has taken hold of the Mormon women and led them not only to submit in silence to what is entirely counter to their nature, but even to choose it and glory in it. Brigham Young told his people often that the world was rapidly hastening to a close, and there were multitudes of spirits waiting for honorable bodies. The Gentiles were corrupt, and the ethereal spirits were waiting anxiously for the favors of the Mormons. The women, he said, would be selfish if they could not endure the wandering affections of their husbands. It was their duty to make a self-sacrifice. Jesus had given His life to redeem; why could they not help to save? It is on that account that the women of Utah have made the sacrifice of the most vital principle of their souls.

The principle which has led the Mormon men to embrace this doctrine, which greatly increases their earthly cares and burdens, is ambition. In heaven they will rule over their posterity; and, consequently, the more wives they have, and the greater their posterity, the greater will be their rank in heaven. Orson Hyde, in one of his sermons, said: “The revelation of the Almighty to a man ... whom God designs to make a ruler and a governor in his eternal kingdom is that he may have more wives, that when he goes to another sphere he may still continue to perpetuate his species; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.” The Mormons declare that those who have no wives are the servants of those who rule. Therefore the object of the Mormon men in embracing polygamy, as they themselves set forth, is to raise up a numerous posterity here and in the world to come, that they may be exalted to the rank of “gods to reign upon thrones.” They believe that all the gods have many wives, and they rule over their descendants, who are constantly increasing in number and dominion; and in accordance with that belief, they teach that Jesus was a polygamist, and that Mary and Martha were his plural wives, with whom he is now living in marriage relations in the celestial world.

But not only can none be saved until the Mormon gospel is accepted; neither can any be condemned till it has been heard and rejected by him. And so, not only must the living hear the Latter-Day Gospel, but the same proclamation must be made through all the bounds of the great gathering-place of the dead. To these “spirits in prison,” whose sad misfortune it was to die before the Hill of Cummorah gave up its golden plates to the great Prophet, must be made the offer of faith and baptism. Hence, when Mormon missionaries die they go on preaching just as before—so great is the task, so distant the goal, set before this peculiar people.

It is said that in the summer of 1884 a wealthy Mormon, while on a visit to Boston, employed a young lady to look up his genealogy. Having learned the names of about two hundred of his ancestors, he had the rite of baptism performed for them all. And it is related that an old man, long a convert to Mormonism, residing in the southern part of Utah, went thirty miles distant to a place where the Saints were in conference for the purpose of saving nearly one hundred of his ancestors from everlasting destruction by being baptized for them. He made the journey in an ox-cart with his two sons. The baptism, of course, was immersion in a river; and the old man was dipped as many times as he could stand the operation, each dip representing an entrance into the Mormon paradise for some one of the otherwise lost hundred of his forefathers; and then his sons in turn were baptized, until the object of their visit was fully accomplished.

There are two classes of priesthood: The Melchizedek and the Aaronic. The Melchizedek priesthood is the higher branch, having special reference to spiritual affairs, while the Aaronic priesthood has most to do with the temporal interests of the Church. Both of these branches are obtained through Joseph Smith, who received his ordination in a supernatural manner. According to Mormon authority, an angelic messenger, calling himself John the Baptist, met him in the woods of New York, May 15th, 1829, and ordained him to the Aaronic priesthood; and soon after, it is claimed, he received his ordination to the Melchizedek priesthood at the hands of the apostles Peter, James, and John.

The Aaronic priesthood includes (beginning with the lowest) the offices of deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop. The Melchizedek priesthood includes the offices of elder, high-priest, patriarch, seventy, and apostle. A worse despotism than is exercised over the people by this priesthood cannot be found on earth. Claiming to have the keys of heaven and hell, and to have its authority directly from the Lord, it wields absolute power, not only in spiritual but in all temporal affairs.

In that hour, also, is put on the “endowment robe,” a garment reaching from head to foot, and made all in one piece, high-necked and with long sleeves. This robe is said to be a sure defence against the adversary and all physical ills. One must never be caught without it; but if, living and dying, he wears that garment, and remembers the grips and his celestial name, he is sure of heaven whatever may befall him.

The rites of the Endowment House are said to be a kind of bastard Masonry, instituted by Joseph Smith at Nauvoo. A remarkable resemblance has been pointed out between the ancient Eleusinian Mysteries and the mysteries of the Endowment House as they are represented by some of the historians of Mormonism. Their object, according to Brigham Young, is “to receive all those ordinances in the house of the Lord which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels, who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key-words, the signs and tokens pertaining to the holy priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell.”

According to this doctrine there are some sins which cannot be forgiven or atoned for except by cutting the throat of the man who committed them and pouring out his blood as an atonement. Three of these sins are apostasy, disclosing the secrets of the Endowment House, and marital unfaithfulness on the part of a wife.

This doctrine has been frequently taught by the leaders of the Church, who have declared that it is a meritorious act for any Saint to spill the blood of a person guilty of any of these sins, and that he would thereby be carrying out the golden rule of love. Thus, Brigham Young, in a sermon delivered in the Bowery at Salt Lake City, September 21st, 1856, said: “There are sins that men commit for which they cannot receive forgiveness in this world or in that which is to come, and if they had their eyes open to see their true condition they would be perfectly willing to have their blood spilled upon the ground, that the smoke thereof might ascend to heaven as an offering for their sins; and the smoking incense would atone for their sins, whereas, if such is not the case, they will stick to them and remain upon them in the spirit world.

“I know when you hear my brethren telling about cutting people off from the earth that you consider it strong doctrine; but it is to save them, not to destroy them.”

And in another discourse, delivered in the Tabernacle of Salt Lake City, February 8th, 1857, Brigham Young said: “I have known a great many men who have left this Church, for whom there is no chance whatever for exaltation; but if their blood had been spilled, it would have been better for them. This is loving our neighbor as ourselves; if he needs help, help him; and if he wants salvation, and it is necessary to spill his blood on the earth in order that he may be saved, spill it. Any of you who understand the principles of eternity, if you have sinned a sin requiring the shedding of blood, except the sin unto death, would not be satisfied nor rest until your blood should be spilled, that you might gain that salvation you desire. This is the way to love mankind.”

But although this horrible doctrine has been publicly preached again and again, yet many of the Mormons deny that it was ever carried into actual practice. The editor of the Deseret News, one of the Mormon leaders, not long ago denied that blood atonement had ever been practised among the Mormons, but he said “in the good time coming it will be.” On the other hand, it is claimed by many Gentiles that not only has it been put into practice frequently in past years, but that it is actually done at the present time. A Gentile observer, after several months’ residence in Salt Lake City in 1884, wrote: “As to the blood atonement, which Mormons generally deny, you may be sure it is still practised.”

After a careful study of the facts in the case, it seems to be clear that the evidence is overwhelming in substantiation of the declaration that it was often practised in the past; and it seems to be equally clear that, while it may be the fact that this abominable practice is still carried on, only more adroitly than formerly, yet the mass of evidence is overwhelming in opposition to that view and in favor of the opinion that the incoming of thousands of Gentiles and Federal officers have effectually stopped the practice of that barbarous doctrine. Nevertheless, it remains one of their doctrines.
