THE RELIGIOUS PUZZLE (continued).

Professor Coyner’s analysis of Mormonism—Rev. Dr. McNiece’s analysis—Reasons for the growth and tenacity of Mormonism—The Christian element its chief source of strength—No Mormon converts from heathenism—Protestantism the source of its recruits—Bible doctrines in the Mormon “Catechism for Children”—The Mormon Articles of Faith—The Mormon heresy compared with Gnosticism in the early Christian Church—A clue to the solution of the religious puzzle.

From the enumeration of some of the prominent and peculiar doctrines of Mormonism which was given in the preceding chapter, it can very clearly be seen that it is naught else than a jumble of a half dozen different systems of religion.

Professor Coyner, Principal of the Salt Lake Collegiate Institute for ten years, has analyzed it as follows: “Mormonism is made of twenty parts. Take eight parts of diabolism, three parts of animalism from the Mohammedan system, one part bigotry from old Judaism, four parts cunning and treachery from Jesuitism, two parts Thugism from India, and two parts Arnoldism, and then shake the mixture over the fires of animal passion and throw in the forms and ceremonies of the Christian religion, and you will have this system in its true component elements.” But, subtle as that analysis is, it cannot be true; for it does not include in the system, as even one of its twenty parts, Christianity; and yet it seems to me that it is the Christian element in the system which, mingled with a great deal of error, gives it its real strength.

The analysis given by Rev. Dr. R. G. McNiece, of Salt Lake City, in the Presbyterian Review, April, 1881, seems to be more correct, and about as near the real truth as any one, perhaps, can come. He says: “Let Paganism, Judaism, Mohammedanism, Jesuitism, Protestantism, and Diabolism be shaken up together, and the result is Mormonism; for from Paganism comes its idea of God; from Judaism its theory of the priesthood and special revelation; from Mohammedanism its plural wife notions, and its sensual ideas of heaven; from Jesuitism its cunning and arbitrary form of government, in which the end is continually made to justify the means; from Protestantism its talk about faith in Christ and the guidance of the Holy Spirit; and its general policy from the devil, as any intelligent man will have to confess after a careful study of its cunning, devilish ways and means.” From this analysis it is seen that its great strength lies in the shrewd way in which it has blended Christian truth with heathen error.

The reasons of its growth and tenacity are many. It is especially adapted to the intellectual capacities of the masses. To these are offered just what they are sure to hunger after—bold assumption and boundless assertion, together with great show of authority. For the superstitious it has miracles, ecstasies, visions, and revelations. The secrecy of the endowments, too, has a charm. The minds of the ignorant delight in prodigies. “Omne ignotum, pro mirifico.” For the lovers of prophecy there is promised the New Jerusalem, an actual reign of the Saints, and an equality with the Redeemer. The gross see charms in its sensual paradise, and listen eagerly to the announcement that a conversation with their spiritual ruler, or a journey on a mission while facing a frowning world, will immediately clear them from their iniquities. These are all elements in the system, which have led to its growth, and now keep it from falling to pieces.

But its chief source of strength is its recognition of many of the truths of the Bible. If its strength came from its heathenish doctrines and practices, then it would naturally follow that its converts would be gathered mainly from heathendom, whereas ninety-nine proselytes in every hundred have been obtained from Christian churches.

About thirty years ago swarms of Mormon missionaries were sent to China, Japan, India, Australia, South Africa, South America, and the Society and Sandwich Islands, and they fondly hoped that many converts would be gathered; but in less than five years they had all returned, completely baffled and disgusted. They reported that the devil was far too lively in those lands, and that, among the Hindoos especially, stupidity and awful depravity were universal. Since then we hear of no more attempts to evangelize the pagan world. A few hundred Sandwich Islanders and New Zealanders have been baptized, but only after American and English missionaries had first brought them to a knowledge of Gospel truth.

And it is said that no Roman Catholic has ever been brought into the Mormon fold, Protestantism furnishing Mormonism its entire supplies. Yes, the fact is that Mormonism has grown in strength and power by the addition of those once members of Protestant Christian churches, or those very near the entrance. Perhaps eight out of every ten who have come to Utah were of that class; and it cannot well be questioned that hundreds of so-called Mormons, though laboring under a great delusion and greatly misled by the hierarchy, are still sincere believers in Christ and His Gospel. Rev. Dr. McNiece says in the Presbyterian Review, April, 1881: “It is only just to say that scattered all through the Mormon ranks are hundreds of devout, worthy, kind-hearted, hospitable people, who came from England, Scotland, and the Scandinavian countries, bringing their Bibles and Christian sentiments with them, and who, although nominally Mormons, have never been persuaded to embrace these odious pagan doctrines, which are the distinctive features of Mormonism.”

Besides, the Mormons believe in the Old and New Testaments as inspired, and in the “Book of Mormon” itself there is much that is taken directly from the Bible—as the Decalogue, the Sermon on the Mount, and other teachings of our Lord; and in their “Catechism for Children,” published in 1877, one finds mingled with many false teachings such sound biblical propositions as these: that our first parents, having fallen under the influence of Satan, “had not the least power to recover themselves from the effects of that fall;” that in this condition “the justice of God required a sacrifice to atone for the broken law, and our first parents being subject, through transgression, to the penalty of the law, could not make this sacrifice;” that to meet such a state of things, “God sent His only begotten Son, who knew no sin, to die for the sins of the world, and thus to satisfy divine justice;” that “this redemption by Jesus Christ is the only one,” and that it is available to all mankind, “but only on conditions of obedience;” that these conditions are “as unchangeable as their Author,” and include faith, which is described as “a principle of power” within the soul, and repentance, which is defined as a “forsaking of sin, with full purpose of heart to work righteousness;” and that even little children are “considered sinners in the sight of God,” and as such are “redeemed solely through the atonement of Christ,” and are therefore to be taught to repent and believe.

In reading such statements, and seeing them corroborated continually by quotations from Scripture, it is not hard to imagine ourselves studying the catechism of some Christian sect, differing from other sects in detail and expression, but agreeing with them in the essentials of the common Christianity. How far such truths are proclaimed by the Mormon teachers and missionaries, or how far they still remain as vital convictions in the breasts of thousands who once professed them in other communions, or who have been taught them catechetically in the Mormon fold, it is very difficult to determine.

In the Mormon Articles of Faith there is very little but what could be subscribed to by some Christian denomination. It is presumed that these Articles comprise all the essential beliefs of Mormonism. They are what their missionaries constantly teach, and what the Mormons always give forth as their creed. They are just one third the number of the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England. They are as follows:

“1. We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

“2. We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam’s transgression.

“3. We believe that, through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.

“4. We believe that these ordinances are: First, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, repentance; third, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

“5. We believe that a man must be called of God by prophecy and by the laying on of hands’ by those who are in authority to preach the Gospel and administer the ordinances thereof.

“6. We believe in the same organization that exists in the Primitive Church—viz.: apostles, prophets, teachers, evangelists, etc.

“7. We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, etc.

“8. We believe the Bible to be the Word of God, as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the ‘Book of Mormon’ to be the Word of God.

“9. We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

“10. We believe in the literal gathering of Israel, and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion will be built upon this continent; that Christ will reign personally upon this earth, and that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisic glory.

“11. We claim the privilege of worshipping Almighty God according to the dictates of our conscience, and allow all men the same privilege; let them worship how, when, or where they will.

“12. We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates; in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law.

“13. We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we say that we follow the admonition of Paul: ‘We believe all things; we hope all things;’ we have endured many things, and hope to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy, we seek after these things.”

The fact is, that this nineteenth century heresy bears much the same relation to the Gospel of to-day that Gnosticism, Montanism, and Manicheism did to that of the early centuries. On the true foundation of the Old and New Testaments, it has built a structure of wood, hay, and stubble. “To the law and the testimony,” is the constant cry. Argument is based almost entirely upon the Bible. Proof-texts are quoted by the thousand.

Our object in directing attention to the Christian element in Mormonism is not to furnish apology or to divert attention from its fearful errors; but it is mentioned because it furnishes a decided clue to the vitality and persistency of the system, and also opens our eyes as to the best way to solve the religious puzzle which this system presents before us. The great question to be answered is: How are we to get rid of the erroneous doctrines of Mormonism?
