THE RELIGIOUS PUZZLE (concluded).

The character of efforts hitherto put forth to solve the puzzle—What has been accomplished—The plan somewhere defective—Mormonism to be reformed, not destroyed—Why Mormons will not listen to Christian missionaries—Moody and Sankey’s meetings in Salt Lake City—The Deseret Evening News on Bishop Tuttle’s sermon—Mormonism a perversion of Christianity—The educational and colonization scheme best fitted to reform it—Proved by comparing Roman Catholicism in the United States with Roman Catholicism in Mexico or Brazil—The probable effect of a larger intelligence—The probable effect of the introduction of Gentile colonies—The religious puzzle solved—The duty of the hour.

Hitherto the efforts which have been put forth against Mormonism as a religious system have been the same in character as when contending with Buddhism, Confucianism, or any other pagan religion. And what has been accomplished?

It is not our desire to depreciate what has been done in Utah by the noble Christian men and women who have faced the insults of men and sometimes death itself in battling with the errors of Mormonism. They are Christian heroes and heroines, and are deserving of all praise and honor. They are worthy to receive crowns and laurels that can never fade. But their sterling worth and Christian heroism do not alter the facts concerning the visible results of their labors. It is true that nearly twenty years elapsed after the occupation of Salt Lake Valley by the Mormons before any attempt was made to introduce the Gospel. It was only by the occupation of Camp Douglas, in 1862, by several regiments of United States troops that the way began to be opened; and only since 1865 has there been any missionary work done in the Territory. But in the twenty years of missionary work what has been accomplished? How many converts from Mormonism have been obtained?

Rev. R. G. McNiece, D.D., of Salt Lake City, in a personal letter to the writer, said: “The number of converts directly from the Mormon ranks I cannot give you; but it is very small, especially among adults. Among the youth the number is greater, and here is where the hope lies. The children and youth come under Christian influence first in the day-schools maintained by the Christian denominations. In the Sabbath-school this influence is deepened, and thereby the way into the Church is opened. I should say that three hundred would be a large estimate of the total number of Christian converts from the Mormon ranks; but the work thus far has been preparatory.”

Now, while it is very true that the work has been in great measure preparatory, nevertheless no such long preparation as twenty years should be necessary in dealing with a people to a great extent speaking our own language. If it were China, or Japan, or India just opened, and it required time for the missionaries to get acquainted with the habits and language of the people, it would be a very different thing. It seems from the small crop of Christian converts thus far obtained that the system of missionary work adopted is somewhere defective.

And does not the fact of the large Christian element in the Mormon religious system show that it must not be treated as a pagan religion? and that different methods must be adopted to overcome its evils? All missionary labor in Utah up to the present time has been in open and direct antagonism to the whole Mormon system, and its object has been openly and professedly to exterminate it from the face of the earth. Now, we raise the question, Can any Christian sect be easily annihilated? Should it be our desire to exterminate it? Should not the object of all our efforts be to reform it—to purge the gold of its dross? And so, does it not seem far more likely that Mormonism is not to be destroyed at all, but rather reformed by various influences brought to bear upon it?

The adult Mormons will not go to hear the Christian missionaries, for they believe that all that is good in Christianity they have already in their own system. The only difference is that they have more; they have an enlarged and expanded Christianity. Consequently they think their system is vastly superior to the Christian’s. Mormon boys write “Come to Jesus” on the clean, white window-sills of Christian chapels, while their parents at home tell them that they know a hundredfold more truth than the Christians, whose whole creed, they say, begins and ends with this despised phrase.

The evangelists Moody and Sankey held a series of meetings in Salt Lake City only a few years ago, and the Deseret Evening News, the official Mormon organ, in an editorial on Moody’s preaching in that city, said: “There is not a man among the whole fraternity of evangelists who can present anything of any value to the Latter-Day Saints which they have not already received; and there is no preacher of them all who, if he were desirous of learning the truth as it is in Jesus, but could learn very many valuable lessons in the things of God from members of our Young People’s Improvement Associations, and even from our Sunday-school children. ‘Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ’ is a saying the full meaning of which is appreciated by the Latter-Day Saints. To exhort them to ‘faith in Christ’ is the work of supererogation.”

And shortly after, the same paper, in an editorial on a sermon preached by Bishop Tuttle, of the Episcopal Church, in Philadelphia, said: “So far as the institutions of modern Christendom are concerned, we candidly confess our lack of confidence in their power to do anything for us.... We have got so far beyond them through the revelations of the Almighty vouchsafed in these latter days, that we look back upon their teachings as a man reverts to the alphabet of his school-days, and we remember their powerless forms and spiritless ceremonies as mere playthings compared with the higher things of the kingdom to which the system they call Mormonism has introduced us.”

Thus we see that Christianity is discounted by the Mormons from the very start; and can we, then, hope to accomplish its overthrow by the ordinary means? From its peculiar relations to Christianity, must we not in reason and fairness regard the Mormon Church, as we must the Roman Catholic Church and even Mohammedanism, as being not utterly false, so much as a mingling of error with truth? It is, therefore, a perversion of Christianity. There is genuine Gospel enough in the Mormon creed to save it from the grave. We are, therefore, to look for a repudiation of the false rather than the destruction of both false and true together.

And what would be better calculated to effect this end than the colonization and educational scheme, which we have already advocated as the surest and easiest means to overcome the political and social evils of the system? The Roman Catholic system is in many respects similar to the Mormon system; and see what intelligence and a surrounding atmosphere of pure Christian truth has done for Roman Catholicism in our land! What a vast difference there is between the system here and the same system in Mexico, Brazil, Spain, or Italy! There is a difference almost as wide as the hemispheres. Take a Roman Catholic from our land to Brazil or Spain, and he will scarcely recognize his religion in that religion called there by the same name. And what has brought about this difference? The American Roman Catholic has been surrounded by intelligence and a free, pure, Christian society. These two things have so operated upon American Roman Catholicism as to greatly reform it and almost radically change it, while they did not antagonize it in a spirit of rancor. How wonderful the revolution! And it has not ceased yet, but is ever going on. The same things would thus be done, we believe, for Mormonism.

And, from the same cause, the demand would gradually spring up for pulpit teaching, couched in a far better spirit, and of much higher intellectual character. The presence of a few intelligent Gentiles has already put to shame and almost banished from religious assemblies those harangues which in days not very remote were accustomed to combine in about equal measure the profane, the obscene, and the brutal.

Then the Territory would be fairly flooded with Gospel institutions of every sort. In every Mormon town there would be a school and a church; and there being in every community a few who in character and life would be truly Christlike, they, aided by the sharp criticisms of a free press, would cuttingly and most effectually rebuke the seriously lax morals of the Mormon Church; and before long it would be found to be politic and necessary in sheer self-defence to remove from Church leadership whoever in walk and conversation would fail to conform to what is at least decent.

It is most likely that in this way the better elements in Mormondom would be led, unconsciously perhaps, to assert their force, and work out through grace a religious reformation. The leaven of revolt is slowly working now. It is well known that many Mormons do not countenance polygamy, and the time may yet come when this view shall prevail, notwithstanding the alleged revelations in the case. And there may come a time when, with polygamy, other false doctrines will be questioned or rejected. And thus reformed, purified, and made fit to live, we may expect to see Mormonism continue for generations a sect fairly Christian, although it would doubtless have many peculiar points; or there may come, through the workings of the Gospel in this subtle way, such a division in belief among the Mormon ranks as to rend asunder the entire Mormon organism.

To this work of internal reformation let us direct our forces. Let the Christians of our land arise in all their might and endeavor to have schools planted all over the Territory of Utah, that intelligence and freedom may be widely disseminated; and let them form Colonization Aid Societies to induce Christian families to emigrate to Utah, and settle in every Mormon town and hamlet. Through the faithful representation and living of the Gospel I have all hope.

In strict accord with this belief, Rev. Arthur T. Pierson, D.D., pastor of the Bethany Church, Philadelphia, in the Homiletic Review, October, 1885, said: “Salt Lake Valley needs nothing more to-day than colonies of Christian tradesmen. Mormonism should be confronted with the witness of a Christian community, consecrated workmen in all the learned professions and departments of industry; Christian families free from the taint of polygamy and full of the rich blessing of the normal household.” Likewise, Judge Osborne, of Utah, wrote recently as follows: “An excellent way to do good with little or no cost would be the location of Christian families in the Mormon towns.... The Mormon priesthood insist upon the complete isolation of their dupes from Christian civilization. They say, ‘You must live your religion;’ they obey, and the result is bitter fruit. Let a few Christian families ‘live their religion’ in their presence, and the darkness of prejudice and superstition would roll away like the mist before the morning sun.”

Yes, put in every Mormon town a few noble Christian families, consecrated men and women, who in character and life shall exhibit the sweet spirit of the Man of Nazareth, who by example and precept shall show a more excellent way, and presently error will depart, and iniquity hide its head abashed. Let the various denominations combine and co-operate against the common foe in that silent yet most effective way, and the Mormon Puzzle will be solved, and solved forever. Let us all labor to this end.

“O Christ, our land for thee; Naught less we crave, That Thou supreme mayst be From wave to wave. Naught less we ask of Thee, Our prayer unceasingly, Our land for Thee, All, all for Thee.”

THE END.

A NEW BOOK BY JOSIAH ALLEN’S WIFE.

SWEET CICELY.—A story of the Josiah Allen’s Wife’s Series. Of thrilling interest. Over 100 illustrations, 12mo, cloth, $2.00.

“Josiah Allen’s Wife” has always been a shrewd observer of human nature as it reveals itself in the round of homely, every day life, and the keen sarcasm and adroit humor with which she lays bear its foibles, its weaknesses and its grotesque outcroppings has rarely, if ever, been equaled. The strong feature of all Miss Holley’s humor, is its moral tone. The present work will treat the “temperance sentiment” in new phase—that of a semi-humorous novel.

SOME OPINIONS OF “JOSIAH ALLEN’S WIFE”:

The Woman’s Journal, Boston: “The keen sarcasm, cheerful wit and cogent arguments of her books have convinced thousands of the ‘folly of their ways,’ for wit can pierce where grave counsel fails.”

The Herald, New York: “Her fun is not far-fetched, but easy and spontaneous. She is now witty, now pathetic, yet ever strikingly original.”

The Home Journal, New York: “She is one of the most original humorists of the day.”

The New Era, Lancaster, Pa.: “Undoubtedly one of the truest humorists. Nothing short of a cast-iron man can resist the exquisite, droll and contagious mirth of her writings.”

ARCHIBALD MALMAISON.

A New Novel. By Julian Hawthorne. 12mo, paper, 15 cts; cloth, extra paper, 75 cts.

INDEPENDENT, N. Y. “Mr. Julian Hawthorne can choose no better compliment upon his new romance, ‘Archibald Malmaison,’ than the assurance that he has at last put forth a story which reads as if the manuscript, written in his father’s indecipherable handwriting and signed ‘Nathaniel Hawthorne,’ had lain shut into a desk for twenty-five years, to be only just now pulled out and printed. It is a masterful romance; short, compressed, terribly dramatic in its important situations, based upon a psychologic idea as weird and susceptible of startling treatment as possible. It is a book to be read through in two hours, but to dwell in the memory forever. The employment of the central theme and the literary conduct of the plot is nearly beyond criticism.”

R. H. STODDARD, IN NEW YORK MAIL AND EXPRESS. “The climax is so terrible, as the London Times has pointed out, and so dramatic in its intensity, that it is impossible to class it with any situation of modern fiction.... Mr. Hawthorne is clearly and easily the first of living romancers.”

THE LONDON TIMES. “After perusal of this weird, fantastic tale (Archibald Malmaison), it must be admitted that upon the shoulders of Julian Hawthorne has descended in no small degree the mantle of his more illustrious father. The climax is so terrible, and so dramatic in its intensity, that it is impossible to class it with any situation of modern fiction. There is much psychological ingenuity shown in some of the more subtle touches that lend an air of reality to this wild romance.”

THE LONDON GLOBE. “‘Archibald Malmaison’ is one of the most daring attempts to set the wildest fancy masquerading in the cloak of science, which has ever, perhaps been made. Mr. Hawthorne has managed to combine the almost perfect construction of a typical French novelist, with a more than typically German power of conception.”

THE ACADEMY. “Mr. Hawthorne has a more powerful imagination than any contemporary writer of fiction. He has the very uncommon gift of taking hold of the reader’s attention at once, and the still more uncommon gift of maintaining his grasp when it is fixed.”

THE FORTUNES OF RACHEL.

A New Novel. By Edward Everett Hale. 12mo, paper, 25c.; cloth, $1.

CHRISTIAN UNION, N. Y. “Probably no American has a more devoted constituency of readers than Mr. Edward Everett Hale, and to all these his latest story, ‘The Fortunes of Rachel,’ will bring genuine pleasure. Mr. Hale is emphatically a natural writer; he loves to interpret common things and to deal with average persons. He does this with such insight, with such noble conception of life and of his work, that he discovers that profound interest which belongs to the humblest as truly as to the most brilliant forms of life.... This story is a thoroughly American novel, full of incident, rich in strong traits of character, and full of stimulating thought; it is wholesome and elevating.”

BOSTON JOURNAL. “The virtue of the book is the healthful, encouraging, kindly spirit which prevades it, and which will help one to battle with adverse circumstances, as indeed, all Mr. Hale’s stories have helped.”

NEW YORK JOURNAL OF COMMERCE. “A purely American story, original all through, and Rachel is one of the pleasantest and most satisfactory of heroines. She is a girl of the soil, unspoiled by foreign travels and conventionalities. After surfeiting on romances whose scenes are laid abroad, it is delightful to come across a healthy home product like this.”

RUTHERFORD.

A New Novel. By Edgar Fawcett. Author of “An Ambitious Woman,” “A Gentleman of Leisure,” “A Hopeless Case,” “Tinkling Cymbals,” etc. 12mo, paper, 25 cts; cloth, extra paper, $1.00.

BOSTON GLOBE. “Truly Mr. Fawcett has here wrought with skill in producing some original and beautiful characters. The motive and plan are those of a better book than he has ever written.... Rutherford is powerful and will contribute much to the reputation of its clever author.”

SAT. EVENING GAZETTE, Boston. “This story evinces grace as well as facility of style, is effectively told throughout, and in its plot and characters, is decidedly interesting. The sympathies of the reader are keenly enlisted for two of the characters who have been reduced from wealth to poverty, and the relation of their experiences in the latter form of life affords opportunity for a very effective exhibition of this phase of New York experience. The book is one of the most elaborate of Mr. Fawcett’s novels.”

NEW YORK TRIBUNE. “Mr. Fawcett’s story, ‘Rutherford,’ is more serious in plan than most of his society novels; it has a motive which is not only tragical, but impressive.... It is well constructed, and contains some excellent sketches of fashionable life and touches of satire.”

THE HOYT-WARD CYCLOPÆDIA OF PRACTICAL QUOTATIONS.

Prose and Poetry. Nearly 20,000 Quotations and 50,000 lines of Concordance.

It contains the celebrated quotations and all the useful Proverbs and Mottoes from the English, Latin, French, German, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese, classified according to subjects. Latin Law Terms and Phrases, Legal Maxims, etc. (all with translations).

It has a vast concordance of nearly 50,000 lines, by which any quotation of note may at once be found and traced to its source. It is to quotations what Young’s or Cruden’s Concordance is to the Bible.

Its Table of Contents; Index of Authors, giving date of birth, nativity, etc.; Topical Index with Cross References, Index of Subjects, Index of Translation, together with its immense Concordance and many other features desirable in a work of reference, combine to make this Cyclopædia what it is,

THE ONLY STANDARD BOOK OF QUOTATIONS.

Invaluable to the Statesman, Lawyer Editor, Public Speaker, Teacher or General Reader.

NOAH PORTER, D.D., LL.D., Pres. Yale College. “It will be a help and a pleasure to many.”

HON. SAMUEL F. RANDALL, WASHINGTON. “The best book of quotations which I have seen.”

GEO. F. EDMUNDS, U.S. SENATOR. “It is the most complete and best work of the kind with which I am acquainted.”

HON. ABRAM S. HEWITT. “The completeness of its indices is simply astonishing.”

HON. F. T. FRELINGHUYSEN, Secretary of State. “Am much pleased with the Cyclopædia of Quotations.”

HENRY WARD BEECHER. “Good all the way through, especially the proverbs of all nations.”

HENRY W. LONGFELLOW. “Can hardly fail to be a very successful and favorite volume.”

WENDELL PHILLIPS. “Its variety and fullness and the completeness of its index gives it rare value to the scholar.”

Royal octavo, over 900 pp. Cloth, $5.00; Sheep, $6.50: Fancy Cloth, Extra Gilt, $7.50; Half Morocco, Gilt, $8.00; Full Morocco, Extra Finish and Gilt, $10.00.

FUNK & WAGNALLS, Publishers, 10 & 12 Dey St., N. Y.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORMON PUZZLE, AND HOW TO SOLVE IT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
