Important Conference of the Church in England--Kidnapping of Brown and Boyce by Missourians--Action of the Citizens of Nauvoo.

Monday, July 6, 1840.

    Conference of the Church in England.

    A General Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints was held in the Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, on the 6th
    day of July, 1840, it being the 1st day of the 4th month of the
    eleventh year of the Church, when the following officers of the
    traveling High Council were present, viz.: Elders Brigham Young,
    Parley P. Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, Willard Richards,
    Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith; other officers, viz.: High
    Priests 5, Elders 19, Priests 15, Teachers 11, and Deacons 3.

    The meeting being called to order, a little after ten o'clock,
    by Elder William Clayton, it was moved by Elder Brigham Young,
    seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff, that Elder Parley P. Pratt
    be chosen President of the conference, [1] which was carried
    unanimously. Elder William  Clayton was chosen clerk. The
    meeting was opened by singing, and prayer by the President.

    Elder Brigham Young then proceeded to prefer charges against
    Elder T. Green, viz., first, for giving way to a false spirit;
    second, for abusing a young female, by accusing her, in a public
    meeting, of things which he could not prove; and third, for abuse
    to the house and congregation at Duckinfield, June 28th, 1840. The
    president then proceeded to ask Elder Green whether he was guilty
    of these charges, or not. He immediately pleaded guilty. After
    Elder Young had made extended remarks to the meeting, touching the
    conduct of Elder Green, he proposed that Elder Green go to those
    characters where he had abused and insulted, and make confession to
    them as far as the offense extended, and then to be suspended from
    office for a season. The President then made remarks to the same
    effect, and put it to the vote of the meeting, viz., that Elder
    Green shall make confession, as stated above, and be suspended from
    office for a season. Carried.

    The President then asked Elder Green if he was willing to make
    confession, he immediately agreed to do it the first opportunity.
    The meeting adjourned a little after twelve o'clock.

    At two o'clock business commenced by singing and prayer, when the
    President called upon the officers to represent the different
    branches of the Church, which was done in the following order,
    viz.--

     Branches Represented, &c.                                           Members. Elders. Priests. Teachers. Deacons.
     The Branch at Manchester Represented by Elder William Clayton       28       3       5        5         1
     The Branch at Preston represented by Elder Joseph Fielding          354      6       8        4         2
     Elders Kington and Browett presented the minutes of the conference
     held in Herefordshire, which were read by Elder Wilford Woodruff,
     representing 33 branches of the Church                              534      10      52       13
     Elder Alfred Cordon read the minutes of the conference held at
     Hanley, Staffordshire, representing 7 branches of the Church        168      4       13       6         2
     The branch at Liverpool, represented by Elder John Taylor           78       1       3        2
     Elder Joseph Fielding read the minutes of the Thornley, represented
     represented by Elder William Kay                                    30       3       2        1         1
     The Branch at Ribchester, represented by Elder Francis Clark        22       2                1
     The Branch at Waddington, represented by John Ellison               58               2        2         1
     The Branch at Clitheroe, represented by Brother Lofthouse           35       1       3        1
     The Branch at Chatburn, represented by Elder John Bond              91       2       2        2
     The Branch at Downham, represented by John Spencer                  25               1
     The Branch at Grindleton, represented by Elder Joseph Fielding      5                1
     The Branch at Whitmore, represented by J. Spencer                   3
     The Branch at Burnley, represented by Elder H. C. Kimball           27       1       1        1
     The Branch at Blackburn, represented by Elder H. C. Kimball         17               1
     Elder Reuben Hedlock read the minutes of the conference held at
     Paisley, Scotland, representing 5 branches of the Church            106      6       5        3         2
     The Branch at Alston, represented by Elder John Sanders             36       2       2        2
     The Branch at Brampton, represented by Elder John Sanders           36       1       1
     The Branch at Longton, represented by Elder Bradshaw                54       2       4        2
     The Branch at Penworthan, represented by Elder P. Melling           77       4       1        1         1
     The Branch at Whittle, represented by Elder Richard Withnall        16       1       4
     The Branch at Southport, represented by R. McBride                  19       1                2
     The Branch at Daubers Lane & Eccleston, Represented by Elder
     Richard Withnall                                                    42               1        3
     The Branch at Hunter's Hill, represented by Richard Benson          26       1       1        1
     The Branch at Bolton, represented by Elder David Wilding            61       1       2        2
     The Branch at Bury and Elton, represented by Elder David Wilding    12
     The Branch at Ratcliff, represented by Elder Amos Fielding          11
     The Branch at Benford, &c. represented by Elder Willard Richards    40       1       1
     The Branch at Stockport, represented by Elder M. Littlewood         85       2       1        2         1
     The Branch at Duckinfield, represented by Elder Henry Royle         41       1       1
     The Branch at Macclesfield, represented by Samuel Heath             14               2
     The Branch at Middlewich, represented by Samuel Heath               20               1        1         1
     The Brach at Plover, represented by Samuel Heath                    24               1        1         1
     The Branch at Northwich, represented by William Berry               14               1
     The Branch at Altrincham, represented by William Berry              4                         1
     The Branch at Whitfield, represented by Walker Johnson              14               1
     The Branch at Pendlebury, represented by Elder William Clayton      13               1        1
     The Branch at Eccles, represented by Elder William Clayton          5
     The Branch at West Bromwich, represented by Elder Theodore Turley   16               1        1

    After the officers had got through the representations, the
    President introduced the new hymn-book; and after suitable remarks
    had been made by him and Elders Young and Thomas Kington, the
    President asked the conference if they were satisfied with the
    labors of those who had made the selection, and if they received
    the book. The unanimous approbation of the meeting was immediately
    manifested.

    By unanimous vote, Thomas Kington, Alfred Cordon, and Thomas Smith
    were ordained High Priests; John Albison, John Blezzard, William
    Berry, John Sanders, John Parkinson, James Worsley, and John Allen
    were ordained Elders; and Joseph Slinger, George Walker, John
    Smith, Robert Williams, William Black, John Melling, and John
    Swindlehurst were ordained Priests.

    Elder Brigham Young then called upon those officers, whose
    circumstances would permit them to devote themselves entirely to
    the work of the ministry, and would volunteer so to do, to stand
    up--when the following names were taken, viz., of the traveling
    High Council, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Wilford
    Woodruff, Willard Richards, and George A. Smith; other officers,
    namely, William Clayton, Reuben Hedlock, Hiram Clark, Theodore
    Turley, Joseph Fielding, Thomas Richardson, Amos Fielding, John
    Parkinson, John Wych, John Needham, Henry Royle, John Blezzard, D.
    Wilding, Charles Price, Joseph Knowles, Wm. Kay, Samuel Heath, Wm.
    Parr, R. McBride, and James Morgan.

     Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Kimball, that
    Elder Peter Melling be appointed to preside over the following
    branches of the Church, namely--Preston, Longton, Penwortham, North
    Meols, and Southport; carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Elder Richard
    Withnall be appointed to preside over the branches of the Church
    at Whittle, Daubers Lane, Chorley, Hunter's Hill, and Euxtonburgh;
    carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Elder Thomas
    Smith be appointed to preside over the branches of the Church at
    Clitheroe, Chatburn, Downham, Chaighley, Grindleton, Whitmore,
    Burnley, Blackburn, Ribchester, and Thornley: carried.

    Moved and seconded, that President Fielding and his counselors
    be set at liberty from the charge which they have sustained as a
    presidency, that they may have the privilege of more fully entering
    into the field of labor; and that their labors be accepted; carried.

    Elders Young and Richards then proceeded to ordain those who had
    been nominated to their respective offices, after which the minutes
    were read and accepted.

    The conference adjourned to the sixth of October next, to be held
    in the Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, at 10 o'clock, a. m.

Tuesday, 7.

    A council of Church Officers, held at Manchester, England.

    Pursuant to previous notice, a general council of the Church
    officers was held in the council room at the Star office,
    Manchester, on the 7th day of July, 1840. The meeting being opened
    by prayer by Elder Kimball, Elder Young began to speak concerning
    those officers who had volunteered to devote themselves wholly to
    the ministry; when it was moved and seconded that Brothers William
    Kay and Thomas Richardson go to Herefordshire, to labor in that
    region with Elder Kington; carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Brothers
    Hiram Clark and Joseph Knowles go with Elder Hedlock to Scotland:
    carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Brother
    Joseph Fielding go to Bedford: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Kimball, that Brothers
    Amos Fielding and John Wych go to Newcastle-upon-Tyne: carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    David Wilding go to Garway, Herefordshire: carried.

    Moved by Elder Young, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brothers
    William Clayton and John Needham go to Birmingham: carried.

     Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Young, that
    Brother Henry Royle go to Sheffield: carried.

    Moved by Elder Clayton, seconded by Elder Young, that Brother John
    Albiston take charge of the following Branches of the Church,
    namely--Duckinfield, Hyde, Woolley Hill, Ashton, and Staley Bridge:
    carried.

    Moved by Elder Pratt, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    William Parr go to Sandbach and Congleton: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Pratt, that Brother
    Heath continue his labors in Macclesfield: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    John Blezzard go to Cornshaw: carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Richards, that Brother
    Robert McBride go to Lancaster: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    James Morgan abide in his own neighborhood to labor with Elder
    David Wilding: carried.

    Moved by Elder Pratt, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    Price give up his business, and labor under the advice of Elder
    Kington as the way opens: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Kimball, that Brother
    William Black go to Lisburn, Ireland, as the way opens: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Smith, that Brother John
    Parkinson have a roving commission, so long as he keeps busy, and
    doing good: carried.

    After Elder Young had addressed the meeting upon several important
    items, the meeting dismissed by blessing from Elder Young.

    Parley P. Pratt, President.

    William Clayton, Clerk.

At this time Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page were laboring in Ohio.

Thursday, 9.

    Extract from Elder Woodruff's Letter to the Editor of the
    Millennial Star--Detailing Incidents of his Ministry.

    I arrived at Froome's Hill, Castle Froome, Herefordshire, on the
    4th of March, and was kindly entertained for the night by Mr.
    John Benbow, who received my testimony, and opened his door for
    meeting; and on the evening following, the 5th of March, for the
    first time I preached the fullness of the Gospel in that place to
    a small congregation, who manifested much interest in what they
    heard, and desired to inquire further into those things; and on
    the evening following I met a large  number at Mr. Benbow's,
    and preached unto them the principles of the Gospel, namely, faith
    in Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins and
    the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; after which
    I administered the ordinance of baptism unto six persons, Mr. and
    Mrs. Benbow among the number. I also preached on Sunday the 8th
    and baptized seven, confirmed thirteen, and broke bread unto them.
    Several of those who were baptized were preachers of the order
    called the United Brethren.

    The United Brethren formerly belonged to the Primitive Methodists,
    but had separated themselves from the body, and chose the name of
    the United Brethren. They had from forty to fifty preachers and
    about the same number of established places of meeting, including
    two chapels.

    Mr. Thomas Kington was the superintendent of the church of the
    United Brethren, whose members numbered about four hundred in all,
    divided into small branches and scattered over an extent of country
    from fifteen to twenty miles. This people almost universally
    appeared willing to give heed to the exhortation of Solomon, to
    hear a matter before they judged or condemned. They opened their
    doors for me to preach, and searched the Scriptures daily to see if
    the things which I taught were true; and on finding that the word
    and spirit agreed and bore record of the truth of the fullness of
    the Everlasting Gospel, they embraced it with all their hearts,
    which has brought great joy and satisfaction to many souls in that
    region.

    I continued preaching and baptizing daily; the congregations were
    large and generally attentive. I was soon privileged with an
    interview with Mr. Thomas Kington, the superintendent of the United
    Brethren, before whom I gave an account of the rise and progress
    of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and bore testimony of the
    truth of the great work which God had set His hand to accomplish in
    these last days.

    Mr. Kington received my testimony and sayings with candor; and
    carried the case before the Lord, made it a subject of prayer, and
    asked the Father in the name of Jesus Christ, if these things were
    true; and the Lord manifested the truth of it unto him, and he went
    forth and was baptized, he and all his household. I ordained him an
    Elder, and he went forth and began to preach the fullness of the
    Gospel.

    I also baptized about forty preachers of the same order, and
    several others belonging unto other churches, and about one hundred
    and twenty members of the United Brethren, which opened about forty
    doors or preaching places, where the fullness of the Gospel would
    meet a welcome reception, and all this during the term of one month
    and five days.

    On the 10th of April I took my departure from the Saints in
    Herefordshire and adjoining country, numbering about one hundred
    and sixty;  whom I left rejoicing in the fullness of the
    Gospel, and hundreds of others who were ready to be baptized as
    soon as a proper time and opportunity arrived. I arrived in Preston
    on the 13th, by way of Worcester, Wolverhampton, Burslem, and
    Manchester, a distance of about one hundred and seventy miles,
    visiting the churches by the way.

    On my arrival in Preston, I was blessed with the happy privilege of
    once more greeting my brethren of the Traveling High Council and
    other Elders, and of sitting with them on the 14th, 15th, and 16th
    of April in the first council and general conference which they had
    ever held, as a quorum, in a foreign nation. After spending several
    days together, (during which time much business of importance was
    transacted for the Church,) it became necessary for us again to
    separate in order to labor in different parts of the vineyard which
    were now open before us. I left Preston on the 17th, accompanied
    by Elder Brigham Young, and visited the churches by the way, until
    we arrived among the Saints in Herefordshire, who were anxiously
    looking for my return. In a few days we were joined in our labors
    by Elder Willard Richards. We took locations in different parts of
    this new field of labor, which extended through various places in
    Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and Gloucestershire.

    We continued preaching, and baptizing, and administering in the
    ordinances of the Gospel daily, unto such as would receive our
    testimony, and obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Truth was mighty
    and prevailed; the work prospered, and multiplied on every hand,
    until several hundreds, including more than fifty preachers of
    various sects, were rejoicing in the fullness of the everlasting
    Gospel, and felt to praise God that they had lived to behold the
    day when the Lord had set His hand to prune His vineyard once
    more with a mighty pruning, and to establish the Gospel in its
    ancient purity again upon the face of the earth; and in many
    instances signs followed the believer, according to the promise
    of the Savior. The Spirit of God accompanied the preaching of the
    word to the hearts of men. Whole households, on hearing the word,
    have received it into good and honest hearts, and gone forth and
    received the ordinances of the Gospel; and frequently we have
    baptized from eight to twelve the first time of meeting with the
    people in new places, and preaching the word of God to them.

    Elder Young labored with us about one month, during which time
    many were baptized, confirmed, and numbers ordained to preach the
    Gospel--and while the Saints were much edified, and their hearts
    made glad with the teaching and instruction by Elder Young, I also
    obtained much benefit myself by enjoying his society, sitting under
    his instruction, and sharing in his counsel.

    As it became necessary for Elder Young to return to Manchester,
    to  assist in preparing a collection of hymns, and other
    matters, he took the parting hand with us on the 20th of May; and
    Elders Richards and myself continued our labors in the vineyard, in
    connection with Elder Kington, who had given himself wholly to the
    work of the ministry.

    The Lord still continued to bless our labors, and added daily unto
    the Church. New doors were opening on every hand; and multiplicity
    of calls constantly reached our ears, many of which we could not
    answer for the want of laborers. Notwithstanding there were about
    fifty ordained Elders and Priests in this part of the vineyard, yet
    there were equally as many places for preaching to be attended to
    upon the Sabbath day. Thus we continued our labors in this region
    until the time drew near for the general conference in Manchester
    on the 6th of July.

    But before leaving the Saints, we considered it wisdom to set in
    order the church, and organize them into branches and conferences,
    that they might be properly represented before the general
    conference. Therefore we held two conferences with the Saints
    before we took our departure from them. The first was held at the
    Gadfield Elm Chapel, Worcestershire, on the 14th of June, at which
    time we organized twelve branches, and transacted such business as
    the occasion required. The Second conference was held at Stanley
    Hill, Herefordshire, on the 21st of June, twenty branches of the
    Church were organized. The minutes of the above-named conferences I
    present you for publication, if you think proper.

    On the day following, Elder Richards and myself took our leave of
    the Saints at Froome's Hill, Herefordshire; but before leaving we
    repaired to a pool three times to baptize and confirm numbers that
    came to us and requested these ordinances at our hands.

    Elder Richards labored in this part of the vineyard about two
    months, during which time he traveled extensively, preached night
    and day, gave much instruction to the Saints generally, and had
    many souls as seals to his ministry. I received much benefit from
    the counsel which he gave in the organization of the churches, and
    it was manifest that he had passed through a profitable school of
    experience during the three years of his travels in England; and
    the interesting seasons we have enjoyed together during these two
    months, will not be easily erased from my memory.

    It was with no ordinary fellings that we took our departure from
    the Saints in Herefordshire on this occasion; for, less than
    four months since, I proclaimed the fullness of the Gospel in
    this region for the first time; but now, we were leaving between
    five and six hundred Saints, who were rejoicing in the new and
    everlasting covenant, and hundreds of others who were wishing to
    hear and obey. I parted from Elder Richards at Birmingham, who went
    direct to Manchester, while I visited  West Bromwich, and
    preached several times to a small branch of the Church which had
    been raised up in that place by Elder Turley, who baptized several
    while I was there. I also attended a conference on the 29th June,
    at Hanley, in the Staffordshire Potteries, in company with Elder
    George A. Smith and others, after which I arrived in Manchester.

    Wilford Woodruff.

    Manchester, July 9, 1840.

[Sidenote: Special Instructions for the High Councils.]

Saturday, 11.--The High Council met at my office, when I taught them principles relating to their duty as a Council, and that they might be guided by the same in future, I ordered it to be recorded as follows: "That the Council should try no case without both parties being present, or having had an opportunity to be present; neither should they hear one person's complaint before his case is brought up for trial; neither should they suffer the character of any one to be exposed before the High Council without the person being present and ready to defend him or herself; that the minds of the councilors be not prejudiced for or against any one whose case they may possibly have to act upon."

[Sidenote: The First Missionary for Australia.]

William Barrett, aged 17, was ordained an Elder in Hanley, Staffordshire, England, by Elders George A. Smith and Alfred Cordon, and took leave for South Australia, being the first Elder who went on a mission to that country.

Sunday, 12--Elias Smith was appointed Bishop by the High Council of Iowa, in place of Alanson Ripley, removed to Nauvoo.

Monday, 13.

    Kidnapping of Alanson Brown and Benjamin Boyce--Affidavit of
    Daniel H. Wells. [2]

    State Of Illinois, Hancock County.

    This day personally appeared before the undersigned, an acting
    justice of the peace, in the aforesaid county, Alanson Brown,
    who, first  being duly sworn according to law, deposes and
    says, that on the 7th day of July, A. D. 1840, and in the county
    of Hancock, in said state, William Allensworth, H. M. Woodyard,
    William Martin, John H. Owsley, John Bain, Light T. Tait, and
    Halsay White, in company with several other persons, to this
    affiant unknown, forcibly arrested this affiant, and one Benjamin
    Boyce, whilst affiant and said Boyce, were quietly pursuing their
    own lawful business; and that immediately after said arrest, the
    said Allensworth, Woodyard, Martin, Owsley, Bain, Tait, and White,
    did illegally and forcibly take, kidnap, and carry this affiant and
    said Boyce, bound with cords, from the said county of Hancock, in
    said state, on the day and year above set forth, in the county of
    Lewis, in the state of Missouri, without having established a claim
    for such a procedure, according to the laws of the United States.

    Affiant states that in a short time after he was taken into the
    state of Missouri, he was put into a room with said Boyce, and
    there kept until about eleven o'clock the following night; when
    they were taken out of the room where they had been confined, into
    the woods, near at hand, by said Tait, a man by the name of Huner,
    and another by the name of Monday, and some others, whose name
    affiant did not learn; they previously placed a rope about the
    neck of the affiant; Huner and Monday then proceeded to hang the
    affiant, and did hang him for some time upon a tree, until affiant
    was nearly strangled, after which they let him down and loosened
    the rope. Shortly after this, affiant heard repeated blows, which
    others--belonging to the same gang of Huner--were inflicting upon
    Boyce, and he could hear also the cries of Boyce, under the pain
    arising from the blows; after which affiant and Boyce were taken
    back to the room where they had been confined, in which they found
    a man by the name of Rogers, and another by the name of Allred.

    Affiant further states that he was kept in imprisonment by the
     persons heretofore named, and others to him unknown, until
    Friday evening next ensuing the Tuesday on which Boyce and himself
    were kidnapped, when he escaped out of their hands and returned
    into the state of Illinois. Affiant had learned that the name of
    the place in said county of Lewis, state of Missouri, to which he
    was taken from the state of Illinois, is called Tully, to which the
    said Allensworth, Woodyard, Martin, Owsley, Bain, Tait and White,
    have fled as fugitives from justice, and at which they are now to
    be found.

    I hereby certify that the foregoing affidavit was this day
    subscribed and duly sworn to before me, by said Alanson Brown.

    Daniel H. Wells.

    Justice of the Peace, July 13, 1840.

    Statement of James Allred.

    State Of Illinois, Hancock County.

    This day personally appeared before the undersigned, an acting
    Justice of the Peace, in and for said county, James Allred, a
    credible witness, who first being duly sworn according to law,
    deposes and says that William Allensworth, John H. Owsley, and
    William Martin, on the 7th day of July, 1840, within the limits
    of said county of Hancock, aided by several other persons, to
    this affiant unknown, forcibly arrested this affiant and one Noah
    Rogers, whilst the affiant and said Rogers were peaceably pursuing
    their own lawful business; and that the said Allensworth, Owsley
    and Martin, after said arrest, aided by sundry persons, to affiant
    unknown, did forcibly take, kidnap and carry this affiant and said
    Rogers from the said county of Hancock in the state of Illinois,
    on the day and year above mentioned into the state of Missouri,
    without having established a claim for such procedure according to
    the laws of the United States.

    Affiant further states, that in a short time after he had been so
    taken into the state of Missouri, he was put into a room with said
    Rogers, and there kept until some time during the following night,
    when they were taken out of the room where they were confined,
    into the woods near by, and this affiant was bound by the persons
    conducting him, to a tree, he having been first forcibly stripped
    by them of every particle of clothing. Those having him in charge
    then told affiant that they would whip him; one of them, by the
    name of Monday, saying to this affiant, "G--d--n you, I'll cut you
    to the hollow." They, however, at last unbound the affiant without
    whipping him.

    Affiant states that said Rogers was taken just beyond the place
    where affiant was bound with a rope around his neck, and he heard
    a great number of blows, which he then supposed, and has since
    learned were inflicted upon said Rogers, and heard him cry out
    several times as if in great agony; after which affiant, together
    with Rogers, was taken  back and placed in the room from which
    they were taken, together with one Boyce and Brown, and detained
    until Monday next succeeding the day on which he was kidnapped; at
    which time he received from one of the company, who had imprisoned
    him, a passport, of which the following is a copy--

    "Tully, Missouri, July 12, 1840. The people of Tully, having
    taken up Mr. Allred, with some others, and having examined into
    the offenses committed, find nothing to justify his detention any
    longer, and have released him. By order of the committee.

    "H. M. Woodward."

    And then this affiant was permitted to return home into the state
    of Illinois. This place in Missouri, to which affiant and said
    Rogers were taken, he has learned is called Tully, and is situated
    in the county of Lewis, and at which place the said Allensworth,
    Owsley and Martin are now living.

    I hereby certify that the forgoing affidavit was this day
    subscribed, and duly sworn to before me, by the said James Allred.

    Daniel H. Wells,

    Justice of the Peace.

    Action of the Citizens of Nauvoo in the Matter of the Kidnapping
    of Brown and Boyce by the Missourians.

    At a meeting of the citizens of Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois,
    13th July, 1840, Judge Elias Higbee was called to the chair, and
    Robert B. Thompson was appointed Secretary.

    On motion a committee was appointed to report resolutions,
    expressive of the sense of this meeting, consisting of the
    following persons, to wit.--Isaac Galland, Robert B. Thompson,
    Sidney Rigdon, and Daniel H. Wells, who retired, and after a short
    absence, reported the following preamble and resolutions, which
    were unanimously adopted--

    Report of the Committee on Resolutions.

    Preamble--The committee appointed to express the sense of this
    meeting, in relation to the recent acts of abduction, and other
    deeds of cruelty and inhumanity committed upon our citizens
    by [some of] the citizens of the state of Missouri, beg leave
    respectfully to report:

    That having under consideration the principal matters involve in
    the discharge of their duty, they have been forced to arrive at the
    following conclusions:

    First--That the people of Missouri, not having sufficiently slacked
    their thirst for blood and plunder, are now disposed to pursue us
    with a repetition of the scenes of brutality which marked their
    whole course of conduct towards us during our unhappy residence
    among them.

     Second--That notwithstanding they have already robbed us
    of our homes, murdered our families, stolen and carried away our
    property; and to complete the measure of their infamy as a state,
    their executive caused unoffending thousands to be banished from
    the state, without even the form of a trial, or the slightest
    evidence of crime; they are now sending their gangs of murdering
    banditti, and thieving brigands, to wreak further vengeance, and
    satisfy their insatiable cupidity in the state of Illinois, and
    that too before we have even had time to erect shelters for our
    families.

    Third--That for the purpose of giving a semblance of justification
    to their most unhallowed conduct, the people of Missouri have again
    commenced concealing goods within the limits of our settlements, as
    they had done before in the state of Missouri, in order to raise a
    charge of stealing against our citizens, and under this guise they
    have within a few days kidnapped, and carried away, several honest
    and worthy citizens of this county.

    Fourth--Under these circumstances the first duty and the only
    redress which seems to offer itself to our consideration is an
    appeal to the executive of the state of Illinois, for redress, and
    protection from further injuries, with a confident assurance that
    he, unlike the governor of Missouri, will extend the executive arm
    to protect from lawless outrage, unoffending citizens. Therefore,

    Resolved 1st: That we view, with no ordinary feelings, the
    approaching danger as a necessary consequence following the lawless
    and outrageous conduct of the citizens of Missouri, in setting
    at defiance the laws of this, as well as of all other states in
    this Union, by forcing from their homes, and from the state, civil
    citizens of Illinois, and taking them into the state of Missouri,
    without any legal process whatever, and there inflicting upon them
    base cruelties in order to extort false confessions from them, to
    give a coloring to their (the Missourians') iniquities, and screen
    themselves from the just indignation of an incensed public.

    Resolved 2ndly: That while we deeply deplore the cause which
    has brought us together on this occasion, we cannot refrain from
    expressing our most unqualified disapprobation at the infringement
    of the laws of this state, as set forth in the above Preamble, and
    strongest indignation at the manner in which the people of Missouri
    treated those whom they had thus inhumanly taken from among us.

    Resolved 3rdly: That inasmuch as we are conscious of our honest
    and upright intentions, and are at all times ready and willing
    to submit to the just requirements of the laws, we claim of the
    citizens and authorities of this state, protection from such unjust
    and, before, unheard of oppressions.

     Resolved 4thly: That the forcible abduction of our citizens
    by the citizens of Missouri, is a violation of the laws regulating
    the federal compact, subversive to the rights of freemen, and
    contrary to our free institutions, and republican principles.

    Resolved, 5thly: That the cruelties practiced upon our citizens,
    since their abduction, is disgraceful to humanity; the height of
    injustice and oppression, and would disgrace the annals of the most
    barbarous nations, in either ancient or modern times; and can only
    find its parallel in the "Auto da Fe"--the inquisitions in Spain.

    Resolved, 6thly: That such unconstitutional and unhallowed
    proceedings on the part of the citizens of Missouri, ought to
    arouse every patriot to exertion and diligence to put a stop to
    such procedure, and use all constitutional means to bring the
    offenders to justice.

    Resolved, 7thly: That we memorialize the Executive of this state,
    of the gross outrage which has been committed on our citizens;
    and pledge ourselves to aid him in such measures as may be deemed
    necessary to restore our citizens to freedom, and have satisfaction
    for the wrongs we have suffered.

    Elias Higbee, Chairman,

    R. B. Thompson, Secretary.

    Memorial to Governor Carlin.

    To his Excellency Governor Carlin:--The undersigned being a
    committee to draft a Memorial to your Excellency relative to the
    recent outrages, would respectfully represent; that after being
    driven from our homes, and pleasant places of abode, in the state
    of Missouri, by the authorities of said state, Illinois seemed to
    be the first shelter or asylum which presented itself to our view;
    that having left the state of Missouri, your memorialists found
    an asylum in the state of Illinois; and notwithstanding the false
    reports which were circulated to our prejudice, we were received
    with kindness by the noble hearted citizens of Illinois; who
    relieved our necessities, and bade us welcome; for which kindness
    we feel thankful.

    That under your Excellency's administration, we have had every
    encouragement given us, and have every reason, from the kindness
    and sympathy which you have ever manifested towards us in our
    sufferings, to feel confident that your aid will ever be offered
    to us in common with the rest of the citizens of the state. That
    feeling ourselves so happy and secure, and beginning again to
    enjoy the comforts of life, we are sorry to say that our quiet has
    been disturbed, our fears alarmed, and our families annoyed by
    the citizens of Missouri; who, with malice and hatred, which is
    characteristic of them, have unconstitutionally sent an armed force
    and abducted some of our friends, namely, James Allred,  Noah
    Rogers, Alanson Brown, and one Boyce, and carried them into the
    state of Missouri, and treated them with the greatest barbarity
    and cruelty; even now their wives and children, as well as their
    friends, are alarmed for the safety of their lives.

    Therefore we have felt it our duty to place the circumstances of
    this unheard-of outrage before you, and appeal to your Excellency
    for protection from such marauders, and take such measures as you
    may deem proper, that our friends may be again restored to the
    bosom of their families, and the offenders punished for their
    crimes.

    We have the greatest confidence in your Excellency, that every
    constitutional means will be resorted to, to restore our friends to
    the society of their families, &c., that we, in common with other
    citizens of the state of Illinois, may enjoy all the rights and
    privileges of freemen.

    Your memorialists have under all circumstances paid the greatest
    respect to the laws of the country, and if any should break the
    same, they have never felt a disposition to screen such from
    justice, but when under false pretenses, to gratify and satiate
    a revengeful disposition--for the citizens of another state,
    regardless of both the laws of God and man, to come and kidnap our
    friends, to carry off our citizens to cruelly treat our brethren;
    such offenders, we think, should be brought to an account, to be
    dealt with according to their merit or demerit; that we may enjoy
    the privileges guaranteed to us by the Constitution of the United
    States.

    We therefore humbly pray that your Excellency will satisfy yourself
    of the gross outrage which has been committed on the citizens of
    the state, and with that energy which is so characteristic of your
    Excellency's administration, take such steps as you may deem best
    calculated to repair the injuries which your memorialists have
    sustained; that you will vindicate the injured laws of the state.

    In conclusion, we beg leave to assure your Excellency, that in the
    discharge of this, as well as every other constitutional movement,
    you may rely upon the hearty co-operation of your memorialists,
    who respectfully submit to your Excellency the accompanying
    Resolutions, which were passed at a large meeting held in this
    place on this day, and also the affidavit of one of those persons
    who was kidnapped, but fortunately has made his escape.

Footnotes:

1. At the present time the above arrangement by which Elder Parley P. Pratt was chosen president of the conference, while Elder Brigham Young was his senior in the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, will seem somewhat out of order. Such procedure is recorded a number of times in the minutes of conferences and other gatherings in the early years of the Church's history; it is therefore proper to say that in those days the right to presidency by reason of seniority of standing in quorums and councils was not as well settled as it is now. Presidency throughout the councils and quorums of the church is determined by well settled principles of seniority of ordination, and as soon as any of these organizations are called to order for business the president of the council or conference is determined by the seniority of standing in said organization without any formal action. In the above case the brethren may have been influenced by the fact that Elder Pratt was an older member of the church than President Young. Also, it appears in a subsequent paragraph that some charges were preferred by President Young against one of the Elders in the conference. This course may have been decided upon by the Apostles, who probably thought that it would not be best for the presiding officer over the conference to make such charges, hence Elder Pratt was chosen to preside and Elder Young left free to make the charges aforesaid.

2. Daniel Hanmer Wells was the son of Daniel Wells by his second wife Catherine Chapin. He was born at Trenton, Oneida county, New York, October 27, 1814. His father was a descendant of Thomas Wells, the fourth governor of Connecticut, while his mother was descended from David Chapin, a veteran of the Revolution, who served under Washington, and was a descendant of one of the oldest and most distinguished families of New England. The father of Daniel H. Wells died when the son was but 12 years old, which threw upon him, at this early age, the care of his mother and younger sister. At the age of 16 he migrated with his mother and sister to Marietta, Ohio, where Daniel H. taught school during the winter, and in the spring moved to Illinois, settling at Commerce, where he made extensive purchases of land. One farm of eighty acres was in the very heart of what became the city of Nauvoo, in fact he platted his farm into city lots which he sold at very reasonable prices to the Saints. The Temple site was selected from the western range of blocks in this addition. In 1885 he married Eliza Robison, and a son was born to them a year later. Mr. Wells served a term as constable in the district in which Commerce was situated, and was now a justice of the peace and familiarly called "Squire Wells." He was a stalwart Whig in politics; a man of high character and great courage.
