The Return of a Prodigal--Conditions in Kirtland--Progress of the Work in Great Britain--The Coming of John C. Bennett.

    Australian Mission.

    Extract of a Letter from Elder William Barratt.

    Deptford, [1] July 15, 1840.

    Dear Brother In Christ:--I write to inform you of my arrival in
    the metropolis this morning, after a tedious journey in the midst
    of much profaneness and swearing, such as I never heard in my
    life before. I feel, as the Apostle expresses it, like a lamb
    among wolves, going into a land of strangers to preach the Gospel;
    therefore I desire your prayers in my behalf. I have witnessed much
    of the spirit of revelation since Sunday; in fact, I only thought
    it a mere thought, when the Elders testified that they were called
    by revelation; but now I know the truth of the assertion, which
    proves to me who ought to preach, and that none ought, without they
    are called by revelation.

    Give my love to all the Saints, and tell them that as many as
    remain faithful I will meet in Zion, bringing my sheaves with me.
    Tell them my faith is fixed, and my resolution is strong to meet
    you all there, whom I love in the Lord. Pray that a door may be
    opened, and that a gift of utterance may be given unto me in a
    foreign land to preach the Gospel. Brethren, sorrow not for me, as
    those that have no hope, for we have a hope of living and eating
    together in the kingdom of our God.

Friday, 17.--By my suggestion, High Council voted that Samuel Bent and George W. Harris go on a mission to procure money for printing certain books.

Saturday, 18.--Elias Smith was ordained a Bishop.

Sunday, 19.--An answer to Brigham Young's letter of the 17th of May was sent by Lorenzo Snow, [2] which gave  the Twelve permission to publish the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and hymn-book, but not to ordain any into the quorum of the Seventies; and likewise some general instructions.

Monday, 20.--Elder John Moon and company arrived in New York being the first arrival of Saints in America.

Wednesday, 22.

    The Prophet's Letter to William W. Phelps--Welcoming him back into
    the Church. [3]

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, July 22, 1840.

    Dear Brother Phelps:--I must say that it is with no ordinary
    feelings I endeavor to write a few lines to you in answer to yours
    of the 29th ultimo; at the same time I am rejoiced at the privilege
    granted me.

     You may in some measure realize what my feelings, as well
    as Elder Rigdon's and Brother Hyrum's were, when we read your
    letter--truly our hearts were melted into tenderness and compassion
    when we ascertained your resolves, &c. I can assure you I feel a
    disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the
    approbation of Jehovah' (whose servant I am), and agreeable to the
    principles of truth and righteousness which have been revealed;
    and inasmuch as long-suffering, patience, and mercy have ever
    characterized the dealings of our heavenly Father towards the
    humble and penitent, I feel disposed to copy the example, cherish
    the same principles, and by so doing be a savior of my fellow men.

    It is true, that we have suffered much in consequence of your
    behavior--the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to
    drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against
    us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and
    enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord--"had it been an
    enemy, we could have borne it." "In the day that thou stoodest on
    the other side, in the day when strangers carried away captive his
    forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon
    [Far West], even thou wast as one of them; that thou shouldest not
    have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he became a
    stranger, neither shouldst thou have spoken proudly in the day of
    distress."

    However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Father has been
    done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. And having
    been delivered from the hands of wicked men by the mercy of our
    God, we say it is your privilege to be delivered from the powers of
    the adversary, be brought into the liberty of God's dear children,
    and again take your stand among the Saints of the Most High, and by
    diligence, humility, and love unfeigned, commend yourself to our
    God, and your God, and to the Church of Jesus Christ.

    Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine,
    I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of
    fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal.

    Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday, and an expression
    of their feeling was taken, when it was unanimously

     Resolved, That W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship.

  "Come on, dear brother, since the war is past,
  For friends at first, are friends again at last."

    Yours as ever, Joseph Smith, Jun.

    Credentials of Elders Samuel Bent and George W. Harris.

    To all whom it may concern:--This is to certify that Elders Samuel
    Bent and George W. Harris are authorized agents of the Church of
    Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, being appointed by the First
    Presidency and High Council of said Church to visit the branches
    of the Church in the east, or wherever they may be led in the
    providence of God, to obtain donations and subscriptions for the
    purpose of printing the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants,
    hymn-books, the new translation of the Scriptures. They are
    likewise instructed and authorized to procure loans in behalf
    of the Church, for carrying into operation the above and other
    important works necessary to the well being of said Church.

    From our long acquaintance with these our beloved brethren, their
    long, tried friendship under circumstances the most trying and
    painful, their zeal for the cause of truth, and their strict
    morality and honesty we most cheerfully recommend them to the
    Saints of the Most High. Any statements they may make relative to
    their mission may be implicitly relied upon, and any loans which
    they may obtain, will be considered binding on the Church. And we
    do hope the Saints will do all in their power to effect the object
    proposed, and lift up the hands of our beloved brethren who have
    cheerfully come forward to engage in a work so great and important.

    Joseph Smith, Jun., President,

    William Marks,

    Elias Higbee,

    David Dort,

    Charles C. Rich,

    Seymour Brunson,

    William Huntington,

    Hyrum Smith,

    Newel Knight,

    Alpheus Cutler,

    Henry G. Sherwood,

    David Fullmer,

    Thomas Grover,

    Lewis D. Wilson.

    The Prophet's Letter to Oliver Granger--Dealing Chiefly with
    Affairs at Kirtland.

    Brother Granger:

    Dear Sir:--It was with great pleasure I received your and Brother
    Richards' letter, dated New York, June 23, 1840, and was very happy
     to be informed of your safe arrival in that place, and your
    probability of success; and I do hope that your anticipations will
    be realized, and that you will be enabled to free the Lord's House
    from all incumbrances, and be prospered in all your undertakings
    for the benefit of the Church; and pray that while you are exerting
    your influence to bring about an object so desirable, that the
    choicest blessings of heaven may rest down upon you, while you are
    endeavoring to do so, and attending to the duties laid upon you by
    the authorities of the Church in this place.

    I am sorry to be informed not only in your letter, but from other
    respectable sources, of the strange conduct pursued in Kirtland by
    Elder Almon W. Babbitt. I am indeed surprised that a man having the
    experience which Brother Babbitt has had, should take any steps
    whatever, calculated to destroy the confidence of the brethren in
    the Presidency or any of the authorities of the Church.

    In order to conduct the affairs of the Kingdom in righteousness, it
    is all important that the most perfect harmony, kind feeling, good
    understanding, and confidence should exist in the hearts of all the
    brethren; and that true charity, love one towards another, should
    characterize all their proceedings. If there are any uncharitable
    feelings, any lack of confidence, then pride, arrogance and envy
    will soon be manifested; confusion must inevitably prevail, and
    the authorities of the Church set at naught; and under such
    circumstances, Kirtland cannot rise and free herself from the
    captivity in which she is held, and become a place of safety for
    the Saints, nor can the blessings of Jehovah rest upon her.

    If the Saints in Kirtland deem me unworthy of their prayers when
    they assemble together, and neglect to bear me up at the throne of
    heavenly grace, it is a strong and convincing proof to me that they
    have not the Spirit of God. If the revelations we have received
    are true, who is to lead the people? If the keys of the Kingdom
    have been committed to my hands, who shall open out the mysteries
    thereof?

    As long as my brethren stand by me and encourage me, I can combat
    the prejudices of the world, and can bear the contumely and abuse
    with joy; but when my brethren stand aloof, when they begin to
    faint, and endeavor to retard my progress and enterprise, then I
    feel to mourn, but am no less determined to prosecute my task,
    being confident that although my earthly friends may fail, and even
    turn against me, yet my Heavenly Father will bear me off triumphant.

    However, I hope that even in Kirtland there are some who do not
    make a man an offender for a word, but are disposed to stand forth
    in defense of righteousness and truth, and attend to every duty
     enjoined upon them; and who will have wisdom to direct them
    against any movement or influence calculated to bring confusion and
    discord into the camp of Israel, and to discern between the spirit
    of truth and the spirit of error.

    It would be gratifying to my mind to see the Saints in Kirtland
    flourish, but think the time is not yet come; and I assure you it
    never will until a different order of things be established and
    a different spirit manifested. When confidence is restored, when
    pride shall fall, and every aspiring mind be clothed with humility
    as with a garment, and selfishness give place to benevolence and
    charity, and a united determination to live by every word which
    proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord is observable, then, and
    not till then, can peace, order and love prevail.

    It is in consequence of aspiring men that Kirtland has been
    forsaken. How frequently has your humble servant been envied in his
    office by such characters, who endeavored to raise themselves to
    power at his expense, and seeing it impossible to do so, resorted
    to foul slander and abuse, and other means to effect his overthrow.
    Such characters have ever been the first to cry out against the
    Presidency, and publish their faults and foibles to the four winds
    of heaven.

    I cannot forget the treatment I received in the house of my
    friends. These things continually roll across my mind, and cause
    me much sorrow of heart; and when I think that others who have
    lately come into the Church should be led to Kirtland instead of to
    this place, by Elder Babbitt; and having their confidence in the
    authorities lessened by such observations as he (Elder Babbitt) has
    thought proper to make, as well as hearing all the false reports
    and exaggerated accounts of our enemies--I must say that I feel
    grieved in spirit, and cannot tolerate such proceedings--neither
    will I; but will endeavor to disabuse the minds of the Saints, and
    break down all such unallowed proceedings.

    It was something new to me when I heard there had been secret
    meetings held in the Lord's House, and that some of my
    friends--faithful brethren--men enjoying the confidence of the
    Church, should be locked out. Such proceedings are not calculated
    to promote union, or peace, but to engender strife; and will be a
    curse instead of a blessing. To those who are young in the work, I
    know they are calculated to be, and must be, injurious. Those who
    have had experience, and who should know better than to reflect on
    their brethren--there is no excuse for them.

    If Brother Babbitt and the other brethren wish to reform the
    Church, and come out and make a stand against sin and speculation,
    &c., they must use other weapons than lies, or their object can
    never be effected;  and their labors will be given to the
    house of the stranger, rather than to the House of the Lord.

    The proceedings of Brother Babbitt were taken into consideration
    at a meeting of the Church at this place, when it was unanimously
    resolved, that fellowship should be withdrawn from him until
    he make satisfaction for the course he has pursued: of which
    circumstance I wish you to apprise him without delay, and demand
    his license.

    Dear sir, I wish you to stand in your lot, and keep the station
    which was given you by revelation and the authorities of the
    Church. Attend to the affairs of the Church with diligence, and
    then rest assured of the blessings of heaven. It is binding on
    you to act as president of the Church in Kirtland, until you are
    removed by the same authority which put you in; and I do hope there
    will be no cause for opposition, but that good feeling will be
    manifested in future by all the brethren.

    Brother Burdick's letter to Brother Hyrum was duly received, for
    which he has our best thanks; it was indeed an admirable letter,
    and worthy of its author. The sentiments expressed were in
    accordance with the spirit of the Gospel, and the principles are
    correct.

    I am glad that Brother Richards has continued with you, and hope he
    has been of some service to you. Give my love to him.

    Our prospects in this place continue good. Considerable numbers
    have come in this spring. There were some bickerings respecting
    your conduct soon after your departure, but they have all blown
    over, and I hope there will never be any occasion for any more;
    but that you will commend yourself to God and to the Saints by a
    virtuous walk and holy conversation.

    I had a letter from William W. Phelps a few days ago, informing
    me of his desire to come back to the Church, if we would accept
    of him. He appears very humble, and is willing to make every
    satisfaction that Saints or God may require.

    We expect to have an edition of the Book of Mormon printed by the
    first of September; it is now being stereotyped in Cincinnati.

    I am, &c., &c.,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

[Sidenote: A Jew's Memorial.]

An interesting memorial concerning the Jews, "To the Protestant Powers of Europe and America," signed and sealed in London the 8th of January, 1839, may be found in the Millennial Star, Vol. I, No. 6. [4]

Sunday, 24.--Elder William Donaldson, member of the British army bound for the East Indies, writes from Chatham, 24th of July, "We go on board tomorrow. I have had a glorious vision about going into the land of Egypt."

Saturday, 25.

    Letter of John C. Bennett to Joseph Smith and Sidney
    Rigdon--Announcing His Intention to Join the Saints.

    Fairfield, Illinois, July 25, 1840.

    Reverend and Dear Friends:--The last time I wrote you was during
    the pendency of your difficulties with the Missourians. You are
    aware that at that time I held the office of "Brigadier-General of
    the Invincible Dragoons" of this state, and proffered you my entire
    energies for your deliverance from a ruthless and savage, though
    cowardly foe; but the Lord came to your rescue, and saved you with
    a powerful arm. I am happy to find that you are now in a civilized
    land, and in the enjoyment of peace and happiness.

    Some months ago I resigned my office with an intention of removing
    to your town, and joining your people; but hitherto I have been
    prevented. I hope, however, to remove to Commerce, and unite with
    your Church next spring. I believe I should be much happier with
    you. I have many things to communicate which I would prefer doing
    orally; and I propose to meet you in Springfield on the first
    Monday in December next, as I shall be there at the time on state
    and United States business.

    If I remove to Commerce, I expect to follow my profession, and to
    that end I enclose you a slip from the Louisville Journal, to
    give you an idea of my professional standing.

    On the first of this month I was appointed to the office of
    "Quartermaster-General of the State of Illinois," which office I
    expect to hold some years.

    I hope you are all quite well. In haste. Write me immediately.

    Yours respectfully,

    John C. Bennett. [5]

    To Messrs. Smith and Rigdon.

Monday, 27.

    Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Making
    Further Tender of his Services to the Church.

    Quartermaster-General's Office,

    Fairfield, Illinois, July 27, 1840.

    To the Reverends Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun.:

    Respected Friends:--I wrote you a few days ago from this place, but
    my great desire to be with you and your people prompts me to write
    again at this time; and I hope it will not be considered obtrusive
    by friends whom I have always so highly esteemed as yourselves.

    At the last District and Circuit Court of the United States, holden
    at Springfield, in June last, I had the honor of being on the
    grand inquest of the United States for the District of Illinois,
    and hoped to have seen you there; but was quite disappointed. I
    attended the meeting of your people opposite Mr. Lowry's hotel, but
    did not make myself known, as I had no personal acquaintance in the
    congregation.

    It would be my deliberate advice to you to concentrate all of your
    Church at one point. If Hancock county, with Commerce for its
    commercial emporium, is to be that point, well; fix upon it, and
    let us cooperate with a general concerted action. You can rely upon
    me in any event. I am with you in spirit, and will be in person as
    soon as circumstances permit, and immediately if it is your desire.
    Wealth is no material object with me. I desire to be happy, and am
    fully satisfied that can enjoy myself better with your people, with
    my present views and feelings, than with any other. I hope that
    time will soon come when your people will become my people, and
    your God my God.

    At the time of your peril and bitter persecution in Missouri, you
    are  aware I proffered you my utmost energies, and had not
    the conflict terminated so speedily, I should have been with you
    then. God be thanked for your rescue from the hand of a savage, but
    cowardly foe!

    I do not expect to resign my office of "Quartermaster-General of
    the State of Illinois" in the event of my removal to Commerce,
    unless you advise otherwise. I shall likewise expect to practice
    my profession; but at the same time your people shall have all
    the benefit of my speaking powers, and my untiring energies in
    behalf of the good and holy faith. Un necessariis unitas, in non
    necessariis libertas, in omnibus charitas, [6] shall be my motto
    with--Suaviter in modo, fortiter in re. [7]

    Be so good as to inform me substantially of the population of
    Commerce and Hancock county, the face of the country, climate,
    soil, health, &c., &c. How many of your people are concentrated
    there? Please to write me in full immediately. Louisville paper
    will accompany this; please inquire for it.

    With sentiments of profound respect and esteem, suffer me to
    subscribe myself,

    Yours respectfully,

    John C. Bennett.

Elder John Taylor sailed for Ireland from Liverpool. [8]

Tuesday, 28.

    Letter of the Prophet to Horace R. Hotchkiss--Rock River Lands and
    the White Purchase.

    Nauvoo, July 28, 1840.

    Horace R. Hotchkiss, Esq.:

    Dear Sir:--I acknowledge the receipt of yours of last month,
    giving me the numbers of the land on Rock River, which you felt
    disposed to sell. In reply to which I have to say, that we have not
    yet examined the land, and consequently have not arrived at any
    conclusion  respecting it; but it is probable that some of my
    friends will visit it this fall, and if we should think it wisdom
    to locate there, or on the other tract, you will be informed of the
    same, and arrangements entered into.

    I am sorry that your health has been so poor, but hope, ere
    this, you are perfectly recovered. It would afford me great
    pleasure indeed, could I hold out any prospect of the two notes
    due next month being met at maturity, or even this fall. Having
    had considerable difficulty (necessarily consequent on a new
    settlement) to contend with, as well as poverty and considerable
    sickness, our first payment will be probably somewhat delayed,
    until we again get a good start in the world; and I am happy to
    say, the prospect is indeed favorable. Under these circumstances
    we shall have to claim your indulgence, which I have no doubt will
    be extended. However, every exertion on our part shall be made
    to meet the demands against us, so that if we cannot accomplish
    all we wish to, it will be our misfortune, and not our fault.
    Notwithstanding the impoverished condition of our people, and the
    adverse circumstances under which we have had to labor, I hope we
    shall eventually rise above them, and again enjoy the blessings of
    health, peace, and plenty.

    You were informed in a former letter that we had paid Mr. William
    White the one thousand dollars specified in your bond; a few days
    ago he called at this place and agreed to give us a deed for the
    ninety acres, (less one-half acre), providing I would give him an
    identifying bond, and pay the interest due from you to him on the
    one thousand dollars, which I agreed to do. I have therefore got
    the deed for the land, and paid him the interest. My reasons for
    so doing were these: there are some who wish to purchase lots,
    providing they can get a good title deed for the same, and who
    would be induced to make purchases and make an effort to raise
    money, for the sake of getting a deed; which effort they would not
    be so likely to make if we could only give them a bond. This I
    think will work both to your advantage and ours, and hope that we
    shall be able by and by to make some cash sales.

    I hope this arrangement with Mr. White will meet your approbation,
    although it is a departure from the common rules of business; but
    was induced to do so from the advantages which will result from it,
    which I hope will be mutual. The amount of interest paid to Mr.
    White, after deducting $61.50, which was coming from him to you
    for rents, was eighty-four dollars and forty cents. Mr. White told
    us that you agreed to pay him as much interest for the money as he
    could get elsewhere. We accordingly (in good faith) allowed him at
    the rate of ten per cent. Hoping the course pursued will meet your
    approbation.

    I am, respectfully, your obedient servant,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

     P. S.--You will recollect the verbal agreement entered into
    by us, that the notes for the interest would not be exacted for
    at least five years. Notwithstanding which, we use our endeavors
    to meet them as fast as possible, and think that when I have the
    pleasure of seeing you again, you will be fully satisfied with the
    course we have taken, and our endeavors to meet all our engagements.

    J. S., Jun.

Thursday, 30.

    Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Expressing
    Anxiety to be with the Saints.

    Fairfield, Wayne County, Illinois, July 30th, 1840.

    To Reverends Sidney Rigdon, and Joseph Smith, Jun.

    Respected Friends:--It is with difficulty that I can forego the
    felicity of an immediate immersion into the true faith of your
    beloved people. I have written you several letters, and forwarded
    you several newspapers to Commerce, which I hope will be duly
    received, as they contain some matters of importance.

    Is Nauvoo, or Commerce, to be the general point of concentration
    for the Mormon people? For at that point I desire to locate, and
    ever remain. My anxiety to be with you is daily increasing, and I
    shall wind up my professional business immediately, and proceed to
    your blissful abode, if you think it best.

    Look at all my letters and papers and write me forthwith. You are
    aware that at the time of your most bitter persecutions, I was
    with you in feeling, and proffered you my military knowledge and
    prowess. My faith is still strong. I believe the God of the whole
    earth will avenge your wrong in time as well as in eternity.

    O my friends, go on and prosper; and may the God of all grace save
    you with an everlasting salvation.

    Yours respectfully,

    J. C. Bennett.

Saturday, August 1.--In the Times and Seasons of this month I find the following:

    A voice from the holy city--rebuilding of the temple of
    Solomon--Recall of the people of God to the land of Judah.

    We have received by the last packet from England, a copy of a
    very extraordinary "Circular" issued by the Jews, now residing
    at Jerusalem, and addressed to all the descendants of Abraham to
    the uttermost  ends of the earth. It is written in the pure
    Hebrew character, and accompanied with an English translation,
    which we annex as matter of the deepest curiosity to the people of
    this country. Next week, if we possibly can, we shall publish the
    original Hebrew in a double sheet, but at present we must content
    ourselves with the translation.--Morning Herald.

    Circular.

    "To our Brethren the Israelites of Europe and America:

    "The liberal and benevolent contributors towards every holy and
    pious purpose--ready to stand in the breach and evince their love
    for the Land of Promise: to the well-wishers of Jerusalem, and
    friends of Zion (dearer to us than life) who extend their bounteous
    aid to this Holy City, and devote their best means, in love and
    affection, 'to take pity on her stones, and show mercy to her
    dust.' To the illustrious and excellent Rabbies--to their worthy
    and distinguished Assessors--to the noble Chiefs and faithful
    Leaders of Israel; to all congregations devoted to the Lord, and
    to every member thereof--health, life, and prosperity. May the
    Lord vouchsafe His protection unto them; may they rejoice and be
    exceedingly glad; and with their own eyes may they behold when the
    Lord restoreth Zion. Such be His gracious will. Amen.

    "It is a fact well known throughout Judah and Israel, that 'the
    glory altogether departed from the daughter of Zion,' since upwards
    of one hundred years ago, the congregation of German Jews in this
    Holy City were forcibly deprived of their homes and inheritance.
    Dreadful and grievous was the yoke under which the despots of this
    land oppressed them. Tyranny and cruel usage ground them to the
    dust, and forced them to forsake their habitations, to abandon
    their houses and all their property, and to seek safety in flight.
    Thus the large court they inherited from their ancestors remained
    deserted and uninhabited, until it was seized upon and possessed by
    aliens. The sacred edifices it contained, namely, the Synagogue and
    Medrash, were by them demolished, the whole of the property utterly
    ruined, and possessions, lawfully ours, devastated before our eyes.
    Then did our souls refuse all consolation! For how could we bear to
    witness the evil which befell our people!

    "As the light gleams forth from a spark, so did our congregation
    take heart and return again to form their establishments, and to
    take root on the Holy Mount. But we could find no rest for our
    wearied feet--no place consecrated and appointed for our prayer and
    instruction. Our aching eyes beheld how every nation and tongue,
    even from the most distant isles of the ocean, is here possessed
    of structures defended by walls, gates, and portcullis, whilst the
    people of the Lord, forcibly  expelled from their inheritances
    by rapacious barbarians, were covered with obloquy, scorn, and
    disgrace.

    "The cries of the people ascended unto the Lord who dwelleth
    in Zion. He looked down, and in pity beheld their sufferings
    and oppression. And ever since the ruler of Egypt first assumed
    the government of the Holy Land--a ruler who maintains justice
    throughout his dominions--an edict was issued permitting Jews to
    do whatsoever they deemed right and expedient, with respect to
    the rebuilding of their demolished synagogues and colleges. Us,
    likewise, the Lord in His mercy vouchsafed to remember, and caused
    us to be reinstated into the heritage of our fathers, even to the
    aforementioned court, which is called the Ruin of R. Jehudah the
    Pious (of blessed memory).

    "Blessed be the Lord our God, the God of our fathers, who inspired
    the heart of the ruler of Egypt to restore unto us the possessions
    of our ancestors. Nor did we delay or lose time in the matter, but
    exerted ourselves to rebuild Jerusalem.

    "'We fenced it, and gathered up the stones thereof,' and the sacred
    undertaking prospered in our hands, so that we have completed the
    Medrash, and 'great is the glory of the house;' and also houses
    for the teachers of the law, and for the hospitable reception and
    entertainment of strangers, which were indispensably necessary
    to accommodate the many pious Israelites who visit the Holy City
    during the festivals. And on Rosh Hodesh Shebath last we joyfully
    placed a Sepher Torah in the Medrash, which we consecrated by the
    name of 'Menahem Zion,' for the Lord has vouchsafed to comfort
    His people.

    "But although we have thus, under the blessings of Providence,
    retrieved from devastation a part of the possessions bequeathed
    unto us by our pious ancestors, yet our hearts are afflicted and
    our eyes are dimmed when we behold the sanctuary of our Lord, the
    Synagogue, which still lies in ruins; nor is it in the power of all
    of us (the German Congregation) to rebuild it; for alas! great is
    the number of our poor who stand in need of bread, and the debts
    we contracted in building the Medrash are large, and weigh heavily
    upon us.

    "The cause of our grief is thus ever present to our eyes--the
    ruins of the Synagogue are heaped in the middle of the court, and
    rank weeds spread over the consecrated pile. We therefore deem it
    our bounden duty to dispatch a messenger unto our brethren, the
    children of Israel, who are dispersed and in exile, in order to
    acquaint them with 'the salvation of the Lord in the land,' so that
    they may arise and take pity on Zion, for it is time to show mercy
    unto her.

    "To undertake this laborious duty was the voluntary offer of
    our dearly beloved friend, that profound and renowned Rabbi,
    the zealous and honorable Aaron Selig Ashkenazi. He is a man
    confirmed in the  fear of the Lord, of a faithful stock;
    and him we depute as our messenger, worthy of all trust, to make
    proclamation unto the communities of Israel 'according to the sight
    which he has seen in the Holy Mount,' and to him we have given
    letters of authorization, containing full particulars as to his
    pious mission, and every necessary information relating thereto.

    "Now, therefore, let the righteous behold and rejoice. Let the
    pious exult and triumph in gladness. The day ye have so long hoped
    for is come, and ye see it. The crown of holiness will again adorn
    its former abode. Therefore, arise, and take upon yourselves,
    according to the words of this letter, to devote a portion of your
    wealth as a sacred tribute towards erecting 'the Temple of the Most
    Holy King on the mountain of the Lord'--that ye may have a portion
    and a righteous record in Jerusalem.

    "Let no one among you refuse his aid, but let the poor man
    contribute his mite for himself and his household freely, as the
    rich dispenses the bounty wherewith the Lord hath blessed him. Let
    fathers and their offspring, the aged and the youthful, alike arise
    in mercy to Zion at this propitious season.

    "Let each man encourage his neighbor and say, 'We will be zealous
    and persevering for our people and the City of our God. And for the
    love of Zion, and the sake of Jerusalem, we will not rest nor be
    easy until Jerusalem is praised throughout the earth, and foremost
    in our joys, even as we have vowed:--If I forget thee, Jerusalem,
    let my right hand forget her cunning; if I prefer not Jerusalem
    above my chief joy.'

    "Such are the words of your brethren who address you for the
    glory of God, and for the honor of His land, His people and His
    inheritance--continually praying for our exiled brethren, and
    offering up our orisons on holy ground and particularly near the
    Western Wall, that it may be well with you everlastingly as you
    yourself desire, and we most sincerely wish.

    "Signed at Jerusalem, the 18th day of year 5597 a. m., by the
    Wardens of the Medrash, and members of the Building Committee, on
    behalf of the Congregation of German Jews in this Holy City.

    ["Signed] Hirsh Joseph,

    "David Reuben,

    "Nathan Saddis,

    "Abraham S. Salmons,

    "Mordecai Avigdor,

    "Uriah S. Hyam."

    The undersigned Assessors of the Bethdin, by the direction of
    the  Rev. Chief Rabbi, hereby certify that Rev. Aaron Selig
    Ashkenazi is actually deputed for the purpose mentioned in the
    above circular.

    "London, the 7th Tebath,

    "24 Dec. 5599.

    "Israel Levy,

    "Aaron Levy,

    "A. L. Barnett."

Monday, August 3.--Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith are at Ledbury, Herefordshire.

Tuesday, 4.--Elder Heber C. Kimball left Manchester for Herefordshire, and Joseph Fielding is at Bedford.

Wednesday, 5.

    Extract of a Letter from Wilford Woodruff to the Editor of the
    Millennial Star--Reporting Labors.

    Beloved Brethren:--Since Elder George A. Smith and myself left
    Manchester for the purpose of going to the south of England, we
    have visited the churches which lay in our route, and found them
    universally prospering and receiving additions.

    We preached in Leek on Sunday, July 10th, and Elder Smith baptized
    six persons after meeting: and numbers were also baptized in the
    churches at the Staffordshire Potteries while we were there. We
    passed through West Bromwich and Birmingham, and found numbers
    who were anxiously wishing for some of the Elders to visit that
    region and labor among them. We arrived in Ludbury, Herefordshire,
    July 22nd, and here spent about two weeks in visiting the churches
    through this region, and I am happy to inform you, that we have
    found the Saints universally rejoicing in the truth, and the work
    progressing upon every hand.

    Elder Thomas Richardson has baptized about forty since he came,
    and Elder William Kay about twenty; they are both much blessed in
    their labors. Elder Kington is laboring constantly in this wide
    field, which is under his care; and he with the Elders and Priests
    generally throughout this region are blessed with many souls as
    seals of their ministry. We baptized forty on Sunday last in this
    region, making 250 since the conference. The churches here now
    number about 800 members and appear [to be] in a very prosperous
    state. We are expecting Elder Kimball every hour, and soon after
    his arrival we shall leave the Saints in this region, for the
    purpose of visiting the city of London and warning the inhabitants
    thereof.

    Wilford Woodruff.

Saturday, 8.--Soon after the July conference at Manchester, Elder Parley P. Pratt started for America for the purpose of getting his family and taking them to England, meantime leaving the Star in charge of President Brigham Young, assisted by Elder Willard Richards.

    The Prophet's Letter to John C. Bennett--Bidding Him Welcome to
    Nauvoo, to partake of--its Poverty.

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois,

    August 8th, 1840.

    Dear Sir:--Yours of the 25th ultimo, addressed to Elder Rigdon and
    myself, is received, for which you have our thanks, and to which I
    shall feel great pleasure in replying.

    Although I have not the pleasure of your acquaintance, yet from
    the kindness manifested towards our people when in bondage and
    oppression, and from the frank and noble mindedness breathed in
    your letter, I am brought to the conclusion that you are a friend
    to suffering humanity and truth.

    To those who have suffered so much abuse, and borne the cruelties
    and insults of wicked men so long, on account of those principles
    which we have been instructed to teach to the world, a feeling of
    sympathy and kindness is something like the refreshing breeze and
    cooling stream at the present season of the year, and are, I assure
    you, duly appreciated by us.

    It would afford me much pleasure to see you at this place, and from
    the desire you express in your letter to move to this place, I hope
    I shall soon have that satisfaction.

    I have no doubt you would be of great service to this community
    in practicing your profession, as well as those other abilities
    of which you are in possession. Since to devote your time and
    abilities in the cause of truth and a suffering people may not
    be the means of exalting you in the eyes of this generation, or
    securing you the riches of the world, yet by so doing you may rely
    on the approval of Jehovah, "that blessing which maketh rich and
    addeth no sorrow." Through the tender mercies of our God we have
    escaped the hands of those who sought our overthrow, and have
    secure locations in this state, and in the territory of Iowa. Our
    principal location is at this place, Nauvoo, (formerly Commerce),
    which is beautifully situated on the banks of the Mississippi,
    immediately above the lower rapids, and is probably the best and
    most beautiful site for a city on the river. It has a gradual
    ascent from the river nearly a mile, then a fine, level, and
    fertile prairie--a situation in  every respect adapted to
    commercial and agricultural pursuits, but like all other places on
    the river, is sickly in summer.

    The number of inhabitants is nearly three thousand, and is fast
    increasing. If we are suffered to remain, [9] there is every
    prospect of its becoming one of the largest cities on the river, if
    not in the western world. Numbers have moved in from the seaboard,
    and a few from the islands of the sea (Great Britain).

    It is our intention to commence the erection of some public
    buildings next spring. We have purchased twenty thousand acres in
    the Iowa Territory opposite this place, which is fast filling up
    with our people. I desire all the Saints, as well as all lovers
    of truth and correct principles, to come to this place as fast as
    possible, or [as rapidly as] their circumstances will permit, and
    endeavor, by energy of action and concentration of talent, &c.,
    &c., to effect those objects, that are so dear to us. Therefore my
    general invitation is, Let all that will, come, and partake of the
    poverty of Nauvoo freely.

    I should be disposed to give you a special invitation to come
    as early as possible, believing you will be of great service
    to us; however, you must make arrangements according to your
    circumstances. Were it possible for you to come here this season
    to suffer affliction with the people of God, no one will be more
    pleased to give you a more cordial welcome than myself.

    A charter has been obtained from the legislature for a railroad
    from Warsaw, being immediately below the rapids of the Mississippi,
    to this place--a distance of about twenty miles, which if carried
    into operation will be of incalculable advantage to this place, as
    steamboats can only ascend the rapids at a high stage of water. The
    soil is good, and I think not inferior to any in the state. Crops
    are abundant in this section of country--and I think provisions
    will be reasonable.

    I should be very happy could I make arrangements to meet you in
    Springfield at the time you mention--but cannot promise myself that
    pleasure. If I should not, probably you can make it convenient to
    come and pay us a visit here, prior to your removal.

    Elder Rigdon is very sick, and has been for nearly twelve months
    with the fever and ague, which disease is very prevalent here at
    this time. At present he is not able to leave his room.

    Yours, &c.,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

    To J. C. Bennett, M. D.

    P. S.--Yours of the 30th is just received, in which I am glad to
    learn that your increasing desire to unite yourself with a people
    "that are  everywhere spoken against," and the anxiety you
    feel for our welfare--for which you have my best feelings; and I
    pray that my heavenly Father will pour out His choicest blessings
    in this world, and enable you by His grace to overcome the evils
    which are in the world, that you may secure a blissful immortality
    in the world that is to come.

    J. S., Jun.

August 10.--Colonel Seymour Brunson, aged forty years, ten months and twenty-three days, died at Nauvoo. Colonel Brunson was among the first settlers of this place. He has always been a lively stone in the building of God and was much respected by his friends and acquaintances. He died in the triumph of faith, and in his dying moments bore testimony to the Gospel that he had embraced.

Saturday, 15.

    Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Announcing
    that he will soon be in Nauvoo.

    Wayne County Illinois, August 15, 1840.

    Reverends Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon.

    Respected Friends:--I have written you several communications to
    Commerce and Nauvoo, supposing they were different places, but a
    brother to a lady in your community, now in this place, informs me
    that they are one and the same.

    I have received no reply to my letters, and attribute the delay
    to a press of business or professional absence. I have come to
    the conclusion to join your people immediately, and take up my
    abode with you. Let us adopt as our motto--Licut partribus sit
    Deus nobius--(as God was with our fathers, so may He be with
    us), and adapt the means to the end, and the victory is ours. The
    winged warrior of the air will not cease to be our proud emblem of
    liberty, and the dogs of war will be forever chained.

    I shall be with you in about two weeks, and shall devote my time
    and energies to the advancement of the cause of truth and virtue,
    and the advocacy of the holy religion which you have so nobly
    defended, and so honorably sustained.

    My love to all the brethren.

    With sentiments of fraternal regard.

    Yours respectfully,

    J. C. Bennett.

Footnotes:

1. Formerly a town in Kent and Surrey, England, on the Thames, noted for its dock yards, now part of London.

2. Lorenzo Snow was born April 30, 1814, in Mantua, Portage county, Ohio. He was the eldest son of Oliver Snow and Rosetta L. Pettibone. The early years of his life were spent upon his father's farm. Later he entered Oberlin College, a Presbyterian institution, in the town of Oberlin, in Lorain county, Ohio, about sixty miles southwest of Kirtland. In June, 1836, he visited Kirtland and attended the Hebrew classes, then being taught in the Temple. While in Kirtland he became a convert to the faith of the Latter-day Saints and was baptized by Elder John Boynton, one of the Twelve Apostles. The following year he did some missionary work among his relatives and friends in Ohio, and in 1836, with his parents, who in the meantime joined the Church, he moved to Missouri, and shortly afterwards went upon a preaching mission through the states of Kentucky and Illinois. A few days before starting upon this mission mentioned in the text, namely, 17th of July, 1840, he was ordained a seventy by President Joseph Young, and the day following was made a High Priest under the hands of Don Carlos Smith. The testimony which this man received of the truth of the Gospel is very interesting, and seems to have remained with him throughout his long life, in all the freshness of its first impression upon him. Having received the usual promise of a testimony of the truth of the work if he obeyed the Gospel, he sought that testimony most earnestly in prayer with the following result as stated by himself:

"I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray than I heard a sound just above my head like the rushing of silken robes; and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, filling me from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and oh, the joyful happiness I felt! No language can describe the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of spiritual darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that time imparted to my understanding. I received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the son of God, and of the restoration of the Holy Priesthood, and the fullness of the Gospel. It was a complete baptism--a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or element, the Holy Ghost; and even more physical in its effects upon every part of my system than the immersion by water."

3. When the great offense of Elder William W. Phelps is taken into account--amounting as it did to a betrayal of the Prophet and the Church in Missouri, during the troubles of the Saints in that state--this letter is remarkable. The Prophet's frank forgiveness of his erring brother, gently chiding his wrong-doing, but at the same time remembering in a large way that brother's former devotion and labors; the Prophet's willingness to have the prodigal return and occupy his former high standing among the Saints--all this exhibits a broad-mindedness and generosity that can come only from a great soul, influenced by the spirit of charity enjoined upon his disciples by the teachings of the Son of God. One of the surest evidences of Joseph Smith's greatness of mind and of the inspiration of God upon him is to be seen in his treatment of those who had fallen but were willing to and did repent of their sins. His capacity to forgive under these circumstances seemed boundless.

4. The article which appeared first in a periodical, entitled "Memorial Concerning God's Ancient People of Israel," and then in the London Times, seems to have been written by a Christian Jew. It deals largely with the promises of God to ancient Israel, especially as to their return as a people to Palestine. The closing paragraph is an appeal to the Protestant powers of the north of Europe and America to assist in this restoration: "As the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia, was stirred up to build the Lord a temple, which was in Jerusalem (2 Chron., xxxvi:22, 23), who is there among you, high and mighty ones of all the nations, to find the good pleasure of the holy will of the Lord of heaven, saying to Jerusalem, 'Thou shalt be built,' and to the temple, 'Thy foundation shall be laid?' (Isa. xliv:28). The Lord God of Israel be with such. Great grace, mercy and peace shall descend upon the people who offer themselves willingly; and the free offerings of their hearts and hands shall be those of a sweet smelling savor unto him who hath said, 'I will bless thee (Gen. xii:3), and contend with him that contendeth with thee.'" (Isa. xlix:25).

5. "This was a Dr. John C. Bennett, a man who seems to have been without any moral character, but who had filled positions of importance. Born in Massachusetts in 1804, he practiced as a physician in Ohio, and later in Illinois, holding a professorship in Willoughby University, Ohio, and taking with him to Illinois testimonials as to his professional skill. In the latter state he showed a taste for military affairs, and after being elected brigadier-general of the Invincible Dragoons, he was appointed quartermaster-general of the state in 1840, and held that position at the state capital when the Mormons applied to the legislature for a charter for Nauvoo." ("The Story of the Mormons," Linn, 1901).

6. Translation: In essentials, unity; in non-essentials, liberty; in all things, charity.

7. Gently in the manner, firmly in the act.

8. Elder John Taylor was accompanied on this mission by Brothers McGuffie and William Black. Elder Taylor had baptized Brother McGuffie while laboring in Liverpool; and as the new convert had some acquaintances in Newry, county Down, Ireland, he thought it advisable to take him along. A large company of saints went with them to see them off. The day after sailing, Elder Taylor and companions arrived in Newry, a beautiful Irish village nestling among rolling hills, characteristic of that part of Ireland. Brother McGuffie obtained the court house to hold a meeting in, and sent around the bell-man to give notice of it. A congregation of six or seven hundred gathered in at seven o'clock in the evening, and Elder Taylor preached to them. This was the introduction of the Gospel into Ireland.

9. "If we are suffered to remain" sounds somewhat prophetic and ominous.

Chapter X.

A Missouri Kidnapping--Continued Development of the Work in Great Britain--The Death of Joseph Smith, Sen., First Patriarch of the Church.

[Sidenote: Settlement of a Difficulty.]

Monday, 17.--Met with the High Council of Nauvoo at my office, also the High Council of Iowa. John Batten preferred many charges against Elijah Fordham. After the testimony, and the councillors had spoken, I addressed the Council at some length, showing the situation of the contending parties, that there was in reality no cause of difference; that they had better be reconciled without an action, or vote of the Council, and henceforth live as brethren, and never more mention their former difficulties. They settled accordingly.

Tuesday, 18.--Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and George A. Smith left Cheltenham for London, one hundred and ten miles, where they arrived in seven and a half hours, at William Allgood's, No. 19 King Street, Borough, and were kindly received by Mrs. Allgood, who took them to the King's Arms Inn.

Great distress is prevailing in Ireland; no work, and provisions very scarce.

The truth is spreading rapidly in England and Scotland.

Friday, 21--Testimony of Benjamin Boyce:

    The Kidnapping of Benjamin Boyce, Mr. Brown, et al.

    I left my home in Nauvoo to go to Adams county, where I had lived
    the summer before, for the purpose of meeting some debts. I fell in
    company with a Mr. Brown, who stated to me that he was in search
    of some horses that had strayed from him. We had not proceeded
    far  together, before we were hailed by twelve armed men,
    who demanded of us where we were going. I stated to them where I
    was going, and likewise Mr. Brown stated his business. They then
    asked if we were "Mormons;" we said we were; they then said that
    we could go no further; they said they were sworn to kill all the
    damned "Mormons" that they could find, and took us prisoners, tied
    us with ropes, and took us to a boat, and four of the company (one
    by the name of Martin, the others not known) took us to Missouri,
    to a little town called Tully, where we were put under guard, and
    kept till 11 o'clock in the evening, when three men came to us
    with a long rope, and tied it round each of our necks. I asked
    them what they were going to do with us; one said they were going
    to take us to the river, kill us, and make catfish bait of us, his
    name was Uno. They then led us to the woods, I should think about
    three-quarters of a mile distant; they then parted us, took and
    stripped me naked, and tied me fast to a tree; one of the company
    cocked a pistol and placed it close to my ear, and swore, if I
    attempted to get away, that he would blow out my brains. They
    then commenced to whip me with large gads which they had for the
    purpose, and literally mangled me from my shoulders to my knees.

    There were in the company, as near as I could recollect, twelve
    or fourteen: they were stripped of their hats and coats, with
    their sleeves rolled up, and collars open, which made them look
    like murderers and robbers. The names, as far as I can recollect,
    Monday, Uno, and Martin; the others I do not recollect. After
    keeping me tied in this condition I should think an hour and
    a half, they then brought Mr. Brown to me, and after some
    consultation, loosed me from the tree where I was tied, and led
    us back to the town, put us in a room where I saw Noah Rogers and
    James Allred. They then tied them about the neck, and led them out,
    and in the course of the night, they brought them back to the room
    where we were.

    Brother Rogers said they stripped him, and whipped him very badly.
    This was on the seventh of July. The next day Rogers and myself
    were taken before a magistrate; nothing proven against us, only
    that we were "Mormons:" and we were ordered to prison. Brown and
    Allred, by some means, were liberated, but we (Rogers and myself)
    were put in jail and put in irons until the 21st of August, when
    through the kindness of God we made our escape and returned to
    Nauvoo.

    Benjamin Boyce.

Sunday, 23.--Ten persons who had been baptized were confirmed at Carpenter's Hall, Manchester. [1]

Saturday, 29--Elder Kimball writes: "The brethren are beginning to excite attention in some of the public grounds in London." Out-door preaching is common in England.

Sunday, 30.--Twenty were confirmed at the hall in Manchester. [2]

[Sidenote: The Beginning of Open Air Meetings.]

Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and George A. Smith, after having spent ten days visiting the clergymen and preachers and others of the several denominations, asking the privilege of preaching in their chapels, and being continually refused by them in a contemptuous manner, they determined to preach in the open air, Jonah-like; and accordingly went to Smithfield Market [3] (to the spot where John Rogers [4] was burnt at the stake), for the purpose of preaching at 10 a. m.,  where they were notified by the police, that the Lord Mayor had issued orders prohibiting street preaching in the city. A Mr. Connor stepped up and said, "I will show you a place outside of his jurisdiction," and guided them to "Tabernacle Square," where they found an assembly of about 400 people listening to a preacher who was standing on a chair. When he got through another preacher arose to speak. Elder Kimball stated to the first clergyman, "There is a man present from America who would like to preach;" which was granted; when Elder George A. Smith delivered a discourse of about twenty minutes, on the first principles of the Gospel, taking for his text, Mark xvi: 16; after which Elder Kimball asked the preacher to give out another appointment at the same place for the American Elder to preach; when he jumped up and said, "I have just learned that the gentleman who has addressed you is a Latter-day Saint; I know them--they are a very bad people; they have split up many churches, and have done a great deal of hurt." He spoke all manner of evil, and gave the Latter-day Saints a very bad character, and commanded the people not to hear the Elders, "as we have got the Gospel, and can save the people, without infidelity, socialism, or Latter-day Saints."

Elder Kimball asked the privilege of standing on the chair to give out an appointment himself. The preacher said, "You shall not do it; you have no right to preach here;" jerked the chair away from him, and ran away with it. Several of the crowd said, "You have as much right to preach here as he has, and give out your appointment;" whereupon Elder Kimball gave out an  appointment for 3 o'clock p. m.; at which time a large congregation was gathered.

After opening the meeting by singing and prayer, Elder Woodruff spoke about thirty minutes, from Gal. i: 8, 9, upon the first principles of the Gospel. Elder Kimball followed upon the same subjects. The people gave good attention, and seemed much interested in what they had heard. The inhabitants who lived around the square opened their windows to four stories high; the most of them were crowded with anxious listeners, which is an uncommon occurrence. The meeting was dismissed in the midst of good feeling.

Mr. Henry Connor invited the Elders to his house. Soon after they arrived here, Elder Kimball felt impressed to return to the place of preaching. When he got there he found a large company talking about the things which they had heard in the afternoon, and they wished him to speak to them again. He did so, when several persons invited him home with them. While Elder Kimball was preaching, several persons came to Brothers Woodruff and Smith to converse on doctrine, when Mr. Connor offered himself for baptism.

Monday, 31.--Elder Kimball baptized Henry Connor, watchmaker, 52 Ironmonger's Row, London, in Peerless Pool, being the first baptized in that place, and confirmed him the same evening.

[Sidenote: The Electric Telegraph.]

The electric telegraph is beginning to be used on the Great Western Railroad in England, between Drayton and Paddington, by which intelligence is communicated at the rate of two hundred thousand miles per second.

    An Address by the First Presidency to the Church.

    To the Saints Scattered Abroad:

    Beloved Brethren:--We address a few lines to the members of the
    Church of Jesus Christ, who have obeyed from the heart that form of
    doctrine which has been delivered to them by the servants of the
    Lord,  and who are desirous to go forward in the ways of truth
    and righteousness, and by obedience to the heavenly command, escape
    the things which are coming on the earth, and secure to themselves
    an inheritance among the sanctified in the world to come.

    Having been placed in a very responsible station in the Church, we
    at all times feel interested in the welfare of the Saints, and make
    mention of them continually in our prayers to our heavenly Father,
    that they may be kept from the evils which are in the world, and
    ever be found walking in the path of truth.

    The work of the Lord in these last days, is one of vast magnitude
    and almost beyond the comprehension of mortals. Its glories are
    past description, and its grandeur unsurpassable. It is the theme
    which has animated the bosom of prophets and righteous men from the
    creation of the world down through every succeeding generation to
    the present time; and it is truly the dispensation of the fullness
    of times, when all things which are in Christ Jesus, whether in
    heaven or on the earth, shall be gathered together in Him, and
    when all things shall be restored, as spoken of by all the holy
    prophets since the world began; for in it will take place the
    glorious fulfilment of the promises made to the fathers, while
    the manifestations of the power of the Most High will be great,
    glorious, and sublime.

    The purposes of our God are great, His love unfathomable, His
    wisdom infinite, and His power unlimited; therefore, the Saints
    have cause to rejoice and be glad, knowing that "this God is our
    God forever and ever, and He will be our Guide until death." Having
    confidence in the power, wisdom, and love of God, the Saints have
    been enabled to go forward through the most adverse circumstances,
    and frequently, when to all human appearances, nothing but death
    presented itself, and destruction inevitable, has the power of God
    been manifest, His glory revealed, and deliverance effected; and
    the Saints, like the children of Israel, who came out of the land
    of Egypt, and through the Red Sea, have sung an anthem of praise
    to his holy name. This has not only been the case in former days,
    but in our days, and within a few months, have we seen this fully
    verified.

    Having through the kindness of our God been delivered from
    destruction, and having secured a location upon which we have
    again commenced operations for the good of His people, we feel
    disposed to go forward and unite our energies for the upbuilding
    of the Kingdom, and establishing the Priesthood in their fullness
    and glory. The work which has to be accomplished in the last days
    is one of vast importance, and will call into action the energy,
    skill, talent, and ability of the Saints, so that it may roll forth
    with that glory and majesty described by the prophet; and will
    consequently require the  concentration of the Saints, to
    accomplish works of such magnitude and grandeur.

    The work of the gathering spoken of in the Scriptures will be
    necessary to bring about the glories of the last dispensation. It
    is probably unnecessary to press this subject on the Saints, as we
    believe the spirit of it is manifest, and its necessity obvious to
    every considerate mind; and everyone zealous for the promotion of
    truth and righteousness, is equally so for the gathering of the
    Saints.

    Dear brethren, feeling desirous to carry out the purposes of God
    to which work we have been called; and to be co-workers with
    Him in this last dispensation; we feel the necessity of having
    the hearty cooperation of the Saints throughout this land, and
    upon the islands of the sea. It will be necessary for the Saints
    to hearken to counsel and turn their attention to the Church,
    the establishment of the Kingdom, and lay aside every selfish
    principle, everything low and groveling; and stand forward in the
    cause of truth, and assist to the utmost of their power, those to
    whom has been given the pattern and design. Like those who held up
    the hands of Moses, so let us hold up the hands of those who are
    appointed to direct the affairs of the Kingdom, so that they may be
    strengthened, and be enabled to prosecute their great designs, and
    be instrumental in effecting the great work of the last days.

    Believing the time has now come, when it is necessary to erect
    a house of prayer, a house of order, a house for the worship of
    our God, where the ordinances can be attended to agreeably to
    His divine will, in this region of country--to accomplish which,
    considerable exertion must be made, and means will be required--and
    as the work must be hastened in righteousness, it behooves the
    Saints to weigh the importance of these things, in their minds,
    in all their bearings, and then take such steps as are necessary
    to carry them into operation; and arming themselves with courage,
    resolve to do all they can, and feel themselves as much interested
    as though the whole labor depended on themselves alone. By so doing
    they will emulate the glorious deeds of the fathers, and secure
    the blessings of heaven upon themselves and their posterity to the
    latest generation.

    To those who feel thus interested, and can assist in this great
    work, we say, let them come to this place; by so doing they will
    not only assist in the rolling on of the Kingdom, but be in a
    situation where they can have the advantages of instruction from
    the Presidency and other authorities of the Church, and rise higher
    and higher in the scale of intelligence until they can "comprehend
    with all Saints what is the breadth and length, and depth and
    height; and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge."

     Connected with the building up of the Kingdom, is the
    printing and circulation of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and
    Covenants, hymnbook, and the new translation of the Scriptures. It
    is unnecessary to say anything respecting these works; those who
    have read them, and who have drunk of the stream of knowledge which
    they convey, know how to appreciate them; and although fools may
    have them in derision, yet they are calculated to make men wise
    unto salvation, and sweep away the cobwebs of superstition of ages,
    throw a light on the proceedings of Jehovah which have already
    been accomplished, and mark out the future in all its dreadful and
    glorious realities. Those who have tasted the benefit derived from
    a study of these works, will undoubtedly vie with each other in
    their zeal for sending them abroad throughout the world, that every
    son of Adam may enjoy the same privileges, and rejoice in the same
    truths.

    Here, then, beloved brethren, is a work to engage in worthy of
    archangels--a work which will cast into the shade the things which
    have been heretofore accomplished; a work which kings and prophets
    and righteous men in former ages have sought, expected, and
    earnestly desired to see, but died without the sight; and well will
    it be for those who shall aid in carrying into effect the mighty
    operations of Jehovah.

    By order of the First Presidency,

    Robert B. Thompson, Scribe.

Saturday, September 5.--Elders Young and Richards went from Manchester to Liverpool, and in the evening organized a company of Saints bound for New York, by choosing Elder Theodore Turley to preside, with six counselors.

    Minutes of the High Council Meeting, at the Office of Joseph
    Smith, Jun., Nauvoo, September 5th, 1840.

    Joseph Smith, Jun., preferred charges against Elder Almon W.
    Babbitt, predicated on the authority of two letters, one from
    Thomas Burdick, the other from Oliver Granger and Levi Richards,
    accusing Elder Babbitt as follows:

    First. For stating that Joseph Smith, Jun., had extravagantly
    purchased three suits of clothes while he was at Washington City,
    and that Sidney Rigdon had purchased four suits while at the same
    place besides dresses in profusion for their families.

    Second. For having stated that Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon
    and Elias Higbee had said that they were worth one hundred thousand
    dollars each, while they were at Washington, and that Joseph Smith,
     Jun., had repeated the same statement while in Philadelphia,
    and for saying that Oliver Granger had stated that he also was
    worth as much as they (that is, one hundred thousand dollars).

    Third. For holding secret councils in the Lord's House, in
    Kirtland, and for locking the doors of the house, for the purpose
    of prohibiting certain brethren in good standing in the Church,
    from being in the Council, thereby depriving them of the use of the
    house.

    Two were appointed to speak on the case, namely, Thomas Grover,
    Austin Cowles.

    Council adjourned till the 6th September, at 2 o'clock, when
    Council met according to adjournment, the evidences were all heard
    on the case pending, and the councilors closed on both sides. The
    parties spoke at length, after which, Joseph Smith withdrew the
    charge, and both parties were reconciled to each other, things
    being adjusted to their satisfaction.

Sunday 6.--Elder Young preached.

Monday 7.--This evening, Elders Kimball, Woodruff and George A. Smith, preached in the south Temperance Hall, London.

On Monday night, Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards, stayed on board the North America with the Saints, and on Tuesday morning, about nine o'clock, the vessel went out with a steamer. The Elders accompanied them fifteen or twenty miles, and left them in good spirits. Elder Richards returned to Manchester the same evening and Elder Young on the 10th.

[Sidenote: The Generosity of John Benbow.]

Elder John Benbow, who had previously furnished two hundred and fifty pounds towards printing the hymn book, Book of Mormon, etc., relinquished all claim to said money, except such assistance as his friends, who might wish to emigrate to America the next season, might need, leaving the remainder to the disposal of Brigham Young, Willard Richards, and Wilford Woodruff, who borrowed said moneys for the benefit of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, forever, also the avails of the Gadfield Elm Chapel, when sold.

Wednesday, 9.--There was a terrific storm on the North of Scotland.

[Sidenote: Earthquake at Mount Ararat.]

Friday, 11.--There was a terrible earthquake at Mount Ararat, which destroyed the town of Makitchevan, damaged all the buildings at Erivan, and devastated the two districts of Sharour and Sourmate in Armenia. A considerable mass was loosened from Mount Ararat and destroyed everything in its way for nearly five miles. The village of Akhouli was buried, with one thousand inhabitants.

Sunday, 13.--Elder Kimball baptized four in London.

[Sidenote: The Death of Joseph, Sen.]

Monday, 14.--My father, Joseph Smith, Sen., Patriarch of the whole Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, died at Nauvoo.

    Biography of Joseph Smith, Sen., Presiding Patriarch of the
    Church, by the Prophet Joseph, his Son.

    Joseph Smith, Sen., was born on the 12th day of July, 1771, in
    Topsfield, Essex county, Massachusetts; he was the second of the
    seven sons of Asahel and Mary Smith. Asahel was born in Topsfield,
    March 7th, 1744. He was the youngest son of Samuel and Priscilla
    Smith. Samuel was born January 26th, 1714, in Topsfield; he was
    the eldest son of Samuel and Rebecca Smith. Samuel was born in
    Topsfield, January 20, 1666, and was the son of Robert and Mary
    Smith, who emigrated from Old England.

    My father removed with his father to Tunbridge, Orange county,
    Vermont, in 1791, and assisted in clearing a large farm of a heavy
    growth of timber. He married Lucy, daughter of Solomon and Lydia
    Mack on the 14th of January, 1796, by whom he had

    Alvin Smith, born February 11th, 1798, died November 19th, 1824.

    Hyrum, born February 9th, 1800.

    Sophronia, born May 16th, 1803.

    Joseph, born December 23rd, 1805.

    Samuel Harrison, born March 13th, 1808.

    Ephraim, born March 13th, 1810, died March 24th, 1810.

    William, born March 13th, 1811.

    Catherine, born July 28th, 1812.

    Don Carlos, born March 25th, 1816.

    Lucy, born July 18th, 1824.

    At his marriage he owned a handsome farm in Tunbridge. In 1802,
     he rented it and engaged in mercantile business, and soon
    after embarked in a venture of [raising] ginseng [5] to send
    to China, and was swindled out of the entire proceeds by the
    shipmaster and agent, he was consequently obliged to sell his farm
    and all of his effects to pay his debts.

    About the year 1816 he removed to Palmyra, Wayne county, New York,
    bought a farm and cleared two hundred acres, which he lost in
    consequence of not being able to pay the last installment of the
    purchase money at the time it was due. This was the case with a
    great number of farmers in New York, who had cleared land under
    similar contracts. He afterwards moved to Manchester, Ontario
    county, New York, procured a comfortable home with sixteen acres of
    land, where he lived until he removed to Kirtland, Ohio.

    He was the first person who received my testimony after I had seen
    the angel, and exhorted me to be faithful and diligent to the
    message I had received. [6] He was baptized April 6th, 1830.

    In August, 1830, in company with my brother Don Carlos, he took a
    mission to St. Lawrence county, New York, touching on his route at
    several of the Canadian ports, where he distributed a few copies
    of the Book of Mormon. He also visited his father, brothers and
    sister residing in St. Lawrence county, bore testimony to the truth
    which resulted eventually in all the family coming into the Church,
    excepting his brother Jesse and sister Susan.

    He removed with his family to Kirtland in 1831; was ordained
    Patriarch and President of the High Priesthood [in Kirtland] [7]
    under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G.
    Williams and myself, on the 18th of December, 1833; was a member of
    the First High Council, organized on the 17th of February, 1834,
    (when he conferred on me and my brother Samuel H., a father's
    blessing).

     In 1836 he traveled in company with his brother John two
    thousand four hundred miles in Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania,
    Vermont, and New Hampshire, visiting the branches of the Church in
    those states and bestowing patriarchal blessings on several hundred
    persons, preaching the Gospel to all who would hear, and baptizing
    many. They returned to Kirtland on the 2nd of October, 1836.

    During the persecutions in Kirtland in 1837, he was made a
    prisoner, but fortunately obtained his liberty, and after a very
    tedious journey in the spring and summer of 1838, he arrived at Far
    West, Missouri. After I and my brother Hyrum were thrown into the
    Missouri jails by the mob, he fled from under the exterminating
    order of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, and made his escape in
    midwinter to Quincy, Illinois, from whence he removed to Commerce
    in the spring of 1839.

    The exposures he suffered brought on consumption, of which he died
    on this 14th day of September, 1840, aged sixty-nine years, two
    months, and two days. He was six feet, two inches high, was very
    straight, and remarkably well proportioned. His ordinary weight was
    about two hundred pounds, and he was very strong and active. In
    his younger days he was famed as a wrestler, and, Jacob like, he
    never wrestled with but one man whom he could not throw. He was one
    of the most benevolent of men; opening his house to all who were
    destitute. While at Quincy, Illinois, he fed hundreds of the poor
    Saints who were flying from the Missouri persecutions, although he
    had arrived there penniless himself.

Tuesday, 15.--The funeral of Joseph Smith, Sen., took place this day, when the following address was delivered by Elder Robert B. Thompson:

    The Discourse of Elder Thompson at the Funeral of Joseph Smith,
    Sen.

    The occasion which has brought us together this day, is one of no
     ordinary importance: for not only has a single family to
    mourn and sorrow on account of the death of the individual, whose
    funeral obsequies we this day celebrate; but a whole society; yes,
    thousands will this day have to say, a Father in Israel is gone.

    The man whom we have been accustomed to look up to as a
    Patriarch, a Father, and a Counselor is no more an inhabitant
    of mortality: he has dropped his clay tenement, bid adieu to
    terrestrial scenes, and his spirit now free and unencumbered, roams
    and expatiates in that world where the spirits of just men made
    perfect dwell, and where pain and sickness, tribulation and death
    cannot come.

    The friends we have lost prior to our late venerable and lamented
    Father, were such as rendered life sweet, and in whose society we
    took great pleasure, and who shed a lustre in the several walks
    of life in which they moved, and to whom we feel endeared by
    friendship's sacred ties. Their virtues and kindnesses will long be
    remembered by the sorrowing widow, the disconsolate husband, the
    weeping children, the almost distracted and heart-broken parent,
    and by a large circle of acquaintances and friends. These, like
    the stars in yonder firmament, shone in their several spheres, and
    filled that station to which they had been called by the providence
    of God, with honor to themselves and to the Church; and we feel to
    mingle our tears with their surviving relatives.

    But on this occasion we realize that we have suffered more than an
    ordinary bereavement, and consequently we feel the more interested.
    If ever there was a man who had claims on the affections of the
    community, it was our beloved but now deceased Patriarch. If ever
    there was an event calculated to raise the feelings of sorrow in
    the human breast, and cause us to drop the sympathetic tear, it
    certainly is the present; for truly we can say with the king of
    Israel, "A prince and a great man has fallen in Israel." A man
    endeared to us by every feeling calculated to entwine around and
    adhere to the human heart, by almost indissoluble bonds. A man
    faithful to his God and to the Church in every situation and under
    all circumstances through which he was called to pass.

    Whether in prosperity, surrounded by the comforts of life, a
    smiling progeny, and all the enjoyments of a domestic circle; or
    when called upon, like the Patriarchs of old, to leave the land
    of his nativity, to journey in strange lands, and become subject
    to all the trials and persecutions that have been heaped upon
    the Saints with a liberal hand, by characters destitute of every
    principle of morality or religion, alike regardless of the tender
    offspring and the aged sire, whose silvery locks and furrowed
    cheeks ought to have been a sufficient shield from their cruelty;
    still, like the Apostle Paul he could exclaim, (and his life
    and conduct have fully borne out the sentiment) "None of these
    things move me; neither count I my life dear, so that I may finish
    my course with joy."

    The principles of the Gospel were too well established in that
    breast, and had got too sure a footing there, ever to be torn down,
    or prostrated by the fierce winds of persecution, the blasts of
    poverty, or the swollen waves of distress and tribulation. No;
    thank God, his house was built upon a rock--consequently it stood
    amid the contending elements, firm and unshaken.

    The life of our departed father has indeed been an eventful one,
    having to take a conspicuous part in the great work of the last
    days; being designated by the ancient prophets who once dwelt on
    this continent, as the father of him whom the Lord had promised
    to raise up in the last days, to lead His people Israel; and by
    a uniform consistent, and a virtuous course, for a long series
    of years, he has proved himself worthy of such a son, and such a
    family by whom he had the happiness of being surrounded in his
    dying moments; most of whom had the satisfaction of receiving his
    dying benediction.

    He was already in the wane of life, when the light of truth broke
    in upon the world, and with pleasure he hailed its benign and
    enlightening rays, and was chosen by the Almighty to be one of the
    witnesses to the Book of Mormon. From that time, his only aim was
    the promotion of truth--his soul was taken up with the things of
    the Kingdom; his bowels yearned over the children of men; and it
    was more than his meat and his drink to do the will of his Father,
    who is in heaven.

    By unceasing industry of himself and family, he had secured a
    home in the state of New York, where he no doubt expected, with
    every honest industrious citizen, to enjoy the blessings of peace
    and liberty. But when the principles of truth were introduced and
    the Gospel of Jesus Christ was promulgated by himself and family,
    friends forsook, enemies raged, and persecution was resorted to by
    wicked and ungodly men, insomuch that he was obliged to flee from
    that place, and seek a home in a more hospitable land.

    In Ohio he met with many kind and generous friends, and was kindly
    welcomed by the Saints; many of whom continue to this day, and can
    call to mind the various scenes which there transpired; many of
    which were of such a nature as not to be easily obliterated.

    While the House of the Lord was building he took great interest in
    its erection, and daily watched its progress, and had the pleasure
    of taking a part at the opening, and seeing it crowded by hundreds
    of pious worshipers. As the King of Israel longed for and desired
    to see the completion of the House of the Lord, so did he; and
    with him he could exclaim, "O Lord, I love the habitation of thine
    house, and the  place where thine honor dwelleth." To dwell
    in the house of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple, was his
    daily delight; and in it he enjoyed many blessings, and spent many
    hours in sweet communion with his heavenly Father. He has trod its
    sacred aisles, solitary and alone from mankind, long before the
    king of day has gilded the eastern horizon; and he has uttered his
    aspirations within its walls, when nature has been asleep. In its
    holy enclosures have the visions of heaven been opened to his mind,
    and his soul has feasted on the riches of eternity; and there under
    his teachings have the meek and humble been instructed, while the
    widow and the orphan have received his patriarchal blessings.

    There he saw the work spreading far and wide; saw the Elders of
    Israel go forth under his blessing--bore them up by the prayer of
    faith, and hailed them welcome when they again returned bringing
    their sheaves with them. There with his aged partner, he spent many
    happy days in the bosom of his family, whom he loved with all the
    tenderness of parental affection.

    Here I might enlarge, and expatiate on the "scenes of joy and
    scenes of gladness" which were enjoyed by our beloved Patriarch,
    but I shall pass on to an event which was truly painful and trying.

    The delightful scene soon vanished; the calm was soon succeeded by
    a storm and the frail bark was driven by the tempest and foaming
    ocean, for many who had once been proud to acknowledge him a
    father and a friend, and who sought counsel at his hands, joined
    with the enemies of truth, and sought his destruction; and would
    have rejoiced to see his aged and venerable form immured in a
    dungeon; but, thank God, this they were not suffered to do; he
    providentially made his escape, and after evading his enemies for
    some time, he undertook and accomplished a journey of a thousand
    miles, and bore up under the fatigue and suffering necessarily
    attendant on such a journey with patient resignation. After a
    journey of several weeks, he arrived in safety at Far West, in the
    bosom of the Church, and was cordially welcomed by the Saints, who
    had found an asylum in the rich and fertile county of Caldwell.

    There he, in common with the rest of the Saints, hoped to enjoy the
    privileges and blessings of peace. There, from the fertile soil and
    flowery meads, which well repaid the labor of the husbandman, and
    poured forth abundance for the support of the numerous herds which
    decked those lovely and wide-spread prairies, he hoped to enjoy
    uninterrupted, the comforts of domestic life.

    But he had not long indulged these pleasing anticipations before
    the delightful prospect again vanished: the cup of blessing which
    he began again to enjoy, was dashed from his aged lips; and the cup
    of sorrow filled to overflowing, was given him instead; and surely
    he drank it to the  very dregs; for not only did he see the
    Saints in bondage, treated with cruelty, and some of them murdered;
    but the kind and affectionate parent saw--and ah! how painful
    was the sight--two of his sons to whom he looked for protection,
    torn away from their domestic circles, from their weeping and
    distracted families, by monsters in the shape of men, who swore and
    threatened to kill them, and who had every disposition to imbrue
    their hands in their blood. This circumstance was too much for
    his agitated and now sinking frame to bear up under; and although
    his confidence in his God was great, and his conduct was that of
    a Christian and a Saint, yet he felt like a man and a parent. At
    that time his constitution received a shock from which it never
    recovered. Ah! yes there were feelings agitated in the bosom of
    our deceased friend at that time of no ordinary kind; feelings of
    painful anxiety, and emotion too great for his earthly tabernacle
    to contain without suffering a great and a sensible injury; and
    which from that time began to manifest itself.

    It would be unnecessary to trace him and his aged partner (who
    shared in all his sorrows and afflictions) from such a scene, as
    many of the Saints are knowing to the privations and sufferings
    which they, in common with the Church, endured while moving from
    that land of oppression; suffice it to say, he arrived in safety in
    Illinois, broken down in constitution and in health, and since then
    he has labored under severe afflictions and pain, while disease has
    been slowly but surely undermining his system.

    Whenever he had a short respite from pain, he felt a pleasure in
    attending to his patriarchal duties, and with cheerfullness he
    performed them; and frequently his labors have been more than his
    strength would admit of; but having great zeal for the cause of
    truth, he felt willing to be spent in the service of his God.

    For some time past he has been confined to his bed, and the time of
    is departure was near at hand. On Saturday evening last, a rupture
    of a blood vessel took place, when he vomited a large quantity
    of blood. His family were summoned to his bedside, it being now
    evident that he could not long survive.

    On Sunday he called his children and grandchildren around him,
    and like the ancient patriarchs gave them his final benediction.
    Although his strength was far gone, and he was obliged to rest at
    intervals, yet his mind was clear, perfectly collected, and calm
    as the gentle zephyrs. The love of God was in his heart, the peace
    of God rested upon him, and his soul was full of compassion and
    blessing.

    All the circumstances connected with his death, were calculated
    to lead the mind back to the time when an Abraham, an Isaac and a
    Jacob bid adieu to mortality, and entered into rest.

     His death, like theirs, was sweet, and it certainly was
    a privilege indeed to witness such a scene; and I was forcibly
    reminded of the sentiment of the poet:

  The chamber where the good man meets his fate,
  Is privileged beyond the common walk of virtuous life.

    There were no reflections of a misspent life--no fearful
    forebodings of a gloomy nature in relation to the future; the
    realities of eternity were dawning, the shades of time were
    lowering; but there was nothing to terrify, to alarm or disturb
    his mind; no, the principles of the Gospel, which, "bring life and
    immortality to light," nobly triumphed in nature's final hour.
    These principles so long taught and cherished by our lamented
    friend, were honorably maintained to the last; which is not only a
    consolation to the immediate relatives, but to the Church at large.

    The instructions imparted by him will long be remembered by his
    numerous progeny, who will undoubtedly profit by the same, and
    strive to render themselves worthy of such a sire; and the whole
    Church will copy his examples, walk in his footsteps, and emulate
    his faith and virtuous actions, and commend themselves to his God
    and to their God.

    Notwithstanding his enemies frequently "shot at him, yet his bow
    abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong
    by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob," and his courage and
    resolution never forsook him.

    His anxiety for the spread of truth was great, and he lived to see
    great and important things accomplished. He saw the commencement
    of the work, small as a mustard seed, and with attention and deep
    interest he watched its progress; and he had the satisfaction of
    beholding thousands on this Continent, rejoicing in its truth, and
    heard the glorious tidings, that other lands were becoming heirs to
    the richest blessings.

    Under these circumstances, he could exclaim, like pious Simeon of
    old, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
    eyes have seen thy salvation."

    Although his spirit has taken its flight and his remains will
    soon mingle with their mother earth, yet his memory will long be
    cherished by all who had the pleasure of his acquaintance, and will
    be fresh and blooming when those of his enemies shall be blotted
    out from under heaven.

    May we, beloved friends, who survive our venerable Patriarch, study
    to prosecute those things which were so dear to his aged heart,
    and pray that a double portion of his spirit may be bestowed on
    us,  that we may be the humble instruments in aiding the
    consummation of the great work which he saw so happily begun;
    that when we have to stand before the bar of Christ, we may with
    our departed friend hear the welcome plaudit, "Come up hither, ye
    blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
    foundation of the world." Amen.

Footnotes:

1. The entry of the text is the only one made in the Prophet's manuscript history for the 23rd of August, but "Uncle" John Smith, brother of the Prophet's father, and formerly president of Adam-ondi-Ahman stake of Zion, in Missouri, makes the following entry in his journal:

"Attended meeting at Nashville. Joseph and Hyrum Smith present and a large assembly of saints, who voted to commence building a city at Nashville and a place of worship." Nashville, by the way, was situated in Lee county, Iowa, on the Mississippi river, at the head of the Des Moines Rapids, about three miles southeast of Montrose, eight miles north of Keokuk. The Church had purchased twenty thousand acres of land in this vicinity and surveyed out of it a townsite on which a number of saints located.

2. Again from the journal of "Uncle" John Smith we learn that on the 30th day of August, the Prophet Joseph was in Nashville and preached on "Eternal Judgment and the Eternal Duration of Matter."

3. Smithfield is noted for other historical incidents than being the scene of John Rogers' martyrdom. It is an open space of nearly six acres in London, England. It was formerly used as a market place, but is now partially laid out in gardens. It was the scene of Bartholomew Fair; William Wallace was executed there; it was the place of the meeting of Wat Tyler and King Richard II, in 1380, when the former was stabbed by the Mayor of London, and then dispatched by the King's attendants. It was the scene of many martyrdoms.

4. John Rogers suffered martyrdom by being burnt at the stake in Smithfield, on the 4th of February, 1555. He was the first victim of what is known in history as the "Marian Persecution;" and which conferred on England's Catholic queen the title of "Bloody Mary." Archbishop Gardiner, however, is usually credited with being the prime instigator of that persecution, though he died before it reached its height, and not before he had shown symptoms of relenting. Cardinal Pole though "naturally humane and gentle," shares the guilt of sanctioning it; "but the chief agent was Bonner, bishop of London, in whose diocese the majority of all the executions took place. * * * * The total number of men, women and children who were burnt--for even children were thrown into the flames and some at the very moment of their birth"--is computed as follows: 1555, from February--72; 1556--94; 1557--79; 1558, from February to September--(when the persecution closed), 39; making a total of 284. It was during this persecution that Ridley and Latimer suffered. On the way to the execution the latter, it is said, "with a keen quaintness which adorns his sermons," uttered the words which fortunately became prophetic--addressing himself to his companion--"Be of good comfort, Master Ridley; play the man; we shall this day light such a candle, by God's grace, in England, as I trust shall never be put out." (History of England, by William Smith, p. 156).

5. Ginseng is a plant, the roots of which are highly esteemed as medicine, being quite generally regarded as possessing the most extraordinary virtues, and as a remedy for almost all diseases, but particularly for exhaustion of body or mind. In China ginseng is sometimes sold for its weight in gold. It was once introduced in Europe, but was soon forgotten. It is a native plant of Chinese Tartary, and grows from one to two feet in height. Its leaves are five fingered and almost smooth. It is doubted by many botanists if this species is really distinct from phanx quinquefolium, a common North American plant, doubtless the species referred to in the text, the root of which is now an article of export from North America to China, and is used to some extent as a domestic medicine in the states west of the Alleghanies, but which European and American medical practitioners generally regard as almost worthless.

6. From that time on the Prophet of the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times had no truer or more constant or faithful friend than his father.

7. This term, "High Priesthood," is often used in these annals--as it is above--for High Priest. The intent of the above statement is to say that "Father Smith,"--for so he was affectionately called by the Saints--was ordained Patriarch and the President of the High Priests in Kirtland. That he was not made President of the High Priesthood is evident from the fact that the Prophet Joseph himself at that time was President of the High Priesthood of the Church, a position to which he was ordained at a Conference of High Priests in Amherst, Loraine county, Ohio, in 1832 (see Church History, Vol. I, p. 243 and note.) The Presidency of the High Priesthood carries with it the office of President of the Church: "And again, the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole Church, and to be like unto Moses. Behold, here is wisdom, yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a Prophet, having all the gifts of God which He bestows upon the head of the Church." (Doc. and Cov. sec. 107, verses 91-9.)

Chapter XI.

Threatening Portents in the Actions of Missouri--General Conferences in Nauvoo and England--The Doctrine of Priesthood.

Tuesday, September 15, 1840.

    "The governor of Missouri, after a silence of about two years, has
    at last made a demand on Governor Carlin of Illinois, for Joseph
    Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt, Caleb
    Baldwin, and Alanson Brown, as fugitives from justice.

    "The demand it seems has been complied with by Governor Carlin,
    and an order issued for their apprehension; accordingly our place
    has recently received a visit from the sheriff for these men;
    but through the tender mercies of a kind Providence, who by His
    power has sustained, and once delivered them from the hands of the
    blood-thirsty and savage race of beings in the shape of men that
    tread Missouri's delightful soil; they were not to be found--as
    the Lord would have it, they were gone from home, and the sheriff
    returned, of course without them.

    "These men do not feel disposed to again try the solemn realities
    of mob law in that state; and a free and enlightened republic
    should respond against it, for Missouri has no claim on them, but
    they have claim on Missouri.

    "What right have they to demand of Governor Carlin, as fugitives
    from justice, men against whom no process had ever been found in
    that state--no, not so much as the form of a process? They were
    taken by a mob militia, and dragged from everything that was dear
    and sacred, and tried (without their knowledge) by a court martial,
    condemned to be shot, but this failing, they were forced into
    confinement, galled with chains, deprived of the comforts of life,
    and even that which was necessary to save life, then brought to a
    pretended trial, without even having a legal process served, and
    then deprived of the privilege of defense. They were taken by a
    mob, tried, condemned and imprisoned by the same, and this Missouri
    cannot deny.

    "What a beautiful picture Governor Boggs has presented to the
     world, after driving twelve or fifteen thousand inhabitants
    from their homes, forcing them to leave the state under the pain
    of extermination, and confiscating their property, and murdering
    innocent men, women and children; then, because that a few made
    their escape from his murdering hand, and have found protection in
    a land of equal rights, so that his plans and designs have all been
    unfruitful, to that extent that he has caused 'Mormonism' to spread
    with double vigor; he now has the presumption to demand them back,
    in order that his thirst for innocent blood may yet be satiated.

    "He has no business with them; they have not escaped from justice,
    but from the hands of a cursed, infuriated, inhuman set, or race
    of beings who are enemies to their country, to their God, to
    themselves, and to every principle of righteousness and humanity.
    They loathe Christianity, and despise the people of God; they war
    against truth, and inherit lies; virtue they tread under their
    feet; while vice (with her ten thousand offspring) is their welcome
    associate; therefore, men on whom Missouri has no claim, she
    cannot, no, she never shall have." [1]

Sunday, 20.--Elder Willard Richards went to Preston, held a conference, ordained five Elders, eleven Priests, eight Teachers, one Deacon, and returned to Manchester same day.

    Letter of Samuel Bent and George W. Harris to the
    Presidency--Reporting Labors.

    Cincinnati, Sept. 23, 1840.

    To the First Presidency and High Council of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints:

    We gladly embrace this opportunity of conveying a few lines to
    you by Ebenezer Robinson, who we expect will leave this place for
    Nauvoo in a few days.

    Brother George W. Harris and myself have visited the several
    branches of the Church in Adams county, Pike county, Jacksonville,
    and Springfield. On our way we stopped at Terre Haute, and Pleasant
    Garden, Indiana. We found the brethren generally very willing and
    anxious to do all in their power to assist the Church in the great
    and glorious cause that we have engaged in respecting the printing
    of the several books in contemplation, but I am sorry to say I
    found them destitute of the means to relieve our present necessity.

    However, we have succeeded in obtaining several notes of hand from
     different brethren in the state of Illinois, to the amount of
    about eighty-three dollars, which will come due on the first day of
    October next, and we have handed them over to Ebenezer Robinson,
    to be delivered to Joseph Smith, Jun., for collection. We expect
    Brother Robinson will arrive with them at the time they become due.

    We have obtained some money, which we have paid over to Brother
    Ebenezer Robinson. We have also given our obligations as agents for
    the Church, to Shepherd and Stearns to the amount of three hundred
    dollars, two hundred of which becomes due on the twenty-sixth day
    of November next, and the other one hundred on the twenty sixth day
    of December next, being the amount due Shepherd and Stearns for the
    stereotype plates.

    We have taken up the bond that Brother Brown gave for the wagon
    or carriage which he let Joseph Smith, Jun., have, and we have
    succeeded in procuring a horse and harness to put alongside of
    the other horse to make it easier for him. We got said horse and
    harness by contributions from the brethren at Dayton and West
    Milton, Ohio.

    Brother Ebenezer Robinson (we think) has been very economical,
    diligent, and persevering, and successful in the business whereupon
    he was sent. He has gained the confidence of the gentlemen with
    whom he has been transacting business in the city, and has done
    honor to the cause of Christ and His Church of Latter-day Saints.
    We can further say to you brethren, we think the course he has
    taken, and our united exertions with him, have established the
    credit of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in this
    place (I mean as to business transactions), to that extent that we
    can obtain any amount of paper, type, and other materials requisite
    to carry on the printing business to a large extent, and upon terms
    that will warrant our success.

    We therefore shall go on with renewed courage and zeal, trusting
    in the Lord to prepare the way before us, and we feel to ask your
    prayers that God may peradventure expand the minds of the Saints
    abroad, that they may be able to comprehend the magnitude of the
    work we so much desire to accomplish, which in all probability will
    induce them to donate with alacrity.

    Brother John E. Page is preaching with the manifestations of the
    Spirit and power in this place, and with considerable success.
    We think when Brother Page leaves the city of Cincinnati, the
    inhabitants thereof will be left without excuse for not receiving
    the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and his garments clear from their blood
    in the day of judgment.

    Accept our love and best wishes.

    Yours in the bonds of the New and Everlasting Covenant,

    Samuel Bent,

    George W. Harris.

     Letter of John E. Page to the Presidency--Reporting Progress
    of Palestine Mission.

    Cincinnati, September 23, 1840.

    To the President and Council of the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints, and also to all the Saints Assembled in General
    Conference:

    Your humble servant embraces with pleasure this opportunity to
    pen for your edification a few lines. I congratulate you upon
    the steady march and advancement of the cause of Christ, as [it]
    has fallen under my observation. Elder Hyde and myself have been
    treated with respect, and had the greatest attention paid us by
    the brethren and sisters; and by gentlemen and ladies of the first
    class in society, we have been made welcome very heartily to their
    dwellings and comforts of life. When we separate from them they
    grip our hands with tears standing full in their eyes, bidding
    farewell, and often leave something noble with us to help us on
    our mission; and a firm promise that they will duly reflect on the
    great things which we have told them. They ardently request us to
    send them some competent Elder to preach to them.

    Yes, dear brethren, the cause of truth is marching onward with
    unparalleled rapidity, and victory! Victory! will soon be the shout
    of all the faithful in Christ; and thank the Lord, thank the Lord,
    is the language of unworthy me, that I have lived to see 1840, with
    all its attendant evidences of the truth of the Book of Mormon, and
    the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

    I must save a place in this communication to make some remarks
    concerning Brother Ebenezer Robinson. I can say, in truth and
    soberness, that he merits the esteem and confidence of the Saints
    and all good men for his diligence and economy while getting
    the Book of Mormon stereotyped, &c., here. The honest and frank
    course he has pursued towards the gentlemen with whom he has
    been concerned in business (viz., Messrs. Shepherd, Stearns, and
    others), has won their everlasting respect and esteem, judging from
    their own manifestations to me.

    Dear brethren and sisters, your humble servants, Orson Hyde and
    myself, sincerely solicit your special prayers, sealed with a
    hearty amen.

    Elder Hyde is truly a humble servant of the Lord, and a very
    agreeable companion in the ministry. Our hearts are one, our faith
    is one, and the strongholds of Satan quake before us. We desire
    to have grace to perform our mission, that we may return to our
    families and brethren with triumph and joy.

    I anticipate that Elder Hyde is in New York City. I am waiting to
    obtain a few copies of the third edition of the Book of Mormon. To
     raise means is hard, yet we trust in the Lord. I shall go to
    Philadelphia as soon as possible.

    I have baptized thirteen in this city; many are believing, and some
    halting between two opinions; and have baptized in all since I
    started, eighty-four.

    I have had a vision from the Lord, which manifested the present
    state of the world respecting the Jews, Jerusalem, the remnant
    of Israel, and also the Gentile world. As hasty summer fruit, so
    is this nation; as a vineyard of grapes fully ripe, ready to be
    gathered for the press, so are all the nations of the earth.

    I want the conference to send some faithful and competent Elder to
    this place, to nurse the seed or word that has been sown here, and
    shall leave this matter with Ebenezer Robinson to lay before the
    conference.

    Elders Bent and Harris are here, and are using all their energies,
    both of mind and body, to fill their calling. I deem them amply
    qualified to discharge the function of their office, provided they
    keep humble.

    Dear brethren, remember me to my family, and pray for them;
    remember me to Sister Hyde, and also all of the wives of the Elders
    in particular, whose husbands are in the field. Tell them to pray
    for us. I hope the authorities of the Church will see that they are
    provided with food and raiment, that they may enjoy life with you.

    Yours in the bonds of the Covenant,

    John E. Page.

Monday, 28.

    Extracts from Orson Hyde's Letter--Signs in the Heavens.

    Burlington County, New Jersey.

    I left Elder Page at Cincinnati the latter part of August, and came
    on up the Ohio river as far as Wellsburgh, Virginia. I stopped with
    Father James. Here I preached twice, and baptized three persons;
    came on by stage and steamboats to Pittsburg; from thence took the
    canal to Leechburgh, where I stopped and preached to a small number
    of Saints, raised up by the instrumentality of Father Nickerson--in
    good spirits.

    As I left this place about nine o'clock in the morning, the
    most remarkable phenomenon occurred in the heavens that I ever
    witnessed. There appeared two bright and luminous bodies, one on
    the north and the other on the south of the sun; in length about
    ten yards, inclining to a circle resembling a rainbow, about fifty
    yards distant from the sun; apparently east about twenty-five
    yards, was a body of light as brilliant almost as the sun itself;
    and on the west, a great distance from the sun,  appeared a
    white semi-circle passing half way round the horizon, and another
    crossing it at right angles, exhibiting a scene of the sublimest
    kind. It was a great wonder to the passengers on board the boat.
    Put this with the fact that the Jews are gathering home, and that
    all Europe is in commotion and on the eve of breaking out in open
    hostilities; and also that the tree of liberty, which has long
    flourished in the republican soil of America, has been girdled,
    and her green foliage, which has shielded and protected the sons
    of oppression from the scorching rays of despotic power, already
    begins to wither like the accursed fig tree--and what language do
    these speak to the Saints! "Lift up your heads, for your redemption
    draweth near!" * * * * * *

    I came on, and met with the Saints in Chester county, Pennsylvania,
    laboring there about one week with Brother Barnes, where we added
    six to their number. I preached about one week in Philadelphia,
    and baptized twelve; came on to this place with Brothers Snow
    and Barnes, and held a two-days' meeting, at which sixteen were
    baptized. I shall return to Philadelphia in a few days, where I
    expect to meet Brother Page, and then, if the Lord will, after
    holding a few meetings in this country, we shall proceed on to New
    York, there to take ship and sail over the seas.

    Orson Hyde.

On the night of the 28th, Elder Heber C. Kimball had the following dream, as related by himself:

    Elder Heber C. Kimball's Dream.

    Having great anxiety for the welfare of the small branch which
    we had raised in London, I retired to rest and had the following
    dream. I thought that we dug a well on high ground in order to
    obtain water, and after digging some considerable time, we came to
    an excellent spring; we then commenced to back it up, but before it
    was finished, we had occasion to leave for a short time and when
    we returned to complete it, we found it carefully filled up with
    sand, and all attempts to remove it proved unavailing, we thought
    it better to choose another spot on lower ground, where we were
    successful. When we returned to London, we experienced a perfect
    fulfillment of my dream--having to open a new preaching place at
    Barrett's Academy, King Square, Goswell Road, our former place
    being closed against us.

Tuesday, 29.--Elders Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith left London for the Manchester conference.

Saturday, October 3.

     Minutes of the General Conference of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints, held in Nauvoo, Hancock County,
    Illinois, Beginning October 3, 1840.

    The conference was opened with prayer by President William Marks.
    President Joseph Smith was then unanimously called to the chair,
    and Robert B. Thompson appointed clerk.

    A letter from Elders Bent and Harris, and one from Elder John E.
    Page were then read by the clerk, which gave very satisfactory
    accounts of their mission.

    On motion, Resolved: That a committee be appointed to ordain such
    as have recommends to this conference for ordination, and that
    Jonathan H. Hale, Elisha H. Groves, Charles C. Rich, John Murdock,
    and Simeon Carter, compose said committee, and report their
    proceedings before the conference closes.

    The President arose and stated that there had been several
    depredations committed on the citizens of Nauvoo, and thought
    it expedient that a committee be appointed to search out the
    offenders, and bring them to justice.

    Whereupon it was Resolved: That Joseph Smith, Elias Higbee, William
    Marks, Vinson Knight, William Law, Charles C. Rich, and Dimick B.
    Huntington, compose said committee.

    On motion, Resolved: That Robert B. Thompson be appointed the
    General Church Clerk, in the room of George W. Robinson, who
    intends to remove to Iowa.

    It having been requested by Elder Page, that the conference would
    appoint an Elder to take charge of the church which he and Elder
    Hyde had raised up in Cincinnati, on motion, Resolved: That Elder
    Samuel Bennett be appointed to preside there.

    The president then arose and stated that it was necessary that
    something should be done with regard to Kirtland, so that it might
    be built up; and gave it as his opinion, that the brethren from
    the east might gather there, and also that it was necessary that
    some one should be appointed from this conference to preside over
    that stake. On motion, Resolved: That Elder Almon W. Babbitt be
    appointed to preside over the Church in Kirtland, and that he
    choose his own counselors.

    Conference adjourned for one hour.

    One o'clock p. m. Conference met pursuant to adjournment. An
    opportunity was given to the brethren who had any remarks to make
    on suitable locations for stakes of Zion. Elder H. W. Miller stated
    that it was the desire of a number of the brethren residing in
    Adams county, to have a stake appointed at Mount Ephrain in that
    county, and stated the advantages of the place for agricultural
    purposes.

     On motion, Resolved: That a stake be appointed at Mount
    Ephraim, in Adams county.

    There being several applications for the appointment of stakes,
    it was Resolved: That a committee be appointed to organize stakes
    between this place and Kirtland, and that Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight,
    and Almon W. Babbitt, compose said committee.

    The President then spoke of the necessity of building a "House of
    the Lord" in this place. Whereupon it was Resolved: That the Saints
    build a house for the worship of God, and that Reynolds Cahoon,
    Elias Higbee, and Alpheus Cutler be appointed a committee to build
    the same.

    On motion, Resolved: That a commencement be made ten days from this
    date, and that every tenth day be appropriated for the building of
    the house.

    President Hyrum Smith arose and stated that there were several
    individuals who, on moving to this place, had not settled with
    their creditors, and had no recommend from the branches of the
    churches where they had resided. On motion, Resolved: That those
    persons moving to this place, who do not bring a recommend, be
    disfellowshiped.

    John C. Bennett, M. D., then spoke at some length, on the
    oppression to which the Church had been subjected, and remarked
    that it was necessary for the brethren to stand by each other, and
    resist every unlawful attempt at persecution.

    Elder Lyman Wight then addressed the meeting. Adjourned till
    tomorrow morning.

Sunday morning, October 4.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment, and was opened with prayer
    by Elder Almon W. Babbitt.

    The clerk was then called upon to read the report of the Presidency
    in relation to the city plat, after which the President made some
    observations on the status of the debts on the city plat, which
    will appear at the close of these conference minutes, and advised
    that a committee be appointed to raise funds to liquidated the
    same. On motion, Resolved: That William Marks and Hyrum Smith
    compose said committee.

    On motion, Resolved: That a committee be appointed to draft a bill
    for the incorporation of the town of Nauvoo, and other purposes.

    Resolved: That Joseph Smith, John C. Bennett, and Robert B.
    Thompson be said committee.

    Resolved: That John C. Bennett be appointed delegate, to urge the
    passage of said bill through the legislature.

    President Hyrum Smith then rose and gave some general instructions
    to the Church. Conference adjourned for one hour.

     One o'clock p. m. Conference met pursuant to adjournment, and
    was opened with prayer by Elder John P. Greene.

    President Joseph Smith then rose and delivered a discourse on
    the subject of baptism for the dead, which was listened to with
    considerable interest, by the vast multitude assembled.

    Dr. John C. Bennett from the committee to draft a charter for the
    city, and for other purposes, reported the outlines thereof. On
    motion, Resolved: That the same be adopted.

    Elder Ebenezer Robinson then rose and gave an account of the
    printing of another edition of the Book of Mormon, and stated that
    it was now nearly completed, and that arrangements had been made
    for the printing of the hymn-book, Book of Doctrine and Covenants,
    &c.

    Conference adjourned to Monday morning.

Monday morning, October 5.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment, and was opened with prayer
    by Elder Lyman Wight.

    Elder Robert B. Thompson, after a few preliminary remarks, read
    an article on the Priesthood, composed by President Joseph Smith,
    which will appear at the close of the conference minutes; after
    which Elder Babbitt delivered an excellent discourse on the same
    subject, at considerable length.

    Conference adjourned for one hour. During the intermission a large
    number was baptized.

    Two o'clock p. m. Conference met pursuant to adjournment. Elder
    Lyman Wight addressed the congregation on the subject of baptism
    for the dead, and other subjects of interest to the Church.

    The President then made some observations and pronounced his
    benediction on the assembly.

    Dr. John C. Bennett said that many persons had been accused of
    crime, and been looked upon as guilty, when on investigation it
    has been ascertained that nothing could be proved against them.
    Whereupon, on motion, it was Resolved: That no person be considered
    guilty of crime, unless proved so by the testimony of two or three
    witnesses.

    He next brought before the conference the treatment the Saints had
    experienced in Missouri, and wished to know whether the conference
    would take any further steps in relation to obtaining redress.
    On motion, resolved: That Elias Higbee and Robert B. Thompson be
    appointed a committee to obtain redress for the wrongs sustained in
    Missouri.

    The committee on ordinations reported that they had ordained
    thirty-nine to the ministry.

     On motion, Resolved: That this conference be dismissed, and
    that the next conference be held on the 6th day of April next.

    Joseph Smith, President.

    Robert B. Thompson, Clerk.

The following is the article on Priesthood referred to in the conference minutes:

    Priesthood.

    In order to investigated the subject of the Priesthood, so
    important to this, as well as every succeeding generation, I shall
    proceed to trace the subject as far as I possibly can from the Old
    and New Testaments.

    There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the Scriptures, viz., the
    Melchisedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. Although there are two
    Priesthoods, yet the Melchisedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic
    or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the
    highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of
    the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity
    on the earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge,
    doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is
    revealed from heaven.

    Its institution was prior to "the foundation of this earth, or
    the morning stars sang together, or the Sons of God shouted for
    joy," and is the highest and holiest Priesthood, and is after the
    order of the Son of God, and all other Priesthoods are only parts,
    ramifications, powers and blessings belonging to the same, and are
    held, controlled, and directed by it. It is the channel through
    which the Almighty commenced revealing His glory at the beginning
    of the creation of this earth, and through which He has continued
    to reveal Himself to the children of men to the present time, and
    through which He will make known His purposes to the end of time.

    Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in
    Daniel as being the "Ancient of Days," or in other words, the
    first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it
    is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first
    and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the
    spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances
    for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ
    was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed
    from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth.
    Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times;
    i. e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be
    revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ
    to the end of all the dispensations that are to be  revealed.
    "Having made known unto us the mystery of His will, according to
    His good pleasure which He hath purposed in Himself: that in the
    dispensation of the fullness of times He might gather together in
    one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
    on earth; even in him." (Ephesians, 1st chap., 9th and 10 verses).

    Now the purpose in Himself in the winding up scene of the last
    dispensation is that all things pertaining to that dispensation
    should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding
    dispensations.

    And again, God purposed in Himself that there should not be an
    eternal fullness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and
    gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever, that
    should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto
    the same fullness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus;
    therefore He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever,
    and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man,
    or to send angels to reveal them. "Are they not all ministering
    spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
    salvation?" (Hebrews, i, 14).

    These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts
    under the direction of the Lord. From the above quotation we learn
    that Paul perfectly understood the purposes of God in relation
    to His connection with man, and that glorious and perfect order
    which He established in Himself, whereby he sent forth power,
    revelations, and glory.

    God will not acknowledge that which He has not called, ordained,
    and chosen. In the beginning God called Adam by His own voice. "And
    the Lord called unto Adam and said unto him, Where art thou? And
    he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid because
    I was naked, and hid myself." (See Genesis 3rd chap., 9, 10.) Adam
    received commandments and instructions from God: this was the order
    from the beginning.

    That he received revelations, commandments and ordinances at the
    beginning is beyond the power of controversy; else how did they
    begin to offer sacrifices to God in an acceptable manner? And if
    they offered sacrifices they must be authorized by ordination.
    We read in (Genesis, 4th chap., 4th), that Abel brought of the
    firstlings of the flock and the fat thereof, and the Lord had
    respect to Abel and to his offering. And, again, "By faith Abel
    offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which
    he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his
    gifts; and by it he being dead, yet speaketh." (Hebrews xi:4).
    How doth he yet speak? Why he magnified the Priesthood which was
    conferred upon him, and died a righteous man, and therefore has
    become an angel of God by receiving his body from the dead, holding
    still the keys of his dispensation; and was sent down from heaven
    unto  Paul to minister consoling words, and to commit unto him
    a knowledge of the mysteries of godliness.

    And if this was not the case, I would ask, how did Paul know so
    much about Abel, and why should he talk about his speaking after he
    was dead? Hence, that he spoke after he was dead must be by being
    sent down out of heaven to administer.

    This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood; every man holding the
    Presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the Presidency
    of them all, even Adam: and Adam receiving his Presidency and
    authority from the Lord, but cannot receive a fullness until Christ
    shall present the Kingdom to the Father, which shall be at the end
    of the last dispensation.

    The power, glory and blessings of the Priesthood could not continue
    with those who received ordination only as their righteousness
    continued; for Cain also being authorized to offer sacrifice, but
    not offering it in righteousness, was cursed. It signifies, then,
    that the ordinances must be kept in the very way God has appointed;
    otherwise their Priesthood will prove a cursing instead of a
    blessing.

    If Cain had fulfilled the law of righteousness as did Enoch, he
    could have walked with God all the days of his life, and never
    failed of a blessing. "And Enoch walked with God after he begat
    Methuselah 300 years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the
    days of Enoch were 365 years; and Enoch walked with God, and he was
    not, for God took him." (Gen. 5th chap., 22nd ver.) Now this Enoch
    God reserved unto Himself, that he should not die at that time,
    and appointed unto him a ministry unto terrestrial bodies, of whom
    there has been but little revealed. He is reserved also unto the
    Presidency of a dispensation, and more shall be said of him and
    terrestrial bodies in another treatise. He is a ministering angel,
    to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation and appeared
    unto Jude as Abel did unto Paul; therefore Jude spoke of him (14,
    15 verses). And Enoch, the seventh from Adam, revealed these
    sayings: "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of His Saints."

    Paul was also acquainted with this character, and received
    instructions from him. "By faith Enoch was translated, that he
    should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated
    him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he
    pleased God; but without faith, it is impossible to please Him, for
    he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that he is a
    revealer to those who diligently seek him." (Heb. 11, 5).

    Now the doctrine of translation is a power which belongs to this
    Priesthood. There are many things which belong to the powers of the
    Priesthood and the keys thereof, that have been kept hid from
    before the foundation of the world; they are hid from the wise and
    prudent to be revealed in the last times.

    Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine
    whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and
    into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their
    place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place
    prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering
    angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into
    so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead.
    "Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
    obtain a better resurrection." (See Heb. 11th chap., part of the
    35th verse.)

    Now it was evident that there was a better resurrection, or else
    God would not have revealed it unto Paul. Wherein then, can it be
    said a better resurrection. This distinction is made between the
    doctrine of the actual resurrection and translation: translation
    obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body,
    but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the
    ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory.

    On the other hand, those who were tortured, not accepting
    deliverance, received an immediate rest from their labors. "And I
    heard a voice from heaven, saying, Blessed are the dead who die
    in the Lord, for from henceforth they do rest from their labors
    and their works do follow them." (See Revelation, 14th chap., 13th
    verse).

    They rest from their labors for a long time, and yet their work is
    held in reserve for them, that they are permitted to do the same
    work, after they receive a resurrection for their bodies. But we
    shall leave this subject and the subject of the terrestrial bodies
    for another time, in order to treat upon them more fully.

    The next great, grand Patriarch [after Enoch] who held the keys
    of the Priesthood was Lamech. "And Lamech lived one hundred and
    eighty-two years and begat a son, and he called his name Noah,
    saying, this same shall comfort us concerning our work and the toil
    of our hands because of the ground which the Lord has cursed." (See
    Gen. 5th chap., 28th and 29th verses.) The Priesthood continued
    from Lamech to Noah: "And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh
    is before me, for the earth is filled with violence through them,
    and behold I will destroy them with the earth." (Gen. 6: 13.)

    Thus we behold the keys of this Priesthood consisted in obtaining
    the voice of Jehovah that He talked with him [Noah] in a familiar
    and friendly manner, that He continued to him the keys, the
    covenants, the power and the glory, with which he blessed Adam at
    the beginning; and the offering of sacrifice, which also shall
    be continued at the last time; for all the ordinances and duties
    that ever have been required by  the Priesthood, under
    the directions and commandments of the Almighty in any of the
    dispensations, shall all be had in the last dispensation, therefore
    all things had under the authority of the Priesthood at any former
    period, shall be had again, bringing to pass the restoration spoken
    of by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets; then shall the sons of
    Levi offer an acceptable offering to the Lord. "And he shall sit as
    a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of
    Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto
    the Lord." (See Malachi 3:3).

    It will be necessary here to make a few observations on the
    doctrine set forth in the above quotation, and it is generally
    supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great
    Sacrifice [i. e., the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus] was offered
    up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of
    sacrifice in future; but those who assert this are certainly
    not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the
    priesthood, or with the Prophets.

    The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part
    of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and
    will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation
    to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of
    sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior
    to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the
    Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings.

    Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood,
    and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority
    and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the
    ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that
    the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but
    the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. "And I will send Elijah the
    Prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord," etc., etc.
    Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to
    administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the
    authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in
    righteousness.

    It is a very prevalent opinion that the sacrifices which were
    offered were entirely consumed. This was not the case; if you read
    Leviticus, second chap., second and third verses, you will observe
    that the priests took a part as a memorial and offered it up before
    the Lord, while the remainder was kept for the maintenance of the
    priests; so that the offerings and sacrifices are not all consumed
    upon the altar--but the blood is sprinkled, and the fat and certain
    other portions are consumed.

    These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the
    Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and
    the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in
    all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and
    ever will exist when the  powers of the Melchisedic Priesthood
    are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all
    things spoken of by the holy Prophets be brought to pass? It is not
    to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again
    with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been
    spoken of by the Prophets; but those things which existed prior to
    Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

    It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the
    Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance,
    baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what
    necessity for them since that time? The Priesthood has descended
    in a regular line from father to son, through their succeeding
    generations. (See Book of Doctrine and Covenants). [2]

    Report Of The Presidency. [3]

    The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints would respectfully report--

    That they feel rejoiced to meet the Saints at another General
    Conference, and under circumstances as favorable as the present.
    Since our settlement in Illinois we have for the most part been
    treated with courtesy and respect, and a feeling of kindness and
    of sympathy has generally been manifested by all classes of the
    community, who, with us, deprecate the conduct of those men whose
    dark and blackening deeds are stamped with everlasting infamy and
    disgrace. The contrast between our past and present situation is
    great. Two years ago mobs were threatening, plundering, driving
    and murdering the Saints. Our burning houses lighted up the canopy
    of heaven. Our women and children, houseless and destitute, had
    to wander from place to place to seek a shelter from the rage of
    persecuting foes. Now we enjoy peace, and can worship the God of
    heaven and earth without molestation, and expect to be able to go
    forward and accomplish the great and glorious work to which we have
    been called.

    Under these circumstances we feel to congratulate the Saints
    of the Most High, on the happy and pleasing change in their
    circumstances, condition and prospects, and which those who shared
    in the perils and distress, undoubtedly appreciate; while prayers
    and thanksgivings daily ascend to that God who looked upon our
    distresses and delivered us from danger and death, and whose hand
    is over us for good.

    From the unpropitious nature of the weather, we hardly expected to
    behold so many of our friends on this occasion; in this, however,
    we are agreeably disappointed, which gives us strong assurance that
    the Saints are as zealous, untiring, and energetic as ever, in the
    great work of the last days; and gives us joy and consolation, and
    greatly  encourages us, while contending with the difficulties
    which necessarily lie in our way. Let the brethren ever manifest
    such a spirit, and hold up our hands, and we must, we will go
    forward; the work of the Lord shall roll forth, the Temple of the
    Lord be reared, the Elders of Israel be encouraged, Zion be built
    up, and become the praise, the joy, and the glory of the whole
    earth, and the song of praise, glory, honor, and majesty to Him
    that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever,
    shall reverberate from hill to hill, from mountain to mountain,
    from island to island, and from continent to continent, and the
    kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our God and His Christ.

    We are glad indeed to know that there is such a spirit of union
    existing throughout the churches, at home and abroad, on this
    continent, as well as on the islands of the sea; for by this
    principle, and by a concentration of action, shall we be able to
    carry into effect the purposes of our God.

    From the Elders abroad we receive the most cheering accounts.
    Wherever the faithful laborer has gone forth weeping, sowing the
    seed of truth, he has returned with joy, bringing his sheaves with
    him; and the information we receive from all quarters is that the
    laborers are few and that the harvest is great. Many wealthy and
    influential people have embraced the Gospel, so that not only
    will the poor rejoice in that they are exalted, but the rich in
    that they are made low. The calls to the Southern States are
    indeed great; many places which a short time ago would think it
    a disgrace to give shelter to a "Mormon," on account of the many
    misrepresentations which were abroad, now desire to hear an Elder
    of the Church of the Latter-day Saints.

    On the islands of the sea, namely, Great Britain, there continues
    to be a steady flow of souls into the Church. Branches have been
    organized in many large and populous cities, and the whole land
    appears to be thirsting for the pure streams of knowledge and
    salvation.

    The Twelve have already printed a new edition of the hymn-book, and
    they issue a monthly periodical in that land. Several families have
    already arrived here from England, and a number more are on their
    way to this place, and are expected this fall.

    If the work rolls forth with the same rapidity it has heretofore
    done, we may soon expect to see flocking to this place, people
    from every land and from every nation; the polished European, the
    degraded Hottentot, and the shivering Laplander; persons of all
    languages, and of every tongue, and of every color; who shall with
    us worship the Lord of Hosts in His holy temple and offer up their
    orisons in His sanctuary.

    It was in consideration of these things, and that a home might be
    provided for the Saints, that induced us to purchase the present
    city for a place of gathering for the Saints, and the extensive
    tract of land on  the opposite side of the Mississippi.
    Although the purchase at the time, and under the peculiar
    circumstances of the Church, appeared to many to be large and
    uncalled for; yet from what we now see, it is apparent to all that
    we shall soon have to say, "This place is too straight, give us
    room that we may dwell." We therefore hope that the brethren who
    feel interested in the cause of truth, and desire to see the work
    of the gathering of Israel roll forth with power, will aid us in
    liquidating the debts which are now owing, so that the inheritances
    may be secured to the Church, and which eventually will be of great
    value.

    The good spirit which is manifested on this occasion, the desire to
    do good, and the zeal for the honor of the Church, inspires us with
    confidence that we shall not appeal in vain, but that funds will be
    forthcoming on this occasion, sufficient to meet the necessities of
    the case.

    It is with great pleasure that we have to inform the Church that
    another edition of the Book of Mormon has been printed, and
    which is expected on from Cincinnati in a short time; and that
    arrangements are making for printing the Book of Doctrine and
    Covenants, hymn-book, &c.; so that the demand which may exist for
    these works will soon be supplied.

    In conclusion we would say, brethren and sisters, be faithful, be
    diligent, contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the
    Saints; let every man, woman and child realize the importance of
    the work, and act as if success depended on his individual exertion
    alone; let all feel an interest in it, and then consider they live
    in a day, the contemplation of which animated the bosoms of kings,
    Prophets, and righteous men thousands of years ago--the prospect
    of which inspired their sweetest notes, and most exalted lays, and
    caused them to break out in such rapturous strains as are recorded
    in the Scriptures; and by and by we will have to exclaim, in the
    language of inspiration--

  The Lord has brought again Zion,
  The Lord hath redeemed His people Israel.

Tuesday, October 6.

    Minutes of a General Conference in England.

    Minutes of a general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints, held at Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, Tuesday,
    the 6th day of October, 1840, it being the first day of the seventh
    month of the eleventh year of the Church; when the following
    officers of the Traveling High Council were present, viz.: Elders
    Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards,
    Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith; other officers: High Priests
    5, Elders 19, Priests 28, Teachers 4, and Deacons 2.

    The meeting being called to order at 10 o'clock by Elder Brigham
    Young,  it was moved by Elder Young, seconded by Elder Woodruff,
    that Elder Orson Pratt be president off the conference, which was
    carried unanimously. Elder George Walker was chosen clerk.

    After singing, and prayer by the president, the following
    statistical report was read:

     Conferences and Branches.                                         Members. Elders. Priests. Teachers. Deacons.
     Preston Conference (including all the branches in the care of     665      18      23       11        2
     Elders Melling and Withnall) as represented by Elder Melling
     Potteries were represented by Elder Alfred Cordon                 248      9       32       9         9
     Birmingham Branch, represented by Elder Alfred Cordon             4
     West Bromwich, represented by Elder Alfred Cordon                 21               3        1
     Clitheroe Conference, represented by Thomas Smith                 295      10      11       9         3
     Herefordshire, &c., represented by Thoedore Curtis                1007     19      78       15        1
     Glasgow, and regions round about, represented by Samuel Mulliner  492      8       7        5         3
     Hilsboro Branch, Ireland, represented by Theodore Curtis          5
     Isle of Man Branch, represented by Hiram Clark                    6
     Liverpool Conference, represented by Priest William Mitchell      100      3       4        2         1
     London Branch, represented by Elder Heber C. Kimball              11               2
     Macclesfield, represented by Priest I. Brown                      71               6        2         2
     Altrincham Conference, (including Middlewich, Nortwich, and       82       1       3        3         3
     Peover,) represented by Elder William Berry
     Bedford Branch, represented by Elder Brigham Young                36       1       1
     Stockport, represented by Elder Martin Littlewood                 140      2       5        2         1
     Bolton, represented by Priest Barroes                             61               2        1
     Duckinfield, represented by Elder Albiston                        76       1       3        1
     Edinburg Conference, represented by Orson Pratt                   43               2
     Pendlebury Branch, represented by Henry Royle                     36               2
     Eccles, represented by Brother E. Leather                         13               3
     Whitefield, represented by Elder Walker Johnson                   39       1       2        3
     Ratcliffe, represented by John Allen                              16       1       2
     Brampton, represented by Thomas Tweddle                           40       1       1        1
     Alston, represented by John Sanders                               39       2       1        2
     Newcastle-upon-Tyne, represented by Amos Fielding                 6                2        1
     Manchester, represented by Brigham Young                          364      4       27       6         1
     Ancrum, represented by Orson Pratt                                9

    The president brought before the conference the subject of
    ordinations, and after various observations thereon, it was
    proposed by Elder George A. Smith, that for the future, ordinations
    be not attended to, except by the Traveling High Council or under
    such restrictions as they may adopt in reference thereto. Elder
    Young spoke on the subject of conferences, and also with respect
    of restricting ordination; and after taking into consideration the
    great expense attendant upon holding general conferences, and the
    inconvenience experienced by members attending them, suggested,
    that for the future, general conferences should in a great measure
    be done away with, or restricted to the Traveling High Council to
    hold conferences at such places and times as they may think proper.

     The meeting adjourned at 12 o'clock.

    At 2 o'clock the meeting opened with prayer, after which Elder
    Kimball spoke on the subject of Elders taking upon themselves the
    responsibility of ordaining officers in this Church; after pointing
    out the evils that might result therefrom, he proceeded to treat
    upon the duty of members towards those who preside over them in
    the Lord, and respecting the members administering to the temporal
    necessities of those whose calling it is to labor amongst them in
    spiritual things.

    Moved by Elder Willard Richards, seconded by Elder Thomas Smith,
    and carried unanimously, that all ordinations be confined to or
    under the regulations of the Traveling High Council.

    Elder Young called the attention of the conference to the case of
    Emma Bolton, a sister from the Potteries, who had conducted herself
    disorderly. Elder Johnson and others spoke of several cases of
    improper conduct on her part; after which it was moved by Elder
    Young, seconded by Elder Kimball, and carried unanimously, that
    Emma Bolton be cut off from the Church.

    The president [of the conference, Elder Orson Pratt], then called
    the attention of the conference to a letter from Isaac Brown and
    other officers of the Church at Macclesfield, concerning Elder
    Heath, and also to some half a dozen charges preferred by the said
    Isaac Brown, James Galley, Edward Horrocks, and John Horrocks,
    against the said Samuel Heath, for several items of misconduct, and
    neglecting the duties of his office; to all of which charges Elder
    Heath pleaded not guilty. The complainants then entered into proof
    of the several items, to which Elder Heath replied by stating that
    the charges against him were in consequence of a misunderstanding,
    &c. The proceedings opened a wide field for instruction from Elder
    Young, followed by the president, who recommended the parties
    to become reconciled to each other, stating that he did not
    consider the charges preferred against Elder Heath sufficiently
    substantiated to withdraw fellowship from him; when it was moved
    and seconded, that no further proceeding be taken on this subject;
    carried unanimously.

    The conference then adjourned till 7 o'clock. p. m.

    At 7 o'clock the meeting was opened with prayer.

    The president having made such preliminary remarks as the
    importance of the subject called forth, proceeded to call upon
    those who were willing to volunteer their services to labor in the
    vineyard of the Lord, when the officers gave their names as follows:

    High Priests--Hiram Clark, Thomas Smith, Alfred Cordon, Thomas
    Kington, Orson Pratt, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard
    Richards, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith.

    Elders--George D. Watt, John Parkinson, David Moss, Martin
    Littlewood, William Parr, Samuel Heath, John Sanders, Theodore
    Curtis, Henry Royle, Thomas Tweddle, John Leigh, Amos Fielding,
    Thomas Richardson.

    Priests--William Snailam, William Speakman, John Needham, James
    Mahon, Frederick Cook, Robert Crooks, William Mitchell, William
    Black, Robert Williams, William Jones, Thomas Pollitt, Richard
    Steele, John Burns, Joseph Knowles, Richard Benson, John Wyche,
    William Roylance, Joseph Street, Joseph White.

    Moved, seconded, and carried, that Elder George D. Watt go to
    Edinburgh; Elder Alfred Cordon to Birmingham, and also take charge
    of the Staffordshire Potteries Conference, and that John Burns,
    Priest, go with him.

    Elder Thomas Kington to take charge of the Herefordshire
    Conferences as heretofore, also Garway; and William Snailam and
    Joseph Knowles, Priests, to accompany him.

    Robert Crooks, Priest, to go to Bolton; Thomas Richardson, Elder,
    and John Needham, Priest, to go to Herefordshire; Elder Hiram Clark
    to go to the Isle of Man; Elder Thomas Tweddle to Glasgow; Elder
    John Sanders to labor at Alston, and go to Carlisle as soon as
    practicable.

    Elder Amos Fielding to go to Newcastle-upon-Tyne; Elder John
    Parkinson to Greenock; Elder Henry Royle and Frederick Cook,
    Priest, to Cly in Flintshire; William Mitchell, Priest, to Leeds;
    Elder Thomas Smith to remain at Clitheroe; Elder John Leigh, and
    James Mahon, Priest, to go to Arden, Cheshire, and Joseph White
    and Richard Steele, Priests, to labor under the direction of Elder
    Cordon.

    Elder John Smith to be ordained High Priest, to take charge of
    the church in Manchester and the regions round about: Elder Peter
    Melling to take charge of the church as heretofore, in connection
    with Elder H. Withnall; and John Wyche, Priest, to go into
    Staffordshire, and labor under the direction of Alfred Cordon.

    Moved and seconded, that the remainder of the officers who have
    volunteered, be left to the Traveling High Council to dispose of,
    and appoint to such places as they may judge expedient; carried.

    Moved and seconded, that in consequence of there not being time to
    transact all the business of this conference, the ordination of
    officers be left to the Traveling High Council to ordain from time
    to time such members as they may consider requisite; carried.

    Elder Young then addressed the meeting on the propriety of
    establishing a fund for the support and clothing of such members
    as may from time to time be called out to labor in the vineyard,
    and whose circumstances may require that their necessities may be
    administered unto. The president then addressed the meeting on
    the same subject,  and pointed out the difference between
    preaching for money and the Elders having their necessities
    ministered unto, while they are called to labor "without taking
    thought for the morrow." Elder Richards followed upon the same
    subject; also Elder Kimball; after which Elder Young moved, that
    wherever a branch of the Church is established, two members be
    appointed to receive the weekly voluntary contributions of the
    members, for promoting the spread of the Gospel, and the same to be
    disposed of by the vote of the church in council with the Twelve
    Apostles; seconded by Elder George A. Smith, and carried.

    The minutes were then read and accepted, and the conference
    adjourned sine die.

    Orson Pratt, President,

    George Walker, Secretary.

Thursday, 8.

    Minutes of Council of the Twelve in England.

    Minutes of a Council of the Twelve, viz., Brigham Young, Heber
    C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and
    Willard Richards; also Hiram Clark, and Reuben Hedlock, High
    Priests, at the house of Willard Richards, No. 1, Chapman Street,
    Manchester; Brigham Young presiding.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, that Elder Willard Richards take charge
    of the Millennial Star, seconded and carried. Voted that our
    publishing office be removed to London as soon as circumstances
    will permit; and that Elders Hedlock and Curtis go where they
    please to labor.

    Willard Richards, Clerk.

Footnotes:

1. The foregoing is an editorial in the Times and Seasons for September, 1840.

2. A discourse on the same subject to the Twelve will be found in vol. iii, p. 385, et seq.

3. This is the report referred to in the conference minutes.
