Progress of the Work in Great Britain--The Saints at Kirtland Reproved for Their Course During the Missouri Persecutions--The Prophet's Address to the Twelve and Saints in Great Britain.

Saturday, October 10.--Elder George A. Smith returned to London, and was soon followed by Elder Woodruff.

[Sidenote: Charges against Oliver Walker.]

David Fulmer preferred a charge against Oliver Walker "for reporting certain slanderous stories of a fallacious and calumniating nature, calculated to stigmatize, and raise a persecution against the Church and individuals in it, in this place, [Nauvoo], and for other acts of unchristianlike conduct," before the High Council at Nauvoo. The defendant pleaded that "he was not prepared to meet the charge, it being too indefinite." Council adjourned till next day.

Sunday, 11.--High Council met according to adjournment. The charge against Oliver Walker was taken up, and the following substituted for the first charge:

    Minutes of the High Council.

    To the High Council of the Church of Jesus Christ at Nauvoo:

    For and in behalf of said Church, I prefer a charge against Elder
    Oliver Walker, for several different offenses hereinafter set
    forth, as said to be by him done, performed, said, and committed,
    as well as various duties omitted, all of which was done at
    different times, periods, places, and seasons, subsequent to
    September 1st, A. D. 1838, to-wit.:

    For a general course of procedure, of acts, doings, and words,
    and suggestions by him, the said Elder Oliver Walker, done,
    performed, said, spoken, hinted at, and suggested, both directly
    and indirectly, and  as calculated to be derogatory to the
    character of the heads and leaders of the Church, and extremely
    injurious and hurtful to the upbuilding, welfare, being, and
    advancement of the same, namely, for fleeing from, quitting, and
    deserting the society, ranks, and needs of his brethren, in times
    of difficulty with, and danger from their enemies, "the mob;"
    restraining from the use of his brethren, his influence, efforts,
    and needful assistance, at such times of need; as also for joining
    with, and strengthening the hands, will, evil pursuits, and designs
    of the mob, and Gentile enemies of the Church, by expressions,
    hints, and suggestions of wavering and dubious nature, respecting
    the faith and order of the Church, and of the professed calling,
    qualifications, proceedings, &c., of Joseph Smith, Jun., as a Seer,
    Prophet, and one called to bring to light the fullness of the
    Gospel, &c., in these last days.

    Likewise for advancing ideas, notions, or opinions, that the
    different orders or sects, namely, Methodists and others, could by
    a pursuit in their faith, order, and pursuits, as readily obtain
    every celestial attainment and Gospel advantage, as they could by
    embracing and pursuing the system brought forth by Joseph Smith,
    Jun., in these last days.

    And moreover for suggesting within the last six months, at Alton,
    Nauvoo, intermediate and adjacent places, that in the Church at
    Nauvoo there did exist a set of pilferers, who were actually
    thieving, robbing, plundering, taking and unlawfully carrying away
    from Missouri, certain goods and chattels, wares and property;
    and that the act and acts of such supposed thieving, &c., was
    fostered and conducted by the knowledge and approbation of the
    heads and leaders of the Church, viz., by the Presidency and High
    Council; all of which items set forth as aforesaid, together with
    any and all corroborating acts, doings, hints, expressions, and
    suggestions in any way belonging to, or connected with, any or all
    of the aforesaid accusations, he, the said Oliver Walker, is hereby
    notified to prepare to defend in said trial.

    Dated October 11, 1840, Nauvoo.

    David Fulmer.

    Walker pleaded that he was not prepared to defend himself, and the
    trial was deferred at his request till April conference.

    Letter of Heber C. Kimball et al. to Messrs. Ebenezer Robinson and
    Don Carlos Smith--Reporting Affairs in the British Mission.

    Manchester, England, October 12, 1840.

    Messrs. Ebenezer Robinson, and Don Carlos Smith:

    Dear Brethren:--We left Manchester immediately after the July
    conference, for the purpose of visiting the city of London. We
    visited the churches which lay on our route through Staffordshire,
    Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and Gloucestershire; and we had many
    interesting meetings, baptizing and confirming daily, as we passed
    along. We baptized forty in one day; many new doors were opening,
    and all things indicated a short work in England.

    The last meeting we held among the Saints while on this journey,
    was in a field in Leigh, Gloucestershire, on the 16th of August.
    We had an interesting time; we baptized fifteen, and ordained one
    Elder and two Priests. Two Methodist priests came twelve miles to
    hear; we baptized them after the first sermon, and confirmed and
    ordained them at the same time, and sent them to preach the Gospel.
    We parted with the Saints there on the 17th, went to Cheltenham,
    (five miles), and spent the night. There were several Saints in
    that place.

    On the 18th we took coach and rode forty miles, through a level
    farming country, something like Illinois prairie; we passed through
    Oxfordshire, leaving the Oxford University a little upon our left.
    This university consists of twenty colleges endowed, and five
    halls not endowed; and is considered the largest and most noted
    university in the world. We then took the railroad and traveled
    seventy miles, had a splendid view of Windsor Castle as we passed
    along. We landed at the London terminus of the Great Western
    Railway at 4 o'clock in the evening. From thence we took coach and
    rode a few miles into the city; we walked over London Bridge, and
    called upon Mr. Allgood, 19 King Street, Borough. Mrs. Allgood is
    sister to Elder Theodore Turley's wife; she treated us kindly, gave
    us such refreshments as we needed, and directed us to lodgings in
    the neighborhood, where we spent the night.

    After which we immediately commenced our researches through this
    great metropolis, for the honest in heart and the meek of the
    earth. We first commenced by visiting the ministers and preachers
    of the various orders, and requested the privilege of delivering
    our message unto the people in their churches and chapels; but of
    course you will not be astonished when we inform you that they
    denied us this privilege, and rejected our testimony.

    We went to and fro through the city of London, from day to day,
    endeavoring to get some door open whereby we could warn the
    people and search out the honest in heart; when on diligent
    search we found the whole city given to covetousness, (which is
    idolatry), priestcraft, tradition, superstition, and all manner
    of abominations, wickedness and uncleanness; and all doors closed
    against us.

    We did not hesitate to stand in the midst of the streets, and,
    Jonah like, cry repentance unto the inhabitants of that mighty
    city--the  metropolis of England--the pride and glory of
    Britain--the boast of the Gentiles, and the largest commercial city
    in the world--containing over one million five hundred thousand
    souls, who are ripening in iniquity and preparing for the wrath of
    God; and like the ox going to the slaughter, know not the day of
    their visitation.

    We shall long remember standing together in the midst of that
    people, and bearing a message which will prove a savor of life unto
    life, or of death unto death, not only unto them, but unto all
    those unto whom the sound of the everlasting Gospel shall come;
    even unto the whole world; and the judgment of the great day shall
    manifest the truth of it unto all nations. And it will ever sweeten
    the memory of that eventful period of our lives, to know that our
    labors, on that occasion, were not in vain; but we were enabled
    through toil, labor, diligent search, perseverance, and the great
    mercy of God, to find some of the blood of Ephraim--a few honest
    souls who were willing to receive and obey the Gospel; and that we
    were enabled to lay the foundation of a work in the city of London,
    which will not be removed until the city is warned, so that they
    will be left without excuse; and the Saints gathered out to stand
    in holy places, while judgment works. Until that time, the seed
    which we have sown there, will bring forth fruit, and the fruit
    will redound to the honor and glory of God.

    We have baptized eleven only, in the city of London, but through
    the faith and the mercy of God, we ere long expect a harvest of
    souls in that place; but we are willing to acknowledge, that in
    our travels, either in America or Europe, we have never before
    found a people, from whose minds we have had to remove a greater
    multiplicity of objections, or combination of obstacles, in order
    to excite an interest in the subject and prepare the heart for the
    reception of the word of God, than in the city of London.

    While conversing with the common people concerning the Gospel, we
    found their highest attainments to be, "Why, I go to church or
    chapel and get my children christened, what more is necessary?"
    When we conversed with the learned, we found them too wise to be
    taught, and too much established in the traditions of their fathers
    to expect any change in the last days. While conversing with the
    ministers of the various orders of the day, upon the principles of
    the Gospel, they would inform us that the ancient order of things
    was done away, and no longer needed; and some of them had preached
    forty years the good old religion, and God was with them, and they
    needed no more revelation, or healing the sick, or anything as
    manifest in the days of the Apostles, for we can get along without
    them in this day of refinement, light and knowledge.

    When we arose to preach unto the people repentance, and baptism
     for the remission of sins, the cry of "Baptist, Baptist,"
    would be rung in our ears. If we spoke of the Church and body of
    Christ being composed of Prophets, and Apostles; as well as other
    members, "Irvingites, Irvingites," would immediately dash into the
    mind. If in the midst of our remarks, we even for once suffered the
    saying to drop from our lips, "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit
    of prophecy," "O, you belong to Johanna Southcote," would be heard
    from several places at once. If we spoke of the second coming of
    Christ, the cry would be, "Aitkenites." If we made mention of the
    Priesthood, they would call us "Catholics." If we testified of the
    ministering of angels, the people would reply, "The Irvingites have
    their angels, and even the Duke of Normandy is ready to swear that
    he has the administering of angels every night."

    These salutations, in connection with a multitude of others, of a
    similar nature, continued to salute our ears from day to day, until
    we were about ready to conclude that London had been such a perfect
    depot of the systems of the nineteenth century, that it contained
    six hundred three score and six different gods, gospels, redeemers,
    plans of salvation, religions, churches, commandments, (essential
    and non-essential), orders of preaching, roads to heaven and to
    hell; and that this order of things had so affected the minds of
    the people, that it almost required a horn to be blown from the
    highest heavens, in order to awaken the attention of the people,
    and prepare their minds to candidly hear and receive the doctrine
    of one Gospel, one faith, one baptism, one Holy Ghost, one God, and
    one plan of salvation, and that, such as Christ and the Apostles
    preached.

    But notwithstanding this, we do not feel discouraged concerning a
    work being perfected in London, but firmly believe that many souls
    will embrace the fullness of the Gospel there, though it will be
    through faith, diligence, perseverance, and prayer.

    Having spent twenty-three days together in this first mission
    in the metropolis, and the time drawing near for our October
    conference, Elder Woodruff left the city on the 10th of September
    for the purpose of attending several conferences. He attended the
    Bran Green and Gadfield Elm conference, held in Worcester on the
    14th of September, and also the Froomes Hill conference, held in
    Herefordshire on the 21st of September. At these two conferences,
    he heard represented, 40 branches of the Church, containing
    1,007 members, and 113 officers, viz., 19 Elders, 78 Priests, 15
    Teachers, and 1 Deacon; the whole of whom had received the fullness
    of the Everlasting Gospel, and been baptized in less than seven
    months in that part of the vineyard which he first opened in the
    month of March; and the work is still progressing very rapidly
    throughout that region; and among the number baptized  there
    have not been much less than one hundred preachers of various sects.

    He also attended the conference in the Staffordshire Potteries,
    which met at Hanley on the 28th of September; where were
    represented 231 members, 9 Elders, 32 Priests, 9 Teachers, and 9
    Deacons; most of whom received the work since our arrival there
    last winter and spring. While he was attending these conferences,
    Elders Kimball and George A. Smith continued their labors in London
    until the first of October, at which time we met together again in
    Staffordshire, and enjoyed each other's company while journeying
    together to Manchester, where the quorum of the Traveling High
    Council, with many Elders and Saints had the privilege of once more
    sitting in a general conference together, on the 6th of October in
    the Carpenter's Hall, where we heard represented 3,636 Saints, and
    383 official members.

    At the July conference there were 2,513 Saints, and 256 official
    members, making an increase in three months of 1,113 Saints and 127
    official members, besides over 200 Saints, including many Elders,
    Priests, Teachers and Deacons, who have emigrated to America; which
    would make over 1,300 additions to the Church in Europe during the
    last three months, and over two thousand since our conference in
    Preston on the 15th of April; which representation at that time was
    1,671 Saints, and 132 official members.

    Thus you see the Lord hath given us an increase, and blessed the
    labors of the servants of God universally in this land, for which
    we feel thankful; and our constant prayer to God is that His
    kingdom may roll forth, that the messengers bearing the everlasting
    Gospel may be diligent, meek, and humble, not weary in well doing,
    but waiting with patience for their reward, which lies at the end
    of the race, that their joy may be full.

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    George A. Smith.

Saturday, 17.--A conference was held in Philadelphia, Elder Orson Hyde presiding; 896 members were represented, including 24 Elders, 11 Priests, 6 Teachers, 5 Deacons, in Pennsylvania, New York City, New Jersey, and vicinity.

[Sidenote: Remarkable Visions by Orson Pratt.]

Parley P. Pratt and family arrived in Manchester, and resumed the editorial labors of the Star. Brother Orson Pratt has recently published a pamphlet, entitled "An interesting account of several Remarkable Visions, and of the late Discovery  of Ancient American Records," comprising 31 pages giving a brief sketch of the rise of the Church.

Monday, 19.

    Letter of Joseph and Hyrum Smith to the Saints in
    Kirtland--Reproving the Saints for Neglect of their Brethren and
    Sisters During the Missouri Persecutions.

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois,

    October 19th, 1840.

    To the Saints in Kirtland, Ohio:

    Dear beloved brethren in the kingdom and patience of Jesus
    Christ:--We take this opportunity of informing you that we yet
    remember the Saints scattered abroad in the regions of Kirtland,
    and feel interested in their welfare as well as in that of the
    Saints at large. We have beheld with feelings peculiar to ourselves
    the situation of things in Kirtland and the numerous difficulties
    to which the Saints have been subjected, by false friends as well
    as open enemies.

    All these circumstances have more or less engaged our attention
    from time to time. We likewise must complain of the brethren who
    are in office and authority in the stake of Kirtland, for not
    writing to us, and making known their difficulties and their
    affairs from time to time, so that they might be advised in matters
    of importance to the well being of said stake; but above all, for
    not sending one word of consolation to us while we were in the
    hands of our enemies, and thrust into dungeons. Some of our friends
    from various sections sent us letters which breathed a kind and
    sympathetic spirit, and which made our afflictions and sufferings
    endurable. All was silent as the grave [from Kirtland]; no feelings
    of sorrow, sympathy, or affection [was expressed] to cheer the
    heart under the gloomy shades of affliction and trouble through
    which we had to pass.

    Dear brethren, could you realize that your brethren were thus
    circumstanced, and were to bear up under the weight of affliction
    and woe which was heaped upon them by their enemies, and you stand
    unmoved and unconcerned! Where were the bowels of compassion?
    Where was the love which ought to characterize the Saints of the
    Most High? Did those high born and noble feelings lie dormant,
    or were you insensible to the treatment we received? However, we
    are disposed to leave these things to God, and to futurity, and
    feel disposed to forget this coldness on the part of the Saints
    in Kirtland, and to look to the future with more pleasure than
    while we contemplated the past; and shall by the assistance of our
    heavenly Father, take such steps as we think best  calculated
    to promote the interests of the Saints, and for the promotion of
    truth and righteousness, and the building up of the kingdom is
    these last days.

    The situation of Kirtland was brought before the general
    conference, held at this place on the 3rd instant, when it was
    resolved that Elder Almon W. Babbitt should be appointed to preside
    over the stake of Kirtland, and that he be privileged to choose his
    own counselors. We therefore hope that the Saints will hold up the
    hands of our beloved brother, and unite with him in endeavoring to
    promote the interests of the kingdom.

    It has been deemed prudent to advise the eastern brethren who
    desire to locate in Kirtland, to do so; consequently you may
    expect an increase of members in your stake, who probably will be
    but young in the faith, and who will require kind treatment. We
    therefore hope the brethren will feel interested in the welfare of
    the Saints, and will use all their endeavors to promote the welfare
    of the brethren who may think proper to take up their residence in
    that place.

    If you will put away from your midst all evil speaking, backbiting,
    and ungenerous thoughts and feelings: humble yourselves, and
    cultivate every principle of virtue and love, then will the
    blessings of Jehovah rest upon you, and you will yet see good and
    glorious days; peace will be within your gates, and prosperity in
    your borders; which may our heavenly Father grant in the name of
    Jesus Christ, is the prayer of yours in the bonds of the covenant,

    Joseph Smith,

    Hyrum Smith.

    An Epistle of the Prophet to the Twelve.

    To the Traveling High Council and Elders of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain:

    Beloved Brethren:--May grace, mercy, and peace rest upon you
    from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Having several
    communications lying before me from my brethren the Twelve, some
    of which ere this have merited a reply, but from the multiplicity
    of business which necessarily engages my attention, I have delayed
    communicating with you to the present time.

    Be assured, beloved brethren, that I am no disinterested observer
    of the things which are transpiring on the face of the whole earth;
    and amidst the general movements which are in progress, none is
    of more importance than the glorious work in which you are now
    engaged; consequently I feel some anxiety on your account, that you
    may by your virtue, faith, diligence and charity commend yourselves
    to one another,  to the Church of Christ, and to your Father
    who is in heaven; by whose grace you have been called to so holy
    a calling; and be enabled to perform the great and responsible
    duties which rest upon you. And I can assure you, that from the
    information I have received, I feel satisfied that you have not
    been remiss in your duty; but that your diligence and faithfulness
    have been such as must secure you the smiles of that God whose
    servant you are, and also the good will of the Saints throughout
    the world.

    The spread of the Gospel throughout England is certainly pleasing;
    the contemplation of which cannot but afford feelings of no
    ordinary kind, in the bosom of those who have borne the heat and
    burden of the day; and who were its firm supporters and strenuous
    advocates in infancy, while surrounded with circumstances the most
    unpropitious, and its destruction threatened on all hands; like the
    gallant bark that has braved the storm unhurt, spreads her canvas
    to the breeze, and nobly cuts her way through the yielding wave,
    more conscious than ever of the strength of her timbers, and the
    experience and capability of her captain, pilot, and crew.

    It is likewise very satisfactory to my mind, that there has been
    such a good understanding between you, and that the Saints have so
    cheerfully hearkened to council, and vied with each other in this
    labor of love, and in the promotion of truth and righteousness.
    This is as it should be in the Church of Jesus Christ; unity is
    strength. "How pleasing it is for brethren to dwell together
    in unity!" Let the Saints of the Most High ever cultivate this
    principle, and the most glorious blessings must result, not only
    to them individually, but to the whole Church--the order of the
    kingdom will be maintained, its officers respected, and its
    requirements readily and cheerfully obeyed.

    Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to
    be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man
    filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his
    family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless
    the whole human race. This has been your feeling, and caused you
    to forego the pleasures of home, that you might be a blessing to
    others, who are candidates for immortality, but strangers to truth,
    and for so doing, I pray that heaven's choicest blessings may rest
    upon you.

    Being requested to give my advice respecting the propriety of your
    returning in the spring, I will do so willingly. I have reflected
    on the subject some time, and am of the opinion that it would be
    wisdom in you to make preparations to leave the scene of your
    labors in the spring. Having carried the testimony to that land,
    and numbers having received it, the leaven can now spread without
    your being obliged to stay.

    Another thing--there have been whisperings of the Spirit that
    there will be some agitations, excitements, and trouble in the
    land in which you are now laboring. I would therefore say, in the
    meantime be diligent: organize the churches, and let everyone stand
    in his proper place, so that those who cannot come with you in the
    spring, may not be left as sheep without a shepherd.

    I would likewise observe, that inasmuch as this place has been
    appointed for the gathering of the Saints, it is necessary that it
    should be attended to in the order that the Lord intends it should.
    To this end I would say, that as there are great numbers of the
    Saints in England who are extremely poor, and not accustomed to
    the farming business, who must have certain preparations made for
    them before they can support themselves in this country, therefore
    to prevent confusion and disappointment when they arrive here,
    let those men who are accustomed to make machinery, and those who
    can command capital, though it be small, come here as soon as
    convenient, and put up machinery, and make such other preparations
    as may be necessary, so that when the poor come on, they may have
    employment to come to. This place has advantages for manufacturing
    and commercial purposes, which but very few can boast of; and
    the establishing of cotton factories, foundries, potteries, &c.,
    would be the means of bringing in wealth, and raising it to a very
    important elevation.

    I need not occupy more space on this subject, as its reasonableness
    must be obvious to every mind.

    In my former epistle I told you my mind respecting the printing of
    the Book of Mormon, hymn-book, &c. I have been favored by receiving
    a hymn-book from you, and as far as I have examined it, I highly
    approve of it, and think it to be a very valuable collection. I am
    informed that the Book of Mormon is likewise printed, which I am
    glad to hear, and should be pleased to hear that it was printed
    in all the different languages of the earth. You can use your own
    pleasure respecting the printing of the Doctrine and Covenants. If
    there is a great demand for it, I have no objections, but would
    rather encourage it.

    I can say, that as far as I have been made acquainted with your
    movements, I am perfectly satisfied that they have been in wisdom;
    and I have no doubt, but that the Spirit of the Lord has directed
    you; and this proves to my mind that you have been humble, and your
    desires have been for the salvation of your fellow man, and not
    for your own aggrandizement, and selfish interests. As long as the
    Saints manifest such a disposition, their counsels will be approved
    of, and their exertions crowned with success.

    There are many things of much importance, on which you ask counsel,
    but which I think you will be perfectly able to decide upon, as
    you are more conversant with the peculiar circumstances than I am;
    and I  feel great confidence in your united wisdom; therefore
    you will excuse me for not entering into detail. If I should see
    anything that is wrong, I would take the privilege of making known
    my mind to you, and pointing out the evil.

    If Elder Parley P. Pratt should wish to remain in England some
    time longer than the rest of the Twelve, he will feel himself at
    liberty to do so, as his family are with him, consequently his
    circumstances are somewhat different from the rest; and likewise
    it is necessary that someone should remain who is conversant with
    the rules and regulations of the Church, and continue the paper
    which is published. Consequently, taking all these things into
    consideration, I would not press it upon Brother Pratt to return in
    the spring.

    I am happy to inform you that we are prospering in this place,
    and that the Saints are more healthy than formerly; and from the
    decrease of sickness this season, when compared with the last, I am
    led to the conclusion that this must eventually become a healthy
    place. There are at present about 3,000 inhabitants in Nauvoo,
    and numbers are flocking in daily. Several stakes have been set
    off in different parts of the country, which are in prosperous
    circumstances.

    Provisions are much lower than when you left. Flour is about $4
    per barrel. Corn and potatoes about 25 cents per bushel; and other
    things in proportion. There has been a very plentiful harvest
    throughout the Union.

    You will observe, by the Times and Seasons, that we are about
    building a temple for the worship of our God in this place.
    Preparations are now making; every tenth day is devoted by the
    brethren for quarrying rock, &c. We have secured one of the most
    lovely situations for it in this region of country. It is expected
    to be considerably larger than the one in Kirtland, and on a more
    magnificent scale, and which will undoubtedly attract the attention
    of the great men of the earth.

    We have a bill before the legislature for the incorporation of
    the city of Nauvoo, and for the establishment of a seminary of
    learning, and other purposes--which I expect will pass in a short
    time.

    You will also receive intelligence of the death of my father; which
    event, although painful to the family and to the Church generally,
    yet the sealing testimony of the truth of the work of the Lord was
    indeed satisfactory. Brother Hyrum succeeds him as Patriarch of the
    Church, according to his last directions and benedictions. [1]

     Several persons of eminence and distinction in society have
    joined the Church and become obedient to the faith; and I am happy
    to inform you that the work is spreading very fast upon this
    continent. Some of the brethren are now in New Orleans, and we
    expect a large gathering from the south. I have had the pleasure of
    welcoming about one hundred brethren who came with Brother Turley;
    the remainder I am informed stayed in Kirtland, not having means to
    get any further. I think that those who came here this fall, did
    not take the best possible route, or the least expensive. Most of
    the brethren have obtained employment of one kind or another, and
    appear tolerably well contented, and seem disposed to hearken to
    counsel.

    Brothers Robinson and Smith lately had a letter from Elders
    Kimball, Smith and Woodruff, which gave us information of the
    commencement of the work of the Lord in the city of London, which
    I was glad to hear. I am likewise informed that Elders have gone
    to Australia and to the East Indies. I feel desirous that every
    providential opening of the kind should be filled, and that you
    should, prior to your leaving England, send the Gospel into as many
    parts as you possibly can.

    Beloved brethren, you must be aware in some measure of my feelings,
    when I contemplate the great work which is now rolling on, and
    the relationship which I sustain to it, while it is extending to
    distant lands, and thousands are embracing it. I realize in some
    measure my responsibility, and the need I have of support from
    above, and wisdom from on high, that I may be able to teach this
    people, which have now become a great people, the principles of
    righteousness, and lead them agreeably to the will of Heaven; so
    that they may be perfected, and prepared to meet the Lord Jesus
    Christ when He shall appear in great glory. Can I rely on your
    prayers to our heavenly Father on my behalf, and on all the prayers
    of all my brethren and sisters in England, (whom having not seen,
    yet I love), that I may be enabled to escape every stratagem of
    Satan, surmount every difficulty, and bring this people to the
    enjoyment of those blessings which are reserved for the righteous?
    I ask this at your hands in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

    Let the Saints remember that great things depend on their
    individual exertion, and that they are called to be co-workers with
    us and the Holy Spirit in accomplishing the great work of the last
    days; and in consideration of the extent, the blessings and glories
    of the same, let  every selfish feeling be not only buried,
    but annihilated; and let love to God and man predominate, and
    reign triumphant in every mind, that their hearts may become like
    unto Enoch's of old, and comprehend all things, present, past and
    future, and come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of the
    Lord Jesus Christ.

    The work in which we are unitedly engaged is one of no ordinary
    kind. The enemies we have to contend against are subtle and well
    skilled in maneuvering; it behooves us to be on the alert to
    concentrate our energies, and that the best feelings should exist
    in our midst; and then, by the help of the Almighty, we shall go
    on from victory to victory, and from conquest to conquest; our
    evil passions will be subdued, our prejudices depart; we shall
    find no room in our bosoms for hatred; vice will hide its deformed
    head, and we shall stand approved in the sight of heaven, and be
    acknowledged the sons of God.

    Let us realize that we are not to live to ourselves, but to God; by
    so doing the greatest blessings will rest upon us both in time and
    in eternity.

    I presume the doctrine of "baptism for the dead" has ere this
    reached your ears, and may have raised some inquiries in your minds
    respecting the same. I cannot in this letter give you all the
    information you may desire on the subject; but aside from knowledge
    independent of the Bible, I would say that it was certainly
    practiced by the ancient churches; and St. Paul endeavors to prove
    the doctrine of the resurrection from the same, and says, "Else
    what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead
    rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?"

    I first mentioned the doctrine in public when preaching the funeral
    sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson; and have since then given
    general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have
    the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who
    are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they
    had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the
    Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have
    been commissioned to preach to them while in prison.

    Without enlarging on the subject, you will undoubtedly see its
    consistency and reasonableness; and it presents the Gospel of
    Christ in probably a more enlarged scale than some have imagined
    it. But as the performance of this rite is more particularly
    confined to this place, it will not be necessary to enter into
    particulars; at the same time I always feel glad to give all the
    information in my power, but my space will not allow me to do it.

    We had a letter from Elder Hyde, a few days ago, who is in New
    Jersey, and is expecting to leave for England as soon as Elder Page
     reaches him. He requested to know if converted Jews are to go
    to Jerusalem or to come to Zion. I therefore wish you to inform him
    that converted Jews must come here.

    Give my kind love to all the brethren and sisters, and tell them I
    should have been pleased to come over to England to see them, but I
    am afraid that I shall be under the necessity of remaining here for
    some time; therefore I give them a pressing invitation to come and
    see me.

    I remain, dear brethren, yours affectionately,

    Joseph Smith.

Footnotes:

1. The last "directions and benedictions" of the Patriarch Joseph Smith, Sen., here referred to, are stated by "Mother Lucy Smith" in her book, "History of the Prophet Joseph" as follows:

"My son Hyrum, I seal upon your head your patriarchal blessing, which I placed upon your head before, for that shall be verified. In addition to this, I now give you my dying blessing. You shall have a season of peace, so that you shall have sufficient rest to accomplish the work which God has given you to do. You shall be as firm as the pillars of heaven unto the end of your days. I now seal upon your head the patriarchal power, and you shall bless the people. This is my dying blessing upon your head in the name of Jesus. Amen."--History of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 266.

Chapter XIII.

Introduction of the Gospel in the Isle of Man--The Nauvoo Charter.

Wednesday, October 21, 1840.--Elder Lorenzo Snow arrived in Manchester, England, from Nauvoo.

Thursday, 22.--The committee appointed by the general conference of the Church at Nauvoo on the 3rd inst., (my brother Hyrum presiding) organized a Stake at Lima this evening, by appointing Isaac Morley, president; John Murdock and Walter Cox, his counselors; also a Bishop's Court composed of Gardner Snow, Clark Hulet and Henry Dean, with James
C. Snow, clerk.

Friday, 23.--Gardner Snow was ordained Bishop under the hands of Hyrum Smith.

Sunday, 25.--The committee organized a Stake at Quincy. The presidency were Daniel Stanton, Stephen Jones and Ezra T. Benson; the latter was ordained a High Priest; also bishop and counselors, George W. Crouse, Azariah Dustin, and Sylvester B. Stoddard.

Tuesday, 27.--The committee organized a Stake called Mount Hope, at the steam mills, Columbus, Adams county. President and counselors were Abel Lamb, Sherman Gilbert and John Smith. Bishop and counselors, were Daniel A. Miller, Isaac Clark, and John Allen; Simeon J. Comfort, clerk.

At Freedom Stake, near Payson, Adams county, Henry W. Miller, Duncan McArthur, and William Tenney were appointed to preside. Bishop and counselors, Matthew Leach, Horra Kimball, and Jacob Foutz.

Wednesday 28.--[On this date a long communication  was sent to the editors of the Times and Seasons signed by Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, detailing their visit to various places in London, but as the communication does not in any way bear upon the incidents of the history of the Church, it is thought unnecessary to publish the letter in extenso. The following paragraph from the letter, however, it is thought should be preserved, because it refers to the liberty the Elders of the Church incidentally enjoyed while engaged in the ministry; and also because it breathes that spirit of liberty in the pursuit of knowledge characteristic of the work of God in the last days.--Editors.]

    We consider it perfectly consistent with our calling, with reason
    and revelation that we should form a knowledge of kingdoms and
    countries whether at home or abroad, whether ancient or modern,
    whether of things past or present or to come; whether it be in
    heaven, earth or hell, air or seas; or whether we obtain this
    knowledge by being local or traveling, by study or by faith, by
    dreams or by visions, by revelation or by prophecy, it mattereth
    not unto us; if we can but obtain a correct [view of] principles,
    and knowledge of things as they are, in their true light, past,
    present and to come. It is under such a view of things that we are
    endeavoring to avail ourselves of every opportunity in our travels
    among the nations of the earth, to record an account of things as
    they pass under our observation.

Thursday, 29.--Elder Woodruff preached twice in London, and baptized three.

Friday, 30.--Elder Lorenzo Snow had a discussion with Mr. Barker, a Methodist minister, at Hill Top, near Birmingham, and baptized two.

Sunday, 31.--I copy the following from the Manx Liberal of this date:

    Mormonism in the Isle of Man.

    To the Editor of the Manx Liberal:

    Sir--I feel rather surprised and chagrined that the modern
    delusion, viz., "Mormonism," should have made such rapid strides
    in this town, hitherto considered exempt from the many systems of
    irreligious creeds which abound in England, America, and elsewhere.
    I had thought that  the powerful and argumentative addresses
    of the dissenting ministers would have checked such a gross piece
    of imposition in its infancy, and thus prevented the great mass of
    our town's people from becoming dupes of designing knaves, "and
    being led away by every wind of doctrine." Above all, I imagined
    the two pamphlets issued by that holy, religious and devout man of
    God, Mr. Hays, Wesleyan minister, (to which connection I have the
    happiness and honor to belong) would have been quite sufficient
    to prove the fallacy of such a system, and prevent its further
    spread. But, sir, alas! alas! the case is quite the reverse;
    numbers continually flock to the Wellington room, and listen with
    eagerness to the principles there advocated. The members of our
    society (Methodists) seem to be most conspicuous in sanctioning and
    promoting this vile and abominable doctrine.

    Oh, sir, the result to our connection will be dreadful! the havoc
    tremendous; just think of the majority of our leading and
    intelligent men aiding and abetting a cause of this description!
    Oh, sir, lamentable and heart-rending to witness the beaming
    countenances, and smiles of approbation displayed recently at
    Taylor's meeting! I could enumerate a host of our members who
    regularly attend those anti-Christian meetings; but I will just
    mention, with your permission, the names of a few who attended one
    of the last meetings. (Here followed a list of names.)

    O! Mr. Editor! I quake for the consequence; such a wholesale
    conversion to Mormonism was never before witnessed in any town or
    country. What will become of our society? What will become of our
    class meetings? What will become of our brethren in the faith? And
    above all, what will become of poor Mr. Hays [1] that nice and
    humble man, who so nobly stood forward to expose the errors of the
    Mormon system; God bless him and preserve him from want! But, Mr.
    Editor, what makes the case worse is, that a rumor is prevalent
    that all these pious men are to be baptized! That is duly immersed
    in the salt water of Douglas Bay, by that abominable creature,
    Taylor! Surely, there must be something enchanting about the vile
    man. Immersion! (my hand shakes while I write) and in winter, too!
    Oh, sir! the thought chills my very soul; surely this American
    dipper intends to drown them; he can have no other object in view,
    therefore, brethren of the Methodist society, beware! Drowning is
    not to be envied, and that too in your sins. Besides, what would
    the venerable John Wesley, (if he  were alive) say to such
    conduct? What will the conference say? And what will the world say?
    I leave these questions to yourselves to answer. In conclusion,
    brethren, I recommend you to read, mark, learn and inwardly digest
    the things which belong to your eternal peace, and listen no longer
    to the follies of men.

    A Staunch Wesleyan.

    Duke Street, Douglas, 29th Oct.

Sunday, November 1, 1840.--The committee organized a Stake, Geneva, Morgan county, Illinois, and called it Geneva Stake; presidents--William Bosley, Howard S. Smith, and Samuel Fowler. Bishop's Court--Gardner Clark, Moses Clare, and David Orton.

Elder Levi Richards arrived in Manchester.

Tuesday, 3.--The English bombarded St. Jean D'Acre, during which a powder magazine exploded, killing over two thousand men.

Thursday, 5.--The committee organized a Stake of the Church at Springfield; presidents--Edwin P. Merriam, Isaac H. Bishop, and Arnold Stephens. Bishop's Court--Abraham Palmer, Henry Stephens, and Jonathan Palmer.

Monday, 9.--Elder George A. Smith received counsel to leave London and go to Staffordshire for his health, as he had injured his lungs by preaching in the streets, so that he discharged considerable blood from them.

Tuesday, 10.--Elder Smith took leave of Elder Woodruff and traveled to Birmingham, met Elder Alfred Cordon, preached and baptized five in the evening.

[Sidenote: Opposition to the Work in England.]

Thursday, 12.--The Weekly Dispatch, England, having published a sarcastic article against the Saints in that country, and blaming the Bishop of Gloucester, and his tithe-fattened clergy for allowing the "Mormons" to delude and baptize five hundred in his Diocese, Elder Wilford Woodruff replied to this, but the Dispatch refused to publish his reply.

Saturday, 21.--Elders Young, Kimball and Richards, visited the Church at Bolton.

Thursday, 26.--Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith preached to the Saints in Hanley this day, and on the 27th at Stoke-upon-Trent.

Saturday, 28.--Elders Young and Kimball left for London.

Elders Elias Higbee and Robert B. Thompson, the committee appointed at the October Conference, wrote a petition to Congress for the redress of the grievances of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri, setting forth their wrongs and sufferings, in substance the same as my petition in connection with Elias Higbee and Sidney Rigdon, of the 28th day of November, 1839.

Thursday, December 3.--Elders Young, Kimball and Woodruff visited the tower of London, the Horse Armory, Jewel Room and the Thames Tunnel.

Friday, 4.--Elders Young and Woodruff visited Buckingham Palace and Westminster Abbey.

[Sidenote: Excommunication of Sidney Roberts.]

There was a conference in New York City, Elder Orson Hyde presiding. The revelations of Elder Sidney Roberts were objected to, which were that a certain brother must give him a suit of clothes, and a gold watch, the best that could be had, also his saluting the sisters with holy kiss. Elder Roberts justified himself in these things. Much good counsel was given him, but he said he knew the revelations he had received were from God, and would make no confession; consequently the conference cut him off, and demanded his license, which he refused to give up.

Elder John Taylor has been preaching and baptizing for some time in the Isle of Man, where the work is now progressing.

Saturday, 5.--Elder Brigham Young writes as follows:

    Letter of Brigham Young to the Presidency, Detailing Movements of
    the Mission in England.

    No. 40, Ironmonger Row, St. Luke's, December 5th, 1840.

    Beloved Brethren--I have just returned from a walk with Brothers
    Kimball and Woodruff. We have only been as far as St. Paul's and
     returned by Smithfield Market about three miles. Brother
    Kimball and myself had fine weather for our journey here; it was a
    beautiful day that we left Macclesfield for Burslem. We found the
    brethren in Macclesfield in good spirits, and in a good state as
    to appearance. They appear to be well suited with Brother James
    Galley; I think he will be a useful man in this kingdom. We found
    Brother George A. Smith in Burslem, not in the best of health. He
    is like the rest of us, the climate does not agree with him; he is
    affected with a bleeding at the lungs. We stayed with him at the
    Potteries. I preached two evenings. The Church is in a good state;
    some of the members have a pretty hard time of it. Brother Smith
    will stay there for the present.

    Saturday, 28th, left for the next stopping place in Grets Green,
    where we spent the Sabbath. On Saturday evening we called to see
    Sister Roden, Father Patrick's daughter; she was very glad to see
    us, and wanted we should stay all night. Her husband was very
    kind to us, and bid us or other Elders welcome to his house at
    any time. We could not stay; took tea with them, and agreed to
    send Elder Lorenzo Snow there if he could come; blessed them, and
    left them. I preached in the morning to the Saints in Grets Green,
    stayed afternoon meeting, and then walked to Birmingham; was very
    tired; heard Elder Snow preach; he is a nice young man, I think.
    Brother Kimball also spoke to the people after Brother Snow had
    got through. We found Brother Robert Williams here; he opened the
    meeting; he seems to be full of the Spirit.

    On Monday at 12 o'clock, Brother Kimball and myself took the
    railway. Brother Williams started on foot for London. We arrived
    here on Monday evening about six o'clock; found Brother Woodruff
    well and in good spirits. We have been pretty busy since we have
    been here.

    Brigham Young.

A great part of the city of Messina, Sicily, was this day destroyed by an earthquake. Such was the force of the first shock that the inhabitants of the town were buried in an instant beneath the ruins.

Sunday, 6.--Elders Young and Kimball preached in Barratt's Academy, London, and administered the sacrament in the evening.

[Sidenote: Elder Taylor's Defense of the Work.]

Monday, 7.--Elder John Taylor issued his third pamphlet in defense of the truth, against the attacks of the Rev. Robert Hays, Wesleyan Minister, Douglas, Isle of Man; the three containing thirty-five pages of closely printed matter,  which are a complete expose of the corruptions of the Wesleyan priesthood, and a clear illustration of the truth of the Latter-day work.

Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Wilford Woodruff, visited the Anatomical Department of the College of Surgeons, London.

Wednesday, 9.--Elders Young and Kimball visited St. Paul's Cathedral, the Monument, London and Southwark Bridges and also the British Museum.

Thursday, 10.--Elder Levi Richards left Manchester for Herefordshire.

Sunday, 13.--I attended the High Council at my office. Robert D. Foster was on trial for lying, slandering the authorities of the Church, profane swearing, etc. Witness was examined in part and trial adjourned to the 20th.

Monday, 14.--Ebenezer Robinson and Don Carlos Smith dissolved co-partnership. The Times and Seasons is to be continued by Don Carlos Smith.

Wednesday, 16.--This day the act chartering the "City of Nauvoo," the "Nauvoo Legion," and the "University of the City of Nauvoo," was signed by the Governor, having previously passed the House and Senate. Following is the act in extenso.

    An Act to Incorporate the City of Nauvoo.

    Section 1. Be it enacted by the people of the State of Illinois,
    represented in the General Assembly, that all that district of
    country embraced within the following boundaries, to wit: beginning
    at the north east corner of section thirty-one in Township seven,
    north of range eight, west of the fourth principal meridian, in the
    county of Hancock, and running thence west to the northwest corner
    of said section, thence north to the Mississippi river, thence west
    to the middle of the main channel of the said river; thence down
    the middle of said channel to a point due west of the southeast
    corner of fractional section number twelve in township six, north
    of range nine, west of the fourth principal meridian, thence east
    to the southeast corner of said section twelve, thence north on the
    range line between township six north, and range eight and nine
    west, to the southwest corner of section six in township six north
    of range eight west, thence east to the southeast corner of
    said section, thence north to the place of beginning, including
    the town plats of Commerce and Nauvoo, shall hereafter be called
    and known by the name of the "City of Nauvoo," and the inhabitants
    thereof are hereby constituted a body corporate and politic by the
    name aforesaid, and shall have perpetual succession, and may have
    and use a common seal which they may change and alter at pleasure.

    Sec. 2. Whenever any tract of land adjoining the "City of Nauvoo"
    shall have been laid out into town lots, and duly recorded
    according to law, the same shall form a part of the "City of
    Nauvoo."

    Sec. 3. The inhabitants of said city, by the name and style
    aforesaid, shall have power to sue and be sued, to plead and be
    impleaded, defend and be defended, in all courts of law and equity,
    and all actions whatsoever; to purchase, receive and hold property,
    real and personal, in said city, to purchase, receive, and hold
    real property beyond the city, for burying grounds, or for other
    public purposes, for the use of the inhabitants of said city, to
    sell, lease, convey or dispose of property, real or personal, for
    the benefit of the city, to improve and protect such property, and
    to do all other things in relation thereto as natural persons.

    Sec. 4. There shall be a City Council, to consist of a Mayor, four
    Aldermen, and nine Councilors, who shall have the qualifications
    of electors of said city, and shall be chosen by the qualified
    voters thereof, and shall hold their offices for two years, and
    until their successors shall be elected and qualified. The City
    Council shall judge of the qualifications, elections and returns of
    their own members, and a majority of them shall form a quorum to
    do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and
    compel the attendance of absent members, under such penalties as
    may be prescribed by ordinance.

    Sec. 5. The Mayor, Aldermen and Councilors, before entering upon
    the duties of their office, shall take and subscribe an oath or
    affirmation that they will support the Constitution of the United
    States, and of this State and that they will well and truly
    perform the duties of their offices to the best of their skill and
    abilities.

    Sec. 6. On the first Monday of February next, and every two years
    thereafter, an election shall be held for the election of one
    Mayor, four Aldermen, and nine Councillors; and at the first
    election under the Act, three Judges shall be chosen viva voce
    by the electors present. The said Judges shall choose two Clerks,
    and the Judges and Clerks, before entering upon their duties,
    shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation such as is now
    required by law to be taken by Judges or Clerks of other elections
    and at all subsequent elections, the necessary number of Judges
    and Clerks shall be appointed by the City Council. At the first
    election thus held, the polls shall be opened at 9 o'clock a. m.
    and closed at 6 o'clock p. m.; at the close of the polls the votes
    shall be counted  and a statement thereof proclaimed at the
    front door of the house at which said election shall be held; and
    the Clerks shall leave with each person elected, or at his place of
    residence, within five days after the election, a written notice
    of his election; and each person so notified shall within ten
    days after the election take the oath or affirmation hereinbefore
    mentioned, a certificate of which oath shall be deposited with the
    Recorder, whose appointment is hereafter provided for, and be by
    him preserved; and subsequent elections shall be held, conducted
    and returns thereof made as may be provided for by ordinance of the
    City Council.

    Sec. 7. All free white male inhabitants, who are of the age of
    twenty one years, who are entitled to vote for State Officers,
    and who shall have been actual residents of the city sixty days
    next preceding said election, shall be entitled to vote for City
    Officers.

    Sec. 8. The City Council shall have authority to levy and collect
    taxes, for city purposes, upon all property, real and personal,
    within the limits of the city, one-half per cent per annum, upon
    the assessed value thereof, and may enforce payment of the same
    in any manner, to be provided by ordinance, not repugnant to the
    Constitution of the United States or of this State.

    Sec. 9. The City Council shall have power to appoint a Recorder,
    Treasurer, Assessor, Marshal, Supervisor of streets, and all such
    other officers as may be necessary, and to prescribe their duties
    and remove them from office at pleasure.

    Sec. 10. The City Council shall have power to require, of all
    officers appointed in pursuance of this Act, bonds, with penalty
    and security, for the faithful performance of their respective
    duties, such as may be deemed expedient; and also to require all
    officers appointed as aforesaid, to take an oath for the faithful
    performance of the duties of their respective offices.

    Sec. 11. The City Council shall have power and authority to make,
    ordain, establish and execute all such ordinances, not repugnant
    to the Constitution of the United States or of this State, as they
    may deem necessary for the peace, benefit, good order, regulation,
    convenience, and cleanliness of said city: for the protection of
    property therein from destruction by fire, or otherwise, and for
    the health and happiness thereof: they shall have power to fill all
    vacancies that may happen by death, resignation, or removal, in
    any of the offices herein made elective; to fix and establish all
    the fees of the office of said corporation not herein established;
    to impose such fines, not exceeding one hundred dollars, for each
    offense, as they may deem just, for refusing to accept any office
    under the corporation, or for misconduct therein; to divide the
    city into wards; to add to the number of Aldermen and Councillors,
     and apportion them among the several wards as may be most
    just and conducive to the interests of the city.

    Sec. 12. To license, tax, and regulate auctions, merchants,
    retailers, grocers, hawkers, peddlers, butchers, pawnbrokers, and
    money-changers.

    Sec. 13. The City Council shall have exclusive power within the
    city, by ordinance, to license, regulate, and restrain the keeping
    of ferries; to regulate the police of the city; to impose fines,
    forfeitures, and penalties for the breach of any ordinance, and
    provide for the recovery of such fines and forfeitures, and the
    enforcement of such penalties; and to pass such ordinances, as may
    be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers
    specified in this Act; provided such ordinances are not repugnant
    to the Constitution of the United States or of this State, and in
    fine to exercise such other legislative powers as are conferred on
    the City Council of the City of Springfield, by an Act entitled an
    Act to Incorporate the City of Springfield, approved February 3rd,
    1840.

    Sec. 14. All ordinances passed by the City Council shall, within
    one month after they shall have been passed, be published in some
    newspaper printed in the city, or certified copies thereof be
    posted up in three of the most public places in the city.

    Sec. 15. All ordinances of the city may be proven by the seal of
    the corporation, and when printed or published in book or pamphlet
    form purporting to be printed or published by authority of the
    corporation, the same shall be received in evidence in all courts
    or places without further proof.

    Sec. 16. The Mayor and Aldermen shall be conservators of the peace
    within the limits of said city, and shall have all the powers of
    Justices of the Peace therein, both in civil and criminal cases,
    arising under the laws of the State; they shall, as Justices of the
    Peace, within the limits of said city, perform the same duties, be
    governed by the same laws, give the same bonds and security, as
    other Justices of the Peace, and be commissioned as Justices of the
    Peace in and for said city by the Governor.

    Sec. 17. The Mayor shall have exclusive jurisdiction in all
    cases arising under the ordinances of the corporation, and shall
    issue such process as may be necessary to carry such ordinances
    into execution and effect; appeals may be had from any decision
    or judgment of said Mayor or Aldermen, arising under the city
    ordinances, to the Municipal Court, under such regulations as may
    be presented by ordinance; which court shall be composed of the
    Mayor as Chief Justice, and the Aldermen as Associate Justices,
    and from the final judgment of the Municipal Court to the Circuit
    Court of Hancock county, in the same manner of appeals  are
    taken from judgments of the Justices of the Peace; provided that
    the parties litigant shall have a right to a trial by a jury of
    twelve men in all cases before the Municipal Court. The Municipal
    Court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases
    arising under the ordinances of the City Council.

    Sec. 18. The Municipal Court shall sit on the first Monday of every
    month, and the City Council at such times and place as may be
    prescribed by city ordinance; special meetings of which may at any
    time be called by the Mayor or any two Aldermen.

    Sec. 19. All process issued by the Mayor, Aldermen, or Municipal
    Court, shall be directed to the Marshal, and, in the execution
    thereof, he shall be governed by the same laws as are or may be
    prescribed for the direction and compensation of constables in
    similar cases. The Marshal shall also perform such other duties as
    may be required of him under the ordinances of said city, and shall
    be the principal ministerial officer.

    Sec. 20. It shall be the duty of the Recorder to make and keep
    accurate records of all ordinances made by the City Council, and
    of all their proceedings in their corporate capacity, which record
    shall at all times be open to the inspection of the electors of
    said city, and shall perform such other duties as may be required
    of him by the ordinances of the City Council, and shall serve as
    Clerk of the Municipal Court.

    Sec. 21. When it shall be necessary to take private property for
    the opening, widening, or altering any public street, lane, avenue,
    or alley, the corporation shall make a just compensation therefor
    to the person whose property is to be taken, and if the amount of
    such compensation cannot be agreed upon, the Mayor shall cause the
    same to be ascertained by a jury of six disinterested freeholders
    of the city.

    Sec. 22. All jurors compelled to inquire into the amount of
    benefits or damages that shall happen to the owners of property
    so proposed to be taken, shall first be sworn to that effect, and
    shall return to the Mayor their inquest in writing, signed by each
    juror.

    Sec. 23. In case the Mayor shall at any time be guilty of a
    palpable omission of duty, or shall wilfully, and corruptly be
    guilty of oppression, mal conduct, or partiality, in the discharge
    of the duties of his office, he shall be liable to be indicted in
    the Circuit Court of Hancock county, and on conviction he shall be
    fined not more than two hundred dollars, and the Court shall have
    power on the recommendation of the jury to add to the judgment of
    the Court that he be removed from office.

    Sec. 24. The City Council may establish and organize an institution
    of learning within the limits of the city, for the teaching of
    the Arts, Sciences, and Learned Professions, to be called the
    "University of the City of Nauvoo," which institution shall be
    under the control and  management of a Board of Trustees,
    consisting of a Chancellor, Registrar, and twenty-three Regents,
    which Board shall thereafter be a body corporate and politic, with
    perpetual succession by the name of the "Chancellor and Regents of
    the University of the City of Nauvoo," and shall have full power to
    pass, ordain, establish, and execute, all such laws and ordinances
    as they may consider necessary for the welfare and prosperity of
    said University, its officers and students; provided that the said
    laws and ordinances shall not be repugnant to the Constitution of
    the United States, or of this State; and provided also, that the
    Trustees shall at all times be appointed by the City Council, and
    shall have all the powers and privileges for the advancement of the
    cause of education which appertain to the Trustees of any other
    College or University of this State.

    Sec. 25. The City Council may organize the inhabitants of said
    city, subject to military duty, into a body of independent military
    men, to be called the "Nauvoo Legion," the Court Martial of which
    shall be composed of the commissioned officers of said Legion,
    and constitute the law-making department, with full power and
    authority to make, ordain, establish, and execute all such laws
    and ordinances as may be considered necessary for the benefit,
    government, and regulation of said Legion; provided said Court
    Martial shall pass no law or act, repugnant to, or inconsistent
    with, the Constitution of the United States, or of this State; and
    provided also that the officers of the Legion shall be commissioned
    by the Governor of the State. The said Legion shall perform the
    same amount of military duty as is now or may be hereafter required
    of the regular militia of the State, and shall be at the disposal
    of the Mayor in executing the laws and ordinances of the city
    corporation, and the laws of the State, and at the disposal of the
    Governor for the public defense, and the execution of the laws of
    the State or of the United States, and shall be entitled to their
    proportion of the public arms; and provided also, that said Legion
    shall be exempt from all other military duty.

    Sec. 26. The inhabitants of the city of Nauvoo are hereby exempted
    from working on any road beyond the limits of the city, and for
    the purpose of keeping the streets, lanes, avenues, and alleys in
    repair, to require of the male inhabitants of said city, over the
    age of twenty-one, and under fifty years, to labor on said streets,
    lanes, avenues, and alleys, not exceeding three days in each year;
    any person failing to perform such labor, when duly notified by the
    Supervisor, shall forfeit and pay the sum of one dollar per day for
    each day so neglected or refused.

    Sec. 27. The City Council shall have power to provide for the
    punishment of offenders by imprisonment in the county or city jail,
    in all cases when such offenders shall fail or refuse to pay the
    fines and forfeitures, which may be recovered against them.

     Sec. 28. This Act is hereby declared to be a public Act, and
    shall take effect on the first Monday of February next.

    Wm. L. D. Ewing,

    Speaker of the House of Representatives.

    S. H. Anderson,

    Speaker of the Senate.

    Approved Dec. 16, 1840.

    Thos. Carlin.

    State of Illinois, Office of Secretary of State.

    I, Stephen A. Douglas, Secretary of State, do hereby certify that
    the foregoing is a true and perfect copy of the enrolled law now on
    file in my office.

    Witness my hand, and Seal of State, at Springfield, this 18th day
    of December, 1840.

    [L. S.]

    S. A. Douglas.

    Secretary of State.

The following are the Legislative powers alluded to in the 13th section of the foregoing Act, as pertaining to the City Council of the City of Springfield, and which consequently became a part of the Charter of the City of Nauvoo, to wit:

    Of the Legislative Powers of the City Council.

    Sec. 1. The City Council shall have powers and authority to levy
    and collect taxes upon all property, real and personal, within
    the city, not exceeding one-half per cent., per annum, upon the
    assessed valuation thereof, and may enforce the payment of the
    same in any manner prescribed by ordinance, not repugnant to the
    Constitution of the United States and of this State.

    Sec. 2. The City Council shall have power to require of all
    officers appointed in pursuance of the Charters, bonds with penalty
    and security for the faithful performance of their respective
    duties as may be deemed expedient, and also to require all
    officers appointed as aforesaid, to take an oath for the faithful
    performance of the duties of their respective offices upon entering
    upon the discharge of the same.

    Sec. 3. To establish, support, and regulate common schools, to
    borrow money on the credit of the city; provided, that no sum or
    sums of money shall be borrowed at a greater interest than six per
    cent per annum, nor shall the interest on the aggregate of all the
    sums borrowed and outstanding ever exceed one half of the city
    revenue, arising for taxes assessed on real property within the
    corporation.

     Sec. 4. To make regulations to prevent the introduction of
    contagious diseases into the city, to make Quarantine Laws for that
    purpose, and enforce the same.

    Sec. 5. To appropriate and provide for the payment of the debt and
    expenses of the city.

    Sec. 6. To establish hospitals, and make regulations for the
    government of the same.

    Sec. 7. To make regulations to secure the general health of the
    inhabitants, to declare what shall be a nuisance, and to prevent
    and remove the same.

    Sec. 8. To provide the city with water, to dig wells and erect
    pumps in the streets for the extinguishment of fires, and
    convenience of the inhabitants.

    Sec. 9. To open, alter, widen, extend, establish, grade, pave, or
    otherwise improve and keep in repair streets, avenues, lanes, and
    alleys.

    Sec. 10. To establish, erect, and keep in repair bridges.

    Sec. 11. To divide the city into wards, and specify the boundaries
    thereof, and create additional wards, as the occasion may require.

    Sec. 12. To provide for lighting the streets and erecting lamp
    posts.

    Sec. 13. To establish, support, and regulate night watches.

    Sec. 14. To erect market houses, establish markets, and market
    places, and provide for the government and regulation thereof.

    Sec. 15. To provide for erecting all needful buildings for the use
    of the city.

    Sec. 16. To provide for enclosing, improving, and regulating all
    public grounds belonging to the city.

    Sec. 17. To license, tax, and regulate auctioneers, merchants, and
    retailers, grocers, taverns ordinaries, hawkers, peddlers, brokers,
    pawnbrokers, and money changers.

    Sec. 18. To license, tax, and regulate hackney carriages, wagons,
    carts and drays, and fix the rates to be charged for the carriage
    of persons, and for the wagonage, cartage and drayage of property.

    Sec. 19. To license and regulate porters and fix the rates of
    porterage.

    Sec. 20. To license and regulate theatrical and other exhibitions,
    shows and amusements.

    Sec. 21. To tax, restrain, prohibit, and suppress, tippling houses,
    dram shops, gaming houses, bawdy and other disorderly houses.

    Sec. 22. To provide for the prevention and extinguishment of fires,
    and to organize and establish fire companies.

    Sec. 23. To regulate the fixing of chimneys, and the flues thereof,
    and stove pipes.

     Sec. 24. To regulate the storage of gunpowder, tar, pitch,
    rosin, and other combustible materials.

    Sec. 25. To regulate and order parapet walls, and partition fences.

    Sec. 26. To establish standard weights and measures, and regulate
    the weights and measures to be used in the city in all other cases
    not provided for by law.

    Sec. 27. To provide for the inspection and measuring of lumber and
    other building materials, and for the measurement of all kinds of
    mechanical work.

    Sec. 28. To provide for the inspection and weighing of hay, lime,
    and stone coal, the measuring of charcoal, firewood, and other
    fuel, to be sold or used within the city.

    Sec. 29. To provide for and regulate the inspection of tobacco, and
    of beef, pork, flour, meal, and whiskey in barrels.

    Sec. 30. To regulate the weight, quality, and price of bread, sold,
    and used in the city.

    Sec. 31. To provide for taking the enumeration of the inhabitants
    of the city.

    Sec. 32. To regulate the election of city officers, and provide
    for removing from office any person holding an office created by
    ordinance.

    Sec. 33. To fix the compensation of all city officers, and regulate
    the fees of jurors, witnesses, and others, for services rendered
    under this Act or any ordinance.

    Sec. 34. To regulate the police of the city, to impose fines,
    and forfeitures, and penalties, for the breach of any ordinance,
    and provide for the recovery and appropriation of such fines and
    forfeitures, and the enforcement of such penalties.

    Sec. 35. The City Council shall have exclusive power within
    the city by ordinance, to license, regulate, and suppress, and
    restrain, billiard tables, and from one to twenty pin alleys, and
    every other description of gaming or gambling.

    Sec. 36. The City Council shall have power to make all ordinances
    which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution
    the powers specified in this Act, so that such ordinances be not
    repugnant to nor inconsistent with, the constitution of the United
    States or of this state.

    Sec. 37. The style of the ordinances of the city shall be--"Be it
    ordained by the city council of the city of Springfield--[Nauvoo]."

    Sec. 38. All ordinances passed by the city council shall, within
    one month after they shall have been passed, be published in some
    newspaper published in the city, and shall not be in force until
    they shall have been published as aforesaid.

    Sec. 39. All ordinances of the city may be proven by the seal of
    the  corporation, and when printed and published by authority
    of the corporation, the same shall be received in evidence in all
    courts and places without further proof.

John C. Bennett who had been delegated to Springfield to carry our petition for a City Charter, announced the passage of the bill, as follows--

    Letter of John C. Bennett to the "Times and Seasons"--Announcing
    the passage of the act incorporating Nauvoo.

    City Of Springfield, December 16, 1840.

    Editors of the Times and Seasons:

    The act incorporating the city of Nauvoo has just passed the
    council of revision, and is now a law of the land, to take effect
    and be in force from and after the first Monday in February
    next. The aforesaid act contains two additional charters--one
    incorporating the "Nauvoo Legion," the other the "University of the
    city of Nauvoo."

    All these charters are very broad and liberal, conferring the most
    plenary powers on the corporators. Illinois has acquitted herself
    with honor, and her state legislators shall never be forgotten.
    Every power we asked has been granted, every request gratified,
    every desire fulfilled. In the senate Mr. Little cancelled every
    obligation to our people, and faithfully, and honestly, and with
    untiring diligence, discharged every obligation devolving upon him
    as our immediate representative in the Upper House. Mark well that
    man, and do him honor. Snyder, and Ralston, and Moore, and Ross,
    and Stapp, and numerous others, likewise in that branch of our
    state government, rendered as very essential services; and the act
    passed that body without a dissenting voice.

    In the House of Representatives, Charles, our immediate
    Representative in the Lower House, was at his post and discharged
    his duty as a faithful representative; he is an acting, and not
    a talking man, and has fulfilled all his obligations to us. Many
    members in this house, likewise, were warmly in our favor; and with
    only one or two dissenting voices, every representative appeared
    inclined to extend to us all such powers as they considered us
    justly entitled to, and voted for the law; and here I should not
    forget to mention, that Lincoln, [2] whose name we erased from the
    electoral ticket in November (not however on account of any dislike
    to him as a man, but simply because his was the last name on the
    ticket, and we desired to show our friendship to the Democratic
     party by substituting the name of Ralston for some one of the
    Whigs) had the magnanimity to vote for our act, and came forward,
    after the final vote to the bar of the house, and cordially
    congratulated me on its passage.

    Our worthy governor is certainly disposed to do us ample justice in
    every respect, and to extend to us every facility for our future
    happiness and prosperity.

    Illinois has certainly done her duty, and her whole duty; and now
    it becomes us to show ourselves upright, honest, just, worthy of
    the favors bestowed by noble, generous, and magnanimous statesmen,
    I have said that we are a law-abiding people, and we must now show
    it. The state has washed her hands in granting all our petitions,
    and if we do not now show ourselves approved, the curse must fall
    upon our own heads. Justice, equal justice, should be our fixed
    object and purpose, and the Great God will prosper us; length of
    days will be in our right hand, and in our left, glory and honor.

    Yours, &c.,

    John C. Bennett.

The City Charter of Nauvoo is of my own plan and device. I concocted it for the salvation of the Church, and on principles so broad, that every honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without distinction of sect or party.

Footnotes:

1. Elder Taylor was also opposed by Rev. Thomas Hamilton, whom he met in a public debate and easily vanquished. "No great honor, however," says Elder Taylor in his account of the affair, "as he was a very ignorant man." Elder Taylor secured for his meeting place the Wellington rooms, and from the platform he answered all who opposed him, and succeeded, despite all opposition, in organizing a branch of the Church in Douglas.

2. This doubtless refers to Abraham Lincoln who was then a member of the legislature. See Nicolay and Hay's Abraham Lincoln, Vol. I, p. 42 et seq.
