Reconstruction of Church Affairs at Nauvoo--Revelation--Municipal Organization of Nauvoo--Installation of Civic and Military Officers.

Friday, January 15, 1841.--I published the following in the Times and Seasons--

    Reproof of John E. Page and Orson Hyde.

    Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page are informed that the Lord
    is not well pleased with them, in consequence of delaying their
    mission, (John E. Page in particular) and they are requested,
    by the First Presidency, to hasten their journey towards their
    destination.

Sunday, 17.--Elder Brigham Young preached twice in the Music Hall, Liverpool.

Monday, 18.--Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards commenced reading the Book of Mormon, and writing an index to the English edition.

Tuesday, 19.--Elder Amos Fielding has baptized twenty-nine at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England.

I received the following revelation: [1]

    Revelation Given to Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, January 19th, 1841.

    Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, I am
    well pleased with your offering and acknowledgments, which you have
    made, for unto this end have I raised you up, that I might show
    forth my wisdom through the weak things of the earth.

    Your prayers are acceptable before me, and in answer to them I say
    unto you, that you are now called immediately to make a solemn
    proclamation of my Gospel, and of this Stake which I have planted
    to be a  corner-stone of Zion, which shall be polished with
    the refinement which is after the similitude of a palace.

    This proclamation shall be made to all the kings of the world, to
    the four corners thereof; to the honorable President elect, and the
    high-minded Governors of the nation in which you live, and to all
    the nations of the earth, scattered abroad.

    Let it be written in the spirit of meekness and by the power of the
    Holy Ghost, which shall be in you at the time of the writing of the
    same;

    For it shall be given you by the Holy Ghost to know my will
    concerning those kings and authorities, even what shall befall them
    in a time to come.

    For, behold! I am about to call upon them to give heed to the light
    and glory of Zion, for the set time has come to favor her.

    Call ye, therefore, upon them with loud proclamation, and with your
    testimony, fearing them not, for they are as grass, and all their
    glory as the flower thereof which soon falleth, that they may be
    left also without excuse,

    And that I may visit them in the day of visitation, when I shall
    unveil the face of my covering, to appoint the portion of the
    oppressor among hypocrites, where there is gnashing of teeth, if
    they reject my servants and my testimony which I have revealed unto
    them.

    And again, I will visit and soften their hearts, many of them for
    your good, that ye may find grace in their eyes, that they may
    come to the light of truth, and the Gentiles to the exaltation or
    lifting up of Zion.

    For the day of my visitation cometh speedily, in an hour when ye
    think not of, and where shall be the safety of my people, and
    refuge for those who shall be left of them?

    Awake, O kings of the earth! Come ye, O, come ye, with your gold
    and your silver, to the help of my people, to the house of the
    daughters of Zion.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Robert B. Thompson
    help you to write this proclamation, for I am well pleased with
    him, and that he should be with you;

    Let him, therefore, hearken to your counsel, and I will bless him
    with a multiplicity of blessings; let him be faithful and true in
    all things from henceforth, and he shall be great in mine eyes;

    But let him remember that his stewardship will I require at his
    hands.

    And again, verily I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum
    Smith, for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his
    heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith
    the Lord.

    Again, let my servant John C. Bennett, help you in your labor in
    sending my word to the kings and people of the earth, and stand
    by  you, even you my servant Joseph Smith, in the hour of
    affliction, and his reward shall not fail, if he receive counsel;

    And for his love he shall be great, for he shall be mine if he do
    this, saith the Lord. I have seen the work which he hath done,
    which I accept, if he continue, and will crown him with blessings
    and great glory.

    And again, I say unto you, that it is my will that my servant Lyman
    Wight should continue in preaching for Zion, in the spirit of
    meekness confessing me before the world, and I will bear him up as
    on eagle's wings, and he shall beget glory and honor to himself,
    and unto my name.

    That when he shall finish his work, that I may receive him unto
    myself, even as I did my servant David Patten, who is with me at
    this time, and also my servant Edward Partridge, and also my aged
    servant Joseph Smith, Sen., who sitteth with Abraham at his right
    hand, and blessed and holy is he, for he is mine.

    And again, verily I say unto you, my servant George Miller is
    without guile: he may be trusted because of the integrity of his
    heart; and for the love which he has to my testimony I, the Lord,
    love him;

    I therefore say unto you, I seal upon his head the office of a
    bishopric, like unto my servant Edward Partridge, that he may
    receive the consecrations of mine house, that he may administer
    blessing upon the heads of the poor of my people, saith the Lord.
    Let no man despise my servant George, for he shall honor me.

    Let my servant George, and my servant Lyman, and my servant John
    Snider, and others, build a house unto my name, such an one as my
    servant Joseph shall show unto them; upon the place which he shall
    show unto them also.

    And it shall be for a house for boarding, a house that strangers
    may come from afar to lodge therein; therefore let it be a good
    house, worthy of all acceptation, that the weary traveler may find
    health and safety while he shall contemplate the word of the Lord;
    and the cornerstone I have appointed for Zion.

    This house shall be a healthy habitation if it be built unto my
    name, and if the governor which shall be appointed unto it shall
    not suffer any pollution to come upon it. It shall be holy, or the
    Lord your God will not dwell therein.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let all my Saints come from afar;

    And send ye swift messengers, yea, chosen messengers, and say
    unto them: Come ye, with all your gold, and your silver, and your
    precious stones, and with all your antiquities; and with all who
    have knowledge of antiquities, that will come, may come, and bring
    the box-tree, and the fir-tree, and the pine-tree, together with
    all the precious trees of the earth;

     And with iron, with copper, and with brass, and with zinc,
    and with all your precious things of the earth, and build a house
    to my name for the Most High to dwell therein;

    For there is not a place found on earth that He may come and
    restore again that which was lost unto you, or which He hath taken
    away, even the fullness of the Priesthood;

    For a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my
    Saints, may be baptized for those who are dead;

    For this ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable
    to me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to
    build a house unto me.

    But I command you, all ye my Saints, to build a house unto me; and
    I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me, and
    during this time your baptisms shall be acceptable unto me.

    But behold, at the end of this appointment, your baptisms for your
    dead shall not be acceptable unto me; and if you do not these
    things at the end of the appointment, ye shall be rejected as a
    church, with your dead, saith the Lord your God.

    For verily I say unto you, that after you have had sufficient time
    to build a house to me, wherein the ordinance of baptizing for the
    dead belongeth, and for which the same was instituted from before
    the foundation of the world, your baptisms for your dead cannot be
    acceptable unto me.

    For therein are the keys of the holy Priesthood, ordained that you
    may receive honor and glory.

    And after this time, your baptisms for the dead, by those who are
    scattered abroad, are not acceptable unto me, saith the Lord;

    For it is ordained that in Zion, and in her stakes, and in
    Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be
    the places for your baptisms for your dead.

    And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be
    acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you
    have built to my name? For, for this cause I commanded Moses that
    he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in
    the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that
    those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before
    the world was;

    Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and
    your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn
    assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices, by the sons of
    Levi, and for your oracles in your most holy places, wherein you
    receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the
    beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the
    glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by
    the ordinance of my holy house which my people are always commanded
    to build unto my holy name.

     And verily I say unto you, let this house be built unto my
    name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein, unto my people;

    For I deign to reveal unto my Church things which have been kept
    hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to
    the dispensation of the fullness of times;

    And I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to
    this house, and the Priesthood thereof; and the place whereon it
    shall be built;

    And ye shall build it on the place where you have contemplated
    building it, for that is the spot which I have chosen for you to
    build it;

    If ye labor with all your might, I will consecrate that spot that
    it shall be made holy;

    And if my people will hearken unto my voice, and unto the voice of
    my servants whom I have appointed to lead my people, behold, verily
    I say unto you, they shall not be moved out of their place.

    But if they will not hearken to my voice, nor unto the voice of
    these men whom I have appointed, they shall not be blest, because
    they pollute mine holy grounds, and mine holy ordinances, and
    charters, and my holy words which I give unto them.

    And it shall come to pass, that if you build a house unto my name,
    and do not do the things that I say, I will not perform the oath
    which I make unto you, neither fulfill the promises which ye expect
    at my hands, saith the Lord;

    For instead of blessings, ye, by your own works, bring cursings,
    wrath, indignation, and judgments upon your own heads, by your
    follies, and by all your abominations, which you practice before
    me, saith the Lord.

    Verily, verily I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to
    any of the sons of men, to do a work unto my name, and those sons
    of men go with all their might, and with all they have, to perform
    that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come
    upon them, and hinder them from performing that work; behold, it
    behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those
    sons of men, but to accept of their offerings;

    And the iniquity and transgression of my holy laws and
    commandments, I will visit upon the heads of those who hindered my
    work, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent
    not, and hate me, saith the Lord God.

    Therefore for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those
    whom I commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in
    Jackson county, Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith
    the Lord your God.

    And I will answer judgment, wrath, and indignation, wailing, and
     anguish, and gnashing of teeth upon their heads, unto the
    third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not and hate
    me, saith the Lord your God.

    And this I make an example unto you, for your consolation
    concerning all those who have been commanded to do a work, and have
    been hindered by the hands of their enemies, and by oppression,
    saith the Lord your God;

    For I am the Lord your God, and will save all those of your
    brethren who have been pure in heart, and have been slain in the
    land of Missouri, saith the Lord.

    And again, verily I say unto you, I command you again to build a
    house to my name, even in this place that you may prove yourselves
    unto me that ye are faithful in all things whatsoever I command
    you, that I may bless you, and crown you with honor, immortality,
    and eternal life.

    And now I say unto you, as pertaining to my boarding house which I
    have commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, let it
    be built unto my name, and let my name be named upon it, and let my
    servant Joseph, and his house have place therein, from generation
    to generation;

    For this anointing have I put upon his head, that his blessing
    shall also be put upon the head of his posterity after him,

    And as I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth,
    even so I say unto my servant Joseph, in thee and in thy seed,
    shall the kindred of the earth be blessed.

    Therefore, let my servant Joseph and his seed after him have place
    in that house, from generation to generation, for ever and ever,
    saith the Lord.

    And let the name of that house be called Nauvoo House, and let it
    be a delightful habitation for man, and a resting place for the
    weary traveler, that he may contemplate the glory of Zion, and the
    glory of this, the corner-stone thereof;

    That he may receive also the counsel from those whom I have set to
    be as plants of renown, and as watchmen upon her walls.

    Behold, verily I say unto you, let my servant George Miller, and
    my servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant
    Peter Haws, organize themselves, and appoint one of them to be a
    president over their quorum for the purpose of building that house.

    And they shall form a constitution whereby they may receive stock
    for the building of that house.

    And they shall not receive less than fifty dollars for a share of
    stock in that house, and they shall be permitted to receive fifteen
    thousand dollars from any one man for stock in that house;

     But they shall not be permitted to receive over fifteen
    thousand dollars stock from any one man;

    And they shall not be permitted to receive under fifty dollars for
    a share of stock from any one man in that house;

    And they shall not be permitted to receive any man as a stockholder
    in this house, except the same shall pay his stock into their hands
    at the time he receives stock;

    And in proportion to the amount of stock he pays into their hands,
    he shall receive stock in that house; but if he pays nothing into
    their hands, he shall not receive any stock in that house.

    And if any pay stock into their hands, it shall be for stock in
    that house, for himself, and for his generation after him, from
    generation to generation, so long as he and his heirs shall hold
    that stock, and do not sell or convey the stock away out of their
    hands by their own free will and act, if you will do my will, saith
    the Lord your God.

    And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant George Miller,
    and my servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my
    servant Peter Haws, receive any stock into their hands, in moneys
    or in properties, wherein they receive the real value of moneys,
    they shall not appropriate any portion of that stock to any other
    purpose, only in that house;

    And if they do appropriate any portion of that stock anywhere else,
    only in that house, without the consent of the stockholder, and do
    not repay fourfold for the stock which they appropriate anywhere
    else, only in that house, they shall be accursed, and shall be
    moved out of their place, saith the Lord God, for I, the Lord, am
    God, and cannot be mocked in any of these things.

    Verily I say unto you, let my servant Joseph pay stock into their
    hands for the building of that house, as seemeth him good; but my
    servant Joseph cannot pay over fifteen thousand dollars stock in
    that house, nor under fifty dollars; neither can any other man,
    saith the Lord.

    And there are others also who wish to know my will concerning them,
    for they have asked it at my hands.

    Therefore I say unto you concerning my servant Vinson Knight, if he
    will do my will, let him put stock into that house for himself, and
    for his generation after him, from generation to generation,

    And let him lift up his voice long and loud, in the midst of the
    people, to plead the cause of the poor and the needy, and let him
    not fail, neither let his heart faint, and I will accept of his
    offerings, for they shall not be unto me as the offerings of Cain,
    for he shall be mine, saith the Lord.

     Let his family rejoice, and turn away their hearts from
    affliction, for I have chosen him and anointed him, and he shall be
    honored in the midst of his house, for I will forgive all his sins,
    saith the Lord. Amen.

    Verily I say unto you, let my servant Hyrum put stock into that
    house as seemeth him good, for himself and his generation after
    him, from generation to generation.

    Let my servant Isaac Galland put stock into that house, for I, the
    Lord, love him for the work he hath done, and will forgive all his
    sins; therefore, let him be remembered for an interest in that
    house from generation to generation.

    Let my servant Isaac Galland be appointed among you, and be
    ordained by my servant William Marks, and be blessed of him, to
    go with my servant Hyrum, to accomplish the work that my servant
    Joseph shall point out to them, and they shall be greatly blessed.

    Let my servant William Marks pay stock into that house, as seemeth
    him good, for himself and his generation, from generation to
    generation.

    Let my servant Henry G. Sherwood pay stock into that house,
    as seemeth him good, for himself and his seed after him from
    generation to generation.

    Let my servant William Law pay stock into that house, for himself
    and his seed after him, from generation to generation.

    If he will do my will, let him not take his family unto the eastern
    lands, even unto Kirtland; nevertheless, I, the Lord, will build
    up Kirtland, but I, the Lord, have a scourge prepared for the
    inhabitants thereof.

    And with my servant Almon Babbitt, there are many things with which
    I am not pleased; behold, he aspireth to establish his council
    instead of the council which I have ordained, even the Presidency
    of my Church, and he setteth up a golden calf for the worship of my
    people.

    Let no man go from this place who has come here essaying to keep my
    commandments.

    If they live here let them live unto me; and if they die, let them
    die unto me; for they shall rest from all their labors here, and
    shall continue their works.

    Therefore let my servant William put his trust in me, and cease to
    fear concerning his family, because of the sickness of the land.
    If ye love me, keep my commandments, and the sickness of the land
    shall redound to your glory.

    Let my servant William go and proclaim my everlasting Gospel with
    a loud voice, and with great joy, as he shall be moved upon by
     my Spirit, unto the inhabitants of Warsaw, and also unto
    the inhabitants of Carthage, and also unto the inhabitants of
    Burlington, and also unto the inhabitants of Madison, and await
    patiently and diligently for further instructions at my general
    conference, saith the Lord.

    If he will do my will, let him from henceforth hearken to the
    counsel of my servant Joseph, and with his interest support the
    cause of the poor, and publish the new translation of my holy word
    unto the inhabitants of the earth;

    And if he will do this, I will bless him with a multiplicity of
    blessings, that he shall not be forsaken, nor his seed be found
    begging bread.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William be
    appointed, ordained, and anointed as a counselor unto my servant
    Joseph, in the room of my servant Hyrum; that my servant Hyrum may
    take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch which was appointed
    unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right.

    That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the Patriarchal
    blessings upon the heads of all my people,

    That whomsoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whomsoever he
    curses shall be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth
    shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth
    shall be loosed in heaven;

    And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a
    prophet, and a seer and a revelator unto my Church, as well as my
    servant Joseph.

    That he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph, and that he
    shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto
    him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with
    the same blessing, and glory, and honor, and Priesthood, and gifts
    of the Priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant
    Oliver Cowdery;

    That my servant Hyrum may bear record of the things which I shall
    show unto him, that his name may be had in honorable remembrance
    from generation to generation forever and ever.

    Let my servant William Law also receive the keys by which he
    may ask and receive blessings; let him be humble before me, and
    be without guile, and he shall receive of my Spirit, even the
    Comforter, which shall manifest unto him the truth of all things,
    and shall give him in the very hour what he shall say.

    And these signs shall follow him; he shall heal the sick, he shall
    cast out devils, and shall be delivered from those who would
    administer unto him deadly poison;

    And he shall be led in paths where the poisonous serpent cannot lay
     hold upon his heel, and he shall mount up in the imagination
    of his thoughts as upon eagle's wings;

    And what if I will that he should raise the dead, let him not
    withhold his voice.

    Therefore, let my servant William cry aloud and spare not, with
    joy and rejoicing, and with hosannas to Him that sitteth upon the
    throne forever and ever, saith the Lord your God.

    Behold I say unto you, I have a mission in store for my servant
    William and my servant Hyrum, and for them alone; and let my
    servant Joseph tarry at home, for he is needed; the remainder I
    will show unto you hereafter. Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Sidney will serve
    me and be counselor unto my servant Joseph, let him arise and come
    up and stand in the office of his calling, and humble himself
    before me;

    And if he will offer unto me an acceptable offering, and
    acknowledgments, and remain with my people, behold, I, the Lord
    your God, will heal him that he shall be healed; and he shall lift
    up his voice again on the mountains, and be a spokesman before my
    face.

    Let him come and locate his family in the neighborhood in which my
    servant Joseph resides,

    And in all his journeyings let him lift up his voice as with the
    sound of a trump, and warn the inhabitants of the earth to flee the
    wrath to come;

    Let him assist my servant Joseph; and also let my servant William
    Law assist my servant Joseph, in making a solemn proclamation unto
    the kings of the earth, even as I have before said unto you;

    If my servant Sidney will do my will, let him not remove his family
    unto the eastern lands, but let him change their habitation even as
    I have said.

    Behold, it is not my will that he shall seek to find safety and
    refuge out of the city which I have appointed unto you, even the
    city of Nauvoo.

    Verily I say unto you, even now, if he will hearken unto my voice,
    it shall be well with him. Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Amos Davis pay
    stock into the hands of those whom I have appointed to build a
    house for boarding, even the Nauvoo House;

    This let him do if he will have an interest, and let him hearken
    unto the counsel of my servant Joseph, and labor with his own hands
    that he may obtain the confidence of men;

    And when he shall prove himself faithful in all things that shall
    be entrusted unto his care, yea, even a few things, he shall be
    made ruler over many;

     Let him therefore abase himself that he may be exalted. Even
    so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Robert D. Foster
    will obey my voice, let him build a house for my servant Joseph,
    according to the contract which he has made with him, as the door
    shall be open to him from time to time.

    And let him repent of all his folly, and clothe himself with
    charity, and cease to do evil, and lay aside all his hard speeches,

    And pay stock also into the hands of the quorum of the Nauvoo House
    for himself and for his generation after him, from generation to
    generation,

    And hearken unto the counsel of my servants Joseph and Hyrum and
    William Law, and unto the authorities which I have called to lay
    the foundation of Zion, and it shall be well with him for ever and
    ever, Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let no man pay stock to the
    quorum of the Nauvoo House, unless he shall be a believer in the
    Book of Mormon, and the revelations I have given unto you, saith
    the Lord your God;

    For that which is more or less than this cometh of evil, and shall
    be attended with cursings and not blessings, saith the Lord your
    God. Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let the quorum of the Nauvoo
    House have a just recompense of wages for all their labors which
    they do in building the Nauvoo House, and let their wages be as
    shall be agreed among themselves, as pertaining to the price
    thereof;

    And let every man who pays stock bear his proportion of their
    wages, if it must needs be, for their support, saith the Lord;
    otherwise, their labors shall be accounted unto them for stock in
    that house. Even so. Amen.

    Verily I say unto you, I now give unto you the officers belonging
    to my Priesthood, that ye may hold the keys thereof, even the
    Priesthood which is after the order of Melchisedek, which is after
    the order of my Only Begotten Son.

    First, I give unto you Hyrum Smith, to be a Patriarch unto you, to
    hold the sealing blessings of my church, even the Holy Spirit of
    promise, whereby ye are sealed up unto the day of redemption, that
    ye may not fall, notwithstanding the hour of temptation that may
    come upon you.

    I give unto you my servant Joseph, to be a presiding elder over all
    my church, to be a translator, a revelator, a seer, and prophet.

    I give unto him for counselors my servant Sidney Rigdon, and my
    servant William Law, that these may constitute a quorum and First
    Presidency, to receive the oracles for the whole church.

     I give unto you my servant Brigham Young, to be a President
    over Twelve traveling Council;

    Which Twelve hold the keys to open up the authority of my kingdom
    upon the four corners of the earth, and after that to send my word
    to every creature.

    They are Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson
    Hyde, William Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff,
    Willard Richards, George A. Smith;

    David Patten I have taken unto myself; behold, his Priesthood no
    man taketh from him; but verily I say unto you, another may be
    appointed unto the same calling.

    And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a High Council, for the
    corner stone of Zion;

    Viz., Samuel Bent, Henry G. Sherwood, George W. Harris, Charles
    C. Rich, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, David Dort, Dunbar Wilson;
    (Seymour Brunson I have taken unto myself, no man taketh his
    Priesthood, but another may be appointed unto the same Priesthood
    in his stead; and verily I say unto you, let my servant Aaron
    Johnson be ordained unto this calling in his stead); David Fullmer,
    Alpheus Cutler, William Huntington.

    And again, I give unto you Don C. Smith, to be a president over a
    quorum of High Priests;

    Which ordinance is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those
    who shall be appointed standing presidents or servants over
    different Stakes scattered abroad,

    And they may travel also if they choose, but rather be ordained for
    standing presidents, this is the office of their calling, saith the
    Lord your God.

    I give unto him Amasa Lyman, and Noah Packard, for Counselors, that
    they may preside over the quorum of High Priests of my Church,
    saith the Lord.

    And again, I say unto you, I give unto you John A. Hicks, Samuel
    Williams, and Jesse Baker, which Priesthood is to preside over
    the quorum of elders, which quorum is instituted for standing
    ministers, nevertheless they may travel, yet they are ordained to
    be standing ministers to my Church, saith the Lord.

    And again, I give unto you, Joseph Young, Josiah Butterfield,
    Daniel Miles, Henry Harriman, Zera Pulsipher, Levi Hancock, James
    Foster, to preside over the quorum of seventies,

    Which quorum is instituted for traveling elders to bear record of
    my name in all the world, wherever the traveling High Council, my
    apostles, shall send them to prepare a way before my face.

    The difference between this quorum and the quorum of elders, is
     that one is to travel continually, and the other is to
    preside over the churches from time to time; the one has the
    responsibility of presiding from time to time, and the other has no
    responsibility of presiding, saith the Lord your God.

    And again, I say unto you, I give unto you Vinson Knight, Samuel H.
    Smith and Shadrach Roundy, if he will receive it, to preside over
    the bishopric; a knowledge of said bishopric is given unto you in
    the book of Doctrine and Covenants.

    And again, I say unto you, Samuel Rolfe and his counselors for
    priests, and the president of the teachers and his counselors, and
    also the president of the deacons and his counselors, and also the
    president of the stake and his counselors;

    The above offices I have given unto you, and the keys thereof, for
    helps and for governments, for the work of the ministry, and the
    perfecting of my Saints;

    And a commandment I give unto you that you should fill all these
    offices and approve of those names which I have mentioned, or else
    disapprove of them at my general conference;

    And that ye should prepare rooms for all these offices in my house
    when you build it unto my name, saith the Lord your God. Even so.
    Amen.

Thursday, 21.--Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards completed the index to the Book of Mormon, and it was immediately put in type, which closed the printing of the first English edition.

Sunday, 24.--Elder Brigham Young preached twice at Liverpool on election and reprobation.

[Sidenote: Hyrum Smith Installed as Patriarch.]

Hyrum Smith, who received the office of Patriarch in the Church, in place of Joseph Smith, Sen., deceased, has by revelation been appointed a Prophet and Revelator. William Law has by revelation been appointed one of the First Presidency, in place of Hyrum Smith, appointed Patriarch. George Miller has been appointed, by revelation, Bishop in place of Edward Partridge, deceased.

Saturday, 30.--At a special conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, held at Nauvoo pursuant to public notice, I was unanimously elected sole Trustee-in-Trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Also Saturday the 30th and Sunday 31st, a Conference was held at Walnut Grove, Knox county, Illinois; Elder William Smith presiding; 113 members, 14 Elders were present; several branches were represented, and several persons baptized.

[Sidenote: First Election of Municipal Officers in Nauvoo.]

Monday, 1.--The first election in Nauvoo, for members of the City Council took place, and the following persons were elected by majorities varying from 330 to 337 votes; to wit, for Mayor, John C. Bennett; Aldermen, William Marks, Samuel H. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, Newel K. Whitney; Councilors, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Charles C. Rich, John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, Don Carlos Smith, John P. Greene, Vinson Knight.

    City Of Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, Feb. 1, A. D. 1841.

    To the County Recorder of the County of Hancock:

    Dear Sir:--At a meeting of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints, at this place on Saturday, the 30th day of January, A.
    D. 1841, I was elected sole Trustee for said Church, to hold my
    office during life (my successors to be the First Presidency of
    said Church) and vested with plenary powers, as sole Trustee in
    Trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to
    receive, acquire, manage or convey property, real, personal, or
    mixed, for the sole use and benefit of said Church, agreeably to
    the provisions of an act entitled, "An Act Concerning Religious
    Societies," approved February 6, 1835.

    Joseph Smith, (L. S.)

    State Of Illinois Hancock Co., ss.

    This day personally appeared before me, Daniel H. Wells, a justice
    of the peace, within and for the county of Hancock, County
    aforesaid, Isaac Galland, Robert B. Thompson, and John C. Bennett,
    who being duly sworn, depose and say that the foregoing certificate
    of Joseph Smith is true.

    Isaac Galland,

    Robert B. Thompson

    John C. Bennett.

    Sworn to and subscribed this third day of February in the year of
    our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-one before me,

    Daniel H. Wells,

    Justice of the Peace.

The above is recorded in the county records at Carthage, in book No. 1, of Bonds and Mortgages, page 95, No. 87.

Wednesday 3.--Elder Taylor reports 160 baptized in Liverpool, England; in Ireland about 25; in the Isle of Man, 70; Hawarden, 30. Elder Lorenzo Snow is laboring in London.

[Sidenote: Nauvoo City Council Organized.]

The City Council of Nauvoo was organized; the opening prayer was offered by myself, after which the Mayor-elect delivered his inaugural address as published in the Times and Seasons, page 316, as follows:

    Inaugural Address.

    City Of Nauvoo, Illinois, Feb. 3rd, 1841.

    Gentlemen of the City Council, Aldermen and Councillors:

    Having been elected to the Mayoralty of this city by the unanimous
    suffrage of all parties and interests, I now enter upon the duties
    devolving upon me as your Chief Magistrate under a deep sense of
    the responsibilities of the station. I trust that the confidence
    reposed in me, by my fellow citizens, has not been misplaced, and
    for the honor conferred they will accept my warmest sentiments
    of gratitude. By the munificence and wise legislation of noble,
    high-minded, and patriotic statesmen, and the grace of God, we
    have been blessed with one of the most liberal corporate acts ever
    granted by a legislative assembly. As the presiding officer of
    the law-making department of the municipal government, it will be
    expected that I communicate to you, from time to time, by oral or
    written messages, for your deliberative consideration and action,
    such matters as may suggest themselves to me in relation to the
    public weal; and upon this occasion I beg leave to present the
    following as matters of paramount importance:

    The 21st section of the addenda to the 13th section of the City
    Charter, concedes to you plenary power "to tax, restrain, prohibit
    and suppress, tippling houses, dram shops," etc., etc., and I now
    recommend, in the strongest possible terms, that you take prompt,
    strong, and decisive measures to "prohibit and suppress" all such
    establishments. It is true you have the power "to tax," or license
    and tolerate, them, and thus add to the city finances; but I
    consider it much better to raise revenue by an advalorem tax on the
    property of sober men, than by licensing dram shops, or taxing the
    signs of the inebriated worshipers at the shrine of Bacchus. The
    revels of bacchanalians in the  houses of blasphemy and noise
    will always prove a disgrace to a moral people. Public sentiment
    will do much to suppress the vice of intemperance, and its
    concomitant evil results; but ample experience has incontrovertibly
    proven that it cannot do all--the law must be brought to the
    rescue, and an effective prohibitory ordinance enacted. This cannot
    be done at a better time than at the present. Let us commence
    correctly, and the great work of reform, at least so far as our
    peaceful city is concerned, can be summarily consummated. It would
    be difficult to calculate the vast amount of evil and crime that
    would be prevented, and the great good that would accrue to the
    public at large by fostering the cause of temperance; but suffice
    it to say that the one would be commensurate to the other. No
    sales of spirituous liquors whatever, in a less quantity than
    a quart, except in cases of sickness on the recommendation of
    a physician or surgeon duly accredited by the Chancellor and
    Regents of the University, should be tolerated. The liberty of
    selling the intoxicating cup is a false liberty--it enslaves,
    degrades, destroys; and wretchedness and want are attendant on
    every step,--its touch, like that of the poison upas, is death.
    Liberty to do good should be cheerfully and freely accorded to
    every man; but liberty to do evil, which is licentiousness, should
    be peremptorily prohibited. The public good imperiously demands
    it--and the cause of humanity pleads for help. The protecting
    aegis of the corporation should be thrown around every moral and
    religious institution of the day, which is in any way calculated to
    ennoble, or ameliorate the condition of the human family.

    The immediate organization of the University, as contemplated in
    the 24th section of the act incorporating our city, cannot be
    too forcibly impressed upon you at this time. As all matters in
    relation to mental culture, and public instruction, from common
    schools up to the highest branches of a full collegiate course in
    the arts, sciences, and learned professions, will devolve upon the
    Chancellor and Regents of the University, they should be speedily
    elected, and instructed to perfect their plan, and enter upon its
    execution with as little delay as possible. The wheels of education
    should never be clogged, or retrograde, but roll progressively from
    the Alpha to the Omega of a most perfect, liberal, and thorough
    course of university attainments. The following observations
    in relation to false education, from Alexander's Messenger, so
    perfectly accords with my feelings and views on this highly
    important subject, that I cannot do better than incorporate them in
    this message.

    "Among the changes for the worse, which the world has witnessed
    within the last century, we include that specious, superficial,
    incomplete way of doing certain things, which were formerly thought
    to be deserving of care, labor and attention. It would seem that
    appearance is now considered of more moment than reality. The
    modern mode of  education is an example in point. Children
    are so instructed as to acquire a smattering of everything, and as
    a matter of consequence, they know nothing properly. Seminaries
    and academies deal out their moral and natural philosophy, their
    geometry, trigonometry, and astronomy, their chemistry, botany,
    and mineralogy, until the mind of the pupil becomes a chaos; and,
    like the stomach when it is overloaded with a variety of food,
    it digests nothing, but converts the superabundant nutriment to
    poison. This mode of education answers one purpose--it enables
    people to seem learned; and seemingly, by a great many, is
    thought all sufficient. Thus we are schooled in quackery, and are
    early taught to regard showy and superficial attainments as most
    desirable. Every boarding school Miss is a Plato in petticoats,
    without an ounce of that genuine knowledge, that true philosophy,
    which would enable her to be useful in the world, and to escape
    those perils with which she must necessarily be encompassed. Young
    people are taught to use a variety of hard terms, which they
    understand but imperfectly--to repeat lessons which they are unable
    to apply--to astonish their grandmothers with a display of their
    parrot-like acquisitions; but their mental energies are clogged
    and torpified with a variety of learned lumber, most of which is
    discarded from the brain long before its possessor knows how to use
    it. This is the quackery of education.

    "The effects of the erring system are not easily obliterated. The
    habit of using words without thought, sticks to the unfortunate
    student through life, and should he ever learn to think, he
    cannot express his ideas without the most tedious and perplexing
    verbosity. This is, more or less, the fault of every writer in
    the nineteenth century. The sense is encumbered with sound. The
    scribbler appears to imagine that if he puts a sufficient number
    of words together he has done his part; and, alas! how many books
    are written on this principle. Thus literature, and even science
    itself, is overloaded with froth and flummery. Verbalizing has
    become fashionable and indispensable, and one line from an ancient
    author will furnish the materials for a modern treatise."

    Our University should be a "utilitarian" institution--and
    competent, industrious teachers and professors should be
    immediately elected for the several departments. "Knowledge is
    power,"--foster education and we are forever free! Nothing can be
    done which is more certainly calculated to perpetuate the free
    institutions of our common country, for which our progenitors
    "fought and bled, and died," than the general diffusion of
    useful knowledge amongst the people. Education should always
    be of a purely practical character, for such, and such alone,
    is calculated to perfect the happiness and prosperity of our
    fellow-citizens--ignorance, impudence, and false knowledge, are
    equally detestible,--shame and confusion follow in their train. As
    you now  possess the power, afford the most ample facilities
    to the Regents to make their plans complete; and thus enable them
    to set a glorious example to the world at large. The most liberal
    policy should attend the organization of the University, and equal
    honors and privileges should be extended to all classes of the
    community.

    In order to carry out the provisions of the 25th section of the
    act incorporating our city, I would recommend the immediate
    organization of the Legion. Comprising, as it does, the entire
    military power of our city, with a provision allowing any citizen
    of Hancock county to unite by voluntary enrollment, early
    facilities should be afforded the court martial for perfecting
    their plans of drill, rules, and regulations. Nothing is more
    necessary to the preservation of order and the supremacy of the
    laws, than the perfect organization of our military forces, under
    a uniform and rigid discipline and approved judicious drill; and
    to this end I desire to see all the departments and cohorts of
    the Legion put in immediate requisition. The Legion should be all
    powerful, panoplied with justice and equity, to consummate the
    designs of its projectors--at all times ready, as minute men,
    to serve the state in such way and manner as may, from time to
    time, be pointed out by the Governor. You have long sought an
    opportunity of showing your attachment to the state government
    of Illinois--it is now afforded; the Legion should maintain the
    constitution and the laws, and be ready at all times for the public
    defense. The winged warrior of the air perches upon the pole of
    American liberty, and the beast that has the temerity to ruffle her
    feathers should be made to feel the power of her talons; and until
    she ceases to be our proud national emblem we should not cease
    to show our attachment to Illinois. Should the tocsin of alarm
    ever be sounded, and the Legion called to the tented field by our
    Executive, I hope to see it able, under one of the proudest mottoes
    that ever blazed upon a warrior's shield--Sicut patribus sit Deus
    nobis; "as God was with our fathers, so may He be with us"--to
    fight the battles of our country, as victors, and as freemen; the
    juice of the uva, or the spirit of insubordination should never
    enter our camp,--but we should stand, ever stand, as a united
    people--one and indivisible.

    I would earnestly recommend the construction of a wing-dam in the
    Mississippi, at the mouth of the ravine at or near the head of
    Main street, and the excavation of a ship canal from that point
    to a point terminating in a grand reservoir on the bank of said
    river, east of the foot of said street, a distance of about two
    miles. This would afford, at the various outlets, the most ample
    water power for propelling any amount of machinery for mill and
    manufacturing purposes, so essentially necessary to the building
    up of a great commercial city in the heart of one of the most
    productive and delightful countries on earth. I  would
    advise that an agent be immediately appointed on behalf of the
    city corporation, to negotiate with eastern capitalists for the
    completion of this great work, on the most advantageous terms, even
    to the conveyance of the privilege for a term of years. This work
    finished, and the future greatness of this city is placed upon an
    imperishable basis. In addition to the great advantages that will
    otherwise accrue to the city and country by the construction of
    this noble work, it would afford the best harbor for steamboats,
    for winter quarters, on this magnificent stream.

    The public health requires that the low lands, bordering on the
    Mississippi, should be immediately drained, and the entire timber
    removed. This can and will be one of the most healthful cities
    in the west, provided you take prompt and decisive action in the
    premises. A board of health should be appointed and vested with the
    usual powers and prerogatives.

    The Governor, council of revision, and legislature of Illinois,
    should be held in everlasting remembrance by our people--they
    burst the chains of slavery and proclaimed us forever free! A vote
    of thanks, couched in the strongest language possible, should be
    tendered them in our corporate capacity; and, when this is done,
    Quincy, our first noble city of refuge, when we came from the
    slaughter in Missouri with our garments stained with blood, should
    not be forgotten.

    As the Chief Magistrate of your city I am determined to execute all
    state laws and city ordinances passed in pursuance to law, to the
    very letter, should it require the strong arm of military power
    to enable me to do so. As an officer I know no man; the peaceful,
    unoffending in the full exercise of all his civil, political, and
    religious rights, and the guilty violator of law shall be punished,
    without respect to persons.

    All of which is respectfully submitted. [2]

    John C. Bennett.

The following persons were elected by the council to their offices, to-wit--Henry G. Sherwood, marshal; James Sloan, recorder; Robert B. Thompson, treasurer; James Robinson, assessor; Austin Cowles, supervisor of streets. I presented to the city council the following resolution, which was unanimously adopted:

     Resolved by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo, that the
    unfeigned thanks of this community be respectfully tendered to the
    Governor, Council of Revision, and Legislature of the state of
    Illinois, as a feeble testimonial of their respect and esteem for
    noble, high-minded, and patriotic statesmen; and as an evidence of
    gratitude for the signal powers recently conferred; also that the
    citizens of Quincy be held in everlasting remembrance, for their
    unparalleled liberality and marked kindness to our people, when in
    their greatest state of suffering and want.

I presented a bill for an ordinance concerning the University of Nauvoo, which passed as follows:

    Sec.1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that the "University of the City of Nauvoo," be, and the same
    is hereby organized by the appointment of the following Board
    of Trustees, to-wit--John C. Bennett, chancellor; William Law,
    registrar; and Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, William
    Marks, Samuel H. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, Newel K. Whitney, Charles
    C. Rich, John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, Don Carlos Smith, John P.
    Greene, Vinson Knight, Isaac Galland, Elias Higbee, Robert D.
    Foster, James Adams, Robert B. Thompson, Samuel Bennett, Ebenezer
    Robinson, John Snider, George Miller, and Lenos M. Knight, Regents
    of the "University of the City of Nauvoo;" as contemplated in
    the 24th section of "An Act to incorporate the City of Nauvoo,"
    approved December 16, 1840.

    Sec. 2. The board named in the first section of this ordinance,
    shall hold its first meeting at the office of Joseph Smith, on
    Tuesday, the 9th day of February, 1841, at 2 o'clock p. m.

    Passed February 3, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I also presented a bill for an ordinance organizing the Nauvoo Legion, which passed the same day, as follows:

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that the inhabitants of the City of Nauvoo, and such citizens of
    Hancock county as may unite by voluntary enrollment, be, and they
    are hereby organized into a body of independent military men, to be
    called the "Nauvoo Legion," as contemplated in the 25th section of
    "An Act to incorporate the City of Nauvoo," approved December 16,
    1840.

    Sec. 2. The Legion shall be, and is hereby divided into two
    cohorts; the horse troops to constitute the first cohort, and the
    foot troops to constitute the second cohort.

     Sec. 3. The general officers of the Legion shall consist of a
    lieutenant-general, as the chief commanding and reviewing officer,
    and president of the court martial and Legion; a major-general,
    as the second in command in the Legion, the secretary of the
    court martial and Legion, and adjutant and inspector-general;
    a brigadier-general, as the commander of the first cohort; and
    brigadier-general, as commander of the second cohort.

    Sec. 4. The staff of the lieutenant-general shall consist of two
    principal aids-de-camp, with the rank of colonels of cavalry; and a
    guard of twelve aids-de-camp, with the rank of captain of infantry;
    and a drill officer, with the rank of colonel of dragoons, who
    shall likewise be the chief officer of the guard.

    Sec. 5. The staff of the major-general shall consist of an
    adjutant, a surgeon-in-chief, a cornet, a quarter-master, a
    paymaster, a commissary, and a chaplain, with the rank of colonels
    of infantry; a surgeon for each cohort, a quarter-master-sergeant,
    sergeant-major, and chief musician, with the rank of captains of
    light infantry, and two musicians, with the rank of captains of
    infantry.

    Sec. 6. The staff of each brigadier-general shall consist of one
    aid-de-camp, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel of infantry,
    provided that the said brigadiers shall have access to the staff of
    the major-general, when not otherwise in service.

    Sec. 7. No officer shall hereafter be elected by the various
    companies of the Legion, except upon the nomination of the
    court-martial; and it is hereby made the duty of the court-martial
    to nominate at least two candidates for each vacant office,
    whenever such vacancies occur.

    Sec. 8. The court-martial shall fill and supply all offices
    ranking between captains and brigadier-generals by granting brevet
    commissions to the most worthy company officers of the line, who
    shall thereafter take rank, and command according to the date of
    their brevets, provided that their original place in the line shall
    not thereby be vacated.

    Sec. 9. The court-martial, consisting of all the military officers,
    commissioned or entitled to commissions, within the limits of the
    city corporation, shall meet at the office of Joseph Smith, on
    Thursday, the 4th day of February, 1841, at 10 o'clock a. m.; and
    then and there proceed to elect the general officers of the Legion,
    as contemplated in the 3rd section of this ordinance.

    Sec. 10. The court-martial shall adopt for the Legion, as nearly as
    may be, and so far as applicable, the discipline, drill, uniform,
    rule, and regulations of the United States army.

    Passed February 8, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Don C. Smith, and Charles C. Rich were duly sworn as members of the City Council. [3]

The following addition has been made to the Charter of the Nauvoo Legion by the legislature--

    Any citizen of Hancock county may, by voluntary enrollment, attach
    himself to the Nauvoo Legion, with all the privileges, which
    appertain to that independent military body.

I gave a general invitation to my friends to enroll themselves, so as to have a perfect organization by the fourth of July. I was appointed chairman of several committees, viz.: "On the Canal," "For Vacating the Town of Commerce," "Vending Spirituous Liquors," "Code of City Ordinances", "Board of Health," &c. Council adjourned to the 8th.

Thursday, 4.

    Minutes of the Meeting which Organized the Nauvoo Legion.

    Pursuant to an ordinance of the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    entitled, "An ordinance organizing the Nauvoo Legion," passed
    February 3, 1841, a court-martial, composed of the commissioned
    officers of the militia of the state of Illinois, within the city
    of Nauvoo, assembled at the office of Joseph Smith, on Thursday
    at 10 o'clock a. m., the 4th day of February, 1841: present--John
    C. Bennett, quarter-master general of the state of Illinois;
    Lieutenant-Colonel Don Carlos Smith; Captains Charles C. Rich,
    Wilson Law, Albert P. Rockwood, William Law, Titus Billings,
    Stephen Markham; first lieutenants, Francis M. Higbee, John T.
    Barnett, John D. Parker, Benjamin S. Wilber, Amos Davis; second
    lieutenants, Chancy L. Higbee, Nelson Higgins, David H. Redfield,
    Hosea Stout, Stephen Winchester, Thomas Rich; third lieutenants,
    John C. Annis, and Alexander Badlam. The court was  called
    to order by General Bennett. On motion, Joseph Smith and Hugh
    McFall were requested to sit in the court. The court-martial then
    proceeded to the election of the general officers of the Legion;
    whereupon Joseph Smith was duly elected lieutenant-general of
    the Nauvoo Legion, and John C. Bennett, major-general. Colonel
    Wilson Law was elected brigadier-general of the first cohort, and
    Lieutenant-Colonel Don Carlos Smith brigadier-general of the second
    cohort, by unanimous vote of the court-martial. Lieutenant-general
    Joseph Smith, after being duly sworn into office, appointed the
    following named persons for his staff, to-wit--Captain A. P.
    Rockwood to be drill officer; Captains William Law and Robert B.
    Thompson, aids-de-camp; and James Allred, Thomas Grover, C. M.
    Kreymeyer, John L. Butler, John Snider, Alpheus Cutler, Reynolds
    Cahoon, Elias Higbee, Henry G. Sherwood, Shadrack Roundy, Samuel H.
    Smith, and Vinson Knight, guards, and assistant aids-de-camp. The
    Legion, at its organization, was composed of six companies.

Friday, 5.--Elder Reuben Hedlock is laboring in Glasgow, Scotland. The Church in that place numbers 55, and the spirit of enquiry increases.

Saturday, 6.

    Minutes of a Council at Brother Richard Harrison's, 72 Burlington
    Street, Liverpool, for organizing a company of Saints going to New
    Orleans on the ship "Sheffield," Captain Porter.

    Elders Brigham Young, Willard Richards, John Taylor, and other
    officers, present. Elder Hyrum Clark was chosen president, and
    Thomas Walmsley, Miles Romney, Edward Martin, John Taylor, Francis
    Clark, and John Riley, counselors to President Clark. Edward
    Martin, clerk and historian. Peter Maughan and John Taylor were
    ordained Elders. President Clark and his counselors were blessed
    and set apart for their mission.

Sunday, 7.--Ship Sheffield sailed from Liverpool with 235 Saints.

Monday, 8.--Levi Richards writes from Lugwardine--

    To the Editor of the Star:

    Since Stanley Hill conference, I have attended about thirty
    council meetings of Church officers, in eleven different places
    in Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and Worcestershire, making a
    circuit of nearly one hundred miles. Union and harmony prevail
    among them, and a  disposition to add to their faith. New
    places are frequently opened for preaching, which is generally
    supplied. Many are baptized every week, although the ice has to
    yield its natural claims, and be put aside. The gift of healing is
    manifested to quite an extent in this region. The gift of tongues
    is received in most of the branches where I am acquainted. The
    spirit of persecution is not yet wholly cast out of the world: for
    recently preaching was held for the first time in Pendock parish,
    eight miles from Ledbury, when a congregation, respectable in
    numbers and appearance, were compelled to retire prematurely, in
    consequence of the quantity of gravel thrown upon the roof and
    against the windows. The mob were numerous, and pelted the Saints
    on their way home with mud. The meeting was held at the shop of a
    tradesman, who had been clerk of the parish, but was so fortunate
    as to obey the Gospel, and be turned out of his stewardship; and
    his wife was dismissed from her school, for the same reason, by the
    parson of the parish. More or less of the Saints are turned out of
    employ, and out of their houses, for obeying the Gospel.

[Sidenote: Nauvoo Council Opened by Prayer.]

City Council met according to adjournment and opened by prayer, which was made a standing rule of the council. I reported a bill for the survey of a canal through the city, which was accepted; and I was appointed to contract for its survey. I also reported a bill for an ordinance on temperance, which was read and laid over.

Wednesday, 10.--Elder James Burnham writes from Overton, Flintshire, North Wales--

    I have organized two branches, with about 150 members; and we are
    continually baptizing, whether it be cold or hot. There is great
    opposition.

[Sidenote: The Echo Company.]

Thursday, 11.--Elders Young, Richards, and Taylor, in council at 72 Burlington Street, Liverpool, set apart, by the laying on of hands, Elder Daniel Browett, to take charge of a company of Saints, about to sail for New Orleans on ship Echo, Captain Wood; and John Cheese, David Wilding, James Lavender, William Jenkins, Robert Harris, and John Ellison, to be his counselors. Robert Harris was ordained an Elder, and Elder Browett was appointed clerk and historian of the company.

Saturday, 13.--Elder Orson Hyde sailed from New York for Liverpool, on his way to Jerusalem, accompanied by Elder George J. Adams.

Sunday, 14.

    Minutes of the London Conference.

    A conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was
    held at Barrett's Academy, 57 King Square, Goswell Road, London,
    on Sunday, the 14th of February, 1841, there being present--Elders
    Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, William Pitt,
    and four Priests. The meeting was called to order by Elder Kimball
    at 2 o'clock p. m. Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Pitt,
    that Elder Woodruff be president of this conference; carried
    unanimously. Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Woodruff,
    that Dr. W. Copeland be clerk; carried unanimously. The meeting
    opened by Elder Kimball with prayer and singing. The president then
    called upon the official members to represent their respective
    branches. The church at Ipswich was represented by Elder Pitt,
    as consisting of twelve members, one Elder, one Priest, and one
    Teacher. The church at Bedford was represented by Robert Williams,
    Priest, as consisting of forty-two members, one Priest, seven
    moved, two died. The church at Woolwich was represented by John
    Griffith, Priest, as consisting of six members, one Priest. The
    church in London was represented by Elder Kimball as consisting of
    forty-six members, one Elder, two Priests: excellent prospects of a
    continued increase. James Allen was ordained an Elder, and Thomas
    Barnes a Priest. Robert Williams was ordained an Elder, to preside
    over the branch at Bedford; and William Smith and John Sheffield
    were ordained Priests. Richard Bates was ordained a Priest, in the
    branch of Woolwich, and A. Painter a Teacher--all under the hands
    of Elders Kimball, Woodruff and Snow. It was then moved by Elder
    Kimball, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Elder Snow be appointed
    president of this [the Woolwich] conference, also to take the
    superintendency of the branch in London. Much valuable instruction
    was given by Elders Kimball and Woodruff in relation to the duties
    of the official members. It was then moved by Elder Kimball,
    and seconded by Elder Snow, that this conference be adjourned
    to Sunday, 16th of May, 1841. The conference was then closed at
    half-past five, by singing and prayer.

    Dr. W. Copeland, Clerk.

Monday, 15.--As chairman of the committee [on the vending of spirituous liquors] I reported a bill to the City  Council, which, after a long discussion, passed into "An ordinance in relation to temperance."

    Ordinance.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that all persons and establishments whatever, in this city, are
    prohibited from vending whisky in a less quantity than a gallon, or
    other spirituous liquors in a less quantity than a quart, to any
    person whatever, excepting on the recommendation of a physician,
    duly accredited in writing, by the Chancellor and Regents of the
    University of the City of Nauvoo; and any person guilty of any act
    contrary to the prohibition contained in this ordinance, shall, on
    conviction thereof before the Mayor or municipal court, be fined
    in any sum not exceeding twenty-five dollars, at the discretion
    of said Mayor or municipal court; and any person or persons who
    shall attempt to evade this ordinance by giving away liquor, or by
    any other means, shall be considered alike amenable, and fined as
    aforesaid.

    Passed February 15, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

In the discussion of the foregoing bill, I spoke at great length on the use of liquors, and showed that they were unnecessary, and operate as a poison in the stomach, and that roots and herbs can be found to effect all necessary purposes.

Tuesday, 16.

    Missouri's "White-washing."

    Resolved by the Senate [of the state of Missouri], the House
    of Representatives concurring, that two thousand copies of the
    evidence taken before the examining court in relation to "Mormon"
    difficulties, and such of the letters, orders, and correspondence
    on that subject, on file in the office of the secretary of state,
    as may be selected by a joint committee of the two houses, shall be
    published in pamphlet form, under the direction of the secretary of
    state; that one copy, in lieu of the manuscript copies, heretofore
    ordered, be sent to our delegation in Congress, to be laid before
    the House to which they respectively belong, one to each member of
    Congress, and the residue be distributed among the Mormons of the
    general assembly.

    Approved February 16, 1841. [4]

Is this Missouri's last struggle to retrieve her lost character to publish to the world a one-sided statement of her robberies, murders, and extermination which she had committed without provocation, at a time when not one Saint was left in Missouri to tell the truth about them?

The ship Echo sailed from Liverpool for New Orleans, with 109 Saints, led by Daniel Browett.

Saturday, 20.--Elder Brigham Young went to Harwarden and preached twice on Sunday.

Elders William Kay and Thomas Richardson introduced the Gospel into the City of Hereford.

The court-martial of the Nauvoo Legion, by a unanimous vote, adopted the following resolutions, to-wit--

    Legion Resolutions.

    That no person whatever, residing within the limits of the City
    of Nauvoo, between the ages of 18 and 45 years, excepting such as
    are exempted by the laws of the United States, shall be exempt
    from military duty, unless exempted by a special act of this
    court; and the fines for neglecting or refusing to appear on the
    days of general parade were fixed at the following rates: for
    generals, $25; colonels, $20; captains, $15; lieutenants, $10; and
    musicians and privates, $5; and for company parade at the following
    rates--for commissioned officers, $5; non-commissioned officers,
    $3; musicians and privates, $2. The 1st and 6th of April, and the
    3rd of July, were fixed upon as days for general parade for this
    year.

    Ordered that Edward P. Duzette enlist and organize a band of music,
    not exceeding twenty men. It was also reported that John Scott had
    been elected captain in the place of William Law, and Lieutenant
    Hosea Stout in the place of Albert P. Rockwood, who has been
    promoted.

Monday, 22.--I laid before the City Council the following--

    Resolution.

    Resolved by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo, that the
    freedom of the city be, and the same hereby is, conferred on the
    present Governor, lieutenant-governor, council of revision, and
    members of both houses of the general assembly, of the state of
    Illinois, as an evidence  of our gratitude for their great
    liberality and kindness to this community, during the present
    winter, which was adopted unanimously.

I also presented the following bill for "An ordinance in relation to the University."

    Ordinance.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that all matters and powers whatever in relation to common schools,
    and all other institutions of learning within the City of Nauvoo
    be, and the same hereby are transferred from the City Council of
    the City of Nauvoo, to the chancellor and regents of the University
    of the City of Nauvoo.

    Passed February 22, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

Tuesday, 23.--Elder Kington writes from Bristol, England, that eight have been baptized in that place.

    An Act to Incorporate the Nauvoo House Association.

    Sec. 1. Be it enacted by the people of the state of Illinois,
    represented in the general assembly, that George Miller, Lyman
    Wight, John Snider, and Peter Haws, and their associates, are
    hereby declared a body corporate, under the name and style of the
    "Nauvoo House Association;" and they are hereby authorized to erect
    and furnish a public house of entertainment, to be called the
    "Nauvoo House."

    Sec. 2. The above-named George Miller, Lyman Wight, John Snider,
    and Peter Haws, and their associates, are hereby declared to be the
    trustees of the association, with full power and authority to hold
    in joint tenancy, by themselves and their successors in office, a
    certain lot in the City of Nauvoo, in the county of Hancock, and
    state of Illinois, known and designated on the plat of said city,
    as the south half of lot numbered fifty-six, for the purpose of
    erecting thereon the house contemplated in the first section of
    this act.

    Sec. 3. The said trustees are further authorized and empowered
    to obtain by stock subscription, by themselves or their duly
    authorized agents, the sum of one hundred and fifty thousand
    dollars, which shall be divided into shares of fifty dollars each.

    Sec. 4. No individual shall be permitted to hold more than three
    hundred, nor less than one share of stock, and certificates of
    stock shall  be delivered to subscribers, so soon as their
    subscriptions are paid in and not before.

    Sec. 5. As soon as the contemplated house shall have been completed
    and furnished, the stockholders shall appoint such agents as the
    trustees may deem necessary in the management of the affairs of
    said association.

    Sec. 6. The trustees shall have power to sue and be sued, plead and
    be impleaded in any court in this state, in the name and style of
    the "Trustees of the Nauvoo House Association."

    Sec. 7. They shall also take the general care and supervision in
    procuring materials for said house, and constructing and erecting
    the same, and further to superintend its general management, and to
    do and perform all matters and things which may be necessary to be
    done, in order to secure the interest and promote the objects of
    this association.

    Sec. 8. This association shall continue twenty years from the
    passage of this act, and the house herein provided for shall be
    kept for the accommodation of strangers, travelers, and all other
    persons who may resort therein for rest and refreshment.

    Sec. 9. It is moreover established as a perpetual rule of said
    house, to be observed by all persons who may keep or occupy the
    same that spirituous liquors of every description are prohibited,
    and that such liquor shall never be vended as a beverage, or
    introduced into common use, in said house.

    Sec. 10. And whereas Joseph Smith has furnished the said
    association with the ground whereon to erect said house, it is
    further declared that the said Smith and his heirs shall hold, by
    perpetual succession, a suite of rooms in the said house, to be set
    apart and conveyed in due form of law to him and his heirs by the
    said trustees, as soon as the same are completed.

    Sec. 11. The Board of Trustees shall appoint one of their number as
    president thereof.

    Approved February 23, 1841.

    Thomas Carlin,

    Governor.

    W. L. D. Ewing,

    Speaker of the House of Representatives.

    S.H. Anderson,

    Speaker of the Senate.

    State of Illinois,

    Office of Secretary of State, s. s.

    I, Stephen A. Douglas, Secretary of State, do hereby certify the
     foregoing to be a true and perfect copy of the enrolled law
    on file in my office.

    Witness my hand and the seal of State.

    Springfield, February 24, A. D. 1841.

    [SEAL.]

    S. A. Douglas,

    Secretary of State.

    An Act to Incorporate the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing
    Association in the County of Hancock.

    Sec. 1. Be it enacted by the people of the state of Illinois,
    represented in the general assembly, that Sidney Rigdon, George
    W. Robinson, Samuel James, Wilson Law, Daniel H. Wells, Hyrum
    Smith, George Miller, William Marks, Peter Haws, Vinson Knight,
    John Scott, Don Carlos Smith, William Huntington, Sen., Ebenezer
    Robinson, Robert B. Thompson, William Law, James Allred, John T.
    Barnett, Theodore Turley, John C. Bennett, Elias Higbee, Isaac
    Higbee, Joseph Smith, Alpheus Cutler, Israel Barlow, R. D. Foster,
    John F. Olney, John Snider, Leonard Soby, Orson Pratt, James
    Kelley, Sidney A. Knowlton, John P. Greene, John F. Weld, and
    their associates and successors, are hereby constituted a body
    corporate and politic, by the name of "The Nauvoo Agricultural and
    Manufacturing Association," and by that name shall be capable of
    suing and being sued, pleading and being impleaded, answering and
    being answered, in all courts and places, and may have a common
    seal, and may alter the same at pleasure.

    Sec. 2. The sole object and purpose of said association shall be
    for the promotion of agriculture and husbandry in all its branches,
    and for the manufacture of flour, lumber, and such other useful
    articles as are necessary for the ordinary purposes of life.

    Sec. 3. The capital stock of said association shall be one hundred
    thousand dollars, with the privilege of increasing it to the sum
    of three hundred thousand dollars, to be divided into shares of
    fifty dollars, which shall be considered personal property, and
    be assignable in such manner as the said corporation may, by its
    by-laws, provide; which capital stock shall be exclusively devoted
    to the object and purposes set forth in the second section of this
    act, and to no other object and purposes, and to the same end the
    said corporation shall have power to purchase, hold, and convey
    real estate, and other property, to the amount of its capital.

    Sec. 4. Said corporation shall have power, by the trustees, or a
    majority of them present at any regularly called meeting, to make
    by-laws for its own government, for the purpose of carrying out
    the objects  of this association, provided the same are not
    repugnant to the laws and constitution of this state, or of the
    United States.

    Sec. 5. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and William Law shall be
    commissioners to receive subscriptions for, and distribute said
    capital stock for said corporation; said commissioners, or a
    majority of them, shall, within six months after the passage of
    this act, either by themselves or their duly appointed agents, open
    a subscription book for said stock at such times and places as they
    shall appoint, and at the time of subscription for such stock, at
    least ten per cent upon each share subscribed for, shall be paid
    to said commissioners, or their duly appointed agents; and the
    remainder of said stock, so subscribed for, shall be paid in such
    sums, and at such times, as shall be provided for by the by-laws of
    said corporation.

    Sec. 6. In case the stock of said corporation shall not all
    be taken up within one year from the passage of this act, the
    duties of said commissioners shall cease, and the trustees of
    said corporation, or a quorum thereof, may thereafter receive
    subscriptions to said stock, from time to time, until the whole
    shall be subscribed.

    Sec. 7. The stock, property, and concerns of said corporation
    shall be managed by twenty trustees, who shall be stockholders of
    said corporation, any five of whom, to be designated by a majority
    of the trustees, shall form a quorum for the transaction of all
    ordinary business of said corporation, the election of which
    trustees shall be annual. The first mentioned twenty persons, whose
    names are recited in the first section of this act, shall be the
    first trustees of said corporation, and shall hold their offices
    until the first Monday in September, A. D. 1841, and until others
    shall be elected in their places.

    Sec. 8. The trustees of said corporation for every subsequent year
    shall be elected on the first Monday in September, in each and
    every year, at such place as the trustees for the time being shall
    appoint, and of which election they shall give at least fifteen
    days previous notice by advertisement in some newspaper, in or near
    the City of Nauvoo. At every election of trustees, each stockholder
    shall be entitled to one vote on each share of stock owned by
    him: provided that no stockholder shall be entitled to more than
    twenty votes, and said stockholders, may vote either in person or
    by proxy. The election for trustees shall be conducted in such
    manner as shall be pointed out by the by-laws of said corporation,
    and whenever a vacancy shall happen by death, resignation, or
    otherwise, among the trustees, the remaining trustees shall have
    power to fill such vacancy, until the next general election for
    trustees.

    Sec. 9. The trustees of said corporation, as soon as may be, after
    their appointment or election under this act, shall proceed to
    elect,  out of their number, a president, treasurer, and
    secretary, who shall respectively hold their offices during one
    year, and until others shall be elected to fill their places, and
    whose duties shall be defined and prescribed by the by-laws of the
    corporation; and said trustees shall also appoint such agents and
    other persons as may be necessary to conduct the proper business,
    and accomplish the declared objects of said corporation, and shall
    likewise have power to fill any vacancy occasioned by the death,
    resignation, or removal of any officer of said corporation.

    Sec. 10. This act shall be construed as a public act, and continue
    in force for the period of twenty years. And the trustees appointed
    under the provisions of this act, shall hold their first meeting at
    the City of Nauvoo, on the first Monday of April, A. D. 1841.

    Approved February 27, 1841.

    Thomas Carlin,

    Governor.

    W. L. D. Ewing,

    Speaker of the House of Representatives.

    S. H. Anderson.

    Speaker of the Senate.

    State of Illinois, Office of Secretary of State.

    I, Lyman Trumbull, Secretary of State, do hereby certify the
    foregoing to be a true and perfect copy of the enrolled law on the
    file in my office.

    Given Under My Hand And Seal Of State, Springfield, March 10, 1841.

    Lyman Trumbull,

    Secretary of State.

Wednesday, 24.--Elder Brigham Young returned to Liverpool, and on the 25th attended a patriarchal blessing meeting at Brother Dumville's. Father Melling officiated; Elder James Whitehead, scribe.

Saturday, 27.--President Brigham Young went to Manchester, and preached in Lombard Street room on Sunday, the 28th.

[Sidenote: Division of Nauvoo into Municipal Wards.]

Monday, March 1.--The City Council divided the city into four wards, at my suggestion, to-wit: all the district of country within the city limits, north of the center of Knight street, and west of the center of Wells street, shall constitute the first ward. North of the center of Knight street and east of the center of Wells street, the second ward. South  of the center of Knight street, and east of the center of Wells street, the third ward. South of the center of Knight street, and west of the center of Wells street, the fourth ward.

I attended the City Council, and presented a bill for "An ordinance in relation to Religious Societies."

    Ordinance on Religious Liberty in Nauvoo.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
    Nauvoo, that the Catholics, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists,
    Latter-day Saints, Quakers, Episcopals, Universalists, Unitarians,
    Mohammedans, and all other religious sects and denominations
    whatever, shall have free toleration, and equal privileges, in this
    city; and should any person be guilty of ridiculing, and abusing
    or otherwise depreciating another in consequence of his religion,
    or of disturbing or interrupting any religious meeting within the
    limits of this city, he shall, on conviction thereof before the
    Mayor or Municipal Court, be considered a disturber of the public
    peace, and fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars, or
    imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of
    said Mayor or Court.

    Sec. 2. It is hereby made the duty of all Municipal officers to
    notice and report to the Mayor any breach or violation of this,
    or any other ordinance of this city, that may come within their
    knowledge, or of which they may be advised; and any officer
    aforesaid, is hereby fully authorized to arrest all such violators
    of rule, law and order, either with or without process.

    Passed March 1, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I also presented a bill as follows:

    An Ordinance in Relation to Public Meetings.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that in order to guarantee the constitutional right of free
    discussion upon all subjects, the citizens of this city, may
    from time to time peaceably assemble themselves together for all
    peaceable or lawful purposes whatever; and should any person
    be guilty of disturbing or interrupting any such meeting or
    assemblage, he shall on conviction thereof before the Mayor or
    Municipal Court, be considered a disturber of the public peace,
    and fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred  dollars, or
    imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of
    said mayor or court.

    Sec. 2. Should any person be guilty of exciting the people to riot
    or rebellion, or of participating in a mob, or any other unlawful
    riotous or tumultuous assemblage of the people, or of refusing to
    obey any civil officer, executing the ordinances of the city, or
    the general laws of the state or United States, or of neglecting or
    refusing to obey promptly, any military order for the due execution
    of said law or ordinances, he shall, on conviction thereof as
    aforesaid, be fined or imprisoned, or both, as aforesaid.

    Passed March 1, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I also offered a bill for "An ordinance, creating certain additional City Officers."

    Ordinance.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that in addition to the city officers heretofore elected, there
    shall be elected by the City Council, one high constable for each
    ward; one surveyor and engineer, one market master, one weigher
    and sealer, and one collector for the city, whose duties shall
    hereafter be defined by ordinance.

    Passed March 1, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I presented the following report:

    Committee's Report.

    Your committee, to whom was referred that portion of the address
    of his honor, the Mayor, which recommended the propriety of
    vacating the town plats, Commerce, and the City of Commerce, and
    incorporating them with the city plat of Nauvoo, would respectfully
    report--That they consider the recommendation contained in the
    address as one of great importance to the future welfare and
    prosperity of this city, and if carried into effect would make the
    streets regular and uniform, and materially tend to beautify this
    city. We would therefore respectfully recommend that the survey of
    the City of Nauvoo be carried through the town plats of Commerce
    and the City of Commerce, as soon as it may be practicable.

    We would therefore recommend to the council the passage of the
    following resolution--That the town plats of Commerce, and Commerce
    City be vacated, and that the same stand vacated from this time
    forth,  and forever; and that the same be incorporated with
    the City of Nauvoo, from this time henceforth and forever.

    All of which is respectfully submitted.

    Joseph Smith, Chairman.

The report was received and adopted, and an ordinance passed accordingly.

A vote of thanks, and the freedom of the city were conferred on the Honorable Richard M. Young, United States Senator for Illinois.

Tuesday, 2.--Elder Brigham Young visited Oldham, and returned on Wednesday, 3rd, to Manchester. Elders Orson Hyde and George J. Adams arrived in Liverpool.

Thursday, 4.--Elder Willard Richards left Liverpool for Preston, and was followed by Elders Hyde, Adams, and Fielding on the 5th.

General William Henry Harrison was inaugurated President of the United States.

Friday, 5.--Elder Parley P. Pratt removed the Star office to 47 Oxford Road, Manchester.

Sunday, 7.--Elders Young and Kimball preached at the Carpenter's Hall, Manchester.

[Sidenote: Appointment of City Officers.]

Monday, 8.--I attended the City Council. The following appointments were made, viz: Alanson Ripley, city surveyor; Theodore Turley, weigher and sealer; James Robinson, assessor; Stephen Markham, market master; James Allred was sworn supervisor of streets, and James Allred, Dimick B. Huntington, and George Morey, high constables.

I gave my views on several local measures proposed by the council.

Wednesday, 10.

    Letter of Brigham Young to the Editor of the Star--On Family
    Prayer.

    Liverpool, March 10, 1841.

    To the Editor of the Star:

    Dear Brother:--I feel anxious to address a few lines to you, on the
    subject of family prayer (and shall feel obliged by your inserting
    the  same in your next Star), for the purpose of imparting
    instruction to the brethren in general. Having traveled through
    many branches of the Church in England, I have found it to be a
    general custom among the brethren I visited, that when any of the
    Traveling Elders are present, they wait for the Elder to go forward
    in family prayer, instead of attending to that duty themselves.
    That is not right; and I would say to them that it would be
    better for them to understand their duty on this subject. My dear
    brethren, remember that the Lord holds all of us responsible for
    our conduct here. He held our father Adam responsible for his
    conduct, but no more than He does us, in proportion to the station
    we hold. The kings of the earth will have to give an account to
    God, for their conduct in a kingly capacity. Kings are heads of
    nations, governors are heads of provinces; so are fathers or
    husbands governors of their own houses, and should act accordingly.
    Heads of families should always take the charge of family worship,
    and call their family together at a seasonable hour, and not wait
    for every person to get through with all they may have to say or
    do. If it were my prerogative to adopt a plan for family prayer,
    it would be the following: Call your family or household together
    every morning and evening, previous to coming to the table, and
    bow before the Lord to offer up your thanksgiving for His mercies
    and providential care of you. Let the head of the family dictate;
    I mean the man, not the woman. If an Elder should happen to be
    present, the head of the house can call upon him, if he chooses so
    to do, and not wait for a stranger to take the lead at such times;
    by so doing we shall obtain the favor of our Heavenly Father, and
    it will have a tendency to teach our children to walk in the way
    they should go, which may God grant for Christ's sake. Amen.

    Brigham Young.

Governor Carlin issued the following Commission--

    Appointment of Joseph Smith Lieutenant-General of the Nauvoo Legion.

    Thomas Carlin, Governor of the State of Illinois, to all to whom
    these presents shall come: Greeting--

    Know ye that Joseph Smith, having been duly elected to the office
    of lieutenant-general, Nauvoo Legion, of the militia of the
    State of Illinois, I, Thomas Carlin, governor of said state, do
    commission him lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo Legion, to take
    rank from the fifth day of February, 1841. He is, therefore,
    carefully and diligently to discharge the duties of said office,
    by doing and performing all manner of things thereunto belonging;
    and I do strictly require all officers and soldiers  under his
    command to be obedient to his orders: and he is to obey such orders
    and directions as he shall receive, from time to time, from the
    commander-in-chief or his superior officer.

    In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the
    great seal of state to be hereunto affixed. Done at Springfield,
    this tenth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
    hundred and forty-one, and of the independence of the United States
    the sixty-fifth.

    By the Governor,

    [SEAL]

    Thomas Carlin.

    Lyman Trumball,

    Secretary of State.

The commission was endorsed on the back as follows--

    Headquarters, Nauvoo Legion, City of Nauvoo, Illinois, March 15,
    1841--Oath of office administered by me, the day and year above
    written.

    John C. Bennett,

    Major-General of the Nauvoo Legion.

Thursday, 11.--Elders Young, Kimball, Richards, and Taylor met in Liverpool.

Monday, 15.--I attended the City Council, and took part in the discussion concerning Mr. Annis' mill, in the southwest part of the city.

Elder Wilford Woodruff attended a conference at Gadfield Elm; 408 members in eighteen branches represented.

Thursday, 16.--Elder George A. Smith attended a conference at Macclesfield, which branch contains ninety one members, one Elder, six Priests, five Teachers, and three Deacons. In consequence of incessant preaching, his lungs are much affected.

Wednesday, 17.--Ship Alesto sailed from Liverpool for New Orleans, with 54 Saints, led by Elders Thomas Smith and William Moss.

Elders Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, and Father Melling went to Preston; Elders Young and Hedlock to Hawarden, and George A. Smith to Leek.

Thursday, 18.--Elder George A. Smith attended a  council of the officers and members of the Church at Leek, numbering sixty-three members, one Elder, six Priests, two Teachers, and two Deacons. Stephen Nixon was ordained an Elder; and John Hudson, Jacob Gibson, and Joseph Knight Priests; and Frederick Rushton and Edwin Rushton, Teachers.

Saturday, 20.

    An Inquiry.

    City Of Nauvoo, March 20, 1841.

    Brother William Allred, Bishop of the stake at Pleasant Vale, and
    also Brother Henry W. Miller, president of the stake at Freedom,
    desire President Joseph Smith to inquire of the Lord His will
    concerning them.

I inquired of the Lord concerning the foregoing question, and received the following answer--

    Revelation.

    Let my servants, William Allred and Henry W. Miller, have an agency
    for the selling of stock for the Nauvoo House, and assist my
    servants Lyman Wight, Peter Haws, George Miller, and John Snider,
    in building said house; and let my servants William Allred and
    Henry W. Miller take stock in the house, that the poor of my people
    may have employment, and that accommodations may be made for the
    strangers who shall come to visit this place, and for this purpose
    let them devote all their properties, saith the Lord.

About this time I received a revelation, given in the City of Nauvoo, in answer to the following interrogatory--"What is the will of the Lord, concerning the Saints in the Territory of Iowa?" [5]

    Revelation.

    "Verily, thus saith the Lord, I say unto you, if those who call
    themselves by my name, and are essaying to be my Saints, if they
    will do my will and keep my commandments concerning them; let them
    gather themselves together, unto the place which I shall appoint
    unto them by my servant Joseph, and build up cities unto my name,
    that they may be prepared for that which is in store for a time to
    come. Let them build up a city unto my name upon the land opposite
    to the City of  Nauvoo, and let the name of Zarahemla be named
    upon it. And let all those who come from the east, and the west,
    and the north, and the south, that have desires to dwell therein,
    take up their inheritances in the same, as well as in the City of
    Nashville, or in the City of Nauvoo, and in all the stakes which I
    have appointed, saith the Lord."

Sunday, 21.--Elder George A. Smith preached at Leek, and confirmed one.

[Sidenote: Organization of the Lesser Priesthood at Nauvoo.]

The Lesser Priesthood was organized in the City of Nauvoo, March 21, 1841, by Bishops Whitney, Miller, Higbee, and Knight. Samuel Rolf was chosen president of the Priests' quorum, and Stephen Markham and Hezekiah Peck, his counselors. Elisha Everett was chosen president of Teachers, and James W. Huntsman and James Hendricks, counselors. Phinehas R. Bird was chosen president of Deacons, and David Wood and William W. Lane counselors.

Footnotes:

1. See Doctrine and Covenants, section cxxiv.

2. The foregoing speech is not printed in the "History of Joseph Smith" as published in the Deseret News and Millennial Star, but such is the prominence of John C. Bennett in the period of the history now reached, and such the despicable part he later plays, that, as affording an insight into his character, the speech becomes important, hence given here in extenso, as it was published in the Times and Seasons, Vol. II, No. 8.

3. Following is the form of oath taken:

We, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Don C. Smith, and Charles C. Rich, do solemnly swear in the presence of Almighty God that we will support the Constitution of the United States, and of the State of Illinois, and that we will well and truly perform the duties of councilors of the City of Nauvoo, according to law, and the best of our abilities.

Joseph Smith,

Hyrum Smith,

Don C. Smith,

Charles C. Rich.

December 3, 1841.

4. For a proper characterization of this document see Vol. III, this History, p. 256.

5. See Doctrine and Covenants, section cxxv.

Chapter XVI.

The First Foreign Mission of the Church 1837-1841.

Tuesday, March 23, 1841.--Elder Young returned to Liverpool, and Elder Richards wrote the following history of the "Mission to England, or the first foreign mission of the Latter-day Saints."

    History of the British Mission.

    About the first of June, 1837, Elder Heber C. Kimball was called by
    the Spirit of Revelation, and set apart by the First Presidency of
    the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, then at Kirtland,
    Ohio, North America, to preside over a mission to England,
    accompanied by Elder Orson Hyde, who was set apart for the same
    work at the same time. In a few days Brother Joseph Fielding,
    Priest, was set apart; and on the eve of the 12th, Elder Willard
    Richards, (having been absent several months on a long journey, and
    having returned the day previous) was called and set apart for the
    same mission.

    The following morning, Tuesday, 13th, these brethren gave the
    parting hand, bid farewell to home, and, without purse or scrip,
    started for England. They were accompanied twelve miles to Fairport
    on Lake Erie by Elders Brigham Young, John P. Greene and Brother
    Levi Richards, and Sisters Kimball, Greene and Fielding (Brother
    R. B. Thompson and wife accompanied the mission to Buffalo, and
    Brother Fitch Brigham to Utica) and others with whom they parted in
    the afternoon, and went on board a steamer for Buffalo; where they
    arrived next day.

    At this place the brethren expected to receive some means
    from Canada, to assist them on their journey, but they were
    disappointed. In the evening they took passage on a canal boat,
    and arrived in Albany on the 19th (Elder Hyde having gone forward
    to New York from Rochester.) Brother Fielding proceeded to New
    York, and on the 20th Elder Kimball accompanied Elder Richards to
    his father's house in Richmond, Massachusetts, thirty miles east,
    where they spent one day, and having received some assistance
    from his friends, bade them  farewell for the last time (his
    father and mother having since died, also a sister whom he had
    left in Kirtland) and on the 21st returned to Albany, and arrived
    in New York on the 22nd, where they found Brothers Orson Hyde and
    Fielding, also Elders John Goodson and Isaac Russell, John Snider,
    Priest,(who had come from Canada to join the mission) anxiously
    awaiting their arrival, so that they might take passage on the
    United States, which was to sail next day, but they arrived too
    late.

    In New York Elder Richards received some further means, quite
    providentially, and on the 23rd the brethren engaged passage to
    Liverpool, on board the Garrick, which was to sail on the 1st of
    July.

    In the meantime the brethren received every possible assistance
    from Elder Elijah Fordham. At that time he was the only member of
    the Church residing in the city [New York], and having no house of
    his own, he procured his father's storehouse for the use of the
    brethren, where they lodged on the floor, amid straw and blankets,
    one week, eating their cold morsel, and conversing with the people
    as they had opportunity; for no place could be procured to preach
    in, and there was no one to receive them into their houses.

    Sunday, the 25th, the brethren held a council at their lodgings
    (Mr. Fordham's store), and organized ready for taking their
    departure.

    On the 29th the brethren sealed, superscribed, and forwarded one
    hundred and eighty of Elder Orson Hyde's "Timely Warnings" to the
    ministers of the different denominations in the city, and went
    on board the Garrick, which hauled out into the river and cast
    anchor.

    July 1st, the ship weighed anchor and was towed to Sandy Hook by
    a steamer, where she spread sail, and in four hours and a half
    was out of sight of land. With the exception of a strong wind on
    the 12th, there was generally a gentle breeze from the northwest
    during the voyage. On the 16th, Elder Orson Hyde preached on the
    aft quarter deck. On the 18th Cape Clear was visible (eighteen days
    out of sight of land;) and on the morning of the 20th, the brethren
    landed in Liverpool twenty days from New York. Here Elders Kimball,
    Hyde, and Richards found themselves on a foreign shore, surrounded
    by strangers, without the first farthing in their possession; but
    the brethren unitedly took lodgings in a private house in Union
    Street, till after the inspection of the ship; and on Saturday,
    the 22nd, took coach for Preston. When they had alighted from the
    coach, and were standing by their trunks in front of the hotel in
    Preston, a large flag was unfurled over their heads on which was
    printed in golden letters, "Truth will prevail;" at the sight of
    which their hearts rejoiced, and they cried aloud, "Amen, thanks be
    unto God, Truth Will Prevail."

     Brother Joseph Fielding lodged with his brother, Rev.
    James Fielding, then a preacher in Vauxhall-road Chapel, and the
    remainder of the brethren took lodgings in St. Wilford Street, Fox
    Street. The same evening the Elders visited the Rev. Mr. Fielding,
    by his request at his lodgings. He had previously been apprized of
    the coming forth of this work in America, through the medium of
    letters from his relatives and others and had requested his church
    to pray that God would send them His servants, and exhorted his
    people to receive their message when they should come.

    Sunday the 28th. As they had no place in which to preach, the seven
    brethren went to Vauxhall Chapel to hear the Rev. Mr. Fielding;
    and at the close of the morning service, Mr. Fielding gave public
    notice that an Elder of the Latter-day Saints would preach in the
    afternoon in his pulpit. This was voluntary with Mr. Fielding as no
    one had requested the privilege; and in the afternoon, according to
    the notice, Elder Kimball gave a brief history of the rise of the
    Church and the first principles of the Gospel, and Elder Hyde bore
    testimony; after which the Rev. Mr. Fielding requested the brethren
    to give out an appointment for the evening, when Elder Goodson
    preached, and Elder Joseph Fielding bore testimony.

    At the close Mr. Fielding again gave leave for preaching at the
    same place on Wednesday evening, when Elder Hyde preached and Elder
    Richards bore testimony; and from that time the Rev. Mr. Fielding
    closed his doors against the Elders and began to oppose the work,
    and stated that the Elders promised to say nothing about baptism
    in their preaching before he ever consented to let them preach in
    his pulpit; whereas the subject of the Elders preaching in his
    chapel had not been named between the parties, before Mr. Fielding
    gave out the public appointment before referred to: much less (if
    possible) that they would "say nothing about baptism."

    Nine of Mr. Fielding's members offered themselves for baptism; and
    Mr. Fielding presented himself before the Elders, and forbade their
    baptizing them, but he received for answer, that "they were of
    age and could act for themselves." On Sunday, the 30th, they were
    baptized under the hands of Elder Kimball; Brother George D. Watt
    being the first who offered himself for baptism in England, and is
    now an Elder laboring in Edinburgh, Scotland.

    Elder Russell preached in the market place in the afternoon, and
    from that day the doors of private houses were opened on almost
    every hand for the Elders.

    July 31st, a council of the Elders decided that Elders Goodson and
    Richards should go on a mission to Bedford, and Elder Russell and
    Priest Snider on a mission to Alston, Cumberland; and after a night
     of prayer, praise and thanksgiving, the brethren took their
    departure on the morning of the first of August for their several
    stations.

    The Rev. Mr. Fielding continued to oppose the doctrine of baptism
    for a season; but finding that he was likely to lose all his "best
    members," he offered to baptize them himself; but they being aware
    that he had no authority, declined his friendly offer, whereupon
    he engaged the Rev. Mr. Giles, a Baptist minister in Preston,
    of as little authority as himself, to do the baptizing for his
    flock; but this iniquitous scheme succeeded little better than the
    other--only one coming forward to his baptism, so far as we have
    heard. Mr. Fielding's people also stated that he acted the part of
    a hypocrite and deceived them, when he read the letters to them in
    public, which he received from America, by keeping back that part
    which treated on baptism, which, since the foregoing failure he has
    opposed.

    Elders Kimball and Hyde, and Priest Fielding continued to preach
    daily in different parts of Preston, and on Wednesday and Thursday
    (August 2nd and 3rd), the meetings were attended by Miss Jeanetta
    Richards who was visiting her friends in Preston, and on Friday she
    requested baptism, which was attended to by Elder Kimball, after
    which she was confirmed at the water side by Elders Kimball and
    Hyde, it being the first confirmation in a foreign land in these
    last days.

    The day following Sister Richards returned home to her friends,
    and informed her father, the Rev. Joseph Richards, an Independent
    minister at Walker-fold, Chaidgely, whom she had found at Preston,
    what she had done, and requested him to send for Elder Kimball to
    preach in his chapel. Mr. Richards complied with his daughter's
    request. Elder Kimball arrived at Walker-fold Saturday eve, August
    12, and the day following preached three times in Mr. Richards'
    pulpit, to crowded assemblies; also twice during the week, and
    twice the Sunday following, being most kindly and cordially
    entertained by Mr. and Mrs. Richard's for nine days, during which
    time Elder Kimball baptized several in the neighborhood.

    After a short visit to Preston, where Elder Hyde continued to
    preach and baptize, Elder Kimball returned to Walker-fold, and
    continued to receive the hospitality of Mr. Richards' house for
    some days, while the work spread in the neighborhood; and from
    thence the work went forth to Clitheroe, Waddington, Downham,
    Cathburn, Thornley, and Ribchester, through the labors of Brothers
    Kimball and Fielding.

    Elders Goodson and Richards arrived in Bedford on the 2nd of
    August, and having letters of introduction to the Rev. Timothy R.
    Matthews from Brother Joseph Fielding (Mrs. Matthew's brother),
    they immediately waited on Mr. Matthews, who expressed great joy at
    their arrival, and manifested his sincerity by walking arm in arm
    with the  Elders through the streets of Bedford, calling on
    the members of his church, and inviting them to attend the lectures
    of the Elders at his chapel vestry that evening. Mr. Matthews
    had previously been apprized of the Saints in America through
    the medium of the Rev. James Fielding of Preston and the letters
    from America, before referred to. In the evening, his church
    assembled in the vestry, and Elders Goodson and Richards continued
    to lecture and testify of the work of God, on that and the three
    following evenings in the same place, with the entire approbation
    of Mr. Matthews, who, at the close of the lectures, publicly bore
    testimony to the truths advanced, and called upon his people to
    know why they did not come forward for baptism; while they in
    return wished to know why he did not set them the example.

    After this Mr. Matthews engaged another house in the neighborhood
    for the Elders to preach in, under the pretense that some of the
    proprietors of the chapel might not be pleased with the Elders
    occupying the vestry, and Mr. Matthews continued to attend the
    preaching of the Elders, and also spent a great share of his time,
    from day to day, in conversation with them.

    Mr. Matthews told the Elders that he had received two ordinations,
    one from Bishop West, whom he had proved to be an impostor, and
    another from the Church of England, which he acknowledged to be
    descended from the Church of Rome, and he further acknowledged that
    he had no authority from God for administering in the ordinances of
    God's house.

    On the 10th Mrs. Braddock and four others were baptized by Elder
    Goodson. Soon after this, Mr. Joseph Saville, member of Mr.
    Matthews' church, being very desirous of receiving baptism at the
    same time with Mr. Matthews, waited on him at his house, in company
    with Elders Goodson and Richards and Mr. Matthews, and Mr. Saville
    mutually agreed to meet the Elders on the bank of the river Ouse
    at a specified hour in the afternoon, and attend to the ordinance
    of baptism. At the hour appointed Mr. Saville met the Elders at
    the place previously designated by Mr. Matthews; but as he (the
    latter) did not make his appearance according to promise, after
    waiting for him an hour, Mr. Saville was baptized, when the Elders
    repaired to Mr. Matthews' to learn the cause of his not fulfilling
    his engagement, and were informed by Mr. Matthews' family that he
    had gone out into the country to preach.

    In a day or two it was currently rumored that Mr. Matthews had
    baptized himself, and this rumor was afterwards confirmed by
    Mrs. Matthews, who stated to Elder Kimball at Preston, that Mr.
    Matthews had baptized himself, reasoning upon this principle within
    himself: "If I  have authority to administer the sacrament
    to my people, why not have authority to baptize myself," &c.--and
    all this after Mr. Matthews had acknowledged to Elders Goodson and
    Richards that he had no authority to administer in the ordinances
    of God's house; and altogether regardless of the words of the
    Apostles (Heb. v: 4), "No man taketh this honor unto himself but he
    that is called of God as was Aaron."

    By the foregoing it is plainly to be seen, that Mr. Matthews has
    attempted to take that upon himself which was never conferred upon
    him by the spirit of revelation, either by God, His angels, or His
    servants; viz., the holy Priesthood; and from that period, Mr.
    Matthews began to preach baptism, and baptized those who felt it
    their duty to be baptized, and then invited them to the penitent
    form to get remission of their sins; but finding that would not
    answer all the design which he intended, he afterwards began to
    baptize for the remission of sins.

    Mr. Matthews appears to have well understood that counterfeit
    coin is more current the nearer it approximates to the true, and
    governed himself accordingly; for he continued to preach faith,
    repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, the second coming
    of Christ, &c., &c., adding one thing to another in imitation of
    truth, as fast as it answered his purpose, from those doctrines
    which he had heard from the Latter-day Saints; but it was some
    time before he arrived at that heaven-daring conscience-seared
    hardihood, to lay hands on those whom he had baptized for the
    reception of the Holy Ghost, and at the same time he acknowledged
    that he had not got the Holy Ghost himself, by praying that he
    might receive it--(Query. How can a man communicate that which he
    is not in possession of?) and he now calls his church "The Church
    of Latter-day Saints."

    Thus has Mr. Matthews been running about from Bedford to Liverpool,
    from Liverpool to Northampton, from Northampton to Bedford,
    and other places, crying aloud in public and private, that the
    Latter-day Saints and their doctrines came from hell; at the same
    time he has been preaching the same doctrines, calls his church by
    the same name, is administering in the same ordinances, just as
    though he fully believed that the doctrines and sacraments of hell
    would be sanctified and made holy and heavenly, when administered
    by the tongue and hands of an impostor.

    About the time that Mr. Matthews rejected the truth in Bedford, his
    son (as Mr. Matthews called him), the Rev. Robert Aitkin, commenced
    his attack on the principles of righteousness in Preston; and while
    furiously pounding his pulpit with the Book of Mormon, and warning
    his people to beware of the Latter-day Saints and their doctrines,
    saying, that they and their record came from hell; called upon his
    people to use all their efforts to put down the work of God, or
    stop the progress of the  Latter-day Saints; and, if it could
    not be put down without, prayed that God would smite the leaders;
    and from that time to the present, his prayer has been answered on
    his own head.

    After Mr. Aitkin had preached against the corruptions of the Church
    of England for years, and established many flourishing chapels in
    Liverpool, Preston, Manchester, Burslem, London, &c.; after he had
    been visited by the Elders of the Church of Latter-day Saints,
    and acknowledged to them at one time that baptism was right, but
    he could find no man who had authority to baptize; and at another
    time, that he was afraid of them, and rejected their testimony; and
    last of all would not receive the Elders into his house; after all
    this, and deserted by a part of his flock, he has fled from the
    remainder because he was an hireling, and cared not for the sheep;
    yes, he has deserted his "Christian Society"--ceased to be an
    Aitkenite, and dissolved his co-partnership with Father Matthews,
    as may well be supposed, returned, and, taken "holy order" in
    "Mother Church," against the corruptions of which he testified so
    diligently from year to year, and is now about to enter on his
    parochial duties in St. John the Evangelist's Church, Hope street,
    Liverpool, for no other reason, that the writer knows of, only that
    he could find no one who had authority to baptize for the remission
    of sins, and not possessing the faith of his father, Matthews, to
    believe that the doctrines of the pit would become holy and gospel
    doctrines when taught by the tongue of wickedness and imposture,
    he has concluded thus publicly to acknowledge himself a servant of
    those very errors he has so long contended against, for the sake of
    filthy lucre.

    About the 12th of September, Elder Goodson and Priest Snider
    returned to Preston, and soon after sailed for America.

    Some years previously, the principles of the Temperance Society
    (originally established in America), were introduced into England,
    and Preston was the first town to receive them. Among the many
    interesting and valuable items held forth by the Temperance people,
    it was often remarked by them that Temperance was the fore-runner
    of the Gospel, which prophecy proved true; for when the fullness
    of the Gospel came from America to England, it was first preached
    in Preston, and through the influence of the Temperance Society,
    the Latter-day Saint, procured the use of the Temperance Hall
    in Preston (a commodious building, originally erected for cock
    fighting) for their chapel, and commenced meeting therein on the
    3rd of September, 1837, and continued until they were ejected
    through the influence of others, the Temperance Society not having
    it entirely at their control. Similar favors have been received
    from several other Temperance Societies in England, for which the
    Lord reward them.

    Elder Richards continued to labor against much opposition in
    Bedford, and the region round about, until the 7th of March, 1838,
    when he returned to Preston, leaving about forty members in charge
    of Elder James Lavender. Elder Russell continued to labor in
    Alston, Brampton, &c, and returned to Preston near the same time,
    leaving about sixty member in the care of Elder Jacob Peart.

    At Christmas, 1837, Priest Joseph Fielding was ordained Elder, and
    several were ordained Teachers, &c., at Preston; and in March,
    1838, the Church had extended from Preston to Penwortham, Longton,
    Southport, Eccleston Whittle, Hunter's Hill, Chorley, and the
    intermediate region, through the labors of Elders Hyde, Kimball,
    and Fielding, and the members amounted to several hundreds in the
    regions of Preston and Clitheroe. During this month, Elders Kimball
    and Hyde were diligently engaged in organizing the different
    branches; and on the first of April a general conference was called
    at Preston, when the organization of the churches was completed,
    and many were ordained, among whom were Elders Joseph Fielding,
    Willard Richards, and William Clayton to the High Priesthood, [i.
    e. they were ordained High Priests], and set apart by Elders
    Kimball and Hyde to preside over all the churches in England.

    On the 9th, Elders Kimball, Hyde and Russell took leave of the
    Saints in Preston, and went to Liverpool, where they were visited
    by Elders Fielding, Richards, Clayton, and others, and on the 20th
    of April, sailed for New York, on board the Garrick, the same
    ship they came out on to England.

    When Elders Fielding and Richards had returned to Longton, they
    found a pamphlet, purporting to be written by the Rev. Richard
    Livesey, a Methodist minister, who had spent some time on a mission
    to the United States, as he says, and having nothing more important
    to attend to during his mission, it appears that he spent his
    time in gathering up a heap of lies and filth from the American
    papers, and imported them to England on his return; and finding
    that the work of God had commenced in his native land, and was
    likely to destroy his craft, set himself at work to condense his
    heterogeneous mass of trans-Atlantic lies, and form the wonderful
    production of the Rev. Richard Livesey's tract against the
    Latter-day Saints; it being the first thing of the kind that the
    enemy of all righteousness had found means to export from America,
    and circulate in England; but since which he has found servants in
    abundance, to assist in this nefarious merchandise of his heart's
    delight.

    The Church at this time was in its infancy, and needed much
    instruction, which necessarily occupied the attention of the
    presiding Elders to a great extent; and as there were few laborers
    in the field, the spread of the work was not very rapid for some
    time.

     Sister Alice Hodgin died at Preston on the 2nd of September,
    1838; and it was such a wonderful thing for a Latter-day Saint
    to die in England, that Elder Richards was arraigned before the
    Mayor's Court at Preston, on the 3rd of October, charged with
    "killing and slaying" the said Alice with a "black stick," &c., but
    was discharged without being permitted to make his defense, as soon
    as it was discovered that the iniquity of his accusers was about to
    be made manifest.

    October 19, 1838, Elder Clayton gave himself wholly to the work,
    and soon after commenced preaching and baptizing in Manchester, and
    from thence the work spread into Stockport, and other places in
    the neighborhood, through the labors of Elders Clayton, Fielding,
    John Moon, and David Wilding. A small church had previously sprung
    up in Bolton, through the labors of Elder David Wilding, and was
    continued by Elder Amos Fielding.

    In the summer of 1839 Elders Clayton Richards, and John Moon,
    labored in Burslem, with some success, and a small church was
    planted in Burnley by Elder Thomas Richardson, besides many who
    were added in the older branches, through the instrumentality of
    the local Elders and Priests, who were generally very faithful.

    December 8, 1839, Elders Hiram Clark, Alexander Wright, and Samuel
    Mulliner arrived in Preston from America; and on the 25th, Brothers
    Wright and Mulliner started for Scotland and soon commenced
    preaching and baptizing in Paisley and vicinity.

    January 13, 1840, Elders Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and
    Theodore Turley arrived in Preston, from America; and on the
    18th Brothers Woodruff and Turley started for the Potteries in
    Staffordshire, passing through Manchester; and on the 22nd, Elder
    Taylor left for Liverpool.

    April 6, 1840, just ten years from the organization of the Church,
    Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson
    Pratt, George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock, landed in Liverpool
    from New York; and on the 9th Elder Kimball arrived in Preston,
    just two years from the day he left for America.

    The arrival of the Elders caused the Saints to rejoice exceedingly,
    for it had been prophesied by many (not of the Church), that they
    would never come, and that Elders Kimball and Hyde would never
    return, but they are both now in England, Elder Orson Hyde having
    arrived in Liverpool on the 3rd instant from New York.

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Orson Hyde,

    Willard Richards.

    Preston, March 24, 1841.

Chapter XVII.

Celebration of the Twelfth Anniversary of the Organization of the Church--Order of Laying Corner-Stones of Temples--Council Meetings of the Twelve in England.

March, 25, 26 and 27, 1841.--Elders Young and Richards were detained at the Liverpool post office, as witnesses in the case of "The Queen vs. Joseph Holloway," for detaining letters.

Saturday, 27.--Elders Wilford Woodruff, and Geo. A. Smith attended a council of the official members of the Staffordshire Conference, at Hanley.

[Sidenote: Staffordshire Conference.]

Sunday, 28.--Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith attended a general meeting of the Staffordshire Conference at Hanley, when 13 branches were represented, containing 1 High Priest, 17 Elders, 55 Priests, 25 Teachers, 14 Deacons, and 663 members. Thomas J. Filcher, J. Taylor, Osmond Shaw, W. Ridge, and H. Ridge were ordained Elders, also 8 Priests, 7 Teachers, and 2 Deacons, under the hands of Wilford Woodruff, Geo. A. Smith, and Alfred Cordon. There have been 141 baptized during the past three months.

[Sidenote: Union of Commerce and Nauvoo Plats.]

Monday, 29.--I attended city council, and moved that the city surveyor be ordered to survey Commerce, and plat the same so as to correspond with the city plat of Nauvoo, and make out a map to be recorded, which was carried by the Council. Much was said in council about fining the owners of dogs, and I contended that it was right to fine individuals  who would keep unruly dogs, to worry cattle, sheep, or the citizens, and an ordinance was passed to that effect.

William Marks, president of the stake at Nauvoo, made choice of Charles
C. Rich and Austin Cowles as his counselors.

Elders Young and Richards were at Liverpool packing Books of Mormon, to pay off those who had loaned them money in order to carry forward the printing and binding.

The following are extracts from Elder Woodruff's letter.

    Letter of Wilford Woodruff to Don C. Smith--Relating to Affairs in
    England.

    Burslem, March 29, 1841.

    Brother Don Carlos Smith:--The following is a brief sketch of my
    journey from London to this place. Elder Kimball left London on
    the 19th February. I left on the 26th, and arrived at Bristol on
    the same day, where I found Elder Kington, who was busily engaged
    in the work of the Lord in that city, and had established a small
    branch of fourteen members. I tarried there a short time and
    preached three times in a theatre, had large congregations, good
    attention, and baptized one, and there appears a good prospect of
    a work being done in that city. Population of Bristol, 200,000.
    While there I visited the suspension bridge, now erecting across
    the river Avon, at St. Vincent's Rocks, Clifton; which bridge is
    one hundred feet in height above the river, and seven hundred in
    length. I spent one evening in Monmouth, on the borders of Wales;
    preached to a large congregation; several applied for baptism
    after meeting. On the 8th of March I attended a conference in
    Garway; Elder Levi Richards was chosen president, and James Morgan,
    clerk; heard four branches represented, containing one hundred
    and thirty-four members; three were ordained to the ministry. I
    also preached at Lugwardine, Shucknall Hill, Ledbury, Dymock, and
    Turkey Hall to large congregations, and find the work of the Lord
    still progressing throughout that region. The excitement upon the
    subject in the city of Hereford has been so great, that it has
    assembled together in the market place three thousand persons at
    a time to hear something upon the cause of the Latter-day Saints.
    On the 15th of March I attended the Gadfield Elm conference, which
    met at the Gadfield Elm Chapel. Elder Wilford Woodruff was chosen
    president; John Hill, clerk; 18 branches represented, containing
    408 members, 8 Elders, 32 Priests, 11 Teachers  and 1 Deacon;
    when such business was transacted as was deemed necessary. I also
    met large congregations at Keysend Street, Coldville, Browcut;
    Dunclose, Froom's Hill, and Stanley Hill, and left many churches
    on the right and left, which time would not permit me to visit.
    I also met with the Froom's Hill conference, on the 22nd March,
    at Stanley Hill, Herefordshire, there being present one of the
    traveling High Council, 2 High Priests, 20 Elders, 30 Priests, 9
    Teachers, two Deacons. Elder Levi Richards was chosen president,
    and Elder Woodruff, clerk. On this occasion I heard represented
    30 branches, containing 997 members, 24 Elders, 66 Priests, 27
    Teachers, 7 Deacons, and 6 were ordained to the ministry. The
    sum total represented at these conferences was 1,539 members, 36
    Elders, 103 Priests, 41 Teachers, 7 Deacons; all of whom have
    embraced the work in that part of the vineyard in one year, besides
    many members and officers who have emigrated to America; and I am
    happy to say that the officers and members, have universally been
    ready to hearken to counsel, and give heed to our instructions, and
    it was with no ordinary feelings that I took my farewell of those
    churches who have been so ready to receive and embrace the truth. I
    called upon the Saints in Birmingham and Gret's Green, but had not
    time to hold any meetings among them. I arrived in Hanley on the
    25th, where I had the privilege of again meeting with Elder Geo. A.
    Smith, and was rejoiced to find the churches universally prospering
    in Staffordshire. I spent one evening with the church at Longton,
    and baptized seven.

Tuesday, 30.--Elders Woodruff and Geo. A. Smith arrived in Manchester, after a ride of forty miles.

Wednesday, 31.--Elders Young and Richards attended conference in Liverpool.

Thursday, April 1, 1841.--Elders Young and Richards went to Manchester, where they found Elders Kimball, Hyde, Woodruff and Smith, and had a happy meeting.

Friday, 2.--Elders Orson Pratt and John Taylor arrived at Manchester and went into council.

    Minutes of a Council Meeting of the Twelve.

    Manchester, England, April 2, 1841.

    This day Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Parley
    P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, John
    Taylor and Geo. A. Smith, of the quorum of the Twelve, met together
    at the house of Brother James Bushaw, coachman No. 4, Gray Street,
    near Oxford road, in this city, in council, after having been
    separated and sent into various counties. To meet once more in
    council after a long separation, and having passed through many
    sore and grievous trials, exposing our lives and our characters
    to the slanders and violence of wicked and murderous men, caused
    our hearts to swell with gratitude to God for His providential
    care over us. Elder Young opened the council by prayer. Elders
    Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt, the committee
    appointed about a year ago to secure a copyright for the Book of
    Mormon, in the name of Joseph Smith, Jun., presented the following
    certificate:

    "Feb. 8, 1841. Then entered for his copy--the property of Joseph
    Smith, Jun.,--'The Book of Mormon; an account written by the hand
    of Mormon, upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi; translated
    by Joseph Smith, Jun. First European, from the second American
    edition. Received five copies.

    "George Greenhill."

    "The above is a true copy of an entry in the register book of
    the Company of Stationers kept, at the hall of the said company.
    Witness my hand, this 17th day of February, 1841.

    "George Greenhill,

    Warehouse-keeper of the Company of Stationers."

    The quorum voted that they accepted the labors of said Committee.

    Resolved: That as the quorum of the Twelve have had nothing to
    do with the printing of the Book of Mormon, they will not now
    interfere with it, but that the said Committee settle the financial
    or business matters thereof with Joseph Smith, Jun., to whom the
    profits rightly belong.

    Resolved: That Elder Amos Fielding be appointed to superintend
    fitting out the Saints from Liverpool to America, under the
    instruction of Parley P. Pratt.

    Resolved: That Brother Geo. J. Adams go to Bedford and
    Northampton and labor in that region.

    Adjourned till tomorrow at 10 o'clock, a. m.; Elder Kimball closed
    by prayer.

    Orson Hyde, Clerk.

    Council Meeting of the Twelve--Continued.

    Manchester, April 3, 1841.

    This day the quorum of the Twelve met pursuant to adjournment. The
    president called upon Elder Hyde to open by prayer. The quorum then
    signed a letter of commendation to the churches in England for
    Elder Hyde.

    The business of publishing the Star and hymn-book was then taken
    into consideration. Brother John Taylor moved that those who have
    had the care and superintendence of publishing the Star and
    hymn-book,  should dispose of them according to their own
    wishes, and dispose of the proceeds in the same way; seconded by
    Elder Orson Pratt, and carried by unanimous vote. Moved by Elder
    Young, and seconded by Elder Kimball, that Elder Parley P. Pratt
    conduct the publication of the Millennial Star as editor of the
    same, after the close of the present volume. Resolved, that Elder
    Parley P. Pratt reprint the hymn-book if he deem it expedient.
    The hymn-book is not to be altered, except the typographical
    errors. The above resolution was moved by Elder Geo. A. Smith, and
    seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff; carried unanimously. Conference
    adjourned.

    Orson Hyde, Clerk.

Sunday, 4.--The President of the United States, William Henry Harrison died at Washington of the pleurisy.

Nine of the Twelve at Manchester attended meeting at Carpenter's hall, and individually bore testimony of the fulness of the everlasting Gospel.

    Council Meeting of the Twelve--Continued.

    Manchester, April 5, 1841.

    Met pursuant to adjournment. Elder Orson Pratt opened the council
    by prayer. It was resolved that the 17th day of April be the day
    appointed for the Twelve who are going to America, to set sail from
    Liverpool. Moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Woodruff
    that the Twelve do business at the conference as a quorum, and call
    upon the Church or conference to sanction it. Adjourned till the
    6th instant, to meet in general conference at Carpenter's Hall, at
    10 o'clock a. m.

    O. Hyde, Clerk.

[Sidenote: Twelfth Anniversary of the Organization of the Church.]

April 6, 1841.--The first day of the twelfth year of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! At an early hour the several companies comprising the "Nauvoo Legion," with two volunteer companies from Iowa Territory, making sixteen companies in all, assembled at their several places of rendezvous, and were conducted in due order to the ground assigned for general review. The appearance, order and movements of the Legion, were chaste, grand and imposing, and reflected great credit upon the taste, skill and tact of the men comprising said Legion. We doubt whether the like can be presented in  any other city in the western country. At half-past seven o'clock a. m., the fire of artillery announced the arrival of Brigadier-Generals Law and Don Carlos Smith, at the front of their respective cohorts; and at 8 o'clock Major-General Bennett was conducted to his post, under the discharge of cannon, and took command of the Legion.

At half-past nine o'clock a. m., Lieutenant-General Smith, with his guard, staff and field officers arrived at the ground, and were presented with a beautiful silk national flag by the ladies of Nauvoo, which was respectfully received and hailed by the firing of cannon, and borne off by Colonel Robinson, the cornet, to the appropriate position in the line; after which the Lieutenant-General with his suite passed the lines in review.

At twelve m., the procession arrived upon the Temple ground, enclosing the same in a hollow square, with Lieutenant-General Smith, Major-General Bennett, Brigadier-Generals Wilson Law and Don Carlos Smith, their respective staffs, guard, field officers, distinguished visitors, choir, band, &c., in the centre, and the ladies and gentlemen, citizens, surrounding in the interior. The superior officers, together with the banner, architects, principal speaker, &c., were duly conducted to the stand at the principal corner stone, and the religious services were commenced by singing from page 65 of the new hymn book.

[Sidenote: Sidney Rigdon's Speech.]

President Sidney Rigdon then addressed the assembly, and remarked the circumstances under which he addressed the people were of no ordinary character, but of peculiar and indescribable interest, that it was the third occasion of a similar nature, wherein he had been called upon to address the people, and to assist in laying the corner stones of houses to be erected in honor of the God of the Saints. Various scenes had transpired since the first was laid--he with some who were with him on that occasion, had waded through scenes that no other people had ever seen--not cursed, but blessed  with. They had seen the blood of the innocent flow, and heard the groans of those dying for the witness of Jesus; in all those scenes of tribulation, his confidence, his courage and his joy had been increasing instead of diminishing. Now the scene had changed; persecution had in a measure subsided; peace and safety, friendship and joy crowned their assembling; and their endeavors to serve God were respected and viewed with interest. The Saints had assembled, not to violate law and trample upon equity and good social order; not to devastate and destroy; but to lift up the standard of liberty and law, to stand in defense of civil and religious, rights, to protect the innocent, to save mankind, and to obey the will and mandate of the Lord of glory; to call up to remembrance the once crucified, but now exalted and glorified Savior; to say that He is again revealed, that He speaks from the heavens, that He reigns; in honor of Him to tell the world that He lives, and speaks, and reigns and dictates--that not every people can build a house to Him, but that people whom He Himself directs--that the present military display is not to usurp authority, but to obey as they are commanded and directed; to honor, not the world, but Him that is alive and reigns, the all in all, the invisible, but beholding, and guiding and directing--that the Saints boast of their King; of His wisdom, His understanding, His power and His goodness--that they honor a God of unbounded power and glory--that He is the chief corner stone in Zion, also the top stone--that He cannot be conquered--that He is working in the world to guide, to conquer, and to subdue--that as formerly, so now He works by revelation--that this is the reason why we are here, and why we are thus--that the Saints have sacrificed all things for the testimony of Jesus Christ--that some from different parts of Europe and from Canada, as well as the different parts of the United States, are present, and among all, a unanimity of purpose and feeling prevails--and why? Because the same God over all had spoken  from the heavens and again revealed Himself. He remarked that he defied the devil to collect such an assembly; none but Jesus would or could accomplish such things as we are about to behold; the devil will not build up, but tear down and destroy; the work of Jesus is like Himself in all ages--that as light shines from the east, and spreads itself to the west, so is the progress of spiritual light and truth--that Jesus is a God of order, regularity and uniformity--that he works now by revelation and by messengers as anciently--shows Himself--lifts the veil; that such things are marvelous, but nevertheless true--that the order of laying the corner stones was expressive of the order of the kingdom--that the minutia were subject matter of revelation, and all the scenery, acts of obedience are understood by the Saints--that the ancient Prophets beheld and rejoiced at this scene, and are near to witness the fulfillment of their predictions--that we are highly favored of God, and brought near to the spirits of just men made perfect. He then closed by exhortation, first to the multitude, and lastly to the Church. The speaker then gave out a hymn, page 205, and closed by prayer.

The architects then, by the direction of the First Presidency, lowered the first (the south-east corner) stone to its place, and President Joseph Smith pronounced the benediction as follows:

    This principal corner stone in representation of the First
    Presidency, is now duly laid in honor of the Great God; and may
    it there remain until the whole fabric is completed; and may the
    same be accomplished speedily; that the Saints may have a place to
    worship God, and the Son of Man have where to lay His head.

President Sidney Rigdon then pronounced the following:

    May the persons employed in the erection of this house be preserved
    from all harm while engaged in its construction, till the whole is
    completed, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
    Holy Ghost. Even so. Amen.

Adjourned for one hour.

Assembled according to adjournment, and proceeded to lay the remaining corner stones, according to previous order.

The second (south-west corner) stone, by the direction of the president of the High Priesthood, with his council and President Marks, was lowered to its place, when the president of the High Priesthood pronounced the following:

    The second corner stone of the Temple now building by the Church
    of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in honor of the Great God,
    is duly laid, and may the same unanimity, that has been manifested
    on this occasion continue till the whole is completed; that peace
    may rest upon it to the laying of the top stone thereof, and the
    turning of the key thereof; that the Saints may participate in the
    blessings of Israel's God, within its walls, and the glory of God
    rest upon the same. Amen.

The third (the north-west corner) stone, superintended by the High Council, was then lowered to its place, with the benediction of Elias Higbee, as follows:

    The third corner stone is now duly laid; may this stone be a firm
    support to the building that the whole may be completed as before
    proposed.

The fourth (the north-east corner) stone, superintended by the Bishops, was then lowered to its place, and Bishop Whitney pronounced the following:

    The fourth and last corner stone, expressive of the Lesser
    Priesthood, is now duly laid, and may the blessings before
    pronounced, with all others desirable, rest upon the same forever.
    Amen.

The services were then declared closed, and the military retired to the parade ground and were dismissed with the approbation and thanks of the commanding officer. The military band, under the command of Captain Duzette, made a conspicuous and dignified appearance, and performed their part honorably. Their soul-stirring strains met harmoniously the rising emotions that swelled each bosom, and stimulated us onward to the arduous but pleasing and honorable duties of the day. The choir also, under the direction of B. S. Wilber, deserve commendation.

[Sidenote: Conduct of the People.]

What added greatly to the happiness we experienced on this interesting occasion, is the fact that we heard no  obscene or profane language; neither saw we any one intoxicated. Can the same be said of a similar assemblage in any other city in the Union? Thank God that the intoxicating beverage, the bane of humanity in these last days, is becoming a stranger in Nauvoo.

In conclusion, we will say we never witnessed a more imposing spectacle than was presented on this occasion, and during the sessions of the conference. Such a multitude of people moving in harmony, in friendship, in dignity, told in a voice not easily misunderstood, that they were a people of intelligence, and virtue and order; in short, that they were Saints; and that the God of love, purity and light, was their God, their Examplar, and Director; and that they were blessed and happy.

[Sidenote: Order of Laying Corner Stones of Temples.]

If the strict order of the Priesthood were carried out in the building of Temples, the first stone would be laid at the south-east corner, by the First Presidency of the Church. The south-west corner should be laid next. The third, or north-west corner next; and the fourth, or north-east corner last. The first Presidency should lay the south-east corner stone and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other corner stones.

If a Temple is built at a distance, and the First Presidency are not present, then the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the persons to dictate the order for that Temple; and in the absence of the Twelve Apostles, then the Presidency of the Stake will lay the south-east corner stone; the Melchisedec Priesthood laying the corner stones on the east side of the Temple, and the Lesser Priesthood those on the west side.

[Sidenote: Conference at Philadelphia.]

A Conference was held at Philadelphia; President Hyrum Smith presiding; many branches were represented and the branch at Philadelphia was organized by electing Benjamin Winchester, President, and Edson Whipple, and William Wharnot, his Counselors. Jacob Syphret was elected Bishop, and Jesse Prince and James Nicholson his Counselors.

     Meeting of the Council of the Twelve in Manchester.

    The Council of the Twelve assembled at Manchester, in Carpenter's
    Hall, on the 7th day of April, 1841, for the first time to transact
    business as a quorum in the presence of the Church, in a foreign
    land; being the first day of the 12th year of the rise of the
    Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Nine of the quorum
    were present; viz., Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde,
    Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards,
    John Taylor and Geo. A. Smith, President Young having called the
    meeting to order, and organized, the conference then opened by
    prayer. Elder Thomas Ward was chosen Clerk. The President then
    made some introductory remarks relative to the organization of the
    Church in the House of the Lord in America, in reference to the
    different quorums in their respective orders and authorities in the
    Church.

    The representation of the churches and conferences throughout the
    kingdom was then called for.

     Location.                    By Whom Represented   Members. Elders. Priests. Teachers. Deacons.
     Manchester                   Parley P. Pratt       443      7       15       9         0
     Clitheroe Conference         Heber C. Kimball      318      6       12       13        3
     Presten Conference           Peter Melling         675      11      15       13        3
     Liverpool                    John Taylor           190      9       8        4         3
     Isle of Man                  John Taylor           90       2       4        2         0
     London Conference            Lorenzo Snow          137      3       8        4         2
     Birmingham Conference        Alfred Cordon         110      4       13       4         1
     Staffordshire Conference     Alfred Cordon         574      19      49       28        16
     Garway Conference            Wilford Woodruff      134      5       6        4         1
     Gadfield Elm Conference      Wilford Woodruff      408      8       33       11        1
     Froom's Hill Conference      Wilford Woodruff      1008     27      67       27        8
     Edingburgh                   Orson Pratt           203      6       9        6         2
     Glasgow, Paisley, Johnstone, Reuben Hedlock        368      12      15       13        11
     Bridge of Weir, and
     Thorney Bank
     Ireland                      Theodore Curtis       35       2       0        1         0
     Wales                        James Burnham         170      2       5        3         3
     Newcastle-upon-Tyne          Amos Fielding         23       1       3        1         0
     Alston                       John Sanders          26       1       0        1         0
     Brampton                     John Sanders          46       0       1        0         0
     Carlisle                     John Sanders          43       1       0        0         0
     Bolton                       Robert Crooks         189      1       11       8         1
     Dukinfield                   John Albertson        120      2       4        3         2
     Northwich, Middlewich, &c    Samuel Heath          112      2       6        6         6
     Oldham                       William Black         86       1       4        1         2
     Stockport                    Elder Magan           161      1       5        2         2
     Eccles                       Elder Magan           24       1       3        1         0
     Pendlebury                   Elder Magan           62       0       2        1         1
     Whitefield                   Elder Magan           41       1       2        3         0
     Radcliffe Bridge             Elder Magan           18       1       3        0         0
                                  Total                 5814     136     304      169       68

    Nearly eight hundred Saints have emigrated to America during the
    past season. These are not included in this representation.

     Conference adjourned till 2 p. m.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment; opened by prayer.

    Scattering members were then represented, consisting of nearly
    fifty, not included in any of the above branches.

    President Young then proceeded to make some remarks on the office
    of Patriarch, and concluded by moving that Elder John Albertson [1]
    be ordained to that office. Seconded by Elder Kimball, and carried
    unanimously.

    Resolved: That George D. Watt, George J. Adams, Amos Fielding,
    William Kay, John Sanders, Thomas Richardson, James Whitehead,
    Thomas Domville, James Galley and George Simpson be ordained High
    Priests.

    Resolved: That the following persons be ordained Elders--William
    Miller, William Leach, John Sands, William Moon, William Hardman,
    William Black, John Goodfellow, Joseph Brotherton, Richard Benson,
    Theophilus Brotherton, John McIlwick, and William Green.

    Resolved: That Manchester, Stockport, Dukinfield, Oldham, Bolton,
    and all the neighboring branches be organized into one conference,
    to be called the Manchester Conference.

    That the Church in Brampton, Alston, and Carlisle be included in
    one conference.

    That the churches of Liverpool, Isles of Man, Wales, viz., Overton,
    Harding and Ellsmere, be organized into one conference, to be
    called the Liverpool conference.

    Resolved: That the Macclesfield Conference include Macclesfield,
    Northwich, Middlewich, and Lostock.

    That Edinburgh Conference include Glasgow, Paisley, Bridge of Weir,
    Johnstone and Thorney Bank.

    That George D. Watt preside over the Edinburgh Conference.

    That John Greenhow preside over the Liverpool Conference.

    That Thomas Ward preside over the Clitheroe Conference.

    That Lorenzo Snow preside over the London Conference.

    That James Galley preside over the Macclesfield Conference.

    That Alfred Cordon preside over the Staffordshire Conference.

    That James Riley be ordained a High Priest, and preside over the
    Birmingham Conference.

    That James McAnley preside over the Glasgow Conference.

    That Thomas Richardson preside over the Gadfield Elm Conference.

    That William Kay preside over the Froom's Hill Conference.

    That Levi Richards have the superintendence of the Garway
    Conference.

     That Peter Melling preside over the Preston Conference.

    That John Sanders preside over the Brampton Conference.

    Adjourned till seven o'clock, p. m.

    Met pursuant to adjournment; commenced by singing, "When shall we
    all meet again," and prayer.

    The Patriarch Peter Melling, was then called upon to pronounce a
    patriarchal blessing upon the head of John Albertson, previous to
    his being ordained to the office of Patriarch. Laying his hands
    upon him he blessed him in the following words:

    "John, I lay my hands upon thy head, in the name of Jesus Christ;
    and by the authority of the Holy Priesthood committed unto me, I
    pronounce upon thy head the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob;
    and I say unto thee, that, inasmuch as it is in thy heart to do
    the will of the Lord, thou shalt be blessed, and the desires of
    thy heart shall be granted thee; and the Lord God will enlarge thy
    heart; and, inasmuch as thou wilt be humble and faithful before
    the Lord in thy calling, even that of a Patriarch, thou shalt be
    blessed, strengthened, and have great wisdom and understanding;
    thy bowels shall be filled with compassion for the widow and
    fatherless; and I pray that our Father in Heaven will take thee
    into His own care, and as He feels for thy welfare, thou shalt
    be made strong in faith, and the Lord shall bless thee and open
    thy understanding. Thou shalt know the doctrine of Jesus Christ,
    and the mysteries of heaven shall be opened to thy mind. Thou
    shalt also have the gift of prophecy and revelation, and thou
    shalt predict those things that shall take place to the latest
    generation. I pray that our Father in heaven may confer these
    blessings upon thy head; yea, thou shalt be a mighty man, if thou
    wilt be a faithful man, and a humble man, so that thou mayst be an
    ornament to thy calling, and a blessing to thy posterity; yea, thy
    posterity shall be blessed, and they shall become mighty upon the
    earth, and become blessed inasmuch as thou wilt be faithful in all
    things, and watch unto prayer. Thou shalt finally overcome, and
    be lifted up on high, and inherit the mansions prepared for thee
    in the kingdom of our God. Thou art of the blood of Ephraim; and
    I seal these blessings upon thy head in the name of Jesus Christ.
    Amen, and amen."

    The Apostles then laid hands on John Albertson, and ordained him to
    the office of Patriarch.

    The ordinations of the High Priests then took place; but, from the
    pressure of business, it was directed that the High Priests who
    were present should retire to the vestry, with those who were to be
    ordained Elders, and there ordain them at the same time that the
    ordinations of the High Priests were proceeding.

    Several appropriate discourses were delivered by different
    members  of the Twelve Apostles in relation to the duties
    of the officers in their respective callings, and the duties and
    privileges of the members; also of the prosperity of the work in
    general.

    A very richly ornamented cake, a present from New York, from
    Elder George J. Adams' wife to the Twelve, was then exhibited to
    the meeting. This was blessed by them and distributed to all the
    officers and members, and the whole congregation, consisting,
    perhaps, of seven hundred people; a large fragment was still
    preserved for some who were not present. During the distribution
    several appropriate hymns were sung, and a powerful and general
    feeling of delight universally pervaded the meeting.

    While this was proceeding, Elder Parley P. Pratt composed, and
    handed over to the clerk, the following lines, which the clerk then
    read to the meeting:

  When in far distant regions,
  As strangers we roam,
  Far away from our country,
  Our friends and our home:

  When sinking in sorrow,
  Fresh courage we'll take,
  As we think of our friends,
  And remember the cake.

    Elder Orson Hyde appealed powerfully to the meeting, and covenanted
    with the Saints present, in a bond of mutual prayer, during his
    mission to Jerusalem and the East, which was sustained on the part
    of the hearers with a hearty amen.

    Elder Fielding remarked respecting the rich cake of which they had
    been partaking, that he considered it a type of the good things of
    that land from whence it came, and from which they had received the
    fullness of the Gospel.

    The number of official members present at this conference was then
    taken, viz., quorum of the Twelve Apostles, 9; Patriarchs, 2; High
    Priests, 16; quorum of the Seventies, 2; Elders, 31; Priests, 28;
    Teachers, 17; Deacons, 2.

    Elders Brigham Young and William Miller then sang the hymn
    "Adieu, my dear brethren," &c., and President Young blessed the
    congregation and dismissed them.

    Brigham Young, Chairman.

    Thomas Ward, Clerk.

Footnotes:

1. John Albertson was the second Patriarch ordained in England, Peter Melling being the first, he was ordained the 17th of April, 1840.
