The General Bankrupt Law--The Doctrine of Baptism for the Dead--The Prophet's Address to the Female Relief Society--The Keys of the Priesthood and the Nauvoo Temple.

Wednesday, April 13.--I introduced Messrs. Backenstos, Stiles, and Robinson into the Lodge Room in the morning, and Samuel H. Smith, William Smith, and Vinson Knight in the evening.

About 150 Saints, from England landed in Nauvoo from the steamer Louisa, and about 60 from the Amaranth.

[Sidenote: The Bankrupt Law.]

Thursday, 14.--Calvin A. Warren, Esq., lawyer, from Quincy, arrived, and commenced an investigation of the principles of general insolvency in my behalf according to the statutes; for the United States Congress had previously instituted a general bankrupt law, by which any individual who was owing to a certain amount more than he was able to pay, could make out a schedule of his property, and of debts due from himself, and by a specified process, pass the same in the hands of a commissioner, government agent, or "assignee," who could make a dividend of all his effects, and pay his creditors whatever percentage his property amounted to, and then the individual was at liberty to start anew in the world, and was not subject to liquidate any claims which were held against him previous to his insolvency, although his property might not have paid but the least percentage, or none at all.

[Sidenote: The Prophet Forced into Bankruptcy.]

The justice or injustice of such a principle in law, I leave for them who made it, the United States. Suffice it  to say, the law was as good for the Saints as for the Gentiles, and whether I would or not, I was forced into the measure by having been robbed, mobbed, plundered, and wasted of all my property, time after time, in various places, by the very ones who made the law, namely, the people of the United State, thereby having been obliged to contract heavy debts to prevent the utter destruction of myself, family and friends, and by those who were justly and legally owing me, taking the advantage of the same act of bankruptcy, so that I could not collect my just dues, thus leaving me no alternative but to become subject again to stripping, wasting, and destitution, by vexatious writs, and law suits, and imprisonments, or take that course to extricate myself, which the law had pointed out.

Friday, 15.--Editorial from the Times and Seasons:

    Baptism For The Dead.

    The great designs of God in relation to the salvation of the human
    family, are very little understood by the professedly wise and
    intelligent generation in which we live. Various and conflicting
    are the opinions of men concerning the plan of salvation, the
    requisitions of the Almighty, the necessary preparations for
    heaven, the state and condition of departed spirits, and the
    happiness or misery that is consequent upon the practice of
    righteousness and iniquity according to their several notions of
    virtue and vice.

    The Mussulman condemns the heathen, the Jew, and the Christian,
    and the whole world of mankind that reject his Koran, as infidels,
    and consigns the whole of them to perdition. The Jew believes that
    the whole world that rejects his faith and are not circumcised,
    are Gentile dogs, all will be damned. The heathen is equally as
    tenacious about his principles, and the Christian consigns all to
    perdition who cannot bow to his creed, and submit to his ipse
    dixit.

    But while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning
    the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks
    upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and
    paternal regard; He views them as His offspring, and without any
    of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men,
    causes "His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth
    rain on the just and on the unjust." He holds the reins of judgment
    in His hands; He is a wise Lawgiver, and  will judge all
    men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but,
    "according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or
    evil," or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain,
    Turkey, or India. He will judge them, "not according to what they
    have not, but according to what they have," those who have lived
    without law, will be judged without law, and those who have a
    law, will by judged by that law. We need not doubt the wisdom and
    intelligence of the Great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy
    to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of
    obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the
    facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His
    inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the
    designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity
    be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that
    the Judge of all the earth has done right.

    The situation of the Christian nations after death, is a subject
    that has called forth all the wisdom and talent of the philosopher
    and the divine, and it is an opinion which is generally received,
    that the destiny of man is irretrievably fixed at his death, and
    that he is made either eternally happy, or eternally miserable;
    that if a man dies without a knowledge of God, he must be eternally
    damned, without any mitigation of his punishment, alleviation of
    his pain, or the most latent hope of a deliverance while endless
    ages shall roll along. However orthodox this principle may be,
    we shall find that it is at variance with the testimony of Holy
    Writ, for our Savior says, that all manner of sin and blasphemy
    shall be forgiven men wherewith they shall blaspheme; but the
    blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither
    in this world, nor in the world to come, evidently showing that
    there are sins which may be forgiven in the world to come, although
    the sin of blasphemy [against the Holy Ghost] cannot be forgiven.
    Peter, also, in speaking concerning our Savior, says, that "He
    went and preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometimes were
    disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the
    days of Noah," (I Peter iii: 19, 20). Here then we have an account
    of our Savior preaching to the spirits in prison, to spirits that
    had been imprisoned from the days of Noah; and what did He preach
    to them? That they were to stay there? Certainly not! Let His own
    declaration testify. "He hath sent me to heal the broken hearted,
    to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
    the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised." (Luke iv: 18.
    Isaiah has it--"To bring out the prisoners from the prison, and
    them that sit in darkness from the prison house.") (Isaiah xlii:
    7.) It is very evident from this that He not only went to preach
    to them, but to deliver, or bring them out of the prison house.
    Isaiah, in  testifying concerning the calamities that will
    overtake the inhabitants of the earth, says, "The earth shall reel
    to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage;
    and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall
    fall and not rise again. And it shall come to pass in that day,
    that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on
    high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall
    be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and
    shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be
    visited." Thus we find that God will deal with all the human family
    equally, and that as the antediluvians had their day of visitation,
    so will those characters referred to by Isaiah, have their time of
    visitation and deliverance, after having been many days in prison.

    The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected
    with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it
    rolled into existence, or ever "the morning stars sang together"
    for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with
    Him, one eternal "now;" he knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities
    of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be
    connected with the human family, their weakness and strength, their
    power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and
    iniquity; He comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; He
    knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; He was acquainted
    with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; He
    ordered all things according to the council of His own will; He
    knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made
    ample provision for their redemption, according to their several
    circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this
    world, or in the world to come.

    The idea that some men form of the justice, judgment, and mercy
    of God, is too foolish for an intelligent man to think of: for
    instance, it is common for many of our orthodox preachers to
    suppose that if a man is not what they call converted, if he dies
    in that state he must remain eternally in hell without any hope.
    Infinite years in torment must he spend, and never, never, never
    have an end; and yet this eternal misery is made frequently to
    rest upon the merest casualty. The breaking of a shoe-string, the
    tearing of a coat of those officiating, or the peculiar location
    in which a person lives, may be the means, indirectly of his
    damnation, or the cause of his not being saved. I will suppose a
    case which is not extraordinary: Two men, who have been equally
    wicked, who have neglected religion, are both of them taken sick
    at the same time; one of them has the good fortune to be visited
    by a praying man, and he gets converted a few minutes before he
    dies; the other sends for three different praying men, a tailor,
    a shoemaker, and a tinman; the tinman has a handle to solder to a
    can, the tailor has a  buttonhole to work on some coat that
    he needed in a hurry, and the shoemaker has a patch to put on
    somebody's boot; they none of them can go in time, the man dies,
    and goes to hell: one of these is exalted to Abraham's bosom, he
    sits down in the presence of God and enjoys eternal, uninterrupted
    happiness, while the other, equally as good as he, sinks to eternal
    damnation, irretrievable misery and hopeless despair, because a man
    had a boot to mend, the button-hole of a coat to work, or a handle
    to solder on to a saucepan.

    The plans of Jehovah are not so unjust, the statements of holy writ
    so visionary, nor the plan of salvation for the human family so
    incompatible with common sense; at such proceedings God would frown
    with indignance, angels would hide their heads in shame, and every
    virtuous, intelligent man would recoil.

    If human laws award to each man his deserts, and punish all
    delinquents according to their several crimes, surely the Lord
    will not be more cruel than man, for He is a wise legislator, and
    His laws are more equitable, His enactments more just, and His
    decisions more perfect than those of man; and as man judges his
    fellow man by law, and punishes him according to the penalty of the
    law, so does God of heaven judge "according to the deeds done in
    the body." To say that the heathens would be damned because they
    did not believe the Gospel would be preposterous, and to say that
    the Jews would all be damned that do not believe in Jesus would be
    equally absurd; for "how can they believe on him of whom they have
    not heard, and how can they hear without a preacher, and how can he
    preach except he be sent;" consequently neither Jew nor heathen can
    be culpable for rejecting the conflicting opinions of sectarianism,
    nor for rejecting any testimony but that which is sent of God, for
    as the preacher cannot preach except he be sent, so the hearer
    cannot believe without he hear a "sent" preacher, and cannot be
    condemned for what he has not heard, and being without law, will
    have to be judged without law.

    When speaking about the blessings pertaining to the Gospel, and
    the consequences connected with disobedience to the requirements,
    we are frequently asked the question, what has become of our
    fathers? Will they all be damned for not obeying the Gospel,
    when they never heard it? Certainly not. But they will possess
    the same privilege that we here enjoy, through the medium of the
    everlasting priesthood, which not only administers on earth, but
    also in heaven, and the wise dispensations of the great Jehovah;
    hence those characters referred to by Isaiah will be visited by the
    Priesthood, and come out of their prison upon the same principle
    as those who were disobedient in the days of Noah were visited by
    our Savior [who possessed the everlasting Melchisedek Priesthood]
    and had the Gospel preached to them, by Him in prison;  and in
    order that they might fulfill all the requisitions of God, living
    friends were baptized for their dead friends, and thus fulfilled
    the requirement of God, which says, "Except a man be born of water
    and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God," they
    were baptized of course, not for themselves, but for their dead.

    Chrysostum says that the Marchionites practiced baptism for their
    dead. "After a catechumen was dead, they had a living man under
    the bed of the deceased; then coming to the dead man, they asked
    him whether he would receive baptism, and he making no answer, the
    other answered for him, and said that he would be baptized in his
    stead; and so they baptized the living for the dead." The church
    of course at that time was degenerate, and the particular form
    might be incorrect, but the thing is sufficiently plain in the
    Scriptures, hence Paul, in speaking of the doctrine, says, "Else
    what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead
    rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor.
    xv: 29). Hence it was that so great a responsibility rested upon
    the generation in which our Savior lived, for, says he, "That upon
    you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from
    the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, son of
    Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I
    say unto you, all these things shall come upon this generation."
    (Matthew xxiii: 35, 36). Hence as they possessed greater privileges
    than any other generation, not only pertaining to themselves, but
    to their dead, their sin was greater, as they not only neglected
    their own salvation but that of their progenitors, and hence their
    blood was required at their hands.

    And now as the great purposes of God are hastening to their
    accomplishment, and the things spoken of in the Prophets are
    fulfilling, as the kingdom of God is established on the earth, and
    the ancient order of things restored, the Lord has manifested to us
    this day and privilege, and we are commanded to be baptized for our
    dead, thus fulfilling the words of Obadiah, when speaking of the
    glory of the latter-day: "And saviors shall come upon Mount Zion to
    judge the remnant of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lord's." A
    view of these things reconciles the Scriptures of truth, justifies
    the ways of God to man, places the human family upon an equal
    footing, and harmonizes with every principle of righteousness,
    justice and truth. We will conclude with the words of Peter: "For
    the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will
    of the Gentiles." "For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also
    to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men
    in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit."

I continued busily engaged in making out a list of  debtors and an invoice of my property to be passed into the hands of the assignee, until--

Saturday evening the 16th.--On this day the first number of The Wasp, a miscellaneous weekly newspaper was first published at my office, William Smith, editor, devoted to the arts, sciences, literature, agriculture, manufacture, trade, commerce, and the general news of the day, on a small sheet, at $1.50 per annum.

Sunday, 17.--Spent the day with my family at home.

[Sidenote: Causes of the Prophet's Insolvency.]

Monday, 18.--In consequence of the utter annihilation of our property by mob violence in the state of Missouri, and the immense expenses which we were compelled to incur, to defend ourselves from the cruel persecutions of that state, we were reduced to the necessity of availing ourselves of the privileges of the general bankrupt law; therefore I went to Carthage with my brothers Hyrum and Samuel H. Smith, and severally testified to our list of insolvency before the clerk of the county commissioners' court. Sidney Rigdon and many more brethren were at Carthage the same day on business. My clerk, Dr. Richards, went with us.

About this time a disturbance broke out in Rhode Island by a part of the inhabitants, wishing to change their Constitution, and make it like those of other states in the Union, which created much confusion and angry feeling in that state, and excitement in other states.

Tuesday, 19.--Rode out and examined some land near the northern limits of the city, &c.

Wednesday, 20.--Assisted in surveying some land in section 25, which I sold to William Cross.

Thursday, 21.--Friday and Saturday was engaged in temporal and spiritual affairs at home, the office, &c.

Friday, 22.--

    James Arlington Bennett Honored.

    Honorary Degree. Ordered by the chancellor and regents of the
    University of the City of Nauvoo, that the honorary degree of L.
    L.  D. be, and the same hereby is, conferred on General James
    Arlington Bennett, of Arlington House, New York.

    Passed April 22, 1842.

    John C. Bennett, Chancellor,

    William Law, Registrar.

Sunday, 24.--Preached on the hill near the Temple, concerning the building of the Temple, and reproved the merchants and the rich who would not assist in building it.

Monday, 25, Tuesday, 26 and Wednesday, 27.--I was engaged in reading, meditation, &c., mostly with my family.

Thursday, 28.--

    "Repast Militaire."

    General Joseph Smith and lady, present their compliments to
    the officers (and their respective ladies) of the consolidated
    General Staff of the Nauvoo Legion, that is to say, his personal
    staff, Major-General Bennett's staff, including the band,
    Brigadier-General Law's staff, and Brigadier-General Rich's staff,
    and respectfully solicit their company at a Repast Militaire, at
    his quarters on the 7th day of May proximo, at one o'clock p. m.

    General Bennett has been ordered to issue a programme of the
    operations and field exercises of the day, which will appear in
    ample form, and due season.

    April 28, A. D. 1842.

    Headquarters, Nauvoo Legion,

    City Of Nauvoo, Illinois, April 28, 1842.

    General Orders--

    The Lieutenant-General directs that a programme militaire issue
    from the office of his commanding general for the 7th of May
    proximo, which I now proceed to consummate.

    1st. The Adjutants will form the lines of their respective
    regiments, and the Colonels of the line assume command at nine
    o-clock, a. m.

    2nd. The Adjutant-General will form the line of the Legion, and the
    Brigadier-Generals assume the command of their respective cohorts
    at half-past nine o'clock a. m.

    3rd. The Major-General will assume the command of the Legion at ten
    o'clock a. m.

    4th. At a quarter past ten o'clock a. m., the Lieutenant-General
    will be escorted to the field at the review station.

     5th. General review and inspection will follow, accompanied
    by such evolutions and exercises as the time will admit of.

    6th. At half-past twelve o'clock p. m. the forces will be dismissed
    until a quarter before two o'clock p. m.

    7th. At two o'clock p. m. the Major-General will resume the command
    and perform such military movements and field exercises as the
    Lieutenant-General may direct.

    8th. At three o'clock p. m. the cohorts will separate and form the
    line of battle, the Brigadiers assume their respective commands
    and General Law's command will make a descent upon that of General
    Rich's in order of sham battle.

    9th. At half-past three o'clock p. m. the cohorts will resume their
    positions in the line of the Legion, and a sham battle will be
    fought between the mounted riflemen under the immediate command of
    Lieutenant General Smith and the Invincibles under the immediate
    command of Major-General Bennett.

    10th. At half-past four o'clock p. m. the forces will be dismissed
    for the day.

    11. Every officer, musician and private will be required to be at
    their respective posts at the hours specified throughout the day,
    under the most severe penalties of the law.

    John C. Bennett

    Major-General.

[Sidenote: The Rights and Privileges of the Women in the Church.]

At two o'clock I met the members of the "Female Relief Society," and after presiding at the admission of many new members, gave a lecture on the Priesthood, showing how the sisters would come in possession of the privileges, blessings and gifts of the Priesthood, and that the signs should follow them, such as healing the sick, casting out devils, &c., and that they might attain unto these blessings by a virtuous life, and conversation, and diligence in keeping all the commandments; a synopsis of which was reported by Miss Eliza R. Snow, as follows:

    Remarks of the Prophet to the Relief Society.

    President Smith arose and called the attention of the meeting to
    the 12th chapter 1st Corinthians--"Now concerning spiritual gifts,
    I would not have you ignorant." Said that the passage in the third
    verse, which reads, "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but
    by the Holy Ghost,"  should be translated "no man can know
    that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." He continued to
    read the chapter, and give instructions respecting the different
    offices, and the necessity of every individual acting in the sphere
    allotted him or her, and filling the several offices to which they
    are appointed. He spoke of the disposition of many men to consider
    the lower offices in the Church dishonorable, and to look with
    jealous eyes upon the standing of others who are called to preside
    over them; that it was the folly and nonsense of the human heart
    for a person to be aspiring to other stations than those to which
    they are appointed of God for them to occupy; that it was better
    for individuals to magnify their respective callings, and wait
    patiently till God shall say to them, "Come up higher."

    He said the reason of these remarks being made was, that some
    little foolish things were circulating in the society, against some
    sisters not doing right in laying hands on the sick. Said that
    if the people had common sympathies they would rejoice that the
    sick could be healed; that the time had not been before that these
    things could be in their proper order; that the Church is not fully
    organized, in its proper order, and cannot be, until the Temple is
    completed, where places will be provided for the administration of
    the ordinances of the Priesthood.

    President Smith continued the subject, by quoting the commission
    given to the ancient Apostles in Mark, 16th chapter, 15th, 16th,
    17th, 18th verses, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the
    Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall
    be saved; but he that believed not shall be damned. And these
    signs shall follow them that believe: In my name shall they cast
    out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
    serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
    them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."

    No matter who believeth, these signs, such as healing the sick,
    casting out devils, &c., should follow all that believe, whether
    male or female. He asked the Society if they could not see by
    this sweeping promise, that wherein they are ordained, it is the
    privilege of those set apart to administer in that authority, which
    is conferred on them; and if the sisters should have faith to heal
    the sick, let all hold their tongues, and let everything roll on.

    He said, if God has appointed him, and chosen him as an instrument
    to lead the Church, why not let him lead it through? Why stand in
    the way when he is appointed to do a thing? Who knows the mind of
    God? Does He not reveal things differently from what we expect?
    He remarked that he was continually rising, although he had
    everything bearing him down, standing in his way, and opposing;
    notwithstanding all this opposition, he always comes out right in
    the end.

     Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick,
    he further remarked, there could be no devil in it, if God gave His
    sanction by healing; that there could be no more sin in any female
    laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face
    with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith,
    or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration.

    He reproved those that were disposed to find fault with the
    management of the concerns of the Church, saying God had called
    him to lead the Church, and he would lead it right; those that
    undertake to interfere will be ashamed when their own folly is made
    manifest; that he calculates to organize the Church in its proper
    order as soon as the Temple is completed.

    President Smith continued by speaking of the difficulties he had to
    surmount ever since the commencement of the work, in consequence of
    aspiring men. "Great big Elders," as he called them, who had caused
    him much trouble; to whom he had taught the things of the kingdom
    in private councils, they would then go forth into the world and
    proclaim the things he had taught them, as their own revelations;
    said the same aspiring disposition will be in this Society, and
    must be guarded against; that every person should stand, and act
    in the place appointed, and thus sanctify the Society and get it
    pure. He said he had been trampled under foot by aspiring Elders,
    for all were infected with that spirit; for instance, John E. Page
    and others had been aspiring; they could not be exalted, but must
    run away as though the care and authority of the Church were vested
    with them. He said he had a subtle devil to deal with, and could
    only curb him by being humble.

    As he had this opportunity, he was going to instruct the ladies of
    this Society, and point out the way for them to conduct themselves,
    that they might act according to the will of God; that he did not
    know that he should have many opportunities of teaching them, as
    they were going to be left to themselves; they would not long
    have him to instruct them; that the Church would not have his
    instructions long, and the world would not be troubled with him a
    great while, and would not have his teachings [in person].

    He spoke of delivering the keys of the Priesthood to the Church,
    and said that the faithful members of the Relief Society should
    receive them in connection with their husbands, that the Saints
    whose integrity has been tried and proved faithful, might know
    how to ask the Lord and receive an answer; for according to his
    prayers, God had appointed him elsewhere.

    He exhorted the sisters always to concentrate their faith and
    prayers for, and place confidence in their husbands, whom God has
    appointed for them to honor, and in those faithful men whom God has
    placed at  the head of the Church to lead His people; that
    we should arm and sustain them with our prayers; for the keys of
    the kingdom are about to be given to them, that they may be able
    to detect everything false; as well as to all the Elders who shall
    prove their integrity in due season.

    He said if one member becomes corrupt, and you know it, you must
    immediately put it away, or it will either injure or destroy the
    whole body. The sympathies of the heads of the Church have induced
    them to bear a long time with those who were corrupt until they are
    obliged to cut them off, lest all become contaminated; you must put
    down iniquity, and by your good examples, stimulate the Elders to
    good works; if you do right, there is no danger of your going too
    fast.

    He said he did not care how fast we run in the path of virtue:
    resist evil, and there is no danger; God, men, and angels will
    not condemn those that resist everything that is evil, and devils
    cannot; as well might the devil seek to dethrone Jehovah, as
    overthrow an innocent soul that resists everything which is evil.

    This is a charitable Society, and according to your natures; it is
    natural for females to have feelings of charity and benevolence.
    You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to
    those sympathies which God has planted in your bosoms.

    If you live up to these principles, how great and glorious will
    be your reward in the celestial kingdom! If you live up to your
    privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your
    associates. Females, if they are pure and innocent, can come in the
    presence of God; for what is more pleasing to God than innocence;
    you must be innocent, or you cannot come up before God: if we would
    come before God, we must keep ourselves pure, as He is pure.

    The devil has great power to deceive; he will so transform things
    as to make one gape at those who are doing the will of God. You
    need not be teazing your husbands because of their deeds, but let
    the weight of your innocence, kindness and affection be felt, which
    is more mighty than a millstone hung about the neck; not war,
    not jangle, not contradiction, or dispute, but meekness, love,
    purity--these are the things that should magnify you in the eyes
    of all good men. Achan [see Joshua vii.] must be brought to light,
    iniquity must be purged out from the midst of the Saints; then the
    veil will be rent, and the blessings of heaven will flow down--they
    will roll down like the Mississippi river.

    If this Society listen to the counsel of the Almighty, through the
    heads of the Church, they shall have power to command queens in
    their midst.

    I now deliver it as a prophecy, if the inhabitants of this state,
    with the people of the surrounding country, will turn unto the Lord
     with all their hearts, ten years will not roll round before
    the kings and queens of the earth will come unto Zion, and pay
    their respects to the leaders of this people; they shall come with
    their millions, and shall contribute of their abundance for the
    relief of the poor, and the building up and beautifying of Zion.

    After this instruction, you will be responsible for your own sins;
    it is a desirable honor that you should so walk before our heavenly
    Father as to save yourselves; we are all responsible to God for the
    manner we improve the light and wisdom given by our Lord to enable
    us to save ourselves.

    President Smith continued reading from the above-mentioned
    chapter, and to give instructions respecting the order of God, as
    established in the Church, saving everyone should aspire only to
    magnify his own office and calling.

    He then commenced reading the 13th chapter--"Though I speak with
    the tongues of men and angels, and have no charity, I am become as
    sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal;" and said, don't be limited
    in your views with regard to your neighbor's virtue, but beware
    of self-righteousness, and be limited in the estimate of your own
    virtues, and not think yourselves more righteous than others; you
    must enlarge your souls towards each other, if you would do like
    Jesus, and carry your fellow-creatures to Abraham's bosom. He said
    he had manifested long-suffering, forbearance and patience towards
    the Church, and also to his enemies; and we must bear with each
    other's failings, as an indulgent parent bears with the foibles of
    his children.

    President Smith then read the 2nd verse--"Though I have the gift
    of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and
    though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and
    have not charity, I am nothing." He then said, though a man should
    become mighty, do great things, overturn mountains, perform mighty
    works, and should then turn from his high station to do evil, to
    eat and drink with the drunken, all his former deeds would not save
    him, but he would go to destruction! As you increase in innocence
    and virtue, as you increase in goodness, let your hearts expand,
    let them be enlarged towards others; you must be long-suffering,
    and bear with the faults and errors of mankind.

    How precious are the souls of men! The female part of the
    community are apt to be contracted in their views. You must not
    be contracted, but you must be liberal in your feelings. Let this
    Society teach women how to behave towards their husbands, to treat
    them with mildness and affection. When a man is borne down with
    trouble, when he is perplexed with care and difficulty, if he can
    meet a smile instead of an argument or a murmur--if he can meet
    with mildness,  it will calm down his soul and soothe his
    feelings; when the mind is going to despair, it needs a solace of
    affection and kindness.

    You will receive instructions through the order of the Priesthood
    which God has established, through the medium of those appointed
    to lead, guide and direct the affairs of the Church in this last
    dispensation; and I now turn the key in your behalf in the name
    of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and
    intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the
    beginning of better days to the poor and needy, who shall be made
    to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads.

    When you go home, never give a cross or unkind word to your
    husbands, but let kindness, charity and love crown your works
    henceforward; don't envy the finery and fleeting show of sinners,
    for they are in a miserable situation; but as far as you can, have
    mercy on them, for in a short time God will destroy them, if they
    will not repent and turn unto him.

    Let your labors be mostly confined to those around you, in the
    circle of your own acquaintance, as far as knowledge is concerned,
    it may extend to all the world; but your administering should be
    confined to the circle of your immediate acquaintance, and more
    especially to the members of the Relief Society. Those ordained to
    preside over and lead you, are authorized to appoint the different
    officers, as the circumstances shall require.

    If you have a matter to reveal, let it be in your own tongue; do
    not indulge too much in the exercise of the gift of tongues, or the
    devil will take advantage of the innocent and unwary. You may speak
    in tongues for your own comfort, but I lay this down for a rule,
    that if anything is taught by the gift of tongues, it is not to be
    received for doctrine.

    President Smith then gave instruction respecting the propriety
    of females administering to the sick by the prayer of faith,
    the laying on hands, or the anointing with oil; and said it was
    according to revelation that the sick should be nursed with
    herbs and mild food, and not by the hand of an enemy. Who are
    better qualified to administer than our faithful and zealous
    sisters, whose hearts are full of faith, tenderness, sympathy
    and compassion. No one. Said he was never placed in similar
    circumstances before, and never had given the same instruction; and
    closed his instructions by expressing his heart-felt satisfaction
    in improving this opportunity.

    The Spirit of the Lord was poured out in a very powerful manner,
    never to be forgotten by those present on this interesting occasion.

Friday, 29.--A conspiracy against the peace of my household was made manifest, and it gave me some trouble  to counteract the design of certain base individuals, and restore peace. The Lord makes manifest to me many things, which it is not wisdom for me to make public, until others can witness the proof of them.

Saturday, 30.--I received a visit from Judge James Adams, of Springfield, and spent most of the day with him and my family. Signed deeds to James and Charles Ivins, and many others.

Sunday, May 1, 1842.--I preached in the grove, on the keys of the kingdom, charity, &c. The keys are certain signs and words by which false spirits and personages may be detected from true, which cannot be revealed to the Elders till the Temple is completed. The rich can only get them in the Temple, the poor may get them on the mountain top as did Moses. The rich cannot be saved without charity, giving to feed the poor when and how God requires, as well as building. There are signs in heaven, earth and hell; the Elders must know them all, to be endowed with power, to finish their work and prevent imposition. The devil knows many signs, but does not know the sign of the Son of Man, or Jesus. No one can truly say he knows God until he has handled something and this can only be in the holiest of holies.

Monday, 2.--The following Editorial appeared in the Times and Seasons:

    The Temple.

    This noble edifice is progressing with great rapidity; strenuous
    exertions are being made on every hand to facilitate its erection,
    and materials of all kinds are in a great state of forwardness, and
    by next fall we expect to see the building enclosed; if not the top
    stone raised with "shouting of grace--grace unto it." There have
    been frequently, during the winter, as many as one hundred hands
    quarrying rock, while at the same time multitudes of others have
    been engaged in hauling, and in other kinds of labor.

    A company was formed last fall to go up to the pine country to
    purchase mills, and prepare and saw lumber for the Temple and
    the Nauvoo House, and the reports from them are very favorable:
    another  company has started, this last week, to take their
    place and to relieve those that are already there: on their return
    they are to bring a very large raft of lumber, for the use of the
    above-named houses.

    While the busy multitudes have thus been engaged in their several
    vocations performing their daily labor, and working one-tenth of
    their time, others have not been less forward in bringing in their
    tithings and consecrations for the same great object. Never since
    the foundation of this Church was laid, have we seen manifested a
    greater willingness to comply with the requisitions of Jehovah, a
    more ardent desire to do the will of God, more strenuous exertions
    used, or greater sacrifices made than there have been since the
    Lord said, "Let the Temple be built by the tithing of my people."
    It seemed as though the spirit of enterprise, philanthropy and
    obedience rested simultaneously upon old and young, and brethren
    and sisters, boys and girls, and even strangers, who were not
    in the Church, united with an unprecedented liberality in the
    accomplishment of this great work; nor could the widow, in many
    instances, be prevented, out of her scanty pittance from throwing
    in her two mites.

    We feel at this time to tender to all, old and young, both in the
    Church and out of it, our unfeigned thanks for their unprecedented
    liberality, kindness, diligence, and obedience which they have so
    opportunely manifested on the present occasion. Not that we are
    personally or individually benefitted in a pecuniary point of view,
    but when the brethren, as in this instance, show a unity of purpose
    and design, and all put their shoulder to the wheel, our care,
    labor, toil and anxiety is materially diminished, our yoke is made
    easy and our burden is light.

    The cause of God is one common cause, in which the Saints are alike
    all interested; we are all members of the one common body, and all
    partake of the same spirit, and are baptized into one baptism and
    possess alike the same glorious hope. The advancement of the cause
    of God and the building up of Zion is as much one man's business as
    another's. The only difference is, that one is called to fulfill
    one duty, and another, another duty; "but if one member suffers,
    all the members suffer with it, and if one member is honored all
    the rest rejoice with it, and the eye cannot say to the ear, I have
    no need of thee, nor the head to the foot, I have no need of thee;"
    party feelings, separate interests, exclusive designs should be
    lost sight of in the one common cause, in the interest of the whole.

    The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people
    of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests
    and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked
    forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live;
    and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung
    and written and prophesied of this  our day; but they died
    without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made
    choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us
    to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day
    glory, the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God will
    gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that
    are upon the earth, "even in one," when the Saints of God will
    be gathered in one from every nation, and kindred, and people,
    and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one,
    the wicked will also be gathered together to be destroyed, as
    spoken of by the prophets; the Spirit of God will also dwell with
    His people, and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations, and
    all things whether in heaven or on earth will be in one, even in
    Christ. The heavenly Priesthood will unite with the earthly, to
    bring about those great purposes; and whilst we are thus united
    in the one common cause, to roll forth the kingdom of God, the
    heavenly Priesthood are not idle spectators, the Spirit of God will
    be showered down from above, and it will dwell in our midst. The
    blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our
    name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up
    and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with
    peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the
    privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have
    manifested; the all but insurmountable difficulties that we have
    overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the
    glory and blessing which they will realize; a work that God and
    angels have contemplated with delight for generations past; that
    fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets; a work
    that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of
    darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the
    salvation of the human family.

    End Of Volume IV.

INDEX TO VOLUME IV.

Abraham, Book of--520 and note.

Adams, James--friendship for the Prophet, 20 and note.

Address, by First Presidency to Saints scattered abroad, 184 et seq.

Affidavits, on suffering of Saints in Missouri, 49-53, also 56-73 and note, 60; of Hyrum Smith denouncing thieves, 460-61.

Alvord T., affidavit of, 57.

Allred, James--statement of on kidnapping, 156-7.

Apostles, The Twelve--farewell addresses of, 1-2; Apostles engaged in selecting hymns, 3; trials of en route for England, 15; meeting of at Cleveland, 19-20; granted permission to publish certain books in England, 161-2; whereabouts of, January 1, 1841, 256; minutes of meeting of in England, 324; ditto, 325-26; council of at Manchester, 332-335; epistle of to the Church in the British Isles, 344-348; departure of from England, 352; arrival of at New York, 360-61; return of to Nauvoo, 390; to share in labor of the Prophet, 400 and 403-404; epistle of to Saints scattered abroad, 409-10; council meeting of, 412; minutes of council meeting of 429-30; epistles of to brethren in America, 433-38; case of Benjamin Winchester before, 443; epistle of, to Saints in England, 448-53; warning against thieves, 463-66 and notes; epistle of on baptism for the dead, 472-5; minutes of a meeting of, 478-79; gift of Hiram Kimball to, 484; whereabouts of, January 1, 1842, 490; epistle of to Saints in Europe, 558 et seq.; meeting of with the Prophet in Masonic lodge, 589; epistles of to Saints in America, 590 et seq.

Australia--report of work in, 343.

B

Babbitt, Elder Almon W.--preaches in Indiana, 17; permitted to build up Kirtland, 476.

Baglev, Mr.--tax difficulty with the Prophet, 542.

Barlow, Israel--assists Brigham Young on Journey, 9.

Barnes, Lorenzo D.--report of to Elder Parley P. Pratt, 569.

Baptists--difference between and former day Saints, 350-51.

Baptisms--in Temple font, 558; for the dead, 568-9; for the dead, editorial in Times and Seasons on, 595 et seq.

Benbow, Elder John--liberality of, 188.

Bennett, Caleb--conference at House of, 6.

Bennett, James Arlington--honored, 600.

Bennett, John C.--first letters of to the Prophet, 169-72; biography, 169; elected mayor Nauvoo, 287; inaugural address of, 288-92.

Bennett, James Gordon--editor New York Herald, course of approved, 477.

Bennett, Samuel--sent on mission, 161; credentials of, 164.

Bishop, Gladden--disfellowshiped by High Council, 550.

Books--list of for and against the Latter-day Saints, 253-6.

Book of Mormon--first English edition of, 274-286: Nauvoo edition, proofs of read by Prophet, 494; ditto 500-501.

Boyee, Benjamin--kidnapping of, 154-6; 180.

British, Mission--history of, 313-321.

Brown, Alanson--kidnapping of, 154-56; 180.

Browning, O. H.--lawyer, counsel for the Prophet at Monmouth trial, 367 et seq.

Brunson, Col. Seymour--death of, 179.

Burke, John M.--affidavit of, 56.

C

Cahoon, William F.--affidavit of, 52.

Carpenter's Hall--Manchester, England, leased by the Saints, 141.

Carter, Samuel--affidavit of, 49 Prophet's instructions to, 153.

Carlin, Governor of Illinois--issues order for arrest of Prophet, 198-9.

Casper, Thomas D.--Affidavit of, 63.

Church, The--Admonished by the Prophet, 5; anniversary of organization of celebrated, 326-31: thirteenth anniversary of, 582.

Clayton, William--preaches in Staffordshire; appointed clerk, Iowa High Council, 382.

Clark, Hyrum--starts on mission to England, 7.

Clark, Joseph--affidavit of, 63.

Clark, Timothy B.--affidavit of, 58.

Clark, William O.--reproved by the Prophet, 445.

Cock Pit, Preston, England--preaching of Twelve in, 114.

Cole, Owen--Affidavit of, 64.

Commerce, Illinois, (afterwards Nauvoo)---appointed a stake of Zion, 12; boundary lines to be changed, 39; name of changed to Nauvoo, 21; merged into Nauvoo plat, 322.

Committee, Senate Judiciary--case of the Missouri Saints before, 81-88, adverse report of, 90-92; of Nauvoo citizens resolutions by, 157-9.

Conferences--minutes of at Commerce, 12; minutes of general, at Nauvoo, 105 et seq.; at Gadfield Elm, England, 131; ditto, 134 et seq.; minutes at Stanley Hall, 138; of Church in England at Manchester, 146 et seq.; general at Nauvoo, minutes of, 204-7; general in England, minutes of, 214-18 at Walnut Grove, Illinois, 387; London, minutes of, 298; at Philadelphia, 331; general of the Church at Nauvoo, minutes of, 336-343; in New York City, 344; minutes of London, 360; at Kirtland, 361; Attica, New York, 412; at Nauvoo, minutes of, general, 423-29; at Lima, minutes of, 439-40; New York, 462; minutes of special at Nauvoo, 583 et seq.

Conner, Henry--converted, 184.

Council, High at Commerce. (Nauvoo)--names of counselors, 12; Advice of to Saints west of Kirtland, 45 and note; authorizes publication of hymn book, 49; appoints committee to collect testimony on case before courts, 49; votes among for poor, 75, 76; votes to return consecrations to the people, 88; memorial of Joseph Smith before, 136-138, 141, 143; Elijah Fordham before, 180; minutes, 187-8; minutes of 219-20; account of inspecting temporal concerns, 417; report of to the Saints, 504-5; trial of Gladden Bishop before, 550.

Council, High at Iowa--appointed for Stake in Iowa, 16; minutes of, 16; order of speaking in, 16 and note; organization of completed, 21; action of on  Missouri debts, 42, 54; minutes of, 94; changes in 352.

Council, of the Twelve--see Apostles.

Council, special--Liverpool, England, 296-7; at Nauvoo, 402.

Curtis, Simon P.--affidavit of, 67.

Curtis, Elder Theodore--before the Court of Sessions, Gloucester, England, 380.

D

Davis, Amos--abuse of the Prophet, 549.

Davis, Matthew S.--reports Prophet's Washington discourse, 78.

Decker, Brother--assists Elders Young and Kimball en route for England, 11.

Discourse--the Prophet's at Nauvoo, 358-360.

Dispatch, England weekly newspaper--article against the Saints, 236.

Donaldson, Elder Wm.--goes to East India, 168.

Draper, Father--assists Elders Young and Kimball et al. en route for England, 14.

Duel, Osmon M.--assists Elders Young and Kimball on mission, 9-10.

Duel, Sister O. M.--cares for Elders Young and Kimball, 10.

Duncan, Joseph--politician, speech against the Saints, 490, also note 480.

E

Election and Reprobation, Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards, 256.

Emigration--arrangements of for English Saints, 510-13.

England--arrival of Apostles in, 76; labors of Elders in, 76; emigration agency in, 484.

Epistles--see Letters.

F

Freedom, Adams County, Illinois--Stake organized at, 233.

Female Relief Society--organization of, 552; ditto, 567-8; remarks of the Prophet to, 570; remarks of the Prophet to, 602-7.

Fielding, Joseph--preaches in England, 7.

Font--baptismal of Temple described, 446.

Fordham, Elijah--healed by the Prophet, 4, and note; before High Council at Nauvoo, 180.

Foster, Dr. Robert D.--attends on Sidney Rigdon, 19-21; on trial for slandering, 239-250.

Foutz, Jacob--affidavit of, 68.

Fulmer, David--prefers charges, 219.

G

Galland, Isaac--letter of Prophet to; his power of attorney for the Prophet cancelled, 495-500.

Gates, Gibson--affidavit of, 71.

Gee, George Washington--death of and biography, 500 and note.

Geneva, Morgan County, Illinois--stake organized at, 236.

Gifford, Alpheus--biography of, 109-110 and note; death of, 184.

Granger, Gilbert--difficulty in settlement of father's estate, 542.

Granger, Elder Oliver--to provide funds for publication, 18; death of, 408-9.

Green, A.--affidavit of, 65.

Greene, John P.--affidavit of, 65.

Groves, Elisha H.--affidavit of, 68.

H

Harris, George W.--sent on special mission, 161: credentials of, 164.

Hawk, William--affidavit of, 58.

Hayes, Elder Ezra--license taken from, 14.

Hedlock, Elder Reuben--starts on mission for England, 10; prepares cuts for Book of Abraham, 543.

Haight, Isaac--entertains Elders, 35; assists Elder Brigham Young et al. on journey, 44.

Higbee, Judge Elias--appointed to go to Washington, 13; attends Prophet to Washington, 19; letters of concerning case of Saints before United States Senate, 81, 88, 94, 95; course at Washington approved, 96 et seq.; presides at mass meeting, Nauvoo, 157-60; writes petition to committee, 237; reproved by the Prophet, 503.

Hinckle, George M.--suit of Prophet against, 423.

Hotchkiss land purchase, 405-408.

Hotchkiss, Horace R.--letter to Prophet, 505-8.

Hunter, Edward--visits Nauvoo, biography of, 416-17 and note.

Hyde Marinda--revelation to, 467.

Hyde, Elder Orson--his allusion to his fall, 2; restored, 12; appointed on Mission to Jerusalem, 106; credentials of, 112-113; departure of from Nauvoo for Jerusalem, 114; at conference in Philadelphia, 224; ditto, New York, 237; reproved, 274; his arrival in Palestine and dedication of the land for the return of Jews, 454-59; incidents en route from Palestine to Europe, 496-99.

J

Jews--memorial of to Protestant Powers of Europe and America, 167 and note; circular of to Israelites of Europe and America, 173-5.

Johnston, Jesse W.--affidavit of, 64.

Johnson, Lyman E.--at Nauvoo, 389.

Jonas, Grand Master Mason--on Nauvoo and the Mormons, 565 et seq.

K

Keokuk, Indian chief--visits the Prophet, 401.

Kilbourn, D. W., anti-Mormon--attempts disturbance in Iowa, 416-17; ditto, 444 and note.

Kimball, Heber C.--departs on mission to England, 9 and note; morphine given to, 15-16; reports of from England, 182 et seq.; dreams of, 203; arrives at Nauvoo from England, 381.

Kiskukosh, Indian chief--visits the Prophet, 401-2.

Knight, Bishop Vinson--appointed Bishop of lower ward, Commerce, 12.

Lathrop, Asahel A.--affidavit of, 65-67.

Latter-day Saints--difference between and Baptists, 348, 350.

Law, William--en route for Nauvoo, 20, and note; appointed member First Presidency, 284-6.

Legion, Nauvoo--character of, 269; minutes of organization of, 295; general review of, 236; officers of, 253; general orders to, 354; defended by the Prophet, 355-6; general orders to, 362; minutes of, 382; general orders, 400; minutes of, 415; general order to, 502; extract from minutes of, 549; fourth regiment of second cohort of, 582; Repast Militaire of, 601; general orders to, 601.

Letters--James Mulholland to Isaac Russell, 5-6; Joseph Smith to Isaac Galland, 8-9; Parley P. Pratt to Prophet, 22; the Prophet to Hyrum Smith, 29; the Prophet et al. to High Council, Nauvoo, 43-44; Hyrum Smith to Parley P. Pratt; Hyrum Smith to the Prophet et al., 52: Charles Adams to Joseph Smith, 53; Orson Pratt to his wife, 54; John B. Webber to the Prophet, 55; Matthew S. Davis on Prophet's sermon; Elias Higbee to the Prophet reporting progress  in Saints' appeal to United States Senate, 81; ditto, 83; ditto, 85; ditto, 88; John Taylor, to the Prophet, 96; R. B. Thompson to Elias Higbee, 96; Horace R. Hotchkiss to Sidney Rigdon et al., 98; Elias Higbee to the Prophet, 98; Horace R. Hotchkiss to Joseph Smith, 100; Sidney Rigdon to the Prophet, 102; Hon. Richard W. Young to Elias Higbee, 111; Heber C. Kimball to the Saints in the United States, 114 et seq.; Brigham Young to the Prophet, 119; Robert Johnson to Senator Young, 121; Senator Young to Judge Elias Higbee, 121; Wilford Woodruff to Don Carlos Smith, 122; Elders Hyde and Page to the Prophet, 123; Brigham Young to the Prophet, 125; the Prophet to Elders Hyde and Page, 128; Willard Roberts to the Star, 130; Heber C. Kimball et al. to Bishop at Nauvoo, 132; William W. Phelps to the Prophet, 141, 142; Hyde and Page to Joseph Smith 142; Elder Woodruff to the Star, 150 et seq.; William Barratt to Saints in England, 161; Prophet to William W. Phelps, 162 et seq.; Prophet to Oliver Granger, 164-7; John C. Bennett to Joseph Smith et al., 168; ditto, 169; ditto, 172; Prophet to Horace R. Hotchkiss, 170-1; Wilford Woodruff to the Star, 176; the Prophet to John C. Bennett, 177-8; John C. Bennett to Messrs, Smith and Rigdon, 179; Samuel Bent and George W. Harris to Presidency of Church, 199; John E. Page to the Presidency, 201; Orson Hyde to Saints in Nauvoo, 202; Heber C. Kimball et al. to Robinson et al., 220-224; Joseph and Hyrum Smith to the Saints in Kirtland, 225; the Prophet to the Twelve, 226; Heber
C. Kimball et al. to Times and Seasons, 234; a staunch Wesleyan to
the Manx Liberal, 234-6; Brigham Young to Presidency, 237; John C. Bennett to Times and Seasons, 248-9; Brigham Young to the Prophet, 251-2; Parley P. Pratt to Sidney Rigdon, 266; Joseph Smith to County Recorder, 287; Levi Richards to the Star, 296; Brigham Young to the Star, 308-9; Wilford Woodruff to Don Carlos Smith, 323-4; George A. Smith to the Star, 343; the Prophet to the Times and Seasons, 356-58; R. B. Thompson to Times and Seasons, 369-70; Orson Hyde to Joseph Smith, 372-4; Orson Hyde to Rabbi Hirschel, 374-8; extract from a letter to the Juliet Courier, 380-1; Orson Hyde to President Smith, 384-88; William Smith, to the Prophet, 391; Horace R. Hotchkiss to Joseph Smith, 405; the Prophet to Hotchkiss, 406-7; Joseph Smith to Smith Tuttle, Esq., 430-33; extract from Orson Hyde, 439; Parley P. Pratt, extract of, 441; Joseph Smith to Reuben McBride, 441; Hyrum Smith to Saints in Kirtland, 443; Orson Hyde to Parley P. Pratt, 454-9; the Prophet, to Esq. Browning et al., 468; ditto to Mr. Hotchkiss, 469; Joseph Smith to Edward Hunter, 481-3; Joseph Smith to Edward Hunter, 491; Orson Hyde to the Star, 495-99; Joseph Smith to Isaac Galland, 499; G. Walker to Brigham Young et al., 505-509; Alfred Cordon to Joseph Smith, 515-16; Joseph Smith to the Church, 517; from the Twelve to all the churches, 517-18; Joseph Smith on tithing, 518; Robert Pierce to Joseph Smith, 519; Joseph Smith to John Wentworth, 535 et seq.; Joseph Smith to John C. Bennett, 544; Dr. C. V. Dyer to John C. Bennett, 544; John C. Bennett to Dr. C. V. Dyer, 545; John C. Bennett to Joseph  Smith, 547; Joseph Smith to Edward Hunter, 548; the Twelve to the Saints in Europe, 558 et seq.; extract from Elder E. P. Maginn, 566; Lorenzo D. Barlow to Parley P. Pratt, 569.

L

Liberty--religious in Nauvoo, 306, Lima, Adams Co., Illinois--Stake organized at, 233.

Little, Sidney H., Senator--death of, 389.

Littlefield, Lyman O.--action against for slander, 514.

Litz, Elder A.--suspended from preaching, 501.

Lowry, John--affidavit of, 56.

M

Maginn, Ezekiel--affidavit of, 64.

Marks, Ephraim--funeral of, 586-587.

Marks, William--appointed President of Stake at Commerce, 12; President of Stake at Nauvoo, 323; financial settlement of Prophet with, 582.

Maughan, Peter--493 and note.

Melling, Peter--ordained a patriarch, first in England, 120 and note; reports to the Prophet at Nauvoo, 543.

Memorials--of Saints to Senate and House of Representatives, 24 et seq.; to Joseph Smith and High Council at Nauvoo, 136; answer to foregoing, 138, 141 and note, 144, 145; to Governor Garlin of Illinois on kidnapping, 159-60.

Millennial Star--Latter-day Saints, 119; prospectus of, 122; 133 and note.

Missouri--action of Legislature on Mormon difficulties, 299 and note.

Modisett, Dr.--gives morphine to Heber C. Kimball, 15; aids Elders Young and Kimball on journey, 17.

Monmouth, Warren Co., Illinois--the Prophet's trial at, 365 et seq.

Moon, Elder John--arrival of with Saints in America, 162.

Morgan, Elizabeth--death of, 551.

Mormon Literature--pro et con, 487-489.

Mormons--Nauvoo and the, 565.

Mulholland, James--Prophet's Secretary, writes Isaac Russell, appointed clerk for land contracts, 16; salary of, 17; death of, 88-9 and note.

N

Nashville, city of--meetings at, 182 and note.

Nauvoo--Agricultural and Manufacturing Association incorporated, 303.

Nauvoo--burying ground for, 353.

Nauvoo, City of--made Post Office at, 121; charters of, 239-249; first election in, 287; City Council organized, 288; officers of, 292, 308; divided into wards, 305; concentration at, 362.

Nauvoo--House Association incorporated, 301.

News--the prospectus of, 112.

Noble, Joseph Bates--healed by the Prophet, 4 and note.

O

Olney, Elder Oliver--license taken from, 552.

Owen, Ephraim--confession of accepted, 12.

Owen, Jedediah--affidavit of, 56.

P

Page, John E.--one of the Twelve, Address on the Book of Mormon, 2; appointed on mission to Palestine, 109; reproved, 274, disregards advice, 372; presides at New York conference, 462-3.

Partridge, Bishop Edward--appointed Bishop upper ward  Commerce, 12; instructs Saints on removal to the West, 39.

Perry, Ashael--received into fellowship, 14.

Pettigrew, David--affidavit of, 71-73.

Petition--Elias Higbee, Robert B. Thompson to Congress, 237; presented to the House, 250-51.

Phelps, Laura, wife of Morris--death of, 513.

Pierce, Robert--business settlement of with the Prophet, 519.

Powell, James--affidavit of, 61.

Pratt, Orson--one of the Twelve, addresses Saints at Nauvoo, 4; starts on mission for England, 7; opens mission in Edinburg, 120; publishes Remarkable Visions, 224; success in Edinburg, 251; elected Professor of Mathematics, Nauvoo University, 414.

Pratt, Elder Parley P., one of the Twelve--preaches at Nauvoo, 4; ditto, 6; starts on mission for England, 7; errors in writings of, 7; letter to the Prophet, 22; his article on eternal duration of matter, 54, 55 and notes; appointed editor of the Millennial Star, 133; returns to America for family, 177; returns to England, 224.

Presidency, First of Church--report of, 212-14; proclamation of to the Church scattered abroad, 267-73; report of at General Conference, 336-339.

Priesthood--article on prepared by the Prophet, 207-212; lesser organized in Nauvoo, 312.

Proclamation--preparation of to Kings, 383.

Q

Quincy, Illinois--a Stake organized at, 233.

R

Ramus, Illinois--minutes of a meeting at, 453; conferences at, 467; deeds to certain lands of, transferred to the Prophet, 477.

Redfield, Harlow--suspended from office, 12; restored, 16.

Resurrection in general and of children, 553 et seq.; and note.

Revelations--to Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, January 19, 1841, 274, et seq.; to William Allred et al. 311; to the Saints in Iowa, 311; to Brigham Young in Nauvoo, July 9, 1841, 382; concerning Nancy Marinda Hyde, 467; to John Snyder et al., 483; to the Twelve, 483; respecting the Times and Seasons, 503.

Rich, Charles C.--elected Brigadier General, 414.

Richards, Levi--affidavit of, 70-71.

Richards, Elder Willard, one of the Twelve--visits Staffordshire, 7; son of dies, 48; on Election and Reprobation, 256-66; assists in indexing Book of Mormon, 274, 286; writes history of British mission, 313-321; appointed private secretary to the Prophet and Temple Recorder, 470.

Rigdon, Elder Sidney, counselor to Joseph Smith--address of to Twelve, 2, 3; appointed to accompany Prophet to Washington, 13; starts with Prophet to Washington, 19; sickness of, left at Columbus, Ohio, 21; in Washington, 48; in Philadelphia, 76; speech of at laying corner stone of Nauvoo Temple, 327-29; baptized for in behalf of his parents, 486.

Riggs, Burr--affidavit of, 67.

Roberts, Sidney--excommunicated, 237.

Robinson, Ebenezer--publisher of Times and Seasons, 23; co-partnership with Don Carlos Smith dissolved, 239; editor Times and Seasons, 402.

Rockwell, Orrin P.--starts with Prophet for Washington, 19.

Rogers, D. W.--his hymn-book discarded, 14.

Root, Henry--affidavit of, 62.

Russell, Isaac--reproved, 5, 6; and note.

S

Saints, Latter-day--sickness among at Nauvoo, 3; healing of the, 3, 4 and notes; admonished to set houses in order, 4-5; petition of to Congress, 24-38.

Sharp, Thomas--editor Warsaw Signal, anti-Mormon, the Prophet on, 487 and note.

Sherwood, Henry G.--healed by the Prophet, 4 and note.

Shoemaker, David--affidavit of, 69.

Sloan, James--statement of, 69.

Smith, Don Carlos, brother of the Prophet--President of the High Priests at Commerce, 12; publisher Times and Seasons, 23; dissolves partnership with Robinson, 239; death of, 393; career of, 393-399.

Smith, Elias--ordained a Bishop, 161.

Smith, Emma, wife of the Prophet appointed to compile hymnbook, 17; assists husband in labors, 510; appointed President of Female Relief Society, 552.

Smith, George Albert--one of the Twelve, starts on mission for England, 10; preaches at Richmond, New York, 75: begins out-door preaching in England, 182 et seq.; injures his health at, 236; arrives at Nauvoo from England, 383; marriage of, 389.

Smith, Hyrum, brother of the Prophet--appointed on committee to establish Nauvoo. 39; testimony of to Book of Mormon, 46 and note; is appointed Patriarch of the Church, 229 and note and 282; appointed Prophet and Revelator, 286.

Smith, Humphery--affidavit of, 62.

Smith, John--affidavit of, 62.

Smith, John--affidavit of, 59.

Smith, Joseph, the Prophet--literary methods of, 1; heals the sick at Commerce, Nauvoo, 3-5 and notes; ditto, 7; preaches on the "other Comforter," 10 and note; ditto "Judgments," 11; attends general conference, Commerce, 11-12 et seq.; appointed to represent cause of the Saints at Washington, 13; starts for Washington, 19; adventure of, by the way, 23; arrives at Washington, 24; meets President Van Buren, 39 et seq.; preaches at Philadelphia, 47; in New Jersey, 49; comment on Missouri affidavits, 73-4; returns to Washington, 77; description of by a Congressman, 78 et seq.; interview with Martin Van Buren, 80; ditto. John C. Calhoun, 80; returns to Nauvoo, 88-9; reflection of on actions of Congress, 145; plans charter of Nauvoo, 349; made sole Trustee-in-trust, of the Church, 287; elected member of the Nauvoo City Council, 287; introduces several bills in City Council, 293 et seq.; appointed Lieutenant-General of Nauvoo Legion, 309; assists in laying corner stone Nauvoo Temple, 329-331; arrest of by officers from Missouri, 364 et seq.; visited by Indians at Nauvoo, 401; views on use of medicine, 414; his experience at Monmouth trial, 419-20; views on relics of antiquity, 420-21 note; reproves sanctimoniousness, 445; denunciation of thieves, 461-2; his estimate of the Book of Mormon, 461; proof-reads Book of Mormon, 468; difficulties in keeping daily journal, 470; proclaims political attitude of the Saints, 479-80 and notes; his views on the gift of tongues, 485; reflections on opening of the year, 1842, 492; debates race question, 501; purpose of debates in Nauvoo, 514; views on privileges of Nauvoo  charter, 516; settlement of with Robert Pierce, 519; settlement of taxes with Mr. Bagley, 542; becomes editor of Times and Seasons, 551; sermon on "Life, Death, and Resurrection," 553 et seq. and note 556; remarks of at funeral of Edward Marks, 587; reproof of unvirtuous persons by 587-88; insolvency of, 594; cause of Prophet's insolvency, 600; remarks respecting: signs and key words received in the Temple, 608.

Smith, Joseph, Sen.--death of, 189; biography of, 189 et seq.; funeral services of, 191-97; benediction of, on Hyrum Smith, 229 and note.

Smith, Samuel--affidavit of, 60.

Smith, William, brother of the Prophet--allowed to retain standing in quorum of the Twelve, 12.

Snow, Erastus, labors of in Salem, 433.

Snow, Lorenzo--sent to England, 161-2 and note; arrives at Manchester, 233; in public discussion with Mr. Barker, 234.

Snyder, Elder John--appointed a mission, 503-504; set apart and instructed, 568.

Spirits, try the, 571-581.

Springfield, Illinois--a Stake organized at, 236.

T

Taylor, Elder John, one of the Twelve Apostles--testimony of to Book of Mormon, 2; preaches at Kirtland, 21; sails for England, 46; arrives at Preston, England, 76; leaves Liverpool for Ireland, 170 and note; in the Isle of Man, 234-6 and note; discussion with Rev. Robert Hayes, 238; reports baptisms, 288; arrives at Nauvoo from England, 381; appointed editor Times and Seasons, 513.

Temple, Nauvoo--corner stones of laid, 327-331; announcement of Trust-in-trust respecting, 517; word of the Twelve respecting, 517; progress of building the, 608 et seq.

Thompson, Elder Robert B.--delivers discourse at the funeral of Joseph Smith, Sen., 191-197; writes petition to Congress, 237; Associate editor Times and Seasons, 353: death of and biography of, 411-412.

Times and Seasons--first number of, 23.

Tithing, arrangements for reception of, 493; record of, 518.

Tribune, New York--criticism of on the course of Missouri, 551.

Trustee-in-trust--sole for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, see Joseph Smith.

Turley, Elder Theodore--starts for England on mission, 10; imprisonment of, 127.

U

University of City of Nauvoo, 243, and 301.

V

Van Buren, President of the United States--Joseph Smith's interview with, 40, 80, 89 and note.

W

Walker, Cyrus--lawyer, counselor for the Prophet, at Monmouth trial, 367 et seq.

Walker, Oliver--before High Council, Nauvoo, 219-20.

Warren, city of, 405; consultation respecting, 486.

Wasp, The--first number, 600.

Wentworth, John--letter of Prophet to, 535 et seq.

Wells, Squire Daniel H.--biography, 154-55.

Whitney, Bishop Newel K.--appointed Bishop middle ward, Commerce.

Wight, Lyman--addresses conference, 13.

Wilber, Brother--assists Elder Young et al., 11.

Williams; Frederick G.--affidavit of, 69.

Witter, Daniel S.--course of respecting settlement at Warren, 470-1.

Wood, Elder Daniel--suspended from preaching, 501; vindication of, 514.

Woodruff, Elder Wilford, one of the Twelve--his account of miraculous healings at Commerce by the Prophet, 3-5; notes; sent by the Prophet to heal the sick, 5; departure of for England, 46; arrives in England, 76; labors of in England, 182 et seq.; mission on Fox Island, 418-19.

Women, The character of Mormon, 568.

World, The--commotions in, 125, 189, 252-3, and 383, 401, 415.

Yokum, William, Haun's Mill victim, 389.

Y

Young, Elder Brigham, one of the Twelve Apostles--remarks of at Nauvoo, 2; starts for England, 9; arrival of at Cleveland, Ohio, 20; rebukes storm, 23; preaches at Richmond, New York, 75; arrival in New York, 77; embarks with four others of the Twelve for England, 94; arrival of in England, 102; farewell of the Saints to, 103; sustained as President of the Twelve, 115 and notes; also 146, and note; on Election and Reprobation, 256-66; assists in indexing Book of Mormon, 274 and 286; arrives at Nauvoo from England, 381; elected to Nauvoo Council, 414.

Young, John, Sen.--father of Brigham, dies, 14.

Young, Joseph, President of the Seventies, grants licenses, 501.

Young, Lorenzo, assists Young and Kimball en route for England, 11.
