Neal A. Maxwell, Smallest Part ( 1973)

Some Introductory Thoughts

This book's title comes from the poignant words of Ammon (Alma 26:16) as he gloried in God's goodness to mankind—so enthusiastically, in fact, that his brother said, "I fear that thy joy doth carry thee away unto boasting." But Ammon's boasting was of God, and, therefore, his joy was so full that his tongue could not transmit all that Ammon wished he could say: Ammon felt more than he could tell!

So it is with me and this book, for underarticulation pervades these pages.

Ammon was impressed that God would be "mindful of us, wanderers in a strange land"; I am impressed that God is "mindful" of mankind today, an age in which the Christian is "a stranger in the land"—in which Christianity is counterculture in a sea of secularism.

Part I of what follows focuses on strategic matters such as truth, morality, and causality—for how an individual views such things surely determines so much else; different beliefs do produce different behavior! A Christian must be aware, therefore, of the implications of his beliefs, but without making these a condition of his association with his fellowmen.

Part II of the book shifts sharply in style and focuses on tactical, but important, things pertaining to the stewardship of the committed Christian, such as how best to help others, how to manage time, and how to communicate—for our life style and our work are outward expressions of our inner beliefs.

Some graphic illustrations are used precisely because words so often reflect only "the smallest part" of what one wishes to communicate. Quotations from others are also used where these illuminate an idea better than the author can (which is often).

Thus in what follows, there is variety through which the reader can move—but with no guarantees as to its adequacy—only with the assurance that the "table" has been set sincerely.

For friends not familiar with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, thank you for your patience as you encounter "inside" references, and even occasional jargon—for the welcome to these pages is just as warm for you!
