Neal A. Maxwell, Smallest Part ( 1973)

PART ONE

Some Strategic Matters

"If you have not chosen the Kingdom of God, it will make in the end no difference what you have chosen instead."

—William Law, English Clergyman of the 18th Century

1

A View of Truth

"This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be . . . ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Timothy 3:1-2, 7.)

"There is no democracy of facts." (Author unknown.)

The Christian's view of truth sets him apart from others in a very strategic way, for there is a profound difference in his valuation of truth—though not necessarily in his fervor for finding out about all kinds of things—and in his view as to what the big issues are.

We live in an age that is flooded with facts and issues, big and small. But, ironically, in some respects men are, as never before, ". . . ever learning, and never able to come to a knowledge of the truth," or of the real issues. The poet, e. e. cummings, described one view of learning when he wrote: "All ignorance toboggans into know and trudges up to ignorance again," a process which would be a reflection of futility as much as humility. Much of the flood flowing from the frontiers of knowledge is very valuable, but in the deluge of data there are also many insignificant truths. There are also isolate truths which are, in many respects, like the isolate individual—both wander in perpetual search of companionship and meaning. Some research is actually undertaken in reaction to the human condition—not to alleviate it. President John R. Silber of Boston University has observed:

"One can forget the meaninglessness of his own existence by occupying himself with scientific experiments of dubious import. Countless scientists and scholars spend their lives in the search of truths that are irrelevant to them."

Something can be both true and unimportant. Therefore, just as there are, in Jesus' words, "the weightier matters of the law," there are "weightier" truths! We must not only distinguish between fact and fancy, but know which facts are worthy of fealty.

The gospel of Jesus calls our attention to the reality that there is an aristocracy among truths; some truths are simply and everlastingly more significant than others! In this hierarchy of truths are some which illuminate both history and the future and which give to men a realistic view of themselves—a view that makes all the difference in the world.

In this context, one can see how being "learned" (by simply indiscriminately stockpiling a silo of truths) is not necessarily the same thing as being wise, for wisdom is the distillation of data—not merely its collection and storage.

So far as is known, the question Pilate put to Jesus, apparently without expecting the Savior to answer—"What is truth?"—has been answered only once: the Lord later said, ". . . truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." Truth is a knowledge of reality—of "things." Some realities are transitory and inconsequential; some realities maintain themselves everlastingly, or longitudinally, over vast spans of time. In the hierarchy of truth, therefore, some truths describe those realities which persist from age to age—which are more significant than fleeting facts. A knowledge of such central realities as the existence of God and his presiding and purposeful role in the universe, the great rescue mission of his Son Jesus Christ, and of man's co-eternality with our Heavenly Father is sovereign sense! Other gradations of truth reflect knowledge of those things which are often important, but passing and proximate.

In point of value, longitudinal truth, when compared to truth which reflects reality as it exists in only a portion of one of the three great time zones—past, present, and future—is like the Bible when it is compared with the single issue of a newspaper. Telephone directories are useful, but inevitably obsolescent reflections of reality. Many of us still store in our memories old phone numbers, and veterans usually know their military service serial number. These are once useful but now useless facts.

Knowing how, through the process of irrigation, land can be made more productive is actually very useful—proximately—but in terms of ultimate utility, man's need to know about soils does not compare in importance with that knowledge which concerns souls!

Our stunning success in understanding physical nature is well known, but one irony that is little appreciated is the fact that many of the critical data about human nature are already available in the scriptures; these data do not need to be discovered—but merely openly accepted and seriously applied. Cataclysm for the people on this planet is most likely to flow from technology created by men who cannot also tame that technology because they cannot tame themselves by using the taming truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The truth which is most liberating, therefore, involves a knowledge of the controlling, cosmic realities in the universe. As Paul noted directly (1 Timothy 2:5) "the truth" is: "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." But life and education, of necessity, must be concerned with truths that are related to realities of all kinds—as long as we are not fatally confused about the gradations of truth.

The Savior noted that if we are really serious about our discipleship, and continue in his word, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." Knowing the truth about those things that really matter frees us from our inhibiting and finite perspective in the same way that turning the light on in an otherwise darkened room can keep us from stubbing toes and breaking furniture

Plastic freedom, by contrast, is a naive freedom; it is filled with a kind of ersatz exhilaration such as a man might have who is unknowingly speeding along the white rapids of a river that takes him to a Niagara of consequences.

Only the all-pervasive perspectives of the gospel—walking in the bright light of the full truth about man and the universe—can make us free, for to achieve real perspective one must not only, as C. S. Lewis said, "keep the clean sea breeze of the centuries blowing through" his mind, but also those teachings and truths which transcend time.

Thus, while the disciple of Christ is urged by the scriptures to seek out the best books, to learn about history and law and cultures (for Christianity is not a religion of repose—intellectually or behaviorally), he is also given potent reminders that there is no democracy among facts; indeed, there is a harsh, not-to-be-deposed aristocracy among truths, and one must come to final terms with "the truth" cited by Paul—not merely "a short armistice."

Some truth can even be carried forward with us into our resurrected state and will give us "so much the advantage in the world to come," because such truth pertains to those dimensions of physical nature and human nature which will persist. These truths involve a knowledge of things which transcend and cut across all three great time zones. It is the acquisition of these truths which God has stressed through his prophets that should have priority, for they involve a particularized kind of knowledge that most often focuses on things pertaining to human nature and happiness.

When Jesus criticized the lawyers of his time (Luke 11:52), he said they had "taken away the key of knowledge." In the inspired translation of the New Testament, Joseph Smith added five words: "for ye have taken away the key of knowledge, the fullness of the scriptures."

Without the divine disclosures God has given to us, we face all the usual dangers of incomplete information, but these are compounded by cosmic consequences when we are ignorant, or heedless, of these key truths.

We should seek these "key" truths, not simply because such truths are shiningly there, but because it is by their light "that we see everything else!"

The illustration may help us to understand how some realities, whether these realities are expressed as events or as laws of human nature, persist through all three time zones, but also, though important at the time, how other realities are but a micro-dot on the landscape of history. Therefore, all truth, as a knowledge of various realities, is similar in that respect, but there are inevitable gradations, both in the significance of truths and in our grasp of their implications.

Thus, like the time-lapse photography we see on TV weather shows, clouds come and go, drop their water, shade us, cool us, vex us—but the land and water masses that persist beneath the passing clouds are like the unchanging truths by which men must manage their lives.

This unique approach to truth, far from denigrating reason, gives us added reasons to develop our intellectual powers because, as John Locke said:

"Reason is natural revelation, whereby the eternal father of light, and fountain of all knowledge, communicates to mankind that portion of truth which he has laid within the reach of their natural faculties: revelation is natural reason enlarged by a new set of discoveries communicated by God. . . ."

Hence, to huddle in contentment without extending oneself intellectually and socially merely because one has knowledge of key truths is a betrayal of our trust. When one fails to stretch his "natural faculties," or to use the light God gives him, his is a stewardship gone sour. Brigham Young said:

"The laws that the Lord has given are not fully perfect because the people could not receive them in their perfect fullness; but they can receive a little here and a little there. . . .

"Hence, if you wish to act upon the fullness of the knowledge that the Lord designs to reveal, little by little, to the inhabitants of the earth, we must improve upon every little as it is revealed."

It is no accident that men like Abraham, Moses, and Joseph Smith, who learned to see so much with their "eye of faith," were given splendid supplemental insights about the universe. But God's desire to share must be met by our readiness to receive. We must be appreciative of, and skilled enough to deal with, the truth that is already "within reach" of our natural faculties. By discovering truth in its many independent spheres, and yet still being humble enough to be enlarged by "a new set of discoveries," truth begets truth. Without divine guidance, our cerebral calisthenics, though often fascinating to engage in, can be empty exercise.

Such an approach to knowledge is not other-worldly at all. The key, longitudinal truths are highly relevant because they are irretrievably connected with the very things that matter most "here and now." We need to see more clearly how such cosmic concepts have their mortal implications and consequences. Otherwise, we are apt to be confused about causality—like the weary soldier in the ballad of my old infantry division of World War II, who wanted to avoid any more beachheads: "I don't mind guns, but I can't stand bullets. Don't send me in."

Knowing the truth about "who" man really is involves both his identity and destiny, and the implications of such persistent realities include crucial information about what man's mortal environment should contain for his well being. The institution of the family is at "peril-point," for instance. Professor Urie Bronfenbrenner warns with regard to our spreading generational separateness:

". . . In today's world children are deprived not only of parents but of adults in general. . . . What is needed is a change in our patterns of living that will bring adults and children back into each other's lives."

A rational scholar will not exclude data about the physical sciences which persist in breaking through with a statistical shout. Yet with regard to critical data about human nature, so many seem to be always "looking beyond the mark."

One would think it folly, for instance, if Holland spent a significant portion of its citizens' time and money destroying the dikes that hold back the sea; it would seem even more absurd if the Dutch people stood by cheering the wrecking crews! Yet, so much of what we are doing currently in our own culture is the equivalent of breaching the dikes, of removing tried and proven safeguards. So little honest attention is given to such matters as family and self-discipline on which so much else depends, yet others clearly pay a social price for the hollowness of someone else's childhood, and we all have a stake in each other's capacity for self-discipline! LaRochefoucauld's words seem to describe some of today's programs which are sincerely designed to compensate for fundamental family failures: "There goes another beautiful theory about to be murdered by a brutal gang of facts."

One of the "brutal gang of facts" of our time concerns the reality "of things as they are"—that citizens who are untutored in restraint and who are driven by their unchecked appetites can neither behave as free men, nor leave other men free; truth includes a knowledge of that harsh reality! He who is merely a "bundle of appetites" and has no capacity for self-discipline is neither educated nor free. A permissive climate is really a cruel climate, for it deludes its citizens into believing they must confront others—but not themselves; it elevates appetites by suggesting that we be accountable to these drives but not to people.

Real individual freedom is tied to truth, it is not freedom a la carte—not freedom apart from everything else—not just to the absence of restraint! Freedom is the catalyst in the chemistry of choice; it is not an outcome to be achieved by itself alone. Free agency in its fullest sense requires the individual to be in command of himself, for one who is a prisoner of his bad impulses cannot really choose; another truth about "things as they are," therefore, is that we either control our bad impulses or they control us.

We do not have much history about "things as they were" in the sensuous society that once was Sodom, but it is not likely that the citizens of Sodom decided at one gigantic civic rally to become the most wicked city in the world. The Sodomites simply sought pleasure, and things got out of control, and there followed lasciviousness, arrogance, idleness, and, significantly, a profound neglect of the poor and the needy. Indeed, sensuous souls often love their neighbors as themselves—i.e. not at all! Thus, Sodom was a free-wheeling, but very unfree society!

Education often gives little more than a curricular curtsy to those kingly truths about family and freedom, even though there is an alliance between moral absolutes and tactical ideals. It is a temporizing tutor who plays his bellows on the fires of student idealism, while insisting that there are, after all, no absolute truths to which idealism can be inseparably connected. Jesus did not drive the money changers from the temple because of vague or relative indignation; he was indignant his Father's house had been made "a house of merchandise!"

Moral education based on eternal truths is necessary for the development of the selflessness each of us needs in order to persist in serving our fellowmen, for relativism does not lend itself to an appreciation of one's fellowmen. It was G. K. Chesterton who wisely observed that, "The more we are certain what good is, the more we shall see good in everything."

Religion must, therefore, press for an emphasis on the application of truth and have a demonstrated concern for behavioral outcome. Rhetoric is an easy religion, and conversational Christianity makes few immediate demands of us, while permitting us to exclaim and despair over distant wrongs.

Our individually imperfect attempts at applying these powerful truths are lamentable, but this is not an indictment of the truths involved; man's early attempts at flight produced many failures, but not because the laws of aerodynamics were unreliable.

Our perspective does affect our behavior and our view of our fellowmen. In fact, when men and women look at life through the lens of the gospel they will see not only more clearly, but more broadly, the realities, obligations, and opportunities around them, as the illustration suggests.

Life, or any particular situation, if viewed only through the peephole of pessimism, presents a puzzling or discouraging picture indeed. Instead of wonder, awe, and pattern, which the Christian sees, the disciples of despair disclaim any knowledge of a "big picture" of life in which "all things denote there is a God . . . yea, . . . and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator." The degree of divine disclosure—from peephole to a picture window view of things—is up to us, for so many today are like the Romans to whom Paul preached and whom he described as follows:

"For the heart of this people is waxed gross and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted. . . ." (Acts 28:27.)

Without, for instance, some perspective about family, an individual is apt to slip into social error or be confused about the role of the state. Chesterton once wrote:

"Only men to whom the family is sacred will ever have a standard or a status by which to criticize the State. They alone can appeal to something more holy than the gods of the city."

Without a standard of truth, society courts subtle disaster, and the basic human hunger for truth goes unmet. John Lukacs cautioned us about the need to balance our concerns for truth and justice:

"Our world has come to the edge of disaster precisely because of its preoccupation with justice, indeed, often at the expense of truth. It is arguable, reasonably arguable, that there is less injustice in this world than a century ago. Only a vile idiot would argue that there is less untruth. We are threatened not by the absence of justice, we are threatened by the fantastic prevalence of untruth. . . . Truth responds to a deeper human need than does justice. A man can live with injustice a long time, indeed, that is the human condition; but he cannot long live with untruth." (The Passing of the Modern Age, New York: Harper & Row.)

This is certainly not to say that we should leave off our concerns about justice, but that we must begin to level with ourselves in the context of truth. We not only need "the truth" to avoid the random life, to see good in others, and to meet a basic hunger—but also to provide a moral basis for society. As Edward C. Banfield found in assessing the incapacity of citizens to cooperate in the area of Montegrano, Italy, ". . . the moral basis of the society may usefully be regarded as the strategic, or limiting, factor." Situations, Banfield wrote, "may be understood, or altered, better from this standpoint than from any other."

Without the anchor of eternal truths, men may wrongly reason that the turbulence we have known in the physical sciences is characteristic of all knowledge. A geophysicist said of the Apollo 17 moon trip, "Everything we've learned from Apollo has been a surprise; there's not been one correct guess." Scientists, or at least many of them, are still open and capable of surprise and wonder. Perhaps this is a vital clue for men in dealing with the "key of knowledge" to which Jesus referred. Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel has observed:

"There is only one way to wisdom: awe. Forfeit your sense of awe, let your conceit diminish your ability to revere, and the universe becomes a marketplace for you. The loss of awe is the great block to insight." [^1]

Sir Isaac Newton had this sense of awe:

"I do not know what I may appear to the world, but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the sea-shore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me." (Brewster's Memoirs of Newton, II, ch. 27.)

Thus the real "famine in the land" is the absence "of hearing the words of the Lord."

For the Christian, mental progress means hungering after truth and righteousness and growing as Chesterton wrote, "into more and more definite convictions. . . ." It is the skeptic who sinks "slowly backwards into . . . vagueness." Intellectual nomads and behavioral gypsies knock on many doors but turn away because the rule is, says C. S. Lewis:

"You must be asking which door is the true one; not which pleases you best by its paint and panelling. In plain language, the question should never be: 'Do I like that kind of service?' but 'Are these doctrines true: Is holiness here? Does my conscience move me towards this? Is my reluctance to knock at this door due to my pride, or my mere taste, or my personal dislike of this particular door-keeper?'"

So much turns, therefore, on one's view of truth and how deep his hunger is for what is contained in "the key of knowledge."

So far as its view of truth is concerned, the gospel is galactic whereas secularism is so insular! Little wonder the prophets have been so concerned with theological truancy—for it reduces human happiness.

Some individuals are simply too busy to be concerned with key truths; others mistake their particular secular passion for the purpose of life; still other individuals specialize in tiny tactical truths and shrink from the strategic truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ because the latter are not only difficult to accept, but "too large to be managed"; many souls are kept from the truth "because they know not where to find it."

The special, longitudinal truths of the gospel help us to feel more and to see more clearly our circumstance—a vital thing in this secular dispensation of despair. Each of us may begin like the young servant of Elisha who feared for the future until "the Lord opened the eyes of the young man" so that he could see what Elisha saw: celestial cavalry!

"And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and and gone forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do?

"And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them.

"And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha." (2 Kings 6:15-17.)

As the disciples of Christ seek to "stand in holy places" unmoved, theirs is a place with a view—a view of truth that, in a time of turbulence, can help us to "fear not, for they that be with us are more than they that be with them." For our own "holy place" can be a "heaven upon earth" when truth is honored as Francis Bacon prescribed:

"Certainly it is a heaven upon earth, to have a man's mind to move in charity, rest in providence, and turn upon the poles of truth." (Francis Bacon, Essays, 1, "Of Truth.")

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Reprinted with permission of Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., from Mere Christianity by C. S. Lewis. Copyright 1943, 1945, 1952 by Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.
