Neal A. Maxwell, Smallest Part ( 1973)

2

A View of Morality

". . . how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?" (Genesis 39:9.)

"For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he. . . ." (Proverbs 23:7.)

"But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matthew 5:28.)

"Morality, then, seems to be concerned with three things. Firstly, with fair play and harmony between individuals. Secondly, with what might be called tidying up or harmonizing the things inside each individual. Thirdly, with the general purpose of human life as a whole: what man was made for: what course the whole fleet ought to be on. . . ." [^1] (C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1958.)

Where more truth and perspective are given, more is expected of men and women. In no situation is this enlarged expectation more demanding than in the realm of morality. Truly, the Christian knows that he is loved unconditionally by God, but also that, as the child of the loving and eternal Father, he is to be measured carefully. "I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings." (Jeremiah 17:10.)

Acknowledging a debt to C. S. Lewis for highlighting what I have since called three-dimensional morality (without wishing to make Lewis responsible for either that designation or what follows), here is an illustration which shows not how narrow Christian morality is, but how wide, how very wide it is.

Men are apt to steer a course in life according to what, how far, and how clearly they see, for surely, "Where there is no vision the people perish."

Lewis's penetrating analogy calls attention to all three dimensions of morality. The first kind is one in which an individual—

". . . is thinking it does not matter what his ship is like inside provided that he does not run into the next ship . . . the results of bad morality in that [first] sphere are so obvious and press on us every day; war and poverty and graft and lies and shoddy work. And also, as long as you stick to the first thing, there is very little disagreement about morality. . . . But though it is natural to begin with all that, if our thinking about morality stops there, we might just as well not have thought at all. Unless we go on to the second thing—the tidying up inside each human being—we are only deceiving ourselves.

"What is the good of telling the ships how to steer so as to avoid collisions if, in fact, they are such crazy old tubs that they cannot be steered at all? What is the good of drawing up, on paper, rules for social behaviour, if we know that, in fact, our greed, cowardice, ill temper, and self-conceit are going to prevent us from keeping them? . . . You cannot make men good by law: and without good men you cannot have a good society. That is why we must go on to think of the second thing: Of morality inside the individual.

"But I do not think we can stop there either. We are now getting to the point at which different beliefs about the universe lead to different behavior. . . . Remember that religion involves a series of statements about facts, which must be either true or false. If they are true, one set of conclusions will follow about the right sailing of the human fleet: if they are false, quite a different set. For example, let us go back to the man who says that a thing cannot be wrong unless it hurts some other human being. He quite understands that he must not damage the other ships in the convoy, but he honestly thinks that what he does to his own ship is simply his own business. But does it not make a great difference whether his ship is his own property or not? . . . If somebody else made me, for his own purposes, then I shall have a lot of duties which I should not have if I simply belonged to myself." (Mere Christianity.)

Concerning this third dimension of morality, George McDonald has said, "The one principle of hell is . . . 'I am my own'." Paul reminded us, ". . . know ye not that . . . ye are not your own?"

Just outside the strait and narrow course the Captain on the flagship has charted, and beckons us to follow, are reefs and shoals, and if we are to make safe passage, we need both a multi-dimensional view of morality and also revelation.

Without revelation the sea of life appears to be only chaos, but, once again, "the truth" when it overlays the human situation discloses not only purpose but the presence of a safe passage—not only the risks to be avoided but also the opportuities that lie in our path, the fellow seamen to be rescued and to be saved.

The wreckage and mistakes we see about us are there not because men are destined to fail in navigating the "strait and narrow" passage, for we come from a "Sea-going Family," as Thomas Carlyle perceived and expressed in a different way:

"Man's unhappiness, as I construe, comes of his greatness; it is because there is an Infinite in him, which with all his cunning he cannot quite bury under the Finite.

Thus the morality that permeates a Christian's understanding is neither the Shavian morality ("An Englishman thinks he is moral when he is only uncomfortable"), nor the episodic sort of thing that breaks forth after a scandal (which Macaulay described as "periodical fits of morality"). The view of morality that emerges from the scriptures is one in which we should stop doing some of the specific things we now do, and in which we start doing some specific things we fail to do now.

In asking anyone, including ourselves, to accept the moral standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Lord is not asking us to give up anything we now have except those attitudes, habits, and patterns which will finally destroy our body or soul! A man can keep his slippers but not his pipe; a woman can serve in the community but must not destroy her ultimate self-esteem as a wife or mother; an individual can keep time for contemplation but must yield on idleness; a man may keep his riches but must place them second; an individual may go on loving but must stop lusting; and men and women can seek out literature and the arts, so long as they can give up or avoid sensuality.

There is not a soul on earth who will not be gentled, enlarged, and refined by the influence of the gospel. Whether we choose to respond to it, or to acknowledge it, true morality presses in on us anyway.

"The truth is, we believe in decency so much—we feel the Rule or Law pressing on us so—that we cannot bear to face the fact that we are breaking it, and consequently we try to shift the responsibility. For you notice that it is only for our bad behavior that we find all these explanations. It is only our bad temper that we put down to being tired or worried or hungry; we put our good temper down to ourselves.

"The Moral Law tells us the tune we have to play: our instincts are merely the keys.

"You probably want to be safe much more than you want to help the man who is drowning: but the Moral Law tells you to help him all the same.

"Think once again of a piano. It has not got two kinds of notes on it, the 'right' notes and the wrong' ones. Every single note is right at one time and wrong at another.

"The most dangerous thing you can do is to take any one impulse of your own nature and set it up as the thing you ought to follow at all costs." (C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity.)

Precisely because of the force of his conscience, the Christian knows the adversary is "jamming" the signals from conscience, hoping we will drift into "mainstream" and away from the "strait and narrow" course. Satan also sends out his own signals and seeks to put an unchaste society on guard against prudery; to warn a relatively idle people about being overworked and exploited; to alert a permissive society concerning the dangers of authority precisely as that society is rushing headlong into anarchy; to prod alienated souls (who hunger for belonging and the sense of being useful and needed) to abandon the family and to avoid parenthood; to induce those wishing to be more "free" to build around themselves higher and higher walls of sensuality; and to tout "honest" books, movies, and dramas, but to avoid being honest with themselves.

In a society in which "anything goes," its members will learn too late that everything has gone!

Without moral truth men have difficulty measuring their societal as well as individual challenges and, therefore, in determining their response. Single-plane morality not only forgets the dead (and the lessons of the past), but it is also cruel to the unborn or the about-to-be-born:

"After all, children are not just transients in the world's boardinghouse, to be welcomed or turned away at the convenience of the older boarders. And if it is true that every newborn child should have a right to its share of food, it is also true that those who control the food supply should think twice before declaring that they no longer have enough for strangers and newcomers. In other words, the essence of the population problem—so far, at least—is not that mankind has propagated too many children but that it has failed to organize a world in which they can grow in peace and prosperity. Rich nations and poor alike have grossly misused the world's resources, both material and intellectual; neglected them, wasted them, and fought each other over how to share them. Thus the basic question is not how many people can share the earth, but whether they can devise the means of sharing it at all." (Otto Friedrich, "Population Explosion: Is Man Really Doomed?" Time, September 13, 1971. Reprinted by permission from Time, The Weekly Newsmagazine; Copyright Time Inc.)

Some, in their over-reaction to the rigid literalism of the pharisaic time, forget that the "Spirit giveth life" by showing how much more—not less—there is to be done in specific service to our fellowmen. A vague morality, therefore, is not morality at all, for it is as undemanding as the tame "Life Force" god with whom it is so often associated. As C. S. Lewis observed, real morality is specific and demanding:

". . . decent behaviour . . . means things like being content with thirty shillings when you might have got three pounds, doing school work honestly when it would be easy to cheat, leaving a girl alone when you would like to make love to her, staying in dangerous places when you could go somewhere safer, keeping promises you would rather not keep, and telling the truth even when it makes you look a fool."

True morality concerns mundane matters that secularism simply doesn't cover.

Thomas C. Schelling, in his important writings on "micromotives," used a powerful but simple illustration of our society's ultimate dependency on cooperation, selflessness, and sacrifice. Schelling notes how cars can line up for miles on a busy highway because a mattress has fallen onto the highway; in spite of the inconvenience to hundreds of waiting motorists, each driver, once he is safely past the mattress, does not stop to remove the mattress because, now that he is past that point, the act of removal would not benefit him. The capacity to act for the good of community similarly requires us to abstain from actions that hurt others, as well as inconveniencing ourselves in order to help future generations. As Schelling noted, "As in the cars that passed the mattress on a holiday weekend, it is hard to reach a bargain with the generations that follow." This latter capacity to anticipate, and thereby prevent, the anguish of our posterity requires the selflessness of a loving parent; it cannot be managed by those who are pleasure-seekers, for pleasure usually takes the form of "me" and "now," while joy is "us" and "always."

There is real doubt, therefore, as to whether or not, without moral education based on eternal truth, men can successfully manage their many and divergent micromotives for the benefit of the full community. Certain current trends are so separatistic that some individuals could become functional hermits—holed up like a missile—in the hardened silo of self-interest. Unless we really see each other as brothers, significant cooperation among men may not be frequent enough; mere biological brotherhood won't do it! In contrast, the Christian's filial feelings extend two ways into time, and "the hearts of the fathers" can be "turned to their children" in a meaningful mutuality.

Psychologist Allen Bergin has written perceptively about a view of life and morality in the gospel context:

"The ideal of self-control is supreme. This life is a test—is a test—is a test. You have not passed until you have endured to the end and are dead. You will be tried every day of your life, whether you know it or not. Today, we are all bombarded by stimuli toward the loosening of moral controls. The provocation is enormous. You must practice self-control and have a strong repertoire of such abilities, so that when stress comes, you can cope. Mercifully, the Lord permits us small doses of evil to practice our controls on before we are hit with real temptation, but then it comes." [^2]

Those who note the failures of believers in meeting some of life's tests are not facing the real issue. As Lewis observed:

". . . any man who becomes a Christian will be nicer than he was before. . . . Christian Miss Bates may have an unkinder tongue than unbelieving Dick Firkin. That, by itself, does not tell us whether Christianity works. The question is what Miss Bates' tongue would be like if she were not a Christian and what Dick's would be like if he became one." (Mere Christianity.)

A sage Chesterton said, "The Christian is only worse because it is his business to be better." True morality moves us into the role of witness and model, not because the Christian has status needs, but simply because lights have a way of being seen in the darkness.

Indeed, the Christian may even witness his morality by his silence in some situations. Theodore Roszak in writing of the "thwarted longings of men" recalled that George Fox chose to "stand still in the light," because Fox was "confident that only such a stillness possesses the eloquence to draw men away from lives we must believe they inwardly loathe."

Mormon once "refused to go up against mine enemies" and, as the Lord had commanded him—"I did stand as an idle witness." No doubt, as Roszak predicted of the wise man who knows when and how to do nothing, Mormon's voice was "like thunder."

Jesus' silence before his accusers in certain situations was "like thunder"—but only because he was certain not just about what was the right thing to do tactically, but also about what was right!

When the light of the gospel was bent by processing it through a pharisaic prism, it lost its fullness as Jesus so often noted during his ministry. When the light of the gospel was processed through the labyrinth of legalism, it was not only less illuminating, it was distorted. In the case of the Pharisees, scribes, and lawyers, the lessened illumination and the distortion in perspective resulted in a tragic inversion of values.

In the incident chronicled by Luke, the diminished light of the gospel was serious enough by itself, but when this diminution also combined with the failure of those who were supposed to be models (the Pharisees, scribes, lawyers) this cruel confluence resulted in both the models' and in other men's being hindered from entering the kingdom of heaven. When a model falters and enters not the gate, he not only ceases to play a positive role, and thus fails his followers, but he actually ends up also blocking the way of his followers—who might still make it, even without him, if they were not hindered by his personal obstruction. The faltering, or fallen, model has done just what Jesus decried: he has "shut up the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 23:13.)

The failure of a model has many implications for his companions on the "strait and narrow way." Those who see the exemplar fail do not usually view his particular failure generously—as a reflection of understandable imperfection in an otherwise good individual; rather, the disappointed viewer is apt to see defective discipleship. Perhaps it is not fair that our shortcomings should be seen this way, but for the person whose faith is tentative and whose own discipleship is not fully established, gross or chronic failure in a "model" is often taken to mean that the exemplar is not, after all, really serious about his discipleship. Of course we have had only one Perfect Model, but for those who are thrust—ready or not—into the exemplar role, it is important to remember that their lives need to reflect wholeness and congruency. In a life that is moving towards significant discipleship, the tactical lapses can be seen in just that context. But gross or chronic lapses raise the frightening prospect (for the onlooker) that the faltering is somehow strategic and not tactical.

One cannot help but wonder how many Sadie Thompsons there are who are nearly ready to commit to the straight and narrow path, but who have been deflected by a jarring experience. Sadie's bitter comment: "You men! You filthy, dirty pigs! . . . You're all the same . . ." reflected not only her disappointment in a supposed model, but her utter sense of emptiness in concluding that it is hopeless to expect to meet a good man. A person may be seen as struggling seriously to control his or her base instincts, or a person may be seen as yielding to his baser instincts, as if moral behavior is the anomaly—not badness.

We worry about sensory deprivation because of noise pollution, about nutritional deprivation because of poverty—and we are right to be so concerned. But emulatory deprivation—being without models and exemplars—may be the greatest deprivation of all. For exemplars not only show us that walking the straight and narrow way is possible, but that it is worth doing!

It is easier nowadays, for instance, with secularism's softened morality, for the adulterer to say that his impulse was simply unmanageable and that his behavior was so profoundly natural that he is not really accountable. Even more subtle is the rationalization of those who are immoral, but manage to create an aura of nobility around their acts, so that the sinner is the one who is terribly misunderstood and who is, therefore, somehow heroic. The trick apparently is to divert compassion from those who have been wronged to those who have wronged them.

It is only at the crucial decision points that one can tell how serious his own or another's commitment to morality is. In that sense, it is perhaps fair, after all, for onlookers to note our successes and failures at precisely those moral measuring points that do matter.

One of the reasons for our applying gospel principles is not only our need to validate truth, but (by experimenting with gospel principles in our lives as Alma urged) to achieve cumulative confirmation so that there is moral momentum in our lives.

It is, therefore, a fair question to ask of one who desires discipleship to what extent he can, using Alma's words, "give place" in his busy life for the serious application of gospel morality.

Part of the reason for the trend toward the religion of rhetoric, with its own rituals and dogma and one-dimensional morality, may be found in the changed response of some to the query "who is my neighbor?" In years past men's response probably reflected a narrowness of view which entirely excluded those not of immediate concern or geographic proximity. But our society today seems to have the reverse problem. Where once our circles of concern were too tightly drawn in terms of who our neighbors were, today our circles of concern are too large, too loose, and too filled with meaningless rhetorical regard for neighbors we know not and hence serve not, "neighbors" who are safe, because they make no real demands of us.

While the world is caught up with the smashing of forms in the arts and elsewhere (all in the name of freedom), what the gospel of Jesus Christ smashes are the conceptual and behavioral walls and compartments that keep men from being whole and congruent. The gospel presses us to align our public and private behaviors, for the gospel of Jesus Christ illuminates even the dark recesses of one's mind, where the battle for intrapersonal morality, too, is won or lost.

It takes courage to face up to the special perspectives that come with the fullness of the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ, for one sees the human drama quite differently! Eternal perspective does not say to us to be inattentive to things like the dollar crises, floods, poverty, law and order, and borders—for these contemporary challenges represent, in fact, some of the interpersonal moral issues and challenges to our agency and to our ability to apply the gospel by assisting others. But in the fullness of the gospel there is also a warning about our being so caught up in the webbing and the throbbing of such events that we fail to see what other moral issues are at stake. We are clearly in one of those

". . . times when a whole generation is caught . . . between two ages, between two modes of life and thus loses the feeling for itself, for the self-evident, for all morals, for being safe and innocent." (Hermann Hesse, as quoted in Trousered Apes, New Rochelle, N. Y.: Arlington House, 1971.)

The Christian must speak out with the eloquence of example concerning the fullness of morality which is contained in "the fullness of the scriptures" in order to help others. While three-dimensional morality moves men toward Christ, secular morality has moved man toward agnosticism and atheism. Chesterton noted that "atheism is abnormality. . . . it is the reversal of a subconscious assumption in the soul."

Just as Joel Barlow could write in the early days of the American Republic about how important "the habit of thinking" was to this nation's future (noting that if we believed enough in our equality as citizens, then our attitudes could spare us either anarchy or tyranny)—so our "habit of thinking" in matters of truth and morality can keep us joyful and free men—worthy sons and daughters of Him who gave us life and freedom in the first place. Without a belief in God—and in his moral laws—joy goes, too. Without the "why?", the gospel supplies answers to [concerning the need for righteous behavior], then, as Professor Earl Rovit warned, "Why not?" is "ceasing to be a question at all. It is becoming a kind of answer."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Copyright Newsweek Inc., July 10, 1972; reprinted by permission.
[^2] John Lukacs, The Passing of the Modern Age, New York: Harper & Row, Inc.
