Neal A. Maxwell, Smallest Part ( 1973)

3

A View of Causality

"They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world. . . ." (D&C 1:16.)

". . . they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference between the holy and the unclean. . . ." (Ezekiel 22:26.)

"If joy itself be continually dampened by the thought of its own continuous annihilation, then only fleeting pleasures remain, unconnected in time. . . . When pleasures become disconnected, the intense ones stand out in prospect like branches stripped of leaves. They are thus sought directly; raw experience as such becomes the goal. Work becomes drudgery, nature becomes boring, humor falls flat, melodious music fades, children are nuisances (which they then become), sympathy and affection are perceived as "sticky," sexuality becomes unreal or dull, chastity is no longer worth the sacrifice, and freedom isn't worth a fight." (From the unpublished manuscript of Dick Hazelett.)

"When men cease to aspire to the ideal, the good, to self-restraint—whether in their arts or in their lives—they do not just stand still, but actually turn the other way, finding self-fulfillment in self-indulgence, and in an obsession with those three ultimate expressions of the totally self-centered life: sex, violence and insanity." (Christopher Booker, Trousered Apes.)

Different beliefs do make for different behaviors; what we think does affect our actions; concepts do have consequences. Therefore the attention given in preceding chapters to truth and morality. Secularism reverses the admonition of Jesus who urged men not to "omit the weightier matters of the law," for secularism—because of its distorted view of truth and its one-dimensional morality—inadvertantly ends up concentrating on the unweighty matters and leaves the weightier matters undone. As in Korea, unchaste servicemen in Vietnam have left orphans behind them—as many as 100,000 children in Vietnam. Funds are now being compassionately collected to aid these children who will find themselves stranded between two cultures and without a father. If we rely, however, only on contraceptives and cash—instead of conscience and chastity—we will always find ourselves dealing with harsh consequences instead of preventing misery. It is the dogmatism of secularism that blinds otherwise good people from seeing "the truth." One-dimensional morality will always fall short of what is desired, for it is our intrapersonal morality that shapes our interpersonal morality. John Lukacs has said:

"The profoundest problems of morality involve, after all, what people do (and how they think) with their own selves: in other words, what people do privately (or, rather, what they think of their own acts). It is therefore that the problem of sexual, that is, of carnal morality is at the center of the moral crisis of our times; it is not merely a marginal development."

Intrapersonal immorality depresses our self-esteem and the affected individual then becomes less sensitive and more disfunctional in the realm of interpersonal morality. The consequence of an incorrect view of truth and morality is symbolized by those fatherless Vietnamese children. The trade-off was typical of secularism—between minutes of pleasure for the sexual partners on the one hand, and on the other, days, weeks, months, years—a lifetime—of probable deprivation for their offspring!

Seriously adhered to, the creed of secularism can sometimes move men from heroin to methadone—but seldom to abstinence. If there is really no ultimate joy which reinforces proximate self-discipline, then proximate pleasure will win out. The only thing that varies is the method used to rob men of their joy and freedom—where once a Capone bootlegged alcohol, his successors now traffic in dope.

Secular concepts which are faulty drift, for instance, toward day care centers (not for the few for whom such may be truly necessary, but for all who wish to be "fulfilled," or simply rid of their children). As Sara Stein and Carter Smith wrote:

"Early learning in school can work in a limited way, but school will never be home. The complexity of family relationships cannot be reproduced. The bond between mother and child is qualitatively different from the bond between care giver and baby."

Thus in applying the teachings of Jesus—with their biting specificity—there are different consequences. One of the sins of secularism, therefore, is vagueness which reflects an uncaringness about consequences and about interpersonal relations. But another consequence of secularism is the vague, erratic, and cosmetic attempt to solve an immediate problem. Daniel P. Moynihan correctly describes the political behavior of Americans as "lurching from crisis to crisis with the attention span of a five-year-old." [^1]

Verity in theology makes for accuracy in action, while doubt and disbelief lead to disjunctive action. Secularism has even drawn some churches behind it with the result noted by Samuel Callan, in which: ". . . the church will wed herself to the culture of the day and be a widow within each succeeding age. . . ."

Where men reject absolute truths and legitimate authority, there are subsequently no criteria for decisions, no direction, and no brakes, while an ever-present sense of hurrying moves such individuals forward to "catch the fashionable insanity." All too often we see a "perversion . . . become a convention."

Eternalism stands in sharp contrast to "instantism." "Instantism," writes President John R. Silber of Boston Universty, means the "annihilation of cultural time through the development of an instant culture," and, finally, "the pollution of time," a form of pollution about which we worry too little.

Another major consequence of secularism is distortion in the diagnosis of human affairs. So often secularism blames "the system," making it the societal scapegoat, when it is the absence of individual goodness or self-discipline that is the real cause. Again, the view one holds of truth and morality is pivotal; the absence of an absolute conceptual framework results in secularism's being "data rich and theory poor," a condition which adversely affects both diagnosis and action. Hazelett has said, "The secular world now knows nearly everything except why anyone should do anything in the first place."

We need both the humility and perspective necessary to see our situation and the governing realities that are "round-about" us as we are simultaneously "compassed about" and surrounded by secularism with its strange, mutant liberalism.

John Lukacs has said insightfully of today's deteriorating New York City:

"Contrary to the liberal belief, the dissolution of authority and censorship has not lifted burdens off minds. No one can close his mind to the imagery of Forty-Second Street, no matter how he wishes to pass through it; a low kind of diabolical interest burns and scratches on the bottom of his brain, like a pebble at the bottom of a shoe. It is just as a bad smell clings to clothes. It is no longer in the material slums of large cities that the depths of modern degradation are to be found; it is in this slum of slums of the Western spirit. This most crowded of streets of the greatest city of the greatest country of the greatest civilization: this is now the hell-hole of the world." [^2]

Since the scriptures, ancient and modern, speak of the time when because "iniquity shall bound, the love of many shall wax cold," can we really ignore iniquity, when it diminishes our capacity to love our fellowmen—in a world where the need for love exceeds the mortal supply? How we see each other and our situations determines how much we feel each other's elbows, how much we will excuse, endure, and expect from others.

Secularism may have helped to enlarge our perception of "who" our neighbors are, but now we need more help in giving more priority to needs that are nearest to us. There is something disabling about having too much of our attention drawn away from our immediate neighbors, for any abstraction of our affection lessens our active esteem of others and reduces our sense of accountability. There can be no development of ultimate love for mankind without much practice involving proximate people.

It was G. K. Chesterton who observed with regard to our microworlds of family and neighborhood:

"If we were tomorrow morning snowed up in the street in which we live, we should step suddenly into a much larger and much wilder world than we have ever known. . . . the typically modern person [seeks] to escape from the street in which he lives.

"But we have to love our neighbor because he is there. . . . He is the sample of humanity which is actually given us. Precisely because he may be anybody he is everybody."

It is what we learn not only in our classrooms, but in our family and in our neighborhood that is so causal and so telling, ultimately, in terms of outcome. Whether we enrich, or infect, our macro-world depends largely on our coping successfully with our microworld.

Secularism tends toward hedonism, and as President Silber warned, "The popularity of hedonism lies in its minimal demands upon the individual." Secularism also tends to make an individual reluctant to "plow back" things of value into the society that has nurtured him: "One must not fail to provide his share of support for the conditions on which he depends," Silber reasons. As Dick Hazelett observed, some nonbelievers seem to be "parasitically drawing on the theism" of their ancestors while, at the same time, rejecting God.

Man can be so easily confused about causality! Bacon observed how "the fly sat upon the axle tree of the chariot wheel and said, 'What a dust do I raise.'"

Secularism's confusion about causal factors (and also its not owning up to consequences) can be seen nowhere better than in relation to the institution of the family and its declining state. Pitirim A. Sorokin wrote with wisdom and power when he said:

". . . it is much easier to grow in the family garden a large crop of creative altruists from newborn babies than it is to transform a grown-up egoist into an altruist or to graft an 'altruistic scion' onto a coarse, selfish stem. . . . So far, the method of 'family gardens' is the easiest and most fruitful way of transformation of the human universe from an ugly wilderness into a magnificent garden of Eden."

The gospel of Jesus Christ alone has provided the truth about the family. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as an institution strives to resist the drift decried by many. Alexis de Tocqueville, when he visited America, gave us another reason to be concerned:

"Thus not only does democracy make every man forget his ancestors, but it hides his descendants and separates his contemporaries from him; it throws him back forever upon himself alone and threatens in the end to confine him entirely within the solitude of his own heart."

Gospel truths about life and the human condition stand in stark contrast to the world's view; the world's solutions so often lead mankind into conceptual cul-de-sacs. Without gospel truths, man's efforts to reach his goals are like the northbound explorer who drove his dog sled feverishly northward on an ice pack that was flowing southward—only to find himself farther from his destination at the end of a hard day's journey than he had been at dawn!

When secularism seeks to be a substitute for religion it is most dangerous, because it appeals to something inside man that makes for pretense such as occurred at the time of the Tower of Babel—but Babel has many modern equivalents. C. S. Lewis wrote well when he asserted:

"What Satan put into the heads of our remote ancestors was the idea that they could 'be like gods'—could set up on their own as if they had created themselves—be their own masters—invent some sort of happiness for themselves outside God, apart from God. And out of that hopeless attempt has come nearly all that we call human history—money, poverty, ambition, war, prostitution, classes, empires, slavery—the long terrible story of man trying to find something other than God which will make him happy. . . .

"That is the key to history. Terrific energy is expended—civilizations are built up—excellent institutions devised; but each time something goes wrong. Some fatal flaw always brings the selfish and cruel people to the top and it all slides back into misery and ruin. In fact, the machine conks. It seems to start up all right and runs a few yards, and then it breaks down. They are trying to run it on the wrong juice. That is what Satan has done to us humans."

What the secularists forget in reacting to hypocrisy among Christians (a real enough challenge), is that, as Silber said in another context, the absence of hypocrisy can mean "only that one has espoused no ideals."

But if, as Chesterton wrote, "Scepticism . . . removes the motive power"—secularism cannot rescue itself and it will lose itself "in quagmires of sensuality." Alexander Pope foresaw such a scene:

"Religion blushing veils her sacred fires,

And unawares morality expires.

Nor public flame, nor private, dares to shine;

Nor human spark is left nor glimpse divine!

Lo! thy dread empire, Chaos! is restored;

Light dies before thy uncreating word;

Thy hand, great Anarch! lets the curtain fall

And universal darkness buries all."

(Alexander Pope, The Dunciad, IV.)

Leslie Fiedler sees "a weariness in the West . . . a weariness with humanism itself which underlines all the movements of our world, a weariness with the striving to be men." If nothingness is to triumph, why struggle?

Man's ennui and his frequent ingratitude for God's goodness to us is best described by Malachi: ". . . Behold, what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at it, saith the Lord of Hosts. . . ." Indeed, the interplay of despair, conflict, and commotion will mean that "men's hearts shall fail them," for the functional fatalist can rally neither himself nor his troops.

Great men can, and have, come out of economic poverty, but much less often out of an emotional ghetto. Thus while secularism sincerely seeks to tear down brick and mortar ghettos, it leaves the human debris of doctrinal deprivation in its wake and creates "a herd morality." For if there is no absolute truth, then, really, how serious is a tactical lie? Lest we think lying is merely a matter of manners, not morals, read what Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn has stated:

". . . violence does not have its own separate existence and is in fact incapable of having it: it is invariably interwoven with the lie. They have the closest of kinship, the most profound natural tie." [^3]

As far as causality and consequences are concerned, the Christian knows that sins are symbiotic—that the "father of lies" wants his sins to move in squad, not in solitude.

Secularism rushes away from a belief in immortality which speaks to us of "was," "am," and "will be"—of "did," "do," and "will do," and toward "raw experience," to resignation, to boredom, and to futility.

As sons and daughters of God we can know "the dignity of causality"—if we do not hesitate to believe.

"For I should not rate highly either the wisdom or the courage of a fledgling bird, if, when the proper time had come, the little agnostic should hesitate long to take his leap from the nest on account of doubts about the theory of aerodynamics." (Charles Sanders Peirce.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Copyright Newsweek Inc., July 10, 1972; reprinted by permission.
[^2] John Lukacs, The Passing of the Modern Age, New York: Harper & Row, Inc.
[^3] 3. As quoted in the New York Times, October 7, 1972.
