Neal A. Maxwell, Smallest Part ( 1973)

PART TWO

Some Tactical Suggestions

"We live in deeds, not years;

In thoughts, not breaths;

In feelings, not in figures on a dial.

We should count time by heart-throbs."

—P. J. Bailey Some Transitional Comments

As indicated in the Introduction, the style and focus of this book shift sharply between Parts I and II. In the war against evil, as in any other war, if the strategy is not sound, the tactics will matter little. Thus, the focus on fundamentals in the first three chapters.

King Benjamin, when he set forth the truths pertaining to the conditions of salvation, pressed oratorically as follows: ". . . and now, if ye believe all these things see that ye do them." (Mosiah 4:10.)

The same challenge persists for the disciple in each age: to conform his life to the requirements of the Realm of which he would be a citizen. Yet it is the unceasing requirements we each have to make, decisions bearing on the interplay of time and truth and minutes and morality—the tactical challenges—that seem to test us so. It is not just giving intellectual assent to the commandment, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," but the specific, unrelenting, tactical challenge of how, then, to be truly effective in helping others.

What follow now, therefore, are a few specific observations about how the Christian can be a good soldier in his tactical behavior in the midst of the fray. We must remember always, however, that hosts of others do good, desire truth, etc. But these individuals are often cut off from the wisdom of the Command Post; communications therefore get garbled by secular sentries and mortal messengers. Of such assaults on evil it might be said, as was said by Marechel Bosquet of another sincere charge, "It is magnificent, but it is not war." (Comment on the "Charge of the Light Brigade.")

4

Some Thoughts on Managing Tasks and Time

"A wise man that had it for a by-word, when he saw men hasten to a conclusion, 'Stay a little, that we may make an end the sooner.'" (Francis Bacon, Essays, 25, of "Dispatch.")

Disciples of Christ must agree with H. D. Thoreau in his view of the relationship of time and eternity: "As if you could kill time without injuring eternity."

Spent time—like a spent bullet—tells us much about its "processor," for we see not only the residual slug, but indicators of how spent time is grooved by a man's soul, a reliable indicator of what a man is like.

No challenges of discipleship are more vexing than the management of one's time or the day-to-day choices we have to make—not always between bad and good things, but often between competing good things. These are precisely the areas where we need to apply our Father's morality, because these challenges are so real and so persistent. It is also at these confluences of time, choice, and tasks that we will achieve our greatest growth or experience the greatest failures.

Indeed, while there is a democracy about time as it is given to all men—day by day and hour by hour—what an unevenness emerges in how men use the time that is given to them! And time is, for all of us, a gift from God. Our first danger, then, in our attitude about time is the danger of thinking, as C. S. Lewis wrote, that each of us "owns" twenty-four new hours daily. That this may be our quantitative allotment is true, but it is given to us as a part of our mortal stewardship so that we can have experience in its expenditure and also that we may be measured, in part, by how we measure out our time.

A second danger in how we spend our time, and in how we approach our tasks, is that we will fail to see things in proper perspective and under-appreciate an opportunity or over-value a task. Once again, since tactics are derived from strategy, the gospel view of truth and morality must come into play.

There were no newspapers, as we know them, at the time of Jesus' ministry. Had there been, one can guess that the news coverage would have missed the significance of what was transpiring at, and after, Calvary, while perhaps reporting the return of Pilate to Caesarea after a trying weekend in Jerusalem, or while noting the arrival or departure of new trade caravans. The atonement, the central fact of human history, would have been ignored or subordinated to the other busy and important things of the time—unless the publisher had perspective about "things as they were."

Man's failure to develop a sense of proportion is not confined to the meridian of time, for it is with us today as one of the clear reminders of our mortality, not only on the grand scale just noted, but in little things, such as our inattention to our own children while we are busy feeling noble about some civic chore we are doing. Too many of us crowd out contemplation about ultimate things in order to brood about some real, but proximate, problems.

While the size of the four circles in the following illustration will shift in size somewhat depending on circumstances, the size-relationships of the circles representing "the things we ought to do," "the things we've got to do," "things we like doing," and the things we do for "other reasons" are fairly reliable indicators about our morality and also how clear-headed we are about the truth.

C. S. Lewis's observation which gave rise to this attempt to express the idea graphically is simply another interesting little test the Christian can use occasionally to check up on himself in his managing of his motives and his time. Obviously, a small "ought to do" circle and a big "like to do" circle suggest some room for improvement—unless one has reached the point when "duty has become a delight."

Our tasks are often without glamour. Duty, with all else that can be said in its favor, also has the tremendous tactical advantage of keeping us plodding along—even when enthusiasm and reason desert us. Some of the many extra steps involved in carrying another's burden a second mile may be taken because of love, but for those of us not yet so capacitated, duty moves many feet!

The challenge of managing time and tasks wisely tends to have an outcome—either we use time wisely or it uses us; either we manage tasks effectively, or we are pushed about and prodded by them. The following observations about the interplay of time and tasks may be helpful, since there seems always to be more to be done than there is time.

A. Alone or in a group (such as a family home evening) write down in two minutes five major lifetime goals you have.

B. Next, write down in two minutes five major goals for the next year of your life.

C. Next, write down in two minutes five major goals you'd pursue if you knew you only had six months to live.

D. Finally, write down in two minutes specific ways in which you have spent time during the last week of your life that relate to the goals listed in A, B, and C.

This exercise in pondering (under pressure of time) tends to make explicit much that is often unarticulated. The exercise also tends to produce family-centered and gospel-centered goals—strategic things tend to emerge and mundane tactical things to shrink in their psychological size. The last two minutes are usually the most uncomfortable for participants, because we see how unconnected our expenditures of time are to some of our real goals.

Suggested by the writings of Anne Morrow Lindbergh [^2], the following illustrations call our attention to the disparity between what we care about and what we can influence. Moreover, as a friend suggested (when he saw the more common dilemma of the larger circle of concern and the smaller circle of influence), there are also situations in which individuals have far more influence than concern!

A. Asking the other person who is sorting out his alternatives what his recommendation is at that time, leaving him free to either describe and defend his viewpoint or back away from it. Getting "fact and feeling" out on the table can save time-consuming preliminaries.

B. Observing, to the other person, that while his recommendation is clear, his careful thought that produced the proposal must also have raised some concerns and, therefore, "What are the concerns he has or the defects in the proposal?" This can also give an indication of the objectivity and thoroughness with which the other person has approached the challenge.

C. Asking courteously, when needed, for clarification if it seems that the real problem is being circumvented with unnecessary delay.

The perpetual processing of the same temptation is both dangerous and time-wasting. Cycling and recycling the same temptation (instead of rejecting such blandishments out of hand) is not only to risk one's soul, again and again, but is to bring on fatigue, so that the Adversary may be able to do indirectly what we will not let him do directly. A lack of decisiveness in dealing with temptation (like David's fatal view from the terrace) ties up our thought processes and prevents us from doing good with the time alloted to us. It is a free man who can dispatch devilish entreaties summarily, the better to spend his time, talent, and energy "in a good cause." The same danger exists if we allow ourselves—after true repentance—to recycle our past mistakes broodingly.

There are two basic ways we can use time, for we will either use time in the spirit of stewardship or by being "acted upon." Chesterton said of Whistler that the latter "was one of those people who live up to their emotional incomes . . . hence he had no strength to spare." Some of us breathlessly "live up" to our income of time simply because we are being controlled rather than really governing ourselves and our schedules.

Man can learn self-discipline without becoming ascetic; he can be wise without waiting to be old; he can be influential without waiting for status. Man can sharpen his ability to distinguish (as the late Richard L. Evans wisely observed) between matters of principle and matters of preference, but only if we have a wise interplay between time and truth, between minutes and morality.

One of the more unique approaches to planning and to managing tasks has been refined by Professor Kent G. Stephens, now of the Brigham Young University. The ideas of Professor Stephens, and others who have pioneered a failure analysis approach (which started out as a way of avoiding failure in our United States Minuteman missile program), have become another tool for achieving success and are worthy of mention. Each of us can think of examples in human history when leaders have said, "That which I feared most has come upon me." While there can be no total immunity from irony in life, too often we drift unnecessarily toward, and fall into, the very errors we most fear.

We have also heard the lament of the failing parents ("Where did we go wrong?"). This concern could have earlier taken the form of, "How could we fail in rearing our children?"—with parents then planning, and acting, to avoid those undesired outcomes. In some respects, whether one is a dove or a hawk, America's recent involvement in Viet Nam drifted into a situation in which we experienced severe failures: we had an undecisive military outcome, while at the same time heavily draining from our national resources and the pool of patriotism. Some hard-headed analysis early in this challenge to foreign and military policy making could have set up some parameters and specific "monitoring" systems to avoid decision by drifting, an outcome that historians will go on trying to explain for decades.

Failure analysis is not intended as an automatic substitute for traditional planning but, on occasion, may be more helpful, and, at least, it can be a useful check on other traditional approaches to success, whether it is an individual or an organization that is involved.

Fault-tree analysis, a specific type of failure analysis, is so named because when the process is portrayed graphically on paper it resembles the branches of a tree. While the approach is too complex to be described herein, it is, nevertheless, based on some simple insights: identifying undesired events or outcomes, determining the probability of such failures, and stressing goal-oriented communication.

For those who are concerned with the effectiveness of approaches to some of our American domestic problems, Professor Stephens warns us that often our sincere social plans which are generously funded "appear highly successful in solving domestic problems, only to have disastrous secondary effects appear, sometimes 25 years later." It is certainly true that often the very way in which we try to solve one problem creates other problems which are at least as severe as the original one we are so sincerely trying to correct.

The point of drawing this particular approach to the attention of the readers is that God has done our "research" for us in this regard, and his commandments are the parameters for human performance. The failures to be avoided have been graphically portrayed to us and the specific behavior paths that could lead us into those failures have been clearly marked with warning signs. Indeed, the analogy given to us in the scriptures of the "strait and narrow path" is apt, for it is precisely the path we must tread. If we are drawn off in other directions or drift to either side, then we will become "entangled in sin" and we will fail!

By planning to avoid specific failures, highlighted in gospel admonitions, we can often move more directly, and with less risk, toward success. While Mormons may not subscribe to what has been called "Gumperson's Law" (the probability of a given event occurring is inversely proportional to its desirability), we do understand "that there must be opposition in all thing"—for resistance and challenge are built into life itself. Also, laid alongside the much-to-be-desired consequences of gospel-living are the ways in which we could fail this mortal test, and the latter are described with at least as much specificity and detail as the positive outcome. The ways in which our entrance into the kingdom of heaven is blocked are also noted in various ways in the scriptures: "except a man be born again . . . ," "a rich man shall hardly enter into . . . ," "no unclean thing can enter . . . ," etc.

Since so often we share tasks as well as time, there are certain conditions that should obtain whenever planning or decision-making is to be shared. The ground rules are relatively easy to describe but exceedingly difficult for most of us to implement with any degree of consistency or sincerity whether as parents or leaders.

The usual blocks to a real sharing in decision-making include:

The real values of sharing decision-making in proper circumstances include:

Obviously, there can be real disadvantages to sharing in decision-making. Generally, however, the disadvantages grow out of the lack of openness and candor between the leader and others. If the leader or parent communicates clearly and honestly ahead of time the degree of influence or involvement he wants others to have, they can usually adapt to almost any role—as long as they know whether the role is simply to be advisory, moderately participative, or influential and even decisive. If the formal leader implies that their role is to be decisive, but he is insincere in this indication, this will cause a reduction of trust that will make meaningful sharing more difficult to achieve in the future. Sharing can also cause a painful distortion in role perception by associates, if ground rules are not clearly established. Sharing cannot immunize the leader, either, from ultimate loneliness of making certain decisions or the responsibility for the decisions.

Size and functional compartmentalization obviously can mitigate against shared decision-making in the mundane, deadline-ridden world that leaders and administrators live in. Compartmentalization can also reinforce the stereo-types we have of each other. We are so quick to assume that a real contribution could not be made by someone (or group), because of our perception of their role, which may be a misperception.

Often, those who quest for a share in decision-making really do not want power, but merely proximity to the process. A wise leader can often provide this without risking his "sense of command."

The leader who is "not afraid" to make tough decisions and "crack heads together" is necessary. But, as the late C. S. Lewis reminded us, "It is so easy to break eggs without making omelets." An administrator can easily delude himself by thinking he is slashing through red tape and overturning bureaucratic impediments when, in fact, he is really cutting people up and removing barriers that were put in place for a wise purpose.

Whenever one is considering "sharing," "helping," and "time" he must also consider stewardship, and it seems, therefore, important to note that:

At the heart of the stewardship principle is the need for us to realize that, while we can do much to influence others by persuasion, by example, by long-suffering, and by occasional reproof—in the last analysis, we cannot do the work of another person without eventually making it our own.

In summary, we cannot mismanage time, tasks, or people without misusing mortality; we cannot "kill time without injuring eternity." The words of Henry Vaughn are a fitting ending for these brief thoughts about time:

"I saw Eternity the other night

Like a great ring of pure and endless light,

All calm, as it was bright,

And round beneath it, Time in hours, days, years,

Driv'n by the spheres

Like a vast shadow moved; in which the world

And all her train were hurled."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^2] He has to decide between two alternatives and must make a decision. Sometimes people need to talk in order to feel better. Sometimes they need to act. In certain situations, listening to another is the best kind of help. In other situations, doing something may be far more effective.
