Neal A. Maxwell, Smallest Part ( 1973)

5

Some Thoughts on Helping and Communicating

"It requires tact and training to make it clear that because each of us can do so little in the great task of regenerating society, it is therefore more necessary that each of us should dedicate his powers and add his individual will to the undertaking." (Jane Addams, Introduction to Graham Taylor's Religion in Social Action.)

"If another person only had in his storehouse of deserved selfesteem what you had put there, what would he have to draw upon and to sustain him?" (Author.)

"Remember that to change your mind and follow him who sets you right is to be none the less free than you were before." (Marcus Aurelius Antoininus, Meditations VIII, 16.)

Probably no Christian act is attempted so often by so many with so many good intentions and yet with so few positive results as when we try to help others. While we sometimes have mixed motives for wanting to help, the problem in these situations is usually not motivational—it is normally conceptual and methodological. The challenges of giving effective help range from our frustrations in trying to respond to those who make it very difficult for others to help them—"How do you pat or spank a porcupine?"—on through to those circumstances in which individuals become like a sponge, soaking up all the help that is offered, becoming dangerously dependent on the source of help. There is a sad correlation, for instance, between youth who feel underwhelmed in terms of the things they are given to do in their youth and these same individuals who feel so overwhelmed later by the realities of life. In between, on the spectrum of circumstances, are hosts of helping situations that call not only for concern but for skill and courage.

Helping can be achieved inadvertently, and sometimes vicariously, and occasionally even where the helper does not really know the person being helped. But usually helping depends on knowing—just as does loving. While abstract affection can rise to the level of a generalized feeling, customized concern, real charity, and real help are facilitated by knowing what another person needs. Awareness makes it more likely that the helper can provide the kind of help in which real growth occurs in the person being helped.

One low-risk way of sharing things about ourselves (in an appropriate way) in a family home evening, or as colleagues in a working relationship, is the exercise, "My Individual Crest," which usually helps us to know others better and to increase our appreciation for each other. (See illustration, page 61.)

This exercise is quite simple. First, equip each participant with a pencil and sheet such as in the illustration (without the instructions noted in each numbered space). Second, indicate vocally what is to be drawn in each numbered area—proceeding one area at a time and allowing no more than one minute for completion of the drawing in each area. Third, after all six drawings are complete, then let each participant show his or her drawing for area #1, and say (in about one minute) what it means, proceeding area by area, so that all participants are focusing their "show and tell" comments on the same area at the same time.

Almost always in Church-related groups there will be a significant spiritual thrust in the responses. One fine friend made area #5 half dark and half light, signifying his reactivation in the Church in mid-life and that "mighty change" in his heart. An able colleague drew an ear in area #3, denoting his ability to be a good listener—which he is! Other friends and associates have in clever ways in area # 4 indicated a desire to send many young men and women on full-time missions to carry the gospel message to more of their fellowmen.

Two able colleagues, Dr. Joseph Bentley and Dr. William Dyer, of the University of Utah and Brigham Young University respectively, spend much of their lives in helping others. Among the insights of these men about the challenges of helping are those things which follow.

Definition: Helping others: To act (or to refrain from acting) in such a way that when the process is over, the person being helped has clarified his goals, purposes, and objectives, and is more able to reach them through personal growth in

spirituality

personal effectiveness (new skills or behavior)

feelings of satisfaction or happiness

Two Different Conditions

There are two basic conditions which recur: when someone needs help and asks for it, and when someone needs help but does not ask.

Some Situations in Which One Needs Help

A person may find himself in many different situations in which receiving help from others is important:

Issues to Be Considered in the Giving of Help

Question: What interferes with or blocks the giving and receiving of help?

Answer # 1. If the prevailing atmosphere is one of fear and distrust. We can avoid ths block when the

Person Helping Person Being Helped

Is able to create a climate of Is able to contribute to a cli-

trust and concern by conveying mate of trust and concern by

personal standards of honesty communicating clearly and honestly.

and fairness and by expressing

concern for the other.

Is able to sincerely offer help. Is able to ask for help and

recognize his need and accept it.

Answer #2. If people are secretive or non-communicative and

withhold important information. We can avoid this

block when the

Person Helping Person Being Helped

Shares himself openly; his feel- Shares himself openly; his feelings,

ings, reactions, opinions. He is reactions, and opinions.

careful, however, not to dominate

the conversation, convey

judgments or require that the

other person feel the same way

or have the same opinion.

Answer #3. If two people use or manipulate each other for their

own needs or interests. We can avoid this block when

the Person Helping Person Being Helped

Is careful not to use the other Is careful not to use the other

person in order to feel "useful." person as a place to "dump" or

(When I'm helping others I'm unload his problems in order to

important. Therefore I help avoid accepting responsibility

others in order to feel impor- for his own actions.

tant, disregarding the other

person.)

Answer # 4. If a person is coerced, forced, convinced, or argued

into one solution or another. We can avoid this

block when the

Person Helping Person Being Helped

Helps others explore many Seeks to identify and explore

possibilities and alternatives; many solutions; accepts respon-

permits and encourages free- sibility for choosing and deciding.

dom and responsibility of

choosing.

Answer # 5. If limits, standards, or expectations are not clear.

We can avoid this block when the

Person Helping Person Being Helped

Is careful to communicate Seeks clarification of standards,

standards, set limits and clarify limits, and expectations.

expectations.

Answer # 6. If superficial or hurried interactions occur. We can

avoid this block when the

Person Helping Person Being Helped

Takes time to listen and tries Takes time to explain and share;

to understand the problem or presents the problem or issue

issue from the point of view of from his point of view.

the other person.

Expresses love, concern, and Expresses love, concern, and

caring for the other as a child caring for the other.

of God and a valuable human

being.

In the foregoing, Dr. Bentley and Dr. Dyer offer much that is both practical and wise. Most of us can readily identify with experiences in our lives in which we have failed, or not been fully successful, because the way in which we sought to help ran us against one or more of the realities just described, as the illustration attempts to portray.

Leaving out those situations in which individuals offer unneeded help, we are left with those situations in which individuals need help but are (1) too proud to ask for help lest this be seen as an admission of inadequacy, (2) not certain as to whom to ask for help or how to ask for help, and (3) not aware that they need help. Potential helpers are often in somewhat similar situations in that they could provide help but are (1) afraid or reluctant to offer help, (2) uncertain as to how to offer help, and (3) unaware that help is needed. In all of the above situations, the critical elements are awareness, communication, concern, and trust. Sometimes all we lack is simply an awareness that we need help or that we could help. Other times, we are very much aware but the level of trust between those involved is not high enough to permit the process of "asking" and "offering" to occur. Sometimes we are able to trust each other, but our communication is not complete or deep enough to sustain a helping transaction. The illustration represents four situations that each of us has, no doubt, experienced.

As is so often the case, the scriptures provide some excellent case studies, and this is especially so with regard to helping and serving others. We find, for instance the situation in which a direct, prompt, and spontaneous response to a call for help was exactly what was needed. In Acts 16:9 we read of a vision Paul had of a Macedonian man who said to Paul, "Come over into Macedonia and help us." Paul did just that and prayed and taught and baptized. The directness of the request was matched by the directness of the response.

We see in 2 Kings 5:1-14 a man of considerable influence and psychological size balking at the specific help that is offered to him by the prophet Elisha because the form of the help proffered was mundane and not dramatic enough to satisfy Naaman's status needs. Fortunately, Naaman's servants offered some specific help of their own by helping Naaman to see that the issue should not be the doing of "some great thing"—but to comply with the seemingly undramatic instructions of the Prophet. Naaman did as all of us who need help must do, at times; he accepted the reproof and feedback, and thence was helped!

While we cannot comprehend its implications, there was even a moment at Calvary when, as James E. Talmage observed,

". . . that the supreme sacrifice of the Son might be consummated in all its fulness, the Father seems to have withdrawn the support of His immediate Presence, leaving to the Savior of men the glory of complete victory over the forces of sin and death."

In Mark 9:14-29 a tender episode illustrates how vital it is for us to be able to be honest about the kind of help we need. The father of the stricken son is told by Jesus that help can be given his son, "If thou canst believe." Anxious for his son to be healed after years of anguish, the father cries out with tears, "Lord, I believe" and then adds honestly and quickly, "help thou my unbelief." Sometimes we can bring to situations "no more than a desire to believe," yet, even then, we can be helped!

President Harold B. Lee has said on occasion that three of the most difficult words for some of us to say are, "I need help."

There is also the need for us to take care in offering help, lest we appear to be condescending. Two-way trust in our human relationships can make it easier to ask for help. Trust can also reduce the chance that our proffers of help will be misunderstood. Of surpassing comfort is the fact that living righteously can give us the incomparable help of the Spirit in our communications with others so that the integrity of our intent can be transmitted clearly. Righteous living also earns us the help of the Spirit in knowing both what is needed and how best to help.

In addition to knowing about an individual in order to help him or her, we will often need others' help to help that individual. Our capacity to help will not always match the full configuration of others' needs—but by including the skills of others we can match and meet more of the needs of the individual whom we seek to serve.

Jesus said the kingdom is like a net "which gathereth of every kind" of person. Often rapport between certain souls seems instantaneous, and the "matching" seems almost automatic, as in the case in the illustration between the leader and Jim. Usually we need to pool our talents, however, to help someone like Sue, and Ann can contribute in this situation. The configurations of personality needs are infinite (to man). Indeed, as was observed in another context about a basic need, "It is not good that the man should be alone." While we may not be able to be helpful to others in every circumstance, most of us are under-used as helping resources.

A simple question we need to ask ourselves periodically is, "Whose needs am I trying to meet?" Some of our urges to help involve us in doing good mostly to feel good—not because some good needs to be done; the good feelings will follow the momentary "losing" of a small piece of one's life in helping another.

Neither can we, nor should we, expect reciprocity in all situations, for the urge and capacity to give help often exceed the readiness of others to receive it. In sharing the vital truths of the gospel, we shall often find that, as Chesterton noted, an individual can be "already weary of hearing what he has never heard." So often the painful process of learning—including learning about spiritual things—must await the arousal of curiosity and even then Rousseau warns that we must not "be in too great a hurry to satisfy this curiosity. Put the problems before him and let him solve them himself."

In a masterful way, this approach was included in the way that the Lord helped the Brother of Jared (Ether 2:16-25 and 3:1-13) solve the problem of lighting the airtight vessels to be used in crossing the ocean. President Henry B. Eyring of Ricks College has artfully called attention to the way in which the Lord facilitated solving the problem—but without helping too much. The Lord helped the Brother of Jared to work out a solution. Later the Lord commended the Brother of Jared in one of the most remarkable experiences ever recorded.

Success in helping depends so much upon our skills in communicating. It is noteworthy that Paul's admonition about "speaking the truth in love" calls for the kind of glowing illumination that produces warmth as well as light in human relationships. The candlepower of candor can produce not only disclosure but detente, not only discovery but understanding. Usually in human affairs when we illuminate an issue it is not unlike using a flashlight, for we see better not only as to distance but also as to detail. Where we may have thought we saw shadows of resistance and malevolence in another, with illumination we see his fears and anxieties. And where we thought we saw only the silhouette of self-interest or sin, we now see a rationale. If we are loving and humble we can even see as Chesterton urged, "far enough into the hypocrite" to see "the virtues that he cannot" display.

An idea of C. S. Lewis once again lends itself to visual treatment.

In our communication, we often need to check our perceptions with each other. So often we proceed apace, sincerely striving to communicate, but being seen by others as doing, or saying, something different than we believe ourselves to be doing. While some disclosures are inappropriate except in certain settings, the workaday world of human relationships can have many of its anxieties drained off and many of its relationships enriched, if we will but invest a little more time in communicating about our perceptions and expectations of each other. Surely no family home evening could be richer in sharing than those in life of this planet's first family, when Adam and Eve "made all things known unto their sons and daughters."

Among the less understood blocks to communicating are several worthy of brief mention here. Thomas Carlyle shared his discovery with us: "Sarcasm I now see to be, in general, the language of the devil." In an age when verbal karate has some sway, we must be willing to let the gentling influence of the gospel tame the tongue—however tempting the tongue's target. So many of our soul scars are made by words—not deeds. The senders of unhelpful and unkind communications (most of us at times) use both some of their irreplaceable time and their precious psychic resources for "warmaking" instead of peacemaking.

In contrast, have you ever reflected on how the Master must have felt as he heard his Father (at the time of baptism and of Jesus' appearance to the Nephites) describe him as ". . . my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased"? It is impossible for us to gauge the impact of that divine compliment to a deserving Son, but one can get a fleeting feeling for what it might mean to have a perfect Father speak that praise. While Jesus knew, intellectually, that he had done well, how marvelous it must have been to hear those words fall from the lips of the Father!

We are not wise enough to know when the need for deserved commendation ceases, if it ever does. But it is significant that our Father commended his Son so openly! Surely on our finite mortal scale of action we cannot dispense with the giving of deserved commendation as a regular part of our style of helping and communicating!

Geniality is a part of Christian communication but so is accuracy. In the same way that vagueness in theology produces human misery, so vagueness in our communications produces difficulty. Evan Hill in writing about the need for accuracy said, "When we show that we care enough to be accurate, a current of warmth is generated between people." [^1] While candor often depends upon a commitment to courage and truth, accuracy often depends upon our not being lazy or indifferent about either issues or people. Fuzziness in communication can mean that we simply do not have the facts, but it can also mean that we simply do not care about the receiver of our communication.

More often, our patterns of communication show great unevenness in our capacities to receive and to send, as this illustration attempts to show.

The imbalance varies with people and circumstance, of course. There are several things that account for the uneveness in our communication exchanges. First, each of us knows and feels more than he can tell. Second, some have more skill in sending than do the rest of us. Third, some simply have more to say and/or perhaps what they say is more relevant to the situation. Fourth, some prefer to practice economy in sending as a matter of style, so that there will always be fewer of their signals floating about to be received. Fifth, the filters and screens we have developed, individually, have different "meshes," depending on our experiences, values, and humility.

A major but subtle factor in communicating is, once again, our experience in having and utilizing the Spirit to help us. Some unwisely believe this divine aid is merely a convenience and a shortcut. In reality it is a skill of the highest order which has to be developed laboriously and painstakingly. While it is true that when aided by the Spirit, handbooks, manuals, and policies are, for that moment, not needed, it is equally true that personal familiarity with policy and mundane matters of administration is like having a "schoolmaster" who can bring us to a point of readiness for operational revelation in connection with our stewardship. The special and sometimes surprising finding of a route to resolution in human affairs is much more apt to come to one who has carefully and prayerfully studied the "map." Those who simply plunge into the wilderness with a "the Lord will provide" attitude will find that scholarship in things spiritual is both necessary and usually unhurried.

As is so often the case with ideas (the truly great ones are simple), so it is with communication: we are most effective when content is packaged simply and when our "delivery system" is also simple. The notice at railway crossings in America is a classic example: "Stop; look; listen." In both helping and communicating, these same three simple acts are also necessary.

One thing to be remembered is the harsh fact that no matter how much we improve our capacities to help others, (and we have a Christian obligation to do this), the mortal network of helpers is not always adequate to cover all contingencies—but even in such situations we are still not left alone:

"When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,

Help of the helpless, O abide with me!"

(H. F. Lyte.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] He has a job or task to accomplish and doesn't have the necessary skill. What are one's motives for helping others? What are one's motives for asking for help? We need to understand our own motives as far as possible. In Christian Herald, June 1973, p. 24.
