Neal A. Maxwell, Smallest Part ( 1973)

6

Some Parting Thoughts

"Men's and nations' finest hours consist of those moments when extraordinary challenge is met by extraordinary response. Hence in those darkest hours, we must light our individual candles rather than vying with others to call attention to the enveloping darkness. Our indignation about injustice should lead to illumination, for if it does not, we are only adding to the despair—and the moment of gravest danger is when there is so little light that darkness seems normal!" (Author.)

A recent physical ailment of shoulder and arm (which a doctor and therapist helped to explain) assisted me in appreciating the interconnectedness of tendons, muscles, and nerves. Some of the pain was not primary pain but was referred pain; discomfort at one point had no visible connection with pain elsewhere—and yet it did. No dramatic single applied treatment could be made at one point that would ease the pain: several things had to be done together with patience. So it often is with life's challenges and spiritual matters: there is far more interconnectedness than we like to admit between beliefs and behavior, between concepts and conduct, between causality and consequences. Pain in society that expresses itself in an arm of government may be referred pain from inflamed homes; numbness in values may disappear only when truth is more widely circulated; spasms in moral muscles will cease only when we approach morality with an appreciation for its multidimensional nature.

This book has briefly discussed fundamental, strategic things like truth and morality. For if an individual has no strategic fortress to defend, tactics do not matter much. If an individual does not see those about him as his brothers and sisters in perpetuity, then rather than saying, ". . . what is past my help is past my care," he may well indicate that those beyond his caring are beyond his helping, too.

A disciple will understand, too, that it is just as wrong to hurt himself as it is to hurt others, because we are so interdependent, for just as what we do to others affects self, so what we do to self affects others. Lewis gives us a useful clue that lies so close to most of us that we miss it:

"For a long time I used to think this a silly, straw-splitting distinction: how could you hate what a man did and not hate the man? But years later it occured to me that there was one man to whom I had been doing this all my life—namely myself. However much I might dislike my own cowardice or conceit or greed, I went on loving myself. There had never been the slightest difficulty about it. In fact the very reason why I hated the things was that I loved the man."

We do not have to accept sin in self or others in order to love. If we are willing to strive for righteousness that is based on truth and morality, we will find greater happiness as we manage better our time and tasks and the process of helping others.

To be sure, travail in some form is the lot of Christians as well as other mortals. If we can but believe with Paul that in the economy of God our challenges will not be "above that ye are able . . . to bear," and have faith in who we are, then, perhaps, the words of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus and of Nephi will speak to us:

"Nothing happens to any man that he is not formed by nature to bear." (Meditations II.)

"I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Nephi 3:7.)

Let the benediction of this book include the simple but eloquent language (to which Elder Gordon B. Hinckley has fortunately called our attention) of a pioneer girl who experienced tactical tragedy because of her belief in the strategic truth. Concerning the Mormon migration to western America in the mid-nineteenth century, she recalled:

"We traveled from fifteen to twenty-five miles a day . . . till we got to the Platte River. . . . We caught up with the handcart companies that day. We watched them cross the river. There were great lumps of ice floating down the river. It was bitter cold. The next morning there were fourteen dead. . . . We went back to camp and had our prayers and . . . sang "Come, Come, Ye Saints, No Toil Nor Labor Fear." I wondered what made my mother cry that night. . . . The next morning my little sister was born. It was the twenty-third of September. We named her Edith. She lived six weeks and died. . . . She was buried at the last crossing of the Sweetwater.

"When we arrived at Devils Gate, it was bitter cold. We left many of our things there. . . . My brother, James . . . was as well as the ever was when we want to bed that night. In the morning he was dead. . . .

"My feet were frozen; also my brother's and my sister's. It was nothing but snow. We could not drive the pegs in our tents. . . . We did not know what would become of us. Then one night a man came to our camp and told us . . . Brigham Young had sent men and teams to help us. . . . We sang songs; some danced, and some cried. . .

"My mother had never got well. . . . She died between the Little and Big Mountains. . . . She was 43 years of age. . . .

"We arrived in Salt Lake City nine o'clock at night the eleventh of December, 1856. Three out of the four that were living were frozen. My mother was dead in the wagon. . . .

"Early next morning Brigham Young came. . . . When he saw our condition, our feet frozen and our mother dead, tears rolled down his cheeks. . . .

"The doctor amputated my toe . . . while the sisters were dressing mother for her grave. . . . When my feet were fixed they carried us in to see our mother for the last time. . . . That afternoon she was buried. . . .

"I have thought often of my mother's words before we left England. 'Polly, I want to go to Zion while my children are small so they can be raised in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for I know this is the true church.'" (Autobiography of Mary Goble Pay, Church Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

While it is no longer necessary in the same sense to find a geographic Zion, the same uncomplaining dedication will be required of those who pursue discipleship. And in the midst of the dedication of those like the woman who recorded this poignant episode, or in the commitment of Paul, who could say, after his own ordeals, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith," there will often be some disparity between the disciple's capacity for appreciation and his powers of articulation.
