Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

3

"UNTO ALL NATIONS"

(Acts)

ROBERT J. MATTHEWS

The book of Acts covers a period of about thirty years and is a continuation of the Gospel of Luke. It is a sequel to the Gospels and was written by Luke to tell what the leaders of the Church did after Jesus' ascension into heaven, especially in missionary work among the Gentiles. (Acts 1:1-2.) Luke was a Gentile and was the natural one to write about missionary work among the Gentiles because he was there when it all began.

Acts is a dramatic and moving story about how the early church taught the gospel of Jesus Christ first to the Jews, next to the Samaritans, and then to the Gentiles. Considerable preparation, conditioning, and struggling were required of many Jewish members of the church before they were willing to accept Gentiles by virtue of the gospel without the law of Moses. Many Jewish Christians vigorously insisted that a Gentile had to become a Jew before he could become a Christian. The whole matter of gentile converts had to be dealt with not only in terms of doctrine but also in terms of culture and emotion.

Acts and the writings of Paul are firsthand accounts of how this was done gradually, a half step at a time, within the framework of the established authority of the priesthood and the administration of the church. We also get an insight into the cultural and emotional resistance that had to be overcome within the church in order for the gospel of Jesus Christ to be extended to the Gentiles, specifically to the Greeks and the Romans. The word gentiles means "the nations, and eventually came to be used to mean all those not of the house of Israel," the covenant people. (Bible dictionary, s.v. "gentile.") Genealogically, gentile refers to the descendants of Japheth, son of Noah. (Gen. 10:1-5.)

Since Luke had a specific purpose in writing about missionary work, he did not give an account of all of the Twelve, but he selected those things basic and necessary to the development of his particular theme. Thus, Acts 1 through 8 tells about calling a new member to the Quorum of the Twelve, extensive conversion among the Jews, appointing seven men to administer welfare activities, taking the gospel to the Samaritans and others, and the preaching of Peter and John. These early chapters are interesting by themselves, but they are especially important as a foundation for understanding properly the middle chapters (Acts 9-15), which deal primarily with the conversion of Paul and the entry of Gentiles into the Church, and the later chapters (Acts 16-28), which give an account of Paul's work as the Apostle of the Gentiles. The major portion of Acts deals with Paul and his travels and does not equally represent the labors of the original Twelve. Luke was writing, not a general church history, but a recitation of how the gospel was made available to the Gentiles. The Acts of the Apostles is not the title given to the work by Luke himself and is not an accurate description of the contents. The earliest manuscripts do not bear this title; the book was originally called simply Acts.

Some casually think of the book of Acts as history and of the Epistles as doctrine, but this classification is too simplistic. All of the books are rich in both history and doctrine: there is much doctrine in Acts and much history in the Epistles. These writings demonstrate the diligent efforts of the church leaders in proclaiming the gospel of Jesus Christ to both Jew and Gentile. The brethren were determined and enthusiastic, alive with the spirit of missionary work and the testimony of Jesus. They knew they had the most important message in the world for their day, and they proceeded to give it.

Jesus' Forty-day Ministry

During the forty-day period following his resurrection, the Savior visited frequently with the Twelve, "speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God" (Acts 1:3) and giving instructions concerning their ministry to "the uttermost part of the earth" (Acts 1:8), which they were to accomplish after receiving the Holy Ghost.

It is probable that during this forty-day period the church was organized into quorums and various offices. The four Gospels contain no reference to a complex church organization during Jesus' mortal ministry and tell only of a Quorum of the Twelve (Luke 6:12-16) and the seventy (Luke 10:1-17). A similar situation is seen with the church in this dispensation, in which the offices of bishop, seventy, patriarch, Quorum of the Twelve, and First Presidency were added years after the original organization.

Increased Missionary Effort

When the Twelve were sent on missions during the ministry of Jesus, they were instructed to go only to the people of Israel and were specifically told not to go among the Gentiles or to the Samaritans. (Matt. 10:5-6; 15:24. See also 3 Ne. 15:21-24.) Jesus ministered briefly among the Samaritans, but he primarily taught the Jews. (John 4:3-43.) As a result of this restricted missionary activity, the church at the time of Jesus' death was almost exclusively Jewish. After his resurrection, however, Jesus commanded the Twelve to go and "teach all nations" (Matt. 28:19), but they were to wait in Jerusalem until they were "baptized with the Holy Ghost," which would occur "not many days hence" (Acts 1:5). After receiving the Holy Ghost, they were to become "witnesses unto [Jesus] both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1:8.) This injunction is the key to the book of Acts and clearly forecasts an extension of the missionary effort and a change in policy regarding the Samaritans and the Gentiles. This change in program is not contradictory, but it indicates that the Lord has a timetable in offering the gospel to various people and races. Acts 1:8 sets the pattern for the entire book: the Jews were taught first, then the Samaritans, and finally the Gentiles.

When Matthias was appointed to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve created by the death of Judas Iscariot, Peter explained that the office of apostle is to be a special witness for the resurrection of Jesus Christ. This responsibility is conspicuous in the subsequent preaching of the Brethren. (See Acts 1:21-22; 2:32; 3:15; 4:33; 5:29-32.) Within a few months, thousands were brought into the church, notably on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2:41, 47) and in similar conversions through the preaching of the gospel by the Twelve (Acts 4:4; 6:7). Peter, who had been given the keys of the presidency, took the lead in all of these events. He indicated that most, if not all, of the Twelve had earlier been followers of John the Baptist. (Acts 1:21-22.) This discipleship is consistent with John's mission to prepare a people for Christ. It would be good economy for John to begin the preparation of those who would later become the Twelve by teaching them their first lessons in the gospel.

Although the membership of the Church was almost completely of Jewish lineage at the time of these early events, it is evident that a number of people of Gentile lineage soon came into the church. For example, the people who had gathered at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost were from sixteen surrounding provinces and countries and had come to Jerusalem to attend the feast. (Acts 2:6-12.) They are spoken of as being "Jews and proselytes." (Acts 2:10.) To understand this statement, we must know that a proselyte was a person of Gentile lineage who had joined the Jewish religion by obedience to the requirements of the law of Moses, including circumcision, baptism, sacrifice, and attending to the dietary laws. It is certain there were Gentile proselytes among the three thousand persons converted and baptized into the church on the day of Pentecost. They were among the first people of Gentile ancestry in the Christian church; but of course, they had earlier become Jews by religion. Later, when the seven were chosen to assist with the distribution of food, one of them is identified as "Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch." (Acts 6:5.) He was a Gentile who had accepted Judaism before he became a Christan. (See Bible dictionary, s.v. "proselyte".) There was another class of Gentile believers called "Godfearers." (Bible dictionary, s.v. "proselyte.") These, although they believed in the God of Israel, did not actually become Jews by ceremony, such as by circumcision. (See Acts 13:16, in which Paul addresses those who are "of Israel" and those "that fear God.")

When the Holy Ghost came upon the Twelve on the day of Pentecost, they spoke with new tongues. But even more significant, the Holy Ghost caused a great change in their hearts. This change is especially noticeable in Peter because we have more information about his activities than about the activities of the other members of the original Twelve. On the night prior to Jesus' crucifixion, Peter is characterized as fearful and hesitant. (John 18:15-27.) But after the day of Pentecost he is bold and forthright, not fearing the Jewish council, imprisonment, or death. (Acts 2-4.) This change can be attributed to the effect of the Holy Ghost, which purifies, emboldens, strengthens, comforts, and in every way prepares a servant of the Lord for the work that is required of him. He is born again.

Although many scriptures illustrate Peter's forthright witness of Jesus, perhaps the best known is his testimony before the Jewish Sanhedrin, when he was arrested for healing a lame man and for preaching the resurrection of the dead through Jesus. (Acts 4:8-12.) This witness was an official testimony of Peter and John to the highest Jewish court. Other aspects of Peter's testimony of Jesus include a strong emphasis that (1) Jesus is the Son of God, (2) he has been raised from the grave (Acts 2:24, 31-36; 3:13-15), (3) he was heir to the throne of David (Acts 2:29-32), (4) he was the prophet spoken of by Moses (Acts 3:20-24), and (5) God had made him both Lord and Christ (Acts 2:36; 5:29-32; 10:38-42).

The Administrative Organization Is Enlarged

As church membership increased, it became necessary to increase the number of administrative offices. One of these offices was established because of a problem in the distribution of food and clothing to the Grecian widows. (A Grecian was not a Greek but a Jew who spoke Greek. These Grecians were generally Jews of the Diaspora and were not indigenous to Jerusalem or Palestine.) Seven men were appointed to attend to the temporal needs of the church so that the Twelve might be free to attend to spiritual affairs. (Acts 6:1-6.) This action was not the same type of administrative action that occasioned the appointment of Matthias to the Twelve, for he filled a vacancy in a quorum already extant. The appointment of these seven was the creation of a new body with specific and limited jurisdiction under the Twelve. (Acts 6:2-3.)

Because seven men were appointed, some have wondered if their office is analogous to that of the seven Presidents of the First Quorum of the Seventy in the church today. This analogy appears unlikely since the seven were especially appointed to serve tables, whereas the calling of a seventy is to preach the gospel. It is probably only coincidental that this group consisted of seven men. At this point many editions of the Bible contain a heading identifying these seven men as deacons. This heading is an interpretation by the editors and translators and is not part of the biblical text itself. The English word deacon, however, comes from the Greek diakonos, meaning a servant or an assistant. Although these seven men were assistants, their calling should not be equated with the ordained office of deacon in the Aaronic Priesthood.

Luke does not give us an account of the work of these seven men in their assignment to serve tables. He does, however, follow the activities of two of the seven, Stephen and Philip, in preaching the gospel to nonmembers. It might be that Stephen and Philip were called to do missionary work in addition to the welfare assignment, or they may simply have been reassigned. In the church today, most calls to service are temporary, and a person is likely to serve in several different callings in the period of a few years. Thus, a man who was once Presiding Bishop might later become a member of the Twelve; one serving as a bishop might be called as a stake president. Nothing suggests that the seven men who were called and set apart to assist in the daily ministration of food were to remain in that capacity for the remainder of their lives. Had Stephen and Philip remained in their original callings, we might have heard nothing further of them since it was their preaching activities that caused Luke to provide a detailed account about them.

The Preaching of Stephen

Stephen is described as "a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 6:5) and "full of faith and power" (Acts 6:8). He performed miracles, and his hearers "were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake." (Acts 6:10.) He was taken before the Sanhedrin and was accused of having said that "Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place [Jerusalem and the temple], and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us." (Acts 6:14.) There was probably some substance in the charge, for Jesus had prophesied earlier of the destruction of Jerusalem and of the temple (Matt. 24) and had explained that the law of Moses would be fulfilled (Matt. 5:17). Stephen's enemies, however, made it appear that he was speaking "blasphemous words against Moses, and against God. . . . against this holy place, and the law." (Acts 6:11, 13.) His defense before the council was well-conceived. After making a short summary of the history of Israel from Abraham to David, Stephen pointed out that the true prophets had always been rejected by the people and that now the Son of God himself had been rejected by the children of those who had persecuted and killed the prophets. (Acts 7:51-52.) Stephen's words were so cutting that the people "gnashed on him with their teeth." (Acts 7:54.) When he declared that he could see a vision of Jesus on the right hand of God, they stoned him to death. (Acts 7:55-58.)

Under the law of Moses, stoning was the prescribed punishment for blasphemy. (Leviticus 24:11-16; Acts 6:11-13.) Stephen was stoned, not for his preaching, nor even for his scolding of the people, but for saying he had had a vision of the Father and the Son. He was stoned for proclaiming that he had received revelation. Stephen foreshadowed the work of Paul and is the earliest person mentioned in the New Testament to imply that the law of Moses was fulfilled and that its rites and customs should come to an end.

The Preaching of Philip

Luke states that at the same time as the death of Stephen there was a great persecution of Christians throughout Judea and Samaria. This scattering actually stimulated missionary activity, for "they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word." (Acts 8:4.)

Philip went to Samaria, where he preached the gospel of Jesus Christ, baptized, performed miracles, and brought many to a knowledge of Jesus. "When the apostles which were at Jerusalem [Peter and John] heard that Samaria had received the word of God" (Acts 8:14), they came from Jerusalem and laid hands on those whom Philip had baptized, giving them the Holy Ghost, and then they returned to Jerusalem (Acts 8:15-17, 25). Philip continued his missionary labors—not in Samaria (north of Jerusalem), but in the region of Gaza (south and west of Jerusalem). There he met, taught, and baptized an Ethiopian who "had come to Jerusalem for to worship." (Acts 8:27.) He was returning to his home, which was evidently in Ethiopia. This man was not of Israelite lineage but was a convert to Judaism, a proselyte.

Philip's activities represented a new dimension in the missionary work because the gospel was now being deliberately taken to other people—people who already had the law of Moses. Up to now, non-Jews were taught incidentally as part of the mission to the Jews; but now missionary work was being done overtly among non-Jewish people, fulfilling the second step of missionary work outlined in Acts 1:8.

The mission to the Samaritans, the offspring of Israelites intermarried with other people, was also a new dimension in the missionary outreach, for the Samaritans were a people who were partly of Israel but who were not Jewish. The Samaritans already had the law of Moses and practiced circumcision; thus, their entry into the church did not raise any new questions about the law. It was a half step toward taking the gospel to non-Israelite people.

The distinction between the powers of the Aaronic and the Melchizedek priesthoods is illustrated in Philip's preaching and baptizing at Samaria. But it was Peter and John, not Philip, who conferred the gift of the Holy Ghost. "In the case of Philip when he went down to Samaria, when he was under the spirit of Elias, he baptized both men and women. When Peter and John heard of it, they went down and laid hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. This shows the distinction between the two powers." [^1] This same difference was explained by John the Baptist when he restored the Aaronic Priesthood to Joseph Smith. (JS-H 1:70-72.)

The Conversion of Saul of Tarsus

Saul was born in Tarsus in Cilicia to Jewish parents of the tribe of Benjamin. Early in life he was sent to Jerusalem for schooling, where he studied under the famous Gamaliel, "a doctor of the law." (Acts 5:34.) Both Saul and Gamaliel were Pharisees. (Acts 22:3; Philip. 3:4-6.)

As a young man Saul persecuted the Christians from city to city and observed the stoning of Stephen at Jerusalem. Soon thereafter, when he was on his way from Jerusalem to Damascus with authority from the chief priest to bind and imprison all in that city who believed in Jesus, the Lord appeared to Saul in a vision. Saul both heard and saw the Savior and received instructions from him. (Acts 9.) The experience left Saul physically blind and very much humbled in spirit. The physical blindness was probably given to him as a symbol of his spiritual blindness.

Saul was later healed of his blindness and baptized by Ananias, a disciple at Damascus. While in Damascus Saul persuaded many at the synagogue to believe that Jesus was the Christ. His success angered the Jews, who by this time looked upon him as a traitor, and they sought to kill him. He then went into the deserts of Arabia for a time. (Gal. 1:17-18.)

Three years after his conversion, Saul went to Jerusalem (Gal. 1:17-18), but he found that the members of the church there were "afraid of him, and believed not that he was a disciple" (Acts 9:26). Fortunately, a notable disciple named Barnabas introduced him to the apostles and told them of his conversion and his preaching at Damascus. While in Jerusalem Saul conferred for fifteen days with Peter and James, the Lord's brother. The scriptures do not give an account of what they talked about. We assume that in addition to discussing the scriptures and points of doctrine, Saul must have asked many things about Jesus and his ministry. How thrilling to ask the chief apostle about when Jesus raised Lazarus from the dead, walked on water, opened the eyes of the blind, healed the sick, fed the five thousand, challenged the teachings of the Pharisees, suffered in the Garden of Gethsemane, and visited with the eleven for forty days following his resurrection. What an opportunity to ask James about Jesus as a boy, about Mary and Joseph and Jesus' other half-brothers and half-sisters, and about other things that James would know firsthand. Surely the diligent and intelligent Saul would, with propriety, ask these and other questions of two men who would be able to answer so well from personal experience.

Because some in Jerusalem were so opposed to Saul that "they went about to slay him" (Acts 9:29), the Brethren counseled him to return to his home city, Tarsus, which he did (Acts 9:30).

There is a discrepancy in the reports of Saul's vision on the road to Damascus. In Acts 9:7 we read that "the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man." In Acts 22:9, however, we read: "They that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me." The Joseph Smith Translation corrects the account in Acts 9 to agree with that in Acts 22. The men who were with Saul saw the light but they did not hear the voice, nor did they see the Lord. This version is surely the correct one, because both the message and the vision of the Lord were intended only for Saul. His companions saw the light, however, and knew for themselves that something unusual was taking place. They could testify to this event and thus help support Saul's declaration of it.

Ananias was probably the presiding officer of the church in Damascus. Since the Lord came to Ananias and instructed him to seek out Saul, teach him the gospel, and heal his blindness, Ananias must have been the person in charge of the church in that area. It is likely that he was the man Saul would have desired most to imprison. It is an ironic turn of events that the very disciple Saul wished to silence should become the one who taught, healed, and baptized him.

Though Saul had seen and talked with the glorified, resurrected Jesus and had been healed of his physical blindness by a servant of the Lord, he still had to be baptized of water for the remission of sins to remedy his spiritual blindness. This ordinance is required of all, no matter how many other spiritual experiences and manifestations they may have had. (See Acts 9:17-19; 22:12-16.)

Ananias was reluctant to go to Saul, even though the Lord had asked him to. But the Lord could see what Ananias could not: Saul's potential for future service. (Acts 9:13-16; cf. 1 Sam. 16:7.) The Lord could see what Saul was capable of becoming. Men and women are called to the service of the Lord, not as a reward for what they have already done, but for what they are able to do in the future if given the proper opportunity. The Lord said that Saul was a chosen vessel and would yet suffer much for the sake of Jesus. (Acts 9:10-16.) Saul was suited by temperament, training, lineage, and experience to serve the Lord at a time when the church was about to reach out to the Gentile world. He was a Jew by lineage, trained as a Pharisee, learned and strict in the law of Moses and the traditions of his fathers, a Roman citizen politically, acquainted with the ways of the Greeks, reared in the Gentile city of Tarsus, and skilled in both the Hebrew and Greek languages. Above all, he had a determined, dedicated soul. His greatest asset was a capacity to love both man and God. For the thirty years remaining to him, he gave the Lord his complete devotion.

The Prophet Joseph Smith described Saul as being "about five feet high; very dark hair; dark complexion; dark skin; large Roman nose; sharp face; small black eyes, penetrating as eternity; round shoulders; a whining voice, except when elevated, and then it almost resembled the roaring of a lion. He was a good orator, active and diligent, always employing himself in doing good to his fellow man." [^2]

Cornelius—Another New Dimension

Cornelius, a centurion of the Italian band, was a devout, God-fearing man with a good reputation among the Jews; but he was not a proselyte to Judaism. That is, he had not been circumcised. While fasting and praying, Cornelius was visited by an angel who told him to send for Peter, who would tell him what he should do. Cornelius was living in the seacoast town of Caesarea; Peter was visiting the city of Joppa about forty miles to the south. At this time Peter was given a vision in which he was commanded to kill and eat some beasts that were considered unclean under the Mosaic code. (Acts 10:10-16.) He did not at first know the meaning of the vision, but by subsequent events he came to recognize that the Lord was about to open the gospel to the Gentile nations.

Cornelius sent messengers to contact Peter, who, hearing of the situation and being instructed by the Spirit, started for Caesarea accompanied by six Jewish Christian brethren. When Peter arrived at Cornelius's home, he found a large gathering, for Cornelius "had called together his kinsmen and near friends." (Acts 10:24.) During the meeting the Holy Ghost came upon the Gentiles present, and they spoke in tongues. This astonished the Jewish Christian brethren, for they were amazed that the Holy Ghost would come upon uncircumcised Gentiles. Peter told the gathering that Gentiles were as eligible for baptism as were the Jews. (Acts 10:44-47.)

When Peter returned to Jerusalem, he was criticized by Jewish Christian brethren who had heard about his eating with Gentiles and keeping company with them. But Peter rehearsed the matter and was able to show them that by a number of revelations (the angel's visit to Cornelius, his own vision of the beasts, the voice of the Spirit to him, and the manifestation of the Holy Ghost at the meeting), the Lord had made it plain that the Gentiles should receive the gospel. We do not know the exact date of the events involving Cornelius, but Luke would probably have been acquainted with the proper chronology. He places the date of these events after the conversion of Saul but before a famine that came at about A.D. 44. Hence, the conversion of Cornelius would have been sometime between A.D. 35 and 43.

It was noted earlier that there were persons of Gentile lineage in the church as early as the day of Pentecost, several years before the conversion of Cornelius. What makes Cornelius and his household unique is that the earlier Gentiles were all proselytes to Judaism; Cornelius and his group were apparently the first nonproselytes and uncircumcised Gentiles to be baptized into the church.

Opening the door of the gospel to the Gentiles was another new dimension of missionary activity and the third step outlined in Acts 1:8. All previous conversions were of persons who held to the law of Moses and practiced circumcision. Even Paul's dramatic entrance into the church did not entail a new type of procedure, but Cornelius's entry signified a new day. It is important that it was Peter, the presiding officer of the church holding the keys of the kingdom, who began the proselytizing effort among the Gentiles. Only through the President of the Church does the Lord make such changes as the one involving Cornelius.

There is another significant feature of priesthood procedure in the account of Cornelius's conversion. The angel did not preach the gospel to Cornelius but directed him to Peter. The angel had sufficient knowledge, but it was not his calling to preach among mortals at that time. Peter was the living mortal administrator with the commission to take the gospel to men on the earth.

A similar circumstance is seen with the Lord's visit to Saul on the road to Damascus. He did not preach the gospel to Saul but told him it would be given to him in the city. Then the Lord sent Ananias to tend to it. Why did not Jesus do it? Because it is not the order of the priesthood for a heavenly being to preach to mortals when there is a qualified mortal with a priesthood commission able to do it. (This principle is alluded to in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus in Luke 16:19-31.) The Prophet Joseph Smith also taught this subject. [^3]

Many have supposed that Cornelius was an exception to the order of heaven—that he received the gift of the Holy Ghost before baptism, whereas all others had to wait until after baptism. The wording of Acts 10:45 leads to this misconception. The Prophet Joseph Smith said Cornelius was not an exception and did not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after his baptism. [^4]

Activity at Antioch: Conversion of the Gentiles

Although Peter had opened the door for the Gentiles to come into the Church, missionary work proceeded slowly among them at first. Many Christians went forth throughout the cities of Phenice, Cyprus, and Antioch "preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only." (Acts 11:19.) About three hundred miles north of Jerusalem, however, at Antioch in Syria, there was lively activity resulting in the conversion of a great number of Greeks. Hearing of this, the Brethren sent Barnabas from Jerusalem to Antioch to look into the matter. After assessing the situation, he soon brought Saul from nearby Tarsus to assist him.

There is a faulty translation in the King James Version of Acts 11:20. The text states that the missionaries at Antioch preached to the Grecians. A Grecian, however, is a Jew who speaks Greek, whereas the sense of verse 20 and the verses following call for the word Greek instead of Grecian. Most modern translations of the Bible use the word Greek. Grecian adds nothing to the story, for Grecians had been in the Church for years; but bringing Greeks into the Church was something new to write about.

Barnabas was probably selected for the assignment at Antioch because he was from Cyprus and, being from a Gentile environment, he would have common ground with Gentile converts. Likewise, his reason for wanting Saul to assist him would be that Saul's experience with Gentiles would make him an asset to the work.

Paul's First Missionary Journey

Saul and Barnabas stayed at Antioch "a whole year" and "taught much people." (Acts 11:26.) At about that time there came a great famine, and the saints in Judea were especially impoverished. The disciples at Antioch sent relief to the Judeans by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. The famine occurred in the days of Claudius Caesar, emperor from A.D. 41 to 54, and is generally thought to have occurred around A.D. 44. (Acts 11:25-30.) It had been ten years since the resurrection of Jesus, and the church had grown rapidly.

When Barnabas and Saul returned to Antioch from Jerusalem, they took John Mark (a nephew or cousin to Barnabas) with them. Shortly thereafter, having been called by revelation and set apart by the laying on of hands, they departed from Antioch and sailed to Cyprus and the cities of Galatia, part of the land known today as Turkey. Chief among the cities were Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe, which they visited in that order. The missionaries preached to Jews, proselytes, and Gentiles and encountered both strong opposition and outstanding success. At Cyprus, Saul (who at this point became known as Paul) found it necessary to smite an enemy with blindness in the name of the Lord. Paul knew well the stunning effect of blindness. At Antioch of Pisidia, the missionaries preached in the synagogue for at least two Sabbaths, and there "came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God." (Acts 13:44.) The Gentiles were pleased, but many of the Jews were not, and Paul and Barnabas were expelled from the city. A similar event occurred at Iconium. At Lystra, Paul and Barnabas were almost worshiped by the Gentiles, but the Jews from Antioch and Iconium stoned Paul and left him for dead. The strongest opposition in every city came from the unbelieving Jews because Paul taught that salvation came through Jesus Christ and not through the law of Moses. (Acts 13:23-42.)

The missionaries then visited the cities in reverse order and returned to Antioch of Syria. The mission had lasted perhaps a year, and the brethren had traveled over fourteen hundred miles—a small thing in our day, but a considerable accomplishment by sailboat and by foot through rough terrain. The probable date of the journey is A.D. 47-48.

There were two notable personal developments for Saul on this journey. The first is that while in Cyprus, Saul became known as Paul and is consistently called Paul thereafter. (Acts 13.) This renaming was probably because the Greek name Paulos would be more acceptable to Gentile audiences. The second development is that until the missionaries reached Cyprus, Barnabas seemed to be in charge. (Acts 11:30; 12:25; 13:2.) Beginning at Cyprus, Paul seemed to be the leader. (Acts 13:13, 50.) Most of the information about this first missionary journey centers around what Paul said and did; little is said about Barnabas.

On their first visit to each place, the missionaries preached and baptized. On the return journey, they "ordained elders in every church." (Acts 14:23.) These actions give a clue to missionary procedure and show that the church was organized with local priesthood leaders.

The Council at Jerusalem

The rapid influx of Gentile converts to Christianity in Antioch and in Galatia caused great concern among some of the Jewish members in the Jerusalem area. Paul and Barnabas had brought many Gentiles into the church by baptism, but they had not required circumcision. Certain men came to Antioch from Judea and taught (without authorization from the apostles) that "except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved." (Acts 15:1.) Paul and Barnabas had a great disputation with them, and the matter was finally taken to the apostles and elders at Jerusalem for settlement. Paul, Barnabas, and Titus, an uncircumcised Greek convert, went to Jerusalem for the scheduled council. There the strongest opposition to the Gentiles came from those members who had been Pharisees before becoming Christians. (Acts 15:5.) In the council Peter rehearsed his experience with Cornelius. The decision was that Gentile converts need not be circumcised but that they should "abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication." (Acts 15:29.) This decision was clearly a vindication of the doctrine taught by Paul and Barnabas and was in harmony with the teaching that the law of Moses had been fulfilled by Christ. The Brethren at Jerusalem wrote an epistle to the saints in the vicinity of Antioch and Cilicia informing them of the decision of the council, and they sent Judas and Silas to confirm by word of mouth what the council had decided.

The action of the Jerusalem council involved a significant policy decision. Ever since Cornelius's conversion (possibly ten years), Gentile converts had been joining the church without circumcision; now it was an officially announced and written declaration. The decision that circumcision was not required of Gentiles categorically meant that circumcision was not a requirement for salvation. This affirmation had been years in coming. The council was held about A.D. 49-50. Cornelius had been baptized (without circumcision) as many as ten years earlier, and a number of Gentiles had been similarly admitted into the church at Antioch and throughout Galatia. Yet the matter was agitated by some. The evidence of Stephen's enlightened preaching and Peter's unmistakable experience with Cornelius makes it clear that the Brethren understood that the law of Moses was fulfilled in Christ, but evidently many members of the church did not understand. It was a matter of doctrine, tradition, culture, and emotion. Even though the Brethren had settled the matter doctrinally a decade before, considerable time passed before the matter was settled culturally and emotionally in the minds of some Jewish Christians. Furthermore, at lest ten years after the council, many Jewish Christians in Jerusalem were still following the law of Moses. (Acts 21:17-25.)

The decision of the Jerusalem council was not definitive and did not forthrightly say that the law of Moses should be discontinued. Although it declared that Gentiles did not need circumcision for salvation, it did not say that Jewish members of the church need not circumcise their sons. This ambiguity was duly noted by the Jewish segment of the church in Jerusalem, for when Paul returned to Jerusalem at the end of his third journey (about A.D. 60), he found many members still "zealous of the law." (Acts 21:20.) They pointed out that the Jerusalem council directed its decree only to the Gentiles and not to the Jews. (Acts 21:17-25.) The reason for this ambiguity seems to be that the Brethren did not wish to overly offend Jewish members. They wanted the Gentiles to be properly received, but they did not want to lose the Jewish Christians in doing so.

The Nephites in America had a much better understanding of the temporary and preparatory nature of the law of Moses than did the Jewish Christians, particularly the Jews of Jerusalem. Both Nephi and Abinadi had explained that the law of Moses should cease to be practiced after Jesus had made the atonement. (See 2 Ne. 25:24-27; Mosiah 12:24-32; 16:14-15.) Furthermore, Jesus told the Nephites after his resurrection that the law of Moses was fulfilled. (See 3 Ne. 9:17; 12:46; 15:2-8.) But the church members in Jerusalem did not understand. They were too bound by tradition or, as Paul said it, driven by a zeal without knowledge (Rom. 10:2), which rendered them impervious to the concept.

This imperviousness happened in other matters also. When the Lord tried to tell the Jews of his other sheep, they were not receptive and therefore were denied the understanding they might have had. The receptive Nephites gained the understanding. (See 3 Ne. 15:16-24; 16:4.) Since circumcision was originally the token of the covenant that God made with Abraham, the Jews of New Testament times looked upon it as the badge of their faith. Failing to understand that the token, but not the covenant, was done away in Christ, they doggedly pursued the old custom and missed the spiritual advancement they could have had by listening to Jesus, Peter, Paul, and the others.

From Paul's epistle to the Galatians, we learn interesting historical facts about the Jerusalem council that are not recorded in Acts. The most significant of these are that the council took place about fourteen years after Paul's conversion; that Paul traveled with Barnabas to the council; that Titus, an uncircumcised Greek convert, accompanied them as something of a test case. By revelation they went to Jerusalem and conferred privately with the Brethren before the council began, just to make certain they were in agreement. Titus was not compelled to be circumcised. The brethren at Jerusalem gave Paul and Barnabas the "right hands of fellowship" and commissioned them to "go unto the heathen" in their ministry. (Gal. 2:9.) This commission possibly gave rise to Paul's later definition of himself as "the apostle of the Gentiles." (Rom. 11:13. See also 2 Tim. 1:11.) Paul and Barnabas were given a special injunction to remember the poor in their ministry, to which Paul replied that he had a natural tendency to do that anyway.

Although Paul was opposed to circumcision as essential for salvation and he emphatically declared that it was not needful for Titus to be circumcised (Gal. 2:1-3), soon after the Jerusalem council Paul circumcised the young Timothy before taking him as a companion on the second mission (Acts 16:1-3). This action provides an insight into Paul's thinking. He saw a difference between necessity and convenience. With Titus, the question was whether or not circumcision was essential for salvation; thus, Paul opposed it. With Timothy it was a matter of rendering him acceptable to the non-Christian Jews where he would do missionary work. Paul was willing to allow circumcision as a concession, but not as a requirement, so that the Jews would be willing to listen to Timothy teach the gospel. This distinction reveals something of Paul's mind and method.

Paul's Travels among the Cities of the Empire

The Jerusalem council was held in about A.D. 49-50. At that time Paul received a special commission to "go unto the heathen" to preach the gospel. (Gal. 2:9.) He refers to this commission in Romans 11:13: "For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles." He spent most of his time and effort traveling throughout the Roman Empire preaching the gospel to the Gentiles. He made three major journeys as a missionary and another journey from Jerusalem to Rome as a prisoner of the state. He also contemplated a journey to Spain, but we do not know if he was able to bring it about. (Rom. 15:24-28.)

The chief areas of Paul's missionary activity throughout the Empire include visits to large centers of population, such as Ephesus, Corinth, Athens, Troas, Philippi, Thessalonica, the cities of Galatia (Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra), Antioch of Syria, and Rome. In each area he was intent on teaching especially the Gentiles, but he did not neglect his Jewish brethren, and in every city where possible he entered the synagogues and taught. (Acts 17:1-2.) Furthermore, a synagogue would be the best place to find Gentile proselytes who were ready for the gospel. They would have Gentile relatives and friends; the referral system for Gentiles would begin at the Jewish synagogue.

Paul's three major missionary journeys and his trip to Rome are chronicled in the book of Acts as follows (the dates and distances are estimated):

At Athens, having seen the pagan altar inscribed "TO THE UNKNOWN GOD," Paul showed characteristic originality and ingenuity by using the occasion as a missionary opportunity: "Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you." (Acts 17:23.) His audience listened patiently until he declared the resurrection of the dead, and then they left, shaking their heads.

After his third missionary journey, Paul was brought before the Sanhedrin in Jerusalem, where he gave an official testimony of his divine call and the reality of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. (Acts 22- 23.) The council was in an uproar because of his mention of the Resurrection. Perhaps the most important factor of his defense was that Paul the Apostle, the special witness for Jesus Christ, was standing where Jesus, Peter, John, and Stephen had stood—bearing witness of the resurrection of Jesus to the highest court in all Jewry.

When the Roman governor Festus was unable to ascertain what charges the Jews brought against Paul, he imprisoned him at Caesarea for two years and finally brought him before King Agrippa for examination. There Paul gave a most eloquent recitation of his early life, conversion, missionary labors, and testimony of Jesus and the Resurrection. Agrippa was moved by the power of the message and was almost persuaded to be a Christian. (Acts 26:28.) In chains, Paul replied that he wished not only the king but all mankind could be even as he (Paul) was, "except these bonds." (Acts 26:29.) Thirty years earlier the Lord had told Ananias that Paul was a chosen vessel to carry his gospel before Jews and Gentiles and before kings and rulers. The book of Acts clearly demonstrates the fulfillment of that call. Not only did Paul speak to multitudes but he personally testified of Christ to the highest leaders of both Jews and Gentiles.

The book of Acts closes with Paul in custody in Rome. The book is unfinished and incomplete, but we subsequently learn from Paul's epistles to Timothy that Paul also stood before Caesar in Rome and taught the gospel of Jesus Christ. He did as he was bidden by the Lord: he testified of Jesus Christ and suffered much for the name of Jesus.

Summary

Acts is a stirring recitation of major missionary accomplishments first among the Jews, then among the Samaritans, and finally among the Gentiles. It shows the role of the president of the church in handling major changes in policy and church developments. Acts chronicles the outreach of the church in half steps as the leaders testified of the resurrection of Jesus, implemented the gospel, and struggled with the cultures, prejudices, and weaknesses of the people. It shows that in spite of opposition, the Lord had men he could depend on, men who dared to bring about his purposes in an uncooperative and unfriendly world.

Notes

Robert J. Matthews is professor of ancient scripture and dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, "What Think Ye of Salvation by Grace?" in Speeches of the Year, 1983-84 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1984), pp. 47-48.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 328.
[^3] Ibid., p. 162.
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 2:474. See also Bruce R. McConkie, "Households of Faith," Speeches of the Year, 1970 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University), December 1, 1970, pp. 5-6.
