Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

4

THE JUST SHALL LIVE BY FAITH

(Romans)

ROBERT L. MILLET

Few men in the history of Christianity will have as much lasting effect on humanity and the course of world events as Paul the Apostle. Given a new direction and a proper channel for his misplaced zeal, Saul of Tarsus underwent a remarkable conversion in the prime of life—from persecutor and enemy of Christians to protector and defender, the friend of God. Having been born of God, Paul forsook position, recognition, and rabbinical preparation for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ "and him crucified." (1 Cor. 2:2.) His message for over thirty years was plain but poignant: salvation was to be had only in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Messiah, who had "abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel." (2 Tim. 1:10.)

With fire in his bones, Paul was given an apostolic commission to make and confirm converts to the Christian way of life. An energetic and indefatigable apostle to the Gentiles, he baptized, ordained, and established individuals in churches throughout the Roman Empire. And it was by means of his epistles—his letters—to the saints scattered abroad that he was able to regulate and set in order the affairs of the churches under his supervision.

These epistles were regulatory letters and, for the most part, were written to handle specific problems or to clear up certain doctrinal misunderstandings. They were written to members of the church who had received and believed the fundamental doctrines of the faith. Because this was their purpose, Paul's epistles do not introduce or even expound upon theological backgrounds or foundations; such foundations were already firmly in place in the lives of those familiar with Paul's earlier teachings. Thus we could appropriately conclude that the Pauline Epistles are not, and were never intended to be, systematic theologies of the gospel of Jesus Christ; rather, they are what they were sent forth to be—regulatory correspondence to ensure a godly walk and conversation as well as orthodoxy in doctrine and practice among the members of the church. When read in conjunction with the book of Acts, the epistles help to supply valuable historical and doctrinal details in the work and ministry of Paul. There are truths and teachings in the Pauline Epistles that have universal value and are thus timeless in their import (for example, the Atonement and Christian conduct); these verities are as binding upon the Latter-day Saints as they were upon the former saints. There are other matters, however, that have specific, first-century reference, and whose focus—though timely and relevant to Paul's churches in a given day and culture—is not understood to be binding upon the restored church.

The epistles of Paul are organized in our present New Testament collection almost exclusively by length. The glaring exception is the Epistle to the Hebrews, whose authorship religious scholars of the world have debated for centuries; this epistle is thus placed at the end of the Pauline corpus. The Epistle to the Romans was written from Corinth during Paul's third missionary journey, in about A.D. 58-59. It is a masterpiece in Christian literature and contains a treasurehouse of understanding as to how the natural man may, through Christ, put off the old man of sin and rise unto a newness of life.

There are obviously many details that might be discussed in a more thorough treatment of the Epistle to the Romans. This chapter will concentrate briefly upon seven doctrinal matters put forward in this epistle and will attempt to penetrate to the core of the subjects to distill the essence of the principles.

Justification by Faith in Christ(Romans 3-4)

In his letter to the Romans, Paul spoke to his readers at length regarding the meaning and cost of Christian discipleship. Having come out of the world and forsaken the sins of Babylon, Christians—through the "gospel of God" (Rom. 1:1)—are expected to press forward in righteousness, put on Christ, and overcome that nature of things which so easily beset them before baptism. Paul, quoting the ancient prophet Habakkuk, assured the Roman saints that "the just shall live by faith." (Rom. 1:17.) In describing the Apostle's challenge to turn the hearts of Jewish and pagan investigators to the Lord, Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained:

On the one hand we are preaching to Jews who in their lost and fallen state have rejected their Messiah and who believe they are saved by the works and performances of the Mosaic law.

On the other hand we are preaching to pagans—Romans, Greeks, those in every nation—who know nothing whatever about the messianic word, or of the need for a Redeemer, or of the working out of the infinite and eternal atonement. They worship idols, the forces of nature, the heavenly bodies, or whatever suits their fancy. As with the Jews they assume that this or that sacrifice or appeasing act will please the deity of their choice and some vague and unspecified blessings will result.

Can either the Jews or the pagans be left to assume that the works they do will save them? Or must they forget their little groveling acts of petty worship, gain faith in Christ, and rely on the cleansing power of his blood for salvation?

They must be taught faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and to forsake their traditions and performances. Surely we must tell them they cannot be saved by the works they are doing, for man cannot save himself. Instead they must turn to Christ and rely on his merits and mercy and grace. [^1]

Paul stressed that salvation is through Christ and that the works of the Mosaic law and the works of the world are insufficient to justify man. For one thing, he stressed that the law of Moses was a system established to point out one's need for a redeemer. "By the deeds of the law," he wrote, "there shall no flesh be justified in his sight." Why should this be the case? The Apostle answered, "For by the law is the knowledge of sin." (Rom. 3:20.) One of the main functions of the law, with its myriad parts, was to demonstrate man's inability to live perfectly by every moral requirement. One translation of Romans 3:20 is as follows: "Indeed it is the straight edge of the Law which shows us how crooked we are." (Phillips Translation.) The law of Moses was given "to specify crimes" (Jerusalem Bible), that is, to establish right and wrong but also to delineate human limitations and to point up the need for divine assistance. "For all have sinned," Paul taught, "and come short of the glory of God; therefore being justified only by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus." (JST, Rom. 3:23-24.)

All persons, both Jews and Gentiles, must also come to the knowledge of the necessity but insufficiency of their own righteous actions. Their works, even the works of those within the Christian community, were to be viewed in perspective. "Therefore ye are justified of faith and works, through grace." (JST, Rom. 4:16.)

Christ as the Second Adam(Romans 5)

Chapter 5 of Romans is a descriptive comparison of, and contrast between, Adam and Jesus Christ. It is a treatise on the grand gift of God through his Son; the saints are encouraged to "joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement." (Rom. 5:11.) It was because of one man, Adam, that sin entered into the world: the Fall opened the door to mortality and made sin a reality. In addition, death, that universal commonality, entered upon the scene through the Fall, so that immortality might be offered by the Infinite One.

Even though Adam was a figure, or type, of the coming Messiah (Adam was the father of mortality; Christ, the father of immortality), yet their actions brought very different results. By the offense of Adam, all die; by the gift of Christ—the Atonement—all are made alive through the Resurrection, with those who believe and obey becoming the recipients of eternal life. Adam's act led to universal condemnation; Christ's gift opened the door to justification. Thus, even though one man's offense (Adam's fall) eventuated in universal death, Christ's abundant grace reigns over and conquers death in the end.

Walking in Newness of Life(Romans 6)

Paul explained to the Romans that through the ordinance of baptism we evidence our acceptance of the atoning sacrifice; through going into the "watery grave," we participate symbolically in the Lord's burial and his subsequent rise from the tomb.

The concept of spiritual rebirth finds its greatest meaning when we consider further implications of the typology of baptism in regard to birth. The godly anguish and suffering of the repentant soul is typical of the excruciating pain experienced by the laboring mother as birth of the infant is imminent. The water used in the baptismal proceedings is symbolic of a body of water in which dirtiness and uncleanness are washed away. (See Acts 22:16.) Paul taught that the process of being taken down into the water is representative of Christ's burial in the tomb for three days. The rise from the watery grave is in the likeness of the Master's rise to a newness of life in the resurrected state. Further, the innocent and pure state of the new candidate for the kingdom is like unto the wholly innocent newborn at birth. Baptism thus becomes the channel by which one is both legally initiated into the church and also spiritually initiated into the blessings of the atonement of Christ. "Now if we be dead with Christ," Paul taught, "we believe that we shall also live with him." (Rom. 6:8.)

Members of the church are counseled to yield not only their hearts but also their whole bodies to the cause of truth. By so centering our souls upon the Lord and his divine purposes, we truly become servants of righteousness and are entitled to the wages of our Master. In the end we will receive a reward from him whom we have chosen to follow. "For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:23.)

The Power of Christ to Change Lives(Romans 7)

Chapter 7 of Romans might well be labeled "Paul: Before and After." It might also be classified as an explanation of how the power of Christ may change people's lives. First of all, Paul encourages the saints to recognize and accept the fact that the Mosaic law has found its perfect fulfillment in Christ and, having realized its purposes, has been done away in the atoning sacrifice. Just as a woman is not being unfaithful to a deceased husband by remarrying, neither is modern Israel unfaithful to the law of Moses by transferring allegiance to the Savior. The saints are now "married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead." (Rom. 7:4.)

Gross misunderstanding is frequently the result of reading Romans 7 without the invaluable assistance of the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. In the King James Version, this chapter depicts Paul as a helpless and largely depraved individual who has little power to choose good and live according to the things of God. Paul is "carnal, sold under sin." (Rom. 7:14.) Further, those things that he knows he should do, he does not do; that which he should not do, he does. "Now then it is no more I that do it," he adds, "but sin that dwelleth in me." (Rom. 7:17.) It is not difficult to understand how unenlightened Christians from Augustine to Luther could concoct from Romans 7 the notion of man's total depravity, particularly if they disregarded other scriptural statements indicating otherwise.

It is to the modern seer, Joseph Smith, that we turn for profound insights—the restoration of plain and precious truths, either of content or of intent. The Joseph Smith Translation stresses man's inabilities to effect righteousness without Christ:

For we know that the commandment is spiritual; but when I was under the law, I was yet carnal, sold under sin.

But now I am spiritual; for that which I am commanded to do, I do; and that which I am commanded not to allow, I allow not.

For what I know is not right I would not do; for that which is sin, I hate. . . .

Now then, it is no more I that do sin; but I seek to subdue that sin which dwelleth in me.

For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing; for to will is present with me, but to perform that which is good I find not, only in Christ. (JST, Rom. 7:14-16, 18-19.)

Truly, through the Prophet Joseph's inspired revision of the Bible, we come to discern more clearly the character and accomplishments of Paul the Apostle.

Heirs of God, Joint Heirs with Christ(Romans 8)

Joseph Smith taught: "It is one thing to see the kingdom of God, and another thing to enter into it. We must have a change of heart to see the kingdom of God, and subscribe the articles of adoption to enter therein." [^2] Individuals are born again to see the kingdom of God (cf. John 3:3) when the influence of the Holy Ghost leads to a spiritual recognition of the true church on earth. Such persons are born again to enter the kingdom of God (cf. John 3:5) when they obey the Spirit's instructions and submit to the "articles of adoption," the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. Faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost are the articles of adoption in the sense that they provide the means whereby a person is initiated into the church and kingdom and also adopted into the family of the Lord Jesus Christ.

For many in the Christian world, being born again consists solely of a spiritual experience; for other groups, it is accomplished primarily through the sacraments of the church. Joseph Smith taught that truth lies in a road between these two extremes; he explained, simply, that "being born again, comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances." [^3]

New members labor to enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost and in doing so begin the processes of spiritual rebirth. As a child of Christ, each one is a member of a new family. They take upon themselves a new family surname and are expected to abide by the rules and regulations of the family. In addition, they are in line to inherit, receive, and possess all the benefits of family membership.

It was never intended, however, that we remain children (even children of Christ) forever. Rather, the Lord desires that the members of his family mature, that they advance and progress in spiritual stature to the point where they qualify as equal inheritors, or "joint-heirs" (Rom. 8:17), with Christ to all that the Father has. In speaking of those members of the Church who have been born again, Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "Then, if they press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, keeping the commandments and living by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, they qualify for celestial marriage, and this gives them power to become the sons of God, meaning the Father. They thus become joint-heirs with Christ who is his natural heir. Those who are sons of God in this sense are the ones who become gods in the world to come. (D&C 76:54-60)." [^4]

These doctrinal verities are touched upon beautifully by Paul in Romans 8. Those who give themselves over to the direction of the Spirit and thus gain the mind of God eventually become the sons and daughters of God. They qualify to call upon the Father in an endearing and intimate manner: "Abba, Father." (Rom. 8:15.) As indicated, they are heirs, "heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ." (Rom. 8:17; see also vv. 13-16.)

Further, those saints who are divinely led have the additional blessing of having the Holy Ghost prompt and direct their very prayers to the Father. "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." (Rom. 8:26.) [^5] In short, the Holy Ghost, who has the power to search the hearts of individuals, directs the adopted saint to pray for needs rather than desires; to pray for that which the Father would be pleased to grant. Through such a process, a person may come to a point not unlike the situation of Nephi, the son of Helaman, in the Book of Mormon. To such a person, the Lord can confidently decree: "All things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will." (Hel. 10:5.)

All of these rights and privileges are available because of the mediation of the Master, he who was called and prepared and foreordained to his messianic labors. Even though it is true that "unconditional election of individuals to eternal life was not taught by the Apostles," even so, "God did elect or predestinate, that all those who would be saved, should be saved in Christ Jesus." [^6]

In speaking of Christ's divine preparation, Paul taught: "For him [Christ] whom he [the Father] did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to his own image, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover, him whom he did predestinate, him he also called; and him whom he called, him he also sanctified; and him whom he sanctified, him he also glorified." (JST, Rom. 8:29-30.)

Christ and True Israel (Romans 9-11)

Chapters 9 through 11 of Romans provide a penetrating treatment of the subject, Who is Israel? Paul emphatically declared that despite the Jews' claims to preferred status because of lineal descent from Abraham, the true Israelite is the one who receives, by faith, Israel's promised Messiah. Circumcision or uncircumcision is an irrelevant matter; Jew or Gentile status is immaterial. What matters is whether the people of the first century A.D. (and all persons thereafter) turned their attention and affections toward Jesus of Nazareth, the God of ancient Israel and the Mediator of God's new covenant with mankind. In a very real sense, the Gentiles in Paul's day showed themselves more approved than did their Jewish counterparts. In Paul's words, the latter group, "which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness." Why? "Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law." (Rom. 9:31-32.) "For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth" (Rom. 10:4); that is to say, Christ is the grand end to all of the law's myriad means, the fulfillment of the law's messianic ordinances and prophecies, and the real religion behind and beyond centuries of ritual.

Paul assured his readers that according to the "election of grace," a remnant of Israel will be spared and will come to the knowledge of their God. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

This election of grace is a very fundamental, logical, and important part of God's dealings with men through the ages. To bring to pass the salvation of the greatest possible number of his spirit children the Lord, in general, sends the most righteous and worthy spirits to earth through the lineage of Abraham and Jacob. This course is a manifestation of his grace or in other words his love, mercy, and condescension toward his children.

This election to a chosen lineage is based on pre-existent worthiness and is thus made "according to the foreknowledge of God." (1 Pet. 1:2.) Those so grouped together during their mortal probation have more abundant opportunities to make and keep the covenants of salvation, a right which they earned by pre-existent devotion to the cause of righteousness. [^7]

Gentiles are warned against haughtiness in their newfound status as adopted children of the covenant; theirs should be a profound sense of gratitude to Israel for opening the door of salvation. It was, needless to say, through the Jews that "the oracles of God" had been given to the world. (Rom. 3:1-2.)

Paul could have been referring to the allegory of Zenos (see Jacob 5-6) when he alluded briefly to the status of Israel as the natural branches of the olive tree and to the status of the Gentiles as the wild branches. (See Rom. 11:16-24.) Through baptism and adoption, the Gentiles are grafted into the mother tree, the house of Israel; they "come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, their Lord and their Redeemer." (1 Ne. 10:14.) Through subsequent righteousness, they begin to produce precious fruit that is acceptable to the Lord of the vineyard. This phenomenon is a great mystery: "that blindness in part is happened to Israel [through her callousness and insensitivity to the principles and presence of the Messiah], until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in." (Rom. 11:25; cf. 16:25; Eph. 3:3-6; Jacob 4:18.) Such an understanding must be received by the Gentiles with gratitude and humility. "Be not highminded, but fear" is Paul's counsel to the Gentiles; "for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee." (Rom. 11:20-21.)

Newness of Life: A Process

Spiritual progress is a gradual thing, a process. We do well to understand that spiritual matters may be neither programmed nor rushed. Many of the dramatic events in the Book of Mormon and the New Testament that involve conversion or spiritual rebirth have a great effect upon the reader but represent an exception rather than a rule. Elder Bruce R. McConkie said:

We are born again when we die as pertaining to unrighteousness and when we live as pertaining to the things of the Spirit. But that doesn't happen in an instant, suddenly. That . . . is a process. Being born again is a gradual thing, except in a few isolated instances that are so miraculous they get written up in the scriptures. As far as the generality of the members of the Church are concerned, we are born again by degrees, and we are born again to added light and added knowledge and added desires for righteousness as we keep the commandments. [^8]

There are few instant Christians or sudden disciples. The Holy Ghost generally brings about meaningful change in process of time, and unusual spiritual moments are granted according to the divine discernment of Him who knows us best: they generally come to us "in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." (D&C 88:68.) Following baptism, our rise unto "newness of life" is frequently so gradual that we may not even notice the changes in our nature. But we must be appropriately patient with ourselves, knowing that the full measure of perfection will not be attained until we are well beyond the grave. Elder McConkie explained:

As members of the Church, if we chart a course leading to eternal life; if we begin the processes of spiritual rebirth, and are going in the right direction . . . then it is absolutely guaranteed—there is no question whatever about it—we shall gain eternal life. Even though we have spiritual rebirth ahead of us, perfection ahead of us, the full degree of sanctification ahead of us, if we chart a course and follow it to the best of our ability in this life, then when we go out of this life we'll continue in exactly that same course. We'll no longer be subject to the passions and the appetites of the flesh. We will have passed successfully the tests of this mortal probation and in due course we'll get the fulness of our Father's kingdom—and that means eternal life in his everlasting presence. [^9]

Each of us needs to strike the appropriate balance between divine discontent (a constant urge to advance and improve) and what Nephi called "a perfect brightness of hope." (2 Ne. 31:20.) The gospel of Jesus Christ is "the power of God unto salvation" (Rom. 1:16), a power that in time may transform a character and renew a nature. Through patiently applying the principles of that gospel, we may thus participate in the noblest of all endeavors—the renovation of each man and woman.

Notes

Robert L. Millet is assistant professor of ancient scripture and New Testament area coordinator at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Dissensions at Corinth (1:10-17) Fellowship of sinners (ch. 5) Women and worship (11:2-16) The exact chronology of Paul's life and the order of his epistles present many problems for the historian. For the most part this study follows the reconstruction found in Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983). See especially his discussion in pages 390-98.
[^2] The wisdom of the world and of the spirit Lawsuits and courts (6:1-8) The Lord's Supper (11:17-34) Richard Kugelman, "The First Letter to the Corinthians," in The Jerome Biblical Commentary: Volume II The New Testament, ed. Raymond E. Brown, Joseph A. Fitzmyer, and Roland E. Murphy (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1968), p. 254. The meaning of korinthiazomai "to practice fornication" was known in Classical Greek as well; see Aristophanes Fr. 354, Liddell, Scott, and Jones Greek-English Lexicon, p. 981.
[^3] Teachers (3:1-4:21) Sexual laxity (6:9-20) Spiritual gifts (ch. 12-14) Paul's arrival at Corinth can be dated with some confidence to A.D. 50 because of an inscription found at Delphi that dates the beginning of Gallio's term as governor of Achaia in A.D. 51. Assuming that Paul was brought before Gallio in the first year of his rule, we can count back a year and a half and date his arrival in A.D. 50. For a complete discussion, see Anderson, Understanding Paul, pp. 390-92.
[^4] Resurrection (ch. 15) Aquila and Priscilla may have been among those Jews expelled from Rome by edict of Claudius. Dated by some scholars to A.D. 49, this edict is attested by Suetonius, Claudius 25: "Since the Jews constantly made disturbances at the instigation of Chrestus (Christ?), he [Claudius] expelled them from Rome." See Hans Conzelmann, 1 Corinthians (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1975), p. 13.
[^5] 1 Corinthians 12:2 suggests that the majority of the members were Gentiles.
[^6] See discussion in David R. Seely, "From Unprofitable Servant to Beloved Brother in Christ," chapter 11 in this volume. See also William F. Orr and James A. Walther, 1 Corinthians, Anchor Bible Series 32 (Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Co., 1976), p. 143.
[^7] Kugelman, "The First Letter to the Corinthians," p. 256.
[^8] For further discussion of Paul and marriage see Anderson, Understanding Paul, pp. 24-25, 104-6.
[^9] Ibid., p. 106.
