Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

5

"IS CHRIST DIVIDED?"

UNITY OF THE SAINTS THROUGH CHARITY

(1, 2 Corinthians)

DAVID R. SEELY

Paul wrote his epistles to the Corinthians (1 and 2 Corinthians) from Ephesus and Macedonia in the spring and fall of the year A.D. 57, during his third mission to the Gentiles. [^1] He addressed them to the members of the church at Corinth, which Paul had helped to found during his first mission in A.D. 50, and they represent two of the earliest (preceded only perhaps by the epistles to the Thessalonians), longest, and most doctrinally replete of the Pauline epistles. Paul wrote the letter found in 1 Corinthians to address the serious dissensions and immorality that had arisen in his absence among the saints there, and to answer some of their questions about church doctrine and practice. Shortly thereafter he wrote the letter found in 2 Corinthians, expressing his joy in hearing that many of the saints had repented and continuing his plea for repentance directed to those who had not.

Historical Background

The ancient Greek city-state of Corinth was strategically located in the center of the isthmus joining northern Greece to the Peloponnesus on the south, and controlled the port to the west on the Corinthian Gulf and the port to the east on the Saronic Gulf. Because of its location, it was inseparably connected with the sea and derived its wealth primarily from shipping and trade. The isthmus was so narrow that small ships or cargoes headed west were often unloaded and dragged across the isthmus to continue their journey, thus avoiding the long journey around the Peloponnesus. Corinth heroically stood alongside her sister states of Athens and Sparta against the invasion from the east in the Persian Wars (490-478 B.C.); opposed the ensuing Athenian imperialism that resulted in the Peloponnesian War (431-404 B.C.); and, once again allied with her Greek sister city-states against the Spartan hegemony in the Corinthian War (395-387 B.C.). It is not surprising that eventually Corinth became the leader of the Achaian Confederacy, which came into conflict in the second century B.C. with the expanding military might of Rome. As a result of Roman supremacy and of Corinth's leading role in opposition, the Greek city was captured and burned by Rome in 146 B.C. and its citizens either killed or sold into slavery.

Therefore the Corinth of Paul's time was not the ancient Greek city but rather a Roman colony founded by decree of Julius Caesar in 44 B.C. on the ancient site, which had lain virtually desolate for more than a century. Its new population initially consisted of freedmen from Italy who were soon joined by Greeks and other foreigners, including many Jews, from the East. As in the past, Corinth quickly became an important center of industry and commerce, a center that in A.D. 27 became the capital of the Roman province of Achaia. Like any port city in ancient or modern times, Corinth at the time of Paul had the reputation of being cosmopolitan, worldly, and promiscuous—full of both philosophies and practices from every corner of the world. In fact, in Koine Greek "the verb korinthiazein, 'to live like a Corinthian' came to mean 'to live a dissolute life.'" [^2]

Chapter 18 of the book of Acts narrates Paul's founding of the first Christian community in Corinth. In the year A.D. 50, Paul left Athens, near the end of his missionary journey, and traveled to Corinth, where he stayed for a year and a half. (Acts 18:11.) [^3] At Corinth he met two Jewish converts, Aquila and his wife, Priscilla, who had recently been forced to leave Rome. [^4] Because they were tentmakers like himself, Paul moved in with them and presumably worked with them in their business while he pursued his missionary efforts there. While Acts 18:4 records that as he taught in the synagogue he "persuaded the Jews and the Greeks," it also implies that his message was more readily accepted by the Gentiles. (Acts 18:5-8.) [^5] Nevertheless, the mixture of Jews and Gentiles may have been a factor in the contentions that soon arose within the church at Corinth. After Silas and Timothy came from Macedonia, Paul moved in with a Gentile named Justus, and many Corinthians believed in his words and were baptized, including Crispus, the "chief ruler of the synagogue." (18:8.)

The social conditions at Corinth were volatile even during Paul's ministry there, and we can only imagine some of the circumstances faced by the early saints in the fledgling church after he left. When Gallio was made "deputy of Achaia" (A.D. 51-52), many of the Corinthian Jews, enraged at Paul for "persuad[ing] men to worship God contrary to the law" (18:13), took him before Gallio for judgment. Gallio refused to get involved and sent the people away, implying that it was not his duty to get involved in a religious squabble. (18:14-16.) Shortly thereafter Paul left with Priscilla and Aquila and went to Ephesus, then continued alone to Antioch and eventually Jerusalem. (18:21.) While he was in Jerusalem, "a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to Ephesus." (18:24.) After Aquila and Priscilla had "expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly" (18:26), Apollos was sent to Corinth with recommendations from "the brethren . . . exhorting the disciples there to receive him, . . . for he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ" (18:27-28).

Within a relatively short time, news came to Paul of moral laxity among the Corinthian saints. He refers in 1 Corinthians 5:9 to a letter, no longer extant, that he had written previously advising them "not to company with fornicators." Further disturbing news of dissension among the saints came by way of messengers from the house of Chloe (1 Cor. 1:11) and a later delegation (1 Cor. 16:17), as well as by way of a letter from the church at Corinth asking his counsel on several of the divisive issues involved (1 Cor. 7:1). These reports provided the impetus for the writing of 1 Corinthians in which Paul addressed the issue of dissension as well as answered the doctrinal questions. He wrote 1 Corinthians in the early summer of A.D. 57, shortly before Pentecost (1 Cor. 16:8); and as a follow-up to this letter, he sent Timothy to see that his counsel was heeded and that the situation in Corinth improved (1 Cor. 16:10-11). The evidence in 2 Corinthians suggests, however, that things got worse before they got better. There are allusions in 2 Corinthians (2:1; 12:14; and 13:1-2) to a "second visit" by Paul, calling the members of the church to repentance, and to a harsh letter (possibly a reference to 1 Corinthians) that finally brought some results. Probably in the fall of A.D. 57, Paul got word that many at Corinth, humbled by his concern through his letters, had repented. He responded by writing the letter preserved in 2 Corinthians to further express his love for the Corinthian saints, his joy that many had responded to his rebuke, and his continued concern for those who still remained rebellious.

We have only a portion of one side of the correspondence between Paul and the saints at Corinth. But from these two letters we can learn much about the challenges faced by the small community of early saints as they sought to learn their identity as Christians in the most worldly of worlds at Corinth. It is not surprising that these letters contain much of value for saints in the latter days as well: faced with many of the same challenges, learning to accept and to love one another and seeking to come out from Babylon to build up Zion.

1 Corinthians: Structure and Contents

An outline of the contents of 1 Corinthians demonstrates that what at first glance may appear to be a random collection of Paul's teachings is really a carefully constructed letter of four parts:

I. 1:1-9: Introduction

A. Salutation (1:1-3)

B. Thanksgiving/blessing (1:4-9)

II. Chapters 1 to 6: Paul's response to reports from the house of Chloe

A. Divisions in the church and a plea for unity

(1:10-4:21)

(1:18-2:16)

B. Immorality (chs. 5-6)

III. Chapters 7 to 15: Paul's response to questions posed by the church at Corinth

A. Marriage (ch. 7)

B. Idol sacrifices (8:1-11:1)

C. Divine worship and the new covenant (11:2-15:58)

a. Charity (ch. 13)

b. Speaking in tongues (ch. 14)

IV. Chapter 16: Conclusion

A. Exhortations (16:1-18)

B. Salutation (16:19-24)

The first part of the letter is a short formal introduction (1:1-9), followed by the body of the letter. The body of the letter is evenly divided between Paul's addressing the reports he had received from people in the house of Chloe of dissension and immorality that had crept into the church at Corinth (1:10-6:20), and his careful response to a series of questions written to him by the church (7:1) on subjects that had contributed to the contention in the church, such as marriage, idol sacrifices, the proper place of spiritual gifts, and the resurrection (chs. 7-15). The letter then ends with a formal conclusion. This study will systematically discuss each major section of the epistle, focusing on one of the major themes found throughout—unity among the saints.

I. Introduction: Salutation and Thanksgiving

Paul begins the first epistle to the Corinthians, just as he begins his other letters, with an introduction consisting of a salutation and a blessing (1:1-3) and a formal statement of thanksgiving (1:4-9). The salutation identifies Paul as the sender of the letter, writing in the official capacity of "an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God," along with Sosthenes, a fellow saint whom he identifies as "our brother." The letter is addressed to the members of the church at Corinth "that are sanctified in Christ Jesus." (1:2) The salutation also contains the blessing or benediction "Grace [charis] be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ." (1:3.) This formulaic blessing is a unique Christian innovation in which Paul appears to have combined a modified form of the common Greek greeting chairein with the common Hebrew greeting shalom. Combining a Greek and a Hebrew greeting may have been a deliberate attempt to reflect the new order of Christian society, which was also a combination of Gentiles and Jews, and the words grace and peace that come from "God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ" adequately summarize the gospel—the "good news"—of the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ. [^6]

Paul begins his thanksgiving by expressing gratitude for the grace of God that is given to the saints in Corinth by Jesus Christ. While gratefully acknowledging grace, a silent reference to the lack of harmony in Corinth and a foreshadowing of the rebuke that is to follow directly, is the conspicuous absence of any mention of its counterpart—peace. Paul then concentrates on the positive fruits of this grace that have been realized among the saints in Corinth—that they have been enriched in "all utterance, and in all knowledge" as well as spiritual gifts. (1:5, 7.) But once again the deafening silence regarding the fruits of faith, love, and righteousness lays the foundation for the body of the letter, which will deal with all of these expected fruits of the gospel. Ending on an optimistic note, he expresses his wish that in the end the saints may be able to stand "blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ" (1:8), silently implying that repentance will be necessary. The final verse of thanksgiving (1:9) forms a transition from the introduction to Paul's first concern—the lack of unity among the saints in Corinth. He carefully sets the stage for his appeal for love and unity, noting that it is God who has called them "into fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord."

II. Paul's Response to Reports from the House of Chloe

Divisions in the Church and a Plea for Unity

Paul immediately addresses one of the disturbing developments at Corinth he has been advised of and makes his plea: "Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ . . . that there be no divisions among you." (1:10.) He has carefully prepared the rhetoric of his message. In verse 1 he indicates the official nature of this letter by referring to his apostolic calling and stewardship over the church in Corinth. At the same time he tempers the harsh nature of his rebuke throughout the letter with the constant use of the term brethren, emphasizing the intimate relationship enjoyed as members of the church and the common fellowship and commitment they enjoy through Jesus Christ.

Apparently the contentions and divisions among the members of the church had been manifested by the division into groups, each proclaiming their allegiance to Paul, Apollos, or Cephas. Paul's response to this situation is a series of rhetorical questions: "Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" (1:13.) Once again Paul has prepared the rhetoric for his argument to follow, mentioning the name of Jesus Christ—who should be the sole focal point of allegiance—nine times in verses 1 through 9 before he explicitly reveals the subject of the letter in verse 10. At the same time he has carefully pointed out, as a model of oneness, the united efforts of God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ in administrating the gospel. (1:1, 3, 4, 9.)

It has been suggested that the factionalism in the church at Corinth may have been due in part to a division between the Greek (Gentile) and the Jewish members—the Greeks aligning themselves with Apollos, the charismatic and eloquent orator from Alexandria, and the Jews, originally from Syro-Palestine, identifying themselves with Cephas, the Apostle Peter. (John 1:42.) [^7] At the same time, those who had been greatly influenced by Paul during his ministry at Corinth cited him as their champion. Ironically, members of one group seem to have distinguished themselves by identifying their faction as "of Christ." Paul responds to the division between the Jews and the Greeks, making the point that "the preaching of the cross" which is the "wisdom of God" is foolishness to all of the wise men of the world—both Jew and Greek. (1:18-21.)

Paul describes the doctrine of "Christ crucified" as a "stumblingblock" to the Jews, who "require a sign" (1:22-23), perhaps a reference to the widespread Jewish expectation of a powerful Messiah who, rather than dying the death of a criminal, was to have brought them mighty acts of political deliverance. To the Greeks who seek wisdom, the crucified Christ is "foolishness." (1:22-23.) But to those who are "called" (become members of the church), "both Jews and Greeks," Christ is the "power of God, and the wisdom of God." (1:24.) Just as there are not many "wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble" found in the congregation at Corinth (1:26), so God has chosen everywhere "the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and . . . the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty" (1:27).

Paul's discussion about the wisdom of the world and the wisdom of the Spirit (1:18-2:16) is directed at the problem of dissension in the church. For members of the church to claim their allegiance to the wisdom of the Jews or Greeks, or to Apollos, Cephas, or even Paul, is to demonstrate a basic misunderstanding of the gospel message of Christ crucified, which transcends all worldly wisdom. Perhaps directing his remarks to those who claimed to be "of Paul," he points out that when he came, he purposely avoided preaching with "enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: that [one's] faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God." (2:4-5.) True conversion, he explains, comes when the natural man—who "receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him" (2:14)—is changed by the power of the Holy Ghost into a spiritual man, who is able to receive "the spirit which is of God," that he "might know the things that are freely given" to him by God (2:12).

The contention manifested at Corinth is a sure sign that the conversion process is not complete or is in a state of disintegration. In chapter 3 Paul describes the members of the church at Corinth as being in the infant stages of conversion—as "babes in Christ" who are "yet carnal: for . . . there is among [them] envying, and strife, and divisions." (3:1-3.) For this reason they must be fed with milk and not meat. (3:2.) Referring to the factionalism in the church, Paul proceeds to teach the proper place of teachers and other of the Lord's representatives on earth. Using a metaphor of agriculture, he explains: "I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase. Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour. For we are labourers together with God: ye are God's husbandry." (3:6-9.) He further compares the church to a building, the laborers as the builders, and the foundation as Jesus Christ. (3:9-15.) While each person's contribution to the building will be judged whether it be good or bad, the foundation—Christ—always remains secure, once again reminding the saints that true unity is achieved not by loyalty to each other but through the common bond of allegiance to God.

Paul concludes his teaching about the role of teachers with a summary of the whole principle: "Therefore let no man glory in men. For all things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's." (3:21-23.)

Immorality among the Saints

In chapters 5 and 6, Paul deals with the report of immorality among the saints in Corinth. He first turns to the specific charge of one who married his father's wife (stepmother). While in and of itself this constituted, according to the Mosaic law (Lev. 18:8; 20:11) and Roman law, the serious transgression of incest, Paul is first concerned with the fact that the members of the church have accepted such a transgressor. He notes that they are "puffed up" with pride in their sympathetic acceptance of this relationship when they should have "rather mourned" and cast such a transgressor out of their midst. (5:1-5.) Brotherhood and fellowship, so important to the unity of the saints, does not, however, extend to the casual acceptance of serious sin. He tells the Corinthian saints, "your glorying is not good." (5:6.)

Reversing the imagery of the well-known saying of Jesus (Matt. 13:33) comparing the kingdom of God, although small, to leaven that could influence the whole world for good, Paul compares the leaven to the one guilty of serious transgression who can also have a great influence on the whole: "Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened." (5:6-7.) In cases of serious sin, judgment is necessary and some may need to be cast out in order not to compromise the whole church.

At the same time that some saints are overly tolerant of those who deserve ecclesiastical discipline, others are taking their brothers to court to be judged by the unbelievers. (6:1-8.) Paul tells them that most of these disputes are over issues so trivial that they should be overlooked, and in the more serious cases they should be solved within the jurisdiction of the church. Finally he exhorts the Corinthians to refrain from any sexual immorality (6:9-20), because such sin defiles the body, which is the "temple of the Holy Ghost" (6:19).

III. Paul's Response to Questions Posed by the Corinthians

The introductory verses in chapters 7, 8, and 12 indicate that Paul's teachings in chapters 7 through 15 are responses to questions posed by the Corinthians in a previous letter concerning marriage (7); idol sacrifices (8-11:1); proper worship—including questions about the place of women, the administration of the sacrament and spiritual gifts (11:2-14:40); and the resurrection (15). Apparently many of these issues had contributed to the contention among the saints.

Questions on Marriage

The Joseph Smith Translation is an invaluable aid in helping us to understand the perplexing passage contained in chapter 7. On the surface it appears that Paul is telling the Corinthians that celibacy is preferable to marriage. The Joseph Smith Translation changes the first verse—"It is good for a man not to touch a woman"—into a statement made in the letter from the Corinthians rather than a statement of Paul, so that verses 2 through 5 are Paul's response to this statement. This simple clarification radically changes the tone of Paul's response, from the implication that the institution of marriage is a concession made to mortals in order to avoid immorality, to a defense of marriage as an essential part of the gospel, one in which sexual relations are essential.

Because Paul claims to have fulfilled all of the religious requirements of Jewish law (Philip. 3:6; Gal. 1:14), which included marriage, many scholars accept the fact that Paul must have been married at some point in his life. [^8] In light of this fact, Paul's apparently positive attitude toward celibacy and his disparagement of marriage in this passage seem odd. Paul himself says that these instructions are given not as doctrine ("commandment of the Lord") but as his own personal opinion (1 Cor. 7:25), and that his approval of the unmarried state is a temporary injunction "good for the present distress" (7:26). Many interpret this "distress" (Gr. anagke) to be reference to Paul's belief that the end of the world and the Second Coming were imminent and therefore the commandment of marriage was suspended for a time. This assumption, however, contradicts other statements made by Paul himself (i.e., 2 Thes. 2) where it is clear that he understood that the apostasy and restoration (and therefore a considerable period of time) must precede the return of the Savior. [^9]

The Joseph Smith Translation confirms that indeed this counsel is a temporary injunction and explains that it is given specifically to those who are involved in missionary work, rendering 1 Corinthians 7:29: "But I speak unto you who are called unto the ministry. For this I say, brethren, the time that remaineth is but short, that ye shall be sent forth unto the ministry. Even they who have wives, shall be as though they had none; for ye are called and chosen to do the Lord's work."

Sacrifice to Idols

The second question that Paul addresses is whether it is permissible for the saints to eat meat that had been sacrificed to idols. This was a problem commonly faced by Christians in many Hellenistic and Roman cities. Much of the meat sold in the markets had originally been sacrificial offerings in the local temples. Partially burned as offerings to the idols of the pagan deities, the remainder of the meat belonged to the priests, who sold and distributed it to the butchers in the area. Furthermore, festive meals held in the homes of pagans, often social events to which they would invite their Christian neighbors, consisted of sacrificial animals that were dedicated to the gods on those occasions.

In chapters 8 through 11:1, Paul discusses the complexities of this difficult issue and gives counsel. In chapter 8 he begins his argument, identifying the relevant principles. First he recognizes that many of the saints have the knowledge that there is only one God and that "an idol is nothing in the world" (8:4-6), and because of this knowledge they are not bothered by eating idol sacrifices. This knowledge, however, "puffeth up" and makes those who are not bothered proud. (8:1.) On the other hand, some saints do not enjoy this knowledge, and when they eat meat offered to idols, "their conscience being weak is defiled." (8:7.) Under the circumstances Paul reminds them that "charity edifieth." (8:1.) It is true that many have the knowledge that eating such meat neither commends nor condemns (8:8), but charity dictates that all members of the church be sensitive to those with less understanding, lest eating meat sacrificed to idols becomes "a stumblingblock to them that are weak" (8:9). The first priority is unity, and while the eating of idol sacrifice may be in and of itself of no import, if it affects the fellowship of the saints it is an important issue. Paul reminds the Corinthians, who would eat such meat in the pride of their knowledge, "When ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ." (8:12.)

Divine Worship and the New Covenant

Paul's teachings throughout the New Testament are enriched by frequent references to the Old Testament. In his letters he introduces direct quotations from scripture by the phrase "for it is written" (see, for example, the citation of Isa. 29:14 in 1 Cor. 1:19 and Isa. 64:4 in 2:9). At other times he makes general reference to Old Testament history and imagery to illustrate and more effectively communicate a point. When he makes his plea to the Corinthians to remain pure from the impure "leaven" of fornicators, he compares it to the fastidious purging of leaven necessary for the feast of Unleavened Bread associated with Passover. From a concrete example well understood from the law of Moses, he teaches the spiritual principle that the saints should "keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." (1 Cor. 5:7-8.)

In his appeal for chastity Paul declares, "Your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own." (6:19.) Giving the reason that the body belongs in part to deity, he cites the Old Testament imagery of God redeeming Israel from slavery by means of the miraculous deliverance at the Red Sea and quotes Exodus 15:16: "For ye are bought with a price." (1 Cor. 6:20.) The image, well known in Israel, is that they were slaves ransomed ("redeemed") from their owners in Egypt by a mighty act of divine intervention and thus became the property of their new master—the Lord God of Israel. [^10]

In chapter 10 Paul builds on this image of Israel's miraculous preservation in the wilderness and compares the present saints with their physical, if not spiritual (in the case of the Gentiles), forefathers. They, just as their forefathers, had been baptized, had "passed through the sea," and had eaten the spiritual meat and drink from the Rock that guided them in the wilderness. (10:1-4.) The author of the old covenant as well as the new is the same—Jesus Christ. Through this comparison, Paul shows the miracles in the desert to be a type of the new covenant instituted by Jesus, made efficacious through baptism and the partaking of the spiritual meat and drink of the sacrament. At the same time, the sacred history of the Old Testament is a foreshadowing of the mighty act of redemption, also a mighty act of divine intervention, accomplished by the Atonement. The point of Paul's masterful sermon is to remind the Corinthians of the darker side of the story of the children of Israel in the wilderness—that they, just as the covenant people of old, were capable of murmuring, idolatry, fornication, and blasphemy. (10:5-12.)

In chapters 12 through 14, Paul turns to the problem of spiritual gifts that had also apparently become a source of contention in the congregation at Corinth. He explains that while unity in the church depends on oneness of purpose, it does not dictate a uniformity of the different manifestations of the Spirit among the individual members. There is a diversity of gifts—wisdom, knowledge, faith, healing, working of miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, gift of tongues—all manifestations of the same Spirit. (12:4-10.) Paul illustrates his point with the apt metaphor of the body. Just as there are different offices and callings in the church (12:28-30), so the various spiritual gifts are given to different individuals and must function together like the different members of the human body. Every part of the body is necessary for its proper function, and no part can claim independence from any other part. While this metaphor delineates the proper function of spiritual gifts and offices in the church, at the same time it speaks to the larger issue of unity in the church. This oneness is characterized by a recognition of the importance of each individual as well as a spirit of mutual empathy that makes the saints as one—suffering and rejoicing with the fortunes of each member of the "body of Christ." (1 Cor. 12:27.) In short, unity is achieved only through love. Joseph Smith recognized this and quoted, in part, Paul's metaphor of the body in an editorial appearing in the April 2, 1842, issue of the Times and Seasons encouraging the Saints in their efforts to build the Nauvoo Temple:

The advancement of the cause of God and the building up of Zion is as much one man's business as another's. The only difference is, that one is called to fulfill one duty, and another another duty; "but if one member suffers, all the members suffer with it, and if one member is honored all the rest rejoice with it, and the eye cannot say to the ear, I have no need of thee, nor the head to the foot, I have no need of thee;" [1 Cor. 12:25-26] party feelings, separate interests, exclusive designs should be lost sight of in the one common cause, in the interest of the whole. [^11]

The crowning gift of the Spirit is charity—"the pure love of Christ" (Moro. 7:47)—which every Saint should seek (1 Cor. 14:1), for without love one is "as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal" (13:1). [^12] Paul's discourse on love has been immortalized in the traditional language of the King James Version and incorporated in part into the thirteenth Article of Faith. Echoing the themes found throughout the letter, Paul identifies charity as that which "rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things." (13:6-7.) Of all of the enduring gifts of God—faith, hope, and charity—"the greatest of these is charity." (13:13.) Charity is the answer to many of the problems among the saints in Corinth and is ultimately the most important ingredient in the unity of the church.

Resurrection in 1 Corinthians

The final problem that Paul addresses in 1 Corinthians is resurrection. In response to those who apparently doubt the resurrection of the dead (15:12), he presents to the Corinthians in chapter 15 one of the most explicit and complete doctrinal expositions of resurrection found anywhere in the New Testament. He reaffirms the historical reality of Christ's crucifixion and resurrection and cites the witnesses of the scriptures: Peter, the Twelve, and the five hundred. (15:3-7.) Last of all he adds his own personal witness, as the "least of the apostles" (15:8-9), that He who once was dead lives. The victory over death is universal, "for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (15:22.) But while resurrection will be enjoyed by all, Paul reminds the Corinthians that in the hereafter there are three glories to be gained (15:40-41), according to one's performance in mortality. The doctrine of resurrection and judgment reminds the saints that the relevance of Paul's letter transcends the cause of local tranquillity and extends to the eternities.

IV. Conclusion: Exhortations and Salutation

In conclusion, Paul mentions the collection for the poor saints in Palestine according to the request of the Jerusalem council. (Acts 11:29.) He then outlines his travel plans to pass through Macedonia and come to Corinth in the near future and adds a touching request in behalf of Timothy that "he may be with you without fear: for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do." (16:10.) His final exhortation sums up the whole letter: "Let all your things be done with charity." (16:14.)

Paul sends greetings from the churches of Asia, from Aquila and Priscilla, and from all of the brethren (16:19-20), and then adds his greeting "with [his] own hand," perhaps a reference to his own signature as in Colossians 4:18 and 2 Thessalonians 3:17. Just as he began his letter, Paul closes with the repetition of the name of the focal point of the gospel—the Lord Jesus Christ (three times in verses 22-24). He looks forward to the return of the resurrected Lord with the Aramaic exclamation Maran-atha (KJV) divided maran 'atha: "The Lord comes" (or "has come"), or marana'tha' "Come, O Lord!" (16:22), and seals the letter with the blessing of "the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ." Last but not least, he adds his personal prayer: "My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen." (16:24.)

2 Corinthians: Historical Background

The events leading up to the writing of 2 Corinthians must be reconstructed from scattered references in the epistles to the Corinthians. After writing 1 Corinthians in Ephesus in the early summer of A.D. 57 (shortly before Pentecost, 1 Cor. 16:8), Paul had sent Timothy to Corinth to see how his letter was received and if the situation there had improved (1 Cor. 16:10-11). Evidence in 2 Corinthians suggests that initially the situation in Corinth got worse rather than better. There are allusions to a second visit by Paul to Corinth (2 Cor. 2:1; 12:14; and 13:1-2) to help rectify the situation; this visit was made "in heaviness" (2 Cor. 2:1). There are also references to a stern letter (2 Cor. 2:4; 7:8-12) sent by Paul. These references may be to 1 Corinthians or perhaps to another letter, now lost, sent in the interim between 1 and 2 Corinthians. Eventually, after his visit the letter, whether 1 Corinthians or another letter, got positive results that Paul later acknowledged: "For though I made you sorry with a letter, . . . I perceive that the same epistle hath made you sorry." (2 Cor. 7:8.)

Meanwhile, still concerned about the Corinthians, Paul sent Titus and another unnamed brother to Corinth (2 Cor. 12:17-18), probably in connection with the collection for the Saints in Palestine. He had evidently prearranged to meet Titus returning from Corinth in Troas, and when Titus did not appear at Troas, he went to Macedonia to meet him there. (2 Cor. 2:12-13.) Paul's anxiety about the affairs at Corinth were finally relieved when Titus arrived and informed him that the Corinthians had mourned and repented of their past behavior. (2 Cor. 7:6-7.) Probably sometime in the fall of A.D. 57, the same year in which he had previously written 1 Corinthians, Paul wrote the epistle preserved in 2 Corinthians (actually his third or fourth letter to the Corinthians) to express his love and concern for the saints at Corinth and his relief and joy that they had responded to his rebuke, and to further encourage those who had remained rebellious to repent.

2 Corinthians: Structure and Contents

The epistle in 2 Corinthians is a personal and emotional letter and gives us much insight into the person of Paul. Most of the material in the letter is relevant to his relief at the repentance of many Corinthians and an explanation and defense of his ministry, directed toward those who have not yet repented. Thus there are passages reflecting many emotions, ranging from love and joy to impatience and anger. Perhaps due to its emotional nature, the letter does not contain a clear-cut structure as does 1 Corinthians, and much of the material can be divided many different ways. The following should be considered only as a general guide to the major themes and not as a comprehensive outline:

I. Introduction (1:1-14)

A. Salutation (1:1-2)

B. Thanksgiving/blessing (1:3-11)

II. Paul's apostolic ministry (1:15-9:15)

A. Paul's recent relations with the Church (1:15-2:13)

B. Paul's apostolic ministry (2:14-5:9)

C. Appeal for reconciliation (5:10-7:16)

D. The collection for Jerusalem (8:1-9:15)

III. Paul's defense of his ministry and call to repentance (10:1-13:10)

A. Initial appeal for obedience (10:1-18)

B. Paul replies to charges (11:1-12:13)

C. Concerns and warnings (12:14-13:10)

IV. Conclusion (13:11-14)

Following the formal introduction (1:1-14), the body of the letter is a loosely organized collection of material. In the first half of the letter Paul expresses his concern for the church at Corinth; explains his apostolic ministry; makes a plea for reconciliation of the saints with him, with each other, and with God; and makes an extended appeal for generous contributions to the relief fund to be sent to the saints in Palestine. (1:15-9:15.) In chapters 10 through 13 he makes a detailed defense of his apostolic calling and ministry, which had apparently been called into question by some in Corinth; replies to specific charges leveled at him; and ends with warnings directed at those who have not yet repented of their dissension. (10:1-13:10.) The letter ends, as do all of Paul's letters, with a formal conclusion and benediction. (13:11-14.)

I. Introduction: Salutation and Thanksgiving

It is apparent that Timothy had returned to Paul from Corinth, as he is included in Paul's salutation. (1:1-2.) As always in his letters, Paul addresses his thanksgiving to God, here referred to as "Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." (1:3.) The object of his gratitude is the comfort that proceeds from "the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort; who comforteth us in all our tribulation." (1:3-4.) Paul sees fit to remind the saints at Corinth of the great afflictions and sufferings he has been called to bear in his missionary labors in Asia. Even though his trials were so great that at one point he says he "despaired even of life" (1:8), he has trust in the "God which raiseth the dead" (1:9)—probably a reference to the detailed exposition he had already sent them on resurrection in 1 Corinthians 15. Paul has experienced God's deliverance from death as a mortal and furthermore has the assurance that God will ultimately deliver him when he finally does succumb to death in the future. Trust in God's eventual deliverance from suffering provides comfort to all persons faced with affliction. Referring to the trials endured by many of the saints at Corinth, Paul assures them that just as the victory over death was wrought by Christ through suffering, so too it is through suffering that mortals can receive consolation and salvation: "For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ." (1:5-7.)

II. Paul's Apostolic Ministry

The epistle in 2 Corinthians demonstrates that Paul understood well, as a priesthood leader, the eternal principle outlined by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Liberty Jail that "no power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; . . . reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved." (D&C 121:41-43.) In a previous letter, and by his visit, Paul had sharply rebuked the saints at Corinth. In this letter he assures them that the letter was written "out of much affliction and anguish of heart" and was motivated solely by the love he had for them. (2:4.) Throughout 2 Corinthians he expresses an increasing love and concern for them.

Increased love should be exercised by the saints toward each other as well. In 2:5-11 Paul refers to a specific individual who had apparently been involved in a serious act of rebellion and who had subsequently repented. He advises the saints that they ought to "forgive him [the individual] and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow." (2:7.) Paul is teaching the principle that after he, representing the church, has forgiven someone, the members of the congregation must also find the capacity to forgive as well, "lest Satan should get an advantage." (2:11.)

Paul rejoices in his missionary labors and describes them as a "triumph in Christ." (2:14.) In chapter 3 he eloquently teaches how the new covenant instituted by Christ replaces the old covenant embodied in the law of Moses. The ancient prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel had witnessed the destruction of Jerusalem and the scattering of her people, which were the disastrous results of centuries of Israel's disobedience (systematically recorded in the Old Testament) to the old covenant inscribed on tables of stone. They must have wondered if mortals could ever be obedient to the conditions of the covenant. To both of these prophets the Lord gave a vision of hope for the future. The Lord promised Jeremiah that he would establish a "new covenant," which he described thus: "I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts." He then echoed the same promise attached to the Mosaic covenant: "And [I] will be their God, and they shall be my people." (Jer. 31:31-33.) To Ezekiel came the word of the Lord couched in similar language: "I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh: that they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God." (Ezek. 11:19; 36:26-27.)

Paul declares that Christ has now established this new covenant, and, building on the prophetic metaphor of stone and flesh, he describes it as a covenant "written . . . not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart." (2 Cor. 3:3.) He adds that ultimately we look through Christ to God the Father, and it is he who has "made us able ministers of the new testament [covenant]." (3:4, 6.) [^13] Continuing with the imagery of stone and flesh, he teaches that the power of the new covenant—which makes it possible to fulfill its conditions—is found "not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." (3:6.)

Paul explains that the manifestation of God to Moses in the revelation of the old covenant was so glorious that Moses had to "put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look." (3:13.) He then expands on the Old Testament passage with an allegory, noting ironically that there remain some "even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their heart." (3:15.) In other words, they are not able to see that the old covenant was transitory ("the end of that which is abolished," 3:13), and the "vail is [now] done away in Christ." (3:14.) Whereas once the law was written with letters on stone, now it is the Spirit that giveth life, and "the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty"—freedom from the death of the old law. (3:17.)

Paul reveals that it is through the Spirit that the covenant becomes internalized (written on the "fleshy tables of the heart"), and this internalization is a process by which a mortal, gradually becoming more like God, can acquire the power to comprehend and obey the conditions of the new covenant: "But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." (3:18.)

In the next section Paul explains the reconciliation of fallen man to God made possible through the gospel. (5:11-7:16.) It is God who has initiated this process, "who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ." (5:18.) An individual who enters into the new covenant in Christ becomes a "new creature" (5:17), and the Atonement makes it possible for that person to repent of "trespasses" and achieve reconciliation with God the Father (5:19). Paul links this concept to his defense of the divine authority of his apostleship that follows, noting to the Corinthians: "Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us." (5:20.) His role as their priesthood leader has been a painful one, and he has had the unpleasant task of calling them to repentance. (7:4-9.) He is relieved that finally they have humbled themselves and that they "sorrowed to repentance." (7:9.) While God has initiated the possibility of reconciliation, it is the duty of the individual saints to finally make it effective in each of their lives by repentance and righteous living.

Years earlier, probably around A.D. 44, the council in Jerusalem had decided that a collection would be made from the church to send to the impoverished saints in Palestine, and Paul and Barnabas were put in charge of the project. (Acts 11:29-30.) Now, thirteen years later, Paul is still carrying out his assignment. Elsewhere in his epistles he briefly mentions this undertaking (1 Cor. 16:1-4; Rom. 15:24-29), but in chapters 8 and 9 in 2 Corinthians, he gives an extended exposition on the subject. He begins his long and tactful appeal for contributions from the Corinthians, giving as an example the generosity of the Macedonians, who, in spite of their "deep poverty," had given abundantly. (8:1-5.) He does not exert his authority to command compliance or prescribe an amount, but wishes it to be a voluntary contribution "to prove the sincerity" of their love. (8:8.) He gently attempts to persuade the Corinthians, comparing the gift to "the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich." (8:9.) Paul goes to great lengths to attest the honesty and trustworthiness of the two unnamed messengers that have been sent to collect the funds (8:16-9:5) and then enumerates the blessings promised for generosity (9:6-15). He compares charitable contributions to the law of the harvest, writing that "he which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully." (9:6.)

III. Paul's Defense of His Ministry and Call to Repentance

At the heart of the contention in the church at Corinth are those who have ridiculed Paul and denied his authority. His necessary response is a bold and vigorous defense of his apostolic authority and his work in the ministry. (10:1-13:10.) Some had accused him of "walk[ing] according to the flesh" (10:2), and others had ridiculed his physical appearance and his inelegant speech (10:10). Elsewhere in the same letter he addressed the charges that he was vacillating and indecisive. (2 Cor. 1:17-18; 4:1-2.)

Paul acknowledges that such charges against him, or any of the authorities of the church, are a sure sign of apostasy and therefore a very serious matter. He fears that the saints in Corinth will be beguiled by false apostles, "transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ" (11:13) and preaching another Christ, another spirit, and another gospel. The kingdom of God is a house of order, and to work in the ministry "a man must be called of God" (Article of Faith 5) for "not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth" (10:18).

In his defense, Paul gives a detailed account of his ministry. (11:1-12:13.) Employing the Old Testament imagery of Israel as the bride of the Lord, he portrays himself as the father (founder) of the church at Corinth who has betrothed his daughter (the church) as a chaste virgin to her husband, Christ. (11:2.) In spite of his weaknesses of body and speech—he sarcastically refers to himself as a fool—Paul has given all of his time and energy to building up the church. He recounts at length some of the great persecutions, dangers, and afflictions he has endured (11:24-33) as a witness to his dedication, and he also refers to the great visions and revelations he has enjoyed. (12:1-7.) He declares, "I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong." (12:10.)

Paul then solemnly warns the Saints, "Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds." (12:12.) He informs them of his plans for another visit (12:14-13:10), reminding them once again, "We do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying (12:19). He also includes a warning against continued dissension, contention, and immorality, expressing the fear that when he returns, he will find "debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults," and those who "have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have committed." (12:20-21.)

IV. Conclusion

Paul's conclusion to 2 Corinthians is short and to the point. Echoing the theme of love and unity well-known from his letter in 1 Corinthians, and with great emotion, he sums up the totality of his ministry to the Corinthians in the final four verses. He bids the Saints farewell and exhorts them, "Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you." (13:11.) Whereas Paul included salutations from numerous individuals in his conclusion to 1 Corinthians (16:19-20), here he sends the greetings of "all the saints," presumably the members of the church in Macedonia to whom he has "boasted" of the Corinthians. (See 2 Cor. 9:2.)

His final succinct benediction includes a special blessing from each member of the Godhead: "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen." (13:14.) He may have been describing a process here whereby through the atonement of Christ and the gift of love from God, the Saints may enjoy fellowship with each other and "communion with the Holy Ghost." [^14] In light of the emphasis on love, brotherhood, and unity prevalent in Paul's two surviving letters to the Corinthians, it is a fitting blessing for the saints there—and for that matter for the saints everywhere.

Joseph Smith, in a letter dated October 19, 1840, to the Twelve laboring in the mission field in England, repeated to the saints in the last dispensation the challenge of brotherhood and love that Paul gave to the infant church at Corinth. The Prophet reminded the Latter-day Saints of the importance of love and unity in the church. Like Paul, he looked back to the past, referring to the "oneness of heart" realized as Zion by the City of Enoch and prophesied by Ezekiel (11:19) as a sign of the new covenant. Then, quoting Paul from the opening verses of 1 Corinthians, the Prophet looked forward to the future return of the Savior:

Let the Saints remember that great things depend on their individual exertion, and that they are called to be co-workers with us and the Holy Spirit in accomplishing the great work of the last days; and in consideration of the extent, the blessings and glories of the same, let every selfish feeling be not only buried, but annihilated; and let love to God and man predominate, and reign triumphant in every mind, that their hearts may become like unto Enoch's of old, and comprehend all things, present, past and future, and "come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ." [1 Cor. 1:7.] [^15]

In the introductory section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord has revealed, just as Paul wrote to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 1:27), that "the weak things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty and strong ones." (D&C 1:19.) The source of the power of the weak is unity, and great is the power of love, brotherhood, and friendship through which the saints become one. Jesus taught that love among mortals is patterned after the divine and is an expected fruit of the gospel: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you. . . . By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:34-35.) The Lord has strongly reemphasized this injunction in our dispensation: "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.)

But the greater power of the weak is found in a higher oneness to which mortal unity is but a prerequisite. Jesus prayed to his Father for his disciples "that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in three, that they also may be one in us." (John 17:21.) As Latter-day Saints, we—just as the Corinthians—can begin to comprehend (though as mortals "we see through a glass, darkly"—1 Cor. 13:12) and receive that power which derives from this divine unity, by first loving each other.

Notes

David R. Seely is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The branches of the church that he and Barnabas had set up on their first missionary journey (i.e., Pisidia, Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe—all in the southern part of Galatia). There are laws given. (D&C 88:36.) If individuals give heed to the prescriptions of the law of Moses, then they are unwittingly nullifying the power of the gospel of Christ. (Gal. 5:4.) See Map no. 19 in LDS edition of the King James Version.
[^2] The people converted in the more northerly part of Galatia around the city of Ancyra, which served as its capital. There are certain bounds and conditions to all laws. (D&C 88:38.) Faith in Christ, not circumcision, is the power that promotes the proper kind of godly love. (Gal. 5:6.) The James referred to is not the brother of John whom Herod Agrippa I had killed earlier (Acts 12), but is thought to be the brother of Jesus who, tradition says, became the Bishop of Jerusalem. The latter may explain his key role in the Jerusalem Council. Compare James's role in giving the "sentence" (Acts 15:13-19) to instances in the history of the restored church when someone other than the person holding the directing power (i.e., the prophet) was appointed to act as president pro tem and presided over a conference. (Cf. History of the Church 4:146.)
[^3] All the organized branches and isolated members in the entire Roman province of Galatia. If we violate the conditions, we are no longer just—we are not justified. (D&C 88:39.) If the people continue to keep the law of Moses, the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ are of no effect in their lives. (Gal. 5:11.) Consult the chronology in the Bible Dictionary of the LDS edition of the King James Version or any other good Bible chronology.
[^4] All persons sin, break the law. (Rom. 3:10, 23; 1 Jn. 1:8; Eccl. 7:20.) Those who militantly teach false doctrines should be excommunicated. (Gal. 5:12.) A look at Map no. 2 in the back of the LDS edition of the King James Version reveals this area—the central portion of Asia Minor.
[^5] Payment must be made for broken law. (Alma 42:25.) The carnal desires of the flesh, to which all people are subject, work against the Spirit. (Gal. 5:17.) The need for circumcision was fulfilled by Christ. (Moro. 8:8.)
[^6] One can overcome the desires of the flesh by walking in the Spirit. (Gal. 5:16.) "The Greeks used 'justify' of judges giving a decision of innocence, so Paul testifies that God through Christ holds his children guiltless. So to 'justify' is to award forgiveness through Christ's sacrifice. One is justified when his sins are canceled through Christ's atonement." (Richard L. Anderson, Understanding Paul [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983], p. 159.)
[^7] The fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance. (Gal. 5:22-23.) Jesus commanded baptism for the remission of sins. (Acts 2:38.) Paul did not argue for baptism, since he was writing to those who were already baptized, but he does mention that it was through baptism that we become heirs to the promises of Abraham. (Gal. 3:27, 29.)
[^8] Exceptions to this will be found in Romans 7:22-23, 25; 8:2, 7.
[^9] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 13.
[^10] Ibid. Italics in original.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 2:470.
[^12] Spencer W. Kimball, Speeches of the Year, May 1954 (Provo: Brigham Young University Press), p. 4.
[^13] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965-75), 5:176.
[^14] Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, October 1972, p. 125.
[^15] McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary 2:463.
