Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

6

CONCERN, CORRECTION, AND COUNSEL FOR CONVERTS

(Galatians)

GEORGE A. HORTON, JR.

A missionary receives the latest report from his field of labor with excitement, hears about the spiritual growth of faithful converts with joy, and is pained with the news of inactivity and apostasy. Such feelings are borne of deep desires for the eternal welfare of loved ones in the bonds of the new and everlasting covenant. Converts become loved by missionaries as if they were members of their immediate families.

In his letter to the Galatians, the Apostle Paul poured out his heart and soul upon receiving disturbing reports that large numbers of his converts were being led astray by a few misguided members of the church who were attempting to dissuade them from the simple gospel by questioning Paul's authority and doctrine. The shocked apostle, worried and anxious to correct the false doctrines these vulnerable converts were being fed, wrote, "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel." (Gal. 1:6.) He assured them that the gospel he preached was true: "I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ." (Gal. 1:11-12.) He also defended his authority, reviewed the factors relating to his own conversion after having been a destroyer of the church (Gal. 1:13), and clarified his motives as bringing these converts, the Gentiles of Galatia, into the covenant of Abraham through baptism, to be one with the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (Gal. 3:27, 29).

The Galatian saints were no ordinary converts—they were among the first congregations of Gentiles successfully brought into the bonds of the gospel of Jesus Christ. They were pioneers in an antagonistic world and needed to be protected, instructed, nurtured, and preserved with all diligence so that spiritual wolves might not enter their flock. As with most missionaries, Paul condemned the bearers of the damnable heresies and distorted practices and raised the specter of judgment for those who would try to draw away fledgling saints by preaching perversions. (Gal. 1:7-9.)

No one can doubt the depth of love and devotion that Paul and his companions had shown for these converted Gentiles. He had been mercilessly beaten with thirty-nine stripes, threatened, stoned, cast out of the cities to which he was now addressing his letter, and dragged out of one city and left for dead. (2 Cor. 11:24-25; Acts 14:19.) The Jews in the synagogues of these Galatian cities had violently rejected him and his companions (Acts 13:45-46), but fortunately they had found some Gentiles who believed and responded to the message of salvation in the gospel of Jesus Christ (Acts 13:48). These new Christians had great faith the Lord could show forth signs and wonders, and they allowed the missionaries to perform priesthood healings among them. (Acts 14:8-10.) How could such converts fall prey so soon to those who would pull them from the precious gospel that had been delivered? What could prove such a successful wedge in turning hearts from pure love and faith in Christ?

Missionary Work in Galatia

Barnabas and Paul had not left the cities of Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch of Pisidia, [^1] the areas of their first journey, without "confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith." (Acts 14:22.) They had also "ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting" (Acts 14:23), and commended them to the Lord.

Shortly after their return to Antioch of Syria, "Certain men which came down from Judaea [to Antioch] taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved." (Acts 15:1.) This caused such an uproar that Paul and Barnabas quickly started for Jerusalem to meet with the apostles and elders over the issue. Part of the result was the great Jerusalem Council, which included Peter, James the Lord's brother, [^2] and other important leaders in the church. The question was not whether the Gentiles should receive the gospel, but whether it was also necessary for them to keep the performances of the law of Moses.

The debate was very emotional, and "there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed [i.e., they were now Christians], saying, That it was needful to circumcise them [Gentiles], and to command them to keep the law of Moses." (Acts 15:5.) Peter, Paul, and Barnabas shared a completely opposite view. Peter quickly explained what the Lord had done for such Gentiles as the household of Cornelius. He challenged, "Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke [the law of Moses] upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?" (Acts 15:10.) Paul and Barnabas supported Peter's view and declared the miracles God had permitted them to perform in behalf of the Gentiles. Finally, the decision was pronounced by James, the Lord's brother: the Gentile converts need not be troubled with the law of Moses in general. Exceptions noted had to do with "meats offered to idols, . . . blood, . . . things strangled, and . . . fornication," all of which they were to avoid. (Acts 15:29.)

If Paul's letter to the Galatians was written after the council, which it very likely was, it clearly demonstrates that the question debated in that important and unique meeting had not really been put to rest by the decision. Either way, certain Christian Jews, commonly called Judaizers, had followed Paul and Barnabas to the area of the Galatian branches and had begun to counteract their efforts with the Gentiles by persuading these converts that they must keep the law of Moses and be circumcised. The result was disastrous to the new and growing church, for apostasy from the pure and unadulterated gospel of Jesus Christ began to set in. (Gal. 1:6.) If unchecked, it would completely destroy the branches and nullify the hard-earned missionary success of Paul and his companions. It is in this context of anxious feelings that Paul penned his pointed and powerful letter to the Galatians.

Background on the Epistle

Knowing to whom and from where this letter was written is not critical in order for us to profit from its message. In fact, we know little that sheds light on these questions. Opinions continue to be sharply divided among scholars on such details.

The questions of when and from where this epistle was written are closely tied—the answer to one helps answer the other. Rome, Ephesus, Antioch of Syria, and Corinth have all been put forth as the point of its origin. The time of its writing could range from prior to the Jerusalem Council to the time of Paul's imprisonment in Rome. The answer one selects as the correct site will largely set the time for the letter. Therefore, the date could range from A.D. 48 to 58. [^3]

The question of those to whom Paul was writing is not as difficult because the general area is well defined. Only the details are unclear. Galatia in general was the territory in the central part of Asia Minor (modern Turkey) stretching in a northwesterly direction. [^4] In the north-central area was the ancient city of Ancyra (modern Ankara), and to the south were the cities visited on Paul's first missionary journey—Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch. Three possible answers to the question of exactly who were the objects of his writing include:

Those who subscribe to the idea that the letter was written to the branches organized on the first missionary journey generally believe that it was written from Antioch before the Jerusalem Council. Those who believe it was being written to the northern part, which includes the city of Ancyra, most often opt for Ephesus as its point of origin on the third missionary journey. A majority of those who believe it was sent to all the branches and members of the province generally set its origin in Corinth during the second or third missionary journey. A statement in the epistle itself may give some reason to believe that it was after a second visit: "Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first." (Gal. 4:13.) On the other hand, some believe that since Paul made a swing down and back on the first journey, the allusion is simply to the first visit on the same journey. One point that could be argued from the letter itself is that Paul would most likely have wanted it addressed to all of those who had been influenced by the Judaizers.

What Brought the Letter Forth?

Did a Gentile convert to the gospel of Jesus Christ have to be circumcised and live the law of Moses before he could be baptized unto salvation? (Acts 15:1.) Some who took an affirmative stand on this position were influential in the church. This was a time of transition, with the gospel being preached to the Gentiles for the first time after more than a millennium of the Jews looking at the Gentiles as inferior people—declared unclean by the standard of the law of Moses. The matter of how to treat Gentiles had not been completely clarified in the minds of many Christian Jews, particularly the Judaizers.

This is not surprising. Remember Peter's resistance to the idea of eating the unclean meats. In order to prepare him for the giving of the gospel to the Gentiles, the voice said, "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." (Acts 10:14-15.) Cornelius and his household were of the "unclean" Gentiles, but as a result of his vision Peter had a change of mind and proceeded to perform the baptisms. His reluctance reflected the feelings of many of the Jews when Gentiles were first converted to the church. The Jews were, after all, a "chosen" people; therefore, they concluded, they should have certain prerogatives. From this view, it was easy to assume that Gentiles could not come into the church without first submitting to the token of circumcision and living the sacred laws given by God to Moses.

The token of circumcision was not only part of the law of Moses that, they could mistakenly reason, preceded the gospel; it was also given as the token of the covenant of Abraham even before the law of Moses was instituted. Since converts were entering the covenant of Abraham through baptism (cf. Gal. 3:27, 29), it was easy to imagine that they must be circumcised first. [^5] Paul knew, however, that this was a damnable distortion of the truth, a perversion that, if not terminated, would cause the people to fall into serious apostasy. Such a false doctrine failed to fully recognize the saving power of Jesus Christ. It failed to recognize that the law was to help Israel rise to a point of faith in Christ such that the Atonement could become effective in their behalf. If they did not turn from the false teachings immediately, serious spiritual penalties would result. (Gal. 1:8-9.)

The Major Message of Galatians

The major message of the letter to the Galatians centers around the relationship of the law of Moses to the gospel and the importance of living so that one is worthy to receive the blessings that come from obedience to gospel covenants. Paul appeals for these converts to "stand fast . . . in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free." (Gal. 5:1.) He counsels them to throw off the shackles of false philosophies and practices and not to allow perverted understanding of the doctrines to cause distortions and apostasy. He warns that now that they have received the true light and way to salvation, they must not slip back and become entangled again in the sins of the flesh.

Issue One: How Is a Person Justified?

One of the main themes of this epistle has to do with justification. This theme is introduced by the statement "a man is not justified by the works of the law" (Gal. 2:16), a warning to those who were being swayed by the efforts of the Judaizers. Before pursuing the argument, let us consider the basic principle.

The Greek meaning underlying the word justify is to "make righteous," to declare righteous, or to acquit. [^6] The implication is that when individuals are justified, they are looked upon as righteous and as though they had committed no sin. In order for us to receive salvation, we must be able to stand before the Lord as just persons—as righteous individuals, not as sinners. To understand this concept, consider the following principles:

There are two ways that payment can be made.

Alternative One: The sinner can pay the penalty or make whatever restitution is possible. However, even after it is paid, the person is still looked upon as one who broke the law. In a spiritual sense, it is much the same when a person takes all the steps possible to repent and pay for his or her sins; that person is still one who broke the law and therefore is not seen as a righteous or completely just person. The only way one can be looked upon as totally just before the law is never to break the law. Only one person has ever qualified in this way: the Lord Jesus Christ, who is referred to as the Just One. It is only he who has been totally righteous and therefore is justified before the law. (Heb. 4:15.) Once we have fallen into transgression, "by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified" (Rom. 3:20), for the broken law then stands to bear testimony against us.

Alternative Two: The sinner can exercise faith in Jesus Christ, repent, be obedient to the covenant, and then be justified through the Atonement, "being justified only by [God's] grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus." (JST, Rom. 3:24.) "He cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam." (2 Ne. 9:21.) With his suffering, Christ brought about the plan of mercy so that the demands of justice can be met when we fully repent. (Alma 42:14-15.)

When we truly exercise faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repent, are baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, then the Spirit—the Holy Spirit of Promise—seals or ratifies these actions, and we are justified by having our guilt transferred to the Savior, who made an infinite atonement for us, [^7] and he now looks upon us again as just persons, or as having never committed sin. (D&C 58:42.) Having done the foregoing, under the influence of the Holy Ghost, we continue on in faithful observance of our covenants to sanctify our lives so that we will be prepared to enter into the celestial kingdom of God. (3 Ne. 27:19-20.)

Throughout Paul's writings, whenever he refers to "the law" it is almost always the law of Moses that is intended. [^8] Therefore, when he says that "a man is not justified by the works of the law," we can safely assume that he is referring to the works of the law of Moses. However, when we consider the principle of justification in the eyes of God, we will also realize that works alone in any context are not sufficient for a person to become justified. It takes the grace of Christ through the Atonement to bring this about "after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23.)

Since a person cannot, once he or she is a lawbreaker, be completely justified by the works of the law—the law of Moses or any other law—the second alternative is really the only practical way by which the Lord will look at us as justified. We desire to be justified; this goes beyond simply paying the penalty for our transgressions, for we want to be viewed as having never committed transgressions in the first place. "Therefore ye are justified of faith and works, through grace, to the end the promise [given to Abraham] might be sure to all the seed; not to them only who are of the law, but to them also who are of the faith of Abraham." (JST, Rom. 4:16.) This promise includes receiving the blessings of the gospel, priesthood, and life eternal. (Abr. 2:11.)

Does this mean that since we cannot be justified by works, works play no role? Certainly not, for we must do all that we are able to do in righteousness—do good works and keep the commandments; then the saving grace of the Lord takes over and does that which only he can do. Therefore it is important for us to keep the law, which for us is the law of the gospel. "That which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same. That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still." (D&C 88:34-35.)

Since the Galatian saints were now being hoodwinked by Judaizers into believing that they must keep the performances of the law of Moses, the apostle was very clear: "By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified." (Gal. 2:16.) Justification comes only by faith in Jesus Christ and keeping the commandments embodied in the gospel.

A subtle implication emerging out of this letter is that Abraham was justified. Paul says, "Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness." (Gal. 3:6.) This quotation from Genesis 15:6 is probably another way of saying that because of his faithfulness before the Lord, Abraham was justified. In so saying, the apostle tells the Galatians that it is not necessary to have the law of Moses in order to obtain salvation. In other words, Abraham was justified even before the law of Moses was instituted. So why should Christians allow themselves to believe they must also keep the law of Moses? (In order to pursue this question further, consider what is said in Galatians 3:7-8, 11, and 24, and Romans 4:1-9, and in the broader context of Romans 3:20-28; 4:25; 5:1-21.)

Issue Two: What Is the Relationship of the Law of Moses to the Covenant of Abraham?

Paul makes a major point about the historical relationship between "the covenant" of Abraham and "the law" of Moses. (Gal. 3:17.) There are things implicit in his reasoning that must be understood in order to more fully understand this message to the Galatians. Some of these he undoubtedly taught them on his first mission, plus he is writing out of a historical context wherein the Jews had been dealing with the law of Moses for generations.

Although it may not be totally clear in the biblical record, we have adequate scripture to show that the Abrahamic covenant, the new and everlasting covenant, and the fullness of the gospel are all one and the same. The fullness of the gospel is referred to in scripture as the "everlasting covenant." (D&C 1:22-23; 39:11; 45:9; 66:2; 101:39; 133:57.)

Abraham received the gospel by baptism, had the Melchizedek Priesthood conferred upon him, and entered into celestial marriage. [^9] This gave the prospect of eternal increase, and coupled with it was the promise that these same blessings would be available to his mortal posterity. (Abr. 2:6-11; D&C 132:29-50.) He was also taught that from his lineage would be born the Messiah and that his posterity would have other choice blessings pertaining to land and inheritance. (Abr. 2; Gen. 17; 22:15-18; Gal. 3.) Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "All of these promises lumped together are called the Abrahamic Covenant. This covenant was renewed with Isaac (Gen. 24:60; 26:1-4, 24) and again with Jacob. (Gen. 28; 35:9-13; 48:3-4.) Those portions of it which pertain to personal exaltation and eternal increase are renewed with each member of the house of Israel who enters the order of celestial marriage; through that order the participating parties become inheritors of all the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (D&C 132; Rom. 9:4; Gal. 3:4.)" [^10]

The covenant and its associated promises were first given to Adam and Eve. That being the case, it has sometimes been asked, "Why is it called the Abrahamic covenant?" It is probably safe to assume that the covenant was named after Abraham in a manner similar to how the "Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God" was named after Melchizedek. (D&C 107:3.) It too had been given long before Melchizedek's time. In Abraham's case, there was also something unique: the responsibility was specifically given to his posterity down through Isaac and Jacob to be the ministers of the covenant and its blessings to the rest of mankind. Today, only those who have received the gospel, entered into covenants, and become spiritually the children of Abraham have the responsibility to do missionary work and take the promises of Abraham to the rest of the Lord's children.

The relationship between the gospel, the covenant of Abraham, and the law of Moses is brought into much better focus for understanding the letter to the Galatians when we put the matter into a chronological context.

Paul makes passing reference in several of his letters to the fact that the gospel and the covenant of Abraham preceded the law of Moses. This point had been made generations earlier by Moses, who said, "The Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached." (Moses 5:58-59.)

Paul mentioned that Moses knew of Christ (Heb. 11:24-26), and it was Christ who was the "spiritual Rock" (1 Cor. 10:4) that Israel drank from in the wilderness. Also setting a context for the apostle's instruction to the Galatians is the mention in one of his epistles that the Israelites had the gospel preached to them: "For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them [Israelites]: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Heb. 4:2.)

With the foregoing in mind, it is easier to understand Paul's reference to Abraham: "And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed." (Gal. 3:8.) The Apostle to the Gentiles was thoroughly familiar with the details of Abraham's covenant with the Lord and is commenting out of that context. To the great patriarch the Lord said, "I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood. . . . And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father; . . . and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) . . . shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abr. 2:9-11.)

In summary, the gospel was available in each previous dispensation—with Adam (Moses 5:58), Enoch (Moses 6:52-62), Noah (Moses 8:19, 24), Abraham (Gal. 3:8), and Moses (Heb. 4:2)—but it was not equally well received by the people living in each of them. With this perspective, we return to Paul's letter.

Israel had the fullness of the gospel before the performances and ordinances of the law of Moses were given. (Heb. 3:14-19; 4:1-2.) This is dramatically demonstrated by what was on the second set of tablets received by Moses on the mount. "It shall not be according to the first [tablets], for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them." (JST, Ex. 34:1.) Because "they hardened their hearts and could not endure [the Lord's] presence," the Lord "took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also." (D&C 84:24-25.)

With this perspective we can appreciate Paul's assertion to the Galatians: "And this I say, that the covenant [of Abraham], that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law [of Moses], which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the promise [to Abraham] of none effect." (Gal. 3:17.) His statement raises a question which he first asks and then answers: "Wherefore then serveth the law? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made." (Gal. 3:19.) What seed? "Specifically, Christ, the preeminent descendant of Abraham; generally, all of the descendants of Abraham who keep the commandments, plus those adopted into his lineage, who are thus made heirs with his natural descendants." [^11] If the overzealous Judaizers would only receive this, the law of Moses would be in force for only a limited time.

By emphasizing that the law did not precede the gospel or Abrahamic covenant, does that mean that the law is in opposition to the covenant? "Is the law then against the promises of God [made to Abraham and his seed]?" (Gal. 3:21.) No, "the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith." (Gal. 3:24.) The schoolmaster (from the Greek word pedagogue) is a servant who has the care of children and of leading them to and from school or a tutor who is responsible for their training. This law was intended to teach the people that obedience would bring the people back to their faith in Christ so they could be justified through his atoning blood and stand innocent once again in the eyes of God.

In its time, Moses' law was a high standard compared to other worldly codes of law, but this law could not in itself save the people. As Abinadi said, "Salvation doth not come by the law alone." (Mosiah 13:28.) The children of Israel "were a stiffnecked people, quick to do iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their God; therefore there was a law given them . . . of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him." (Mosiah 13:29-30.) It pointed their souls to Christ. (Jacob 4:5.) Its intent was to "persuad[e] them to look forward unto the Messiah." (Jarom 1:11.) It served to "strengthen their faith in Christ." (Alma 25:16.)

It was intended that when Christ had offered the Great and Last Sacrifice, the performances, ordinances, and carnal commandments of the law would no longer be necessary—they would be fulfilled. (Matt. 5:18; 3 Ne. 15:4-5.) So also the token of circumcision would no longer be required. (Moro. 8:8.)

Since one who enters and is obedient to the Abrahamic covenant will receive eternal life, how do we enter? The Galatian saints were reminded, "As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. . . . And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:27, 29.) That is, whether we are children of Abraham by blood lineage or not, when we enter the waters of baptism and are baptized by an authorized bearer of the holy priesthood, we are adopted into the family of Abraham and become his spiritual sons and daughters and thus heirs of the covenant. Then we can go on and receive the covenants and ordinances that will qualify us to receive all of the blessings the Lord has in store for his faithful and obedient children.

It seems as if Paul is saying to the Galatians, "You do not have to be circumcised. You do not have to keep the law of Moses. If you have faith, repent, and are baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ, you have taken the fundamental steps toward being justified before the Lord. So exercise more faith, keep the commandments, and seek to be worthy of the higher ordinances that lead to salvation and exaltation in the celestial kingdom."

Paul uses an allegory to demonstrate the significant advantage of being subject to the gospel over being under the demands of the law of Moses. These two covenants are symbolically identified—the law is referred to as Mount Sinai and the covenant as the heavenly or new Jerusalem. From the first comes bondage under the law of performances and ordinances, but from the second comes freedom through the fullness of the gospel. The allegory is extended by using the family of Abraham. The Mosaic law is likened unto Ishmael, son of the bondwoman, who persecuted Isaac. The Abrahamic covenant is like the son of the freewoman, and consequently the first (the law of Moses) was cast out. But Sarah's son came under the Abrahamic covenant and was to inherit all the blessings promised to Abraham. (Gen. 26:1-4.)

So it is that those who are under the law of Moses cannot obtain their complete blessings until they rise to the heights of the gospel and accept the fullness of the covenant responsibilities, thereby qualifying for the fullness of the covenant's blessings. In essence, Paul is saying: "So, you foolish Galatians, do not take a step back and jeopardize your greatest blessings." After all, "in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love." (Gal. 5:6; 6:15.)

Although Paul does not discuss in this epistle the fact that the blood lineage of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob alone is not sufficient, he makes a major point of it in his letter to the Romans. One must enter into the covenant and bring forth the proper fruits of repentance and righteous living to be considered a child and heir of the promise. (Rom. 9:6-8; 11:17-25; cf. 2 Ne. 30:1-2.)

Freedom Does Not Give License

Having clarified the relationship between the law of Moses, the covenant of Abraham, and the gospel of Jesus Christ, Paul turns to the Galatians' manner of living as covenant Christians. It is true that the gospel frees them from the obligations of the law of Moses, but it also puts them under other, loftier responsibilities. Several related points are stressed in the latter part of this letter, including:

As we consider the works of the flesh apparent in the days of Paul, ponder on those that would have to be added to the list today. In his time there was "adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness [debauchery], idolatry [worshipping false gods], witchcraft [spiritualism], hatred, variance [quarreling], emulations [jealousies], wrath, strife [conflict], seditions, heresies [false doctrines], envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like." (Gal. 5:19-21.) Our list would have to include homosexuality, pornography, habit-forming harmful drugs, X-rated movies, embezzlement, and a multitude of other spiritually destructive practices. As Paul reminds the Galatians, those who indulge in such things are on a course that will lead them to damnation rather than salvation in the kingdom of God. (Gal. 5:21.)

True disciples of Christ must seek to put all forms of sin and transgression out of their lives and live worthy of the Spirit. It is the Spirit that helps us achieve justification and sanctification and leads to the presence of God.

Paul's Final Appeal

The missionary apostle's final soul-searching appeal is something like this: "Now, dear Galatian saints, brothers and sisters in the covenant, if there are those of you who have resisted the false doctrines and remained worthy of the Spirit, do not look down upon those who have been otherwise affected. Forgive those who are erring, lift them up, and help them overcome their faults. Do all you can for the less fortunate, and it will help you personally to resist temptation. Bear one another's burdens, and in this way you will be fulfilling some of the major requirements of the law of Christ." (See Gal. 6:1-5.)

Though we are free to choose what we will do, we cannot avoid the consequences of our own acts. "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7.) "One may do as he pleases, but he cannot evade responsibility. He may break laws, but he cannot avoid penalties. One gets away with nothing. No one ever gets anything for nothing. God is just." [^12] If we choose the lesser life, we will reap corruption and spiritual destruction. But if we choose the influence of the Spirit, we will reap life everlasting in the kingdom of God. We will each become a new creature—changed and spiritually born of God. (Gal. 6:15; cf. Alma 5:14.)

As a brother in Christ, Paul makes his final appeal in words like these: "Don't be like the Judaizers who are trying to get you to keep the law of Moses when they don't even keep the law themselves. It would be to your destruction, but being faithful in the cause of Christ will bring you peace and eternal life."

Commentary on Selected Verses

1:1. Since there is no direct mention of an apostolic ordination, the question has been raised as to whether Paul filled one of the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve or whether the title generally refers to something like that of the Seventy. It has been pointed out that he was called and set apart for his first mission by "prophets and teachers" (Acts 13:1-4) at Antioch without direct mention of a member of the Twelve. On the other hand, Paul and Barnabas are referred to as apostles more than once in Luke's account. (Cf. Acts 14:4, 14.) Paul also refers to his apostolic authority in the first verse of many of his epistles. (Rom. 1:1; 1 Cor. 1:1; 2 Cor. 1:1; Gal. 1:1; Eph. 1:1; Col. 1:1; 1 Tim. 1:1; 2 Tim. 1:1; Titus 1:1; compare 1 Pet. 1:1; 2 Pet. 1:1. See also 1 Cor. 9:1-2; 15:7-9.) The nature of his mission and associated events tend to support the fact that he was one of the Twelve. According to Joseph Fielding Smith, "This quorum was continued for a time, and other apostles were ordained when vacancies occurred." [^13] (Acts 1:23-26; 14:14; Gal. 1:1.)

1:3. "God the Father" refers to Elohim, the father of our spirits.

1:4. The reference to "evil world" means people who are not living in righteousness.

1:6-9. Harold B. Lee declared: "Today those warnings are just as applicable as they were in that day in which they were given. There are some as wolves among . . . our own membership, men are arising speaking perverse things. Now perverse means diverting from the right or correct, and being obstinate in the wrong, willfully, in order to draw the weak and unwary members of the Church away after them." [^14]

1:12. This revelation came at least in two ways: first, through the actual appearance of Jesus Christ to Paul on the road to Damascus (Acts 9:3-7; 22:6-11; 26:13-15), and second, by inspiration through the Holy Spirit, some of which apparently came during the time spent in Arabia (cf. vs. 17).

1:13. Compare Acts 9:1-2; 22:4, "I persecuted this way unto the death."

1:14. "Profited" means he was above others in advancing knowledge as one of the Pharisees, which Paul calls "the most straitest sect of our religion." (Acts 26:5.)

1:16. "Flesh and blood" here is an idiom meaning human being.

1:17. Two questions are raised: (1) Which area of Arabia is referred to and what was Paul's motivation? Though Damascus was now part of the Roman province of Syria, at the time of Paul it was under the influence of the Nabatean King Aretas IV who ruled from Petra—identified as Sela in Edom on map number 7 in the LDS edition of the King James Version. (Cf. 2 Cor. 11:32.) The reference could mean that this new convert simply went into the desert a short distance from Damascus, or, as some speculate, he may have gone as far as the red rock city of Petra itself. (2) Did he go to escape the opposition of the Jews of Damascus who would have been irate over his conversion, or did he go for contemplation and to commune with the Lord? Both reasons are likely. Surely he needed time to restructure his thinking about the relationship of the gospel of Jesus Christ with the law of Moses, which he had learned to venerate.

1:19. See note 2 at the end of the chapter.

1:21. Paul was originally from the city of Tarsus in the province of Cilicia, near the northeastern tip of the Mediterranean Sea.

2:2. The reference to fourteen years probably puts Paul, Barnabas, and Titus in Jerusalem at the time the Jerusalem Council settled the question of circumcision and the law of Moses. (Acts 15:4ff.) Another possibility might be the trip to bring provisions for the poor of Jerusalem (Acts 11:29-30), but the chapter is couched in the context of the controversy over circumcision, which suggests that the first possibility is more likely.

2:2. Paul's first discussion took place privately with some church leaders.

2:3. As an outgrowth of the private discussion, it was determined that Paul's companion Titus, a Greek who had joined the church, would not be compelled to be circumcised. This is in contrast to Paul's later willingness to have a Jewish disciple, Timothy, circumcised. Timothy's mother was a Jewess and his father a Greek, making Timothy Jewish under Jewish law. Paul did not suggest that Jews should give up circumcision, only that Gentiles need not practice it. (Acts 16:1-3.)

2:7. Paul was to preach to the Gentiles, while Peter would preach unto the Jews. (Cf. 2:9.) This decision came despite the fact that Peter, head of the church at this time, turned the key that opened the gospel to the Gentiles when he baptized the household of Cornelius. (Acts 10:44-48.)

2:9. This James is most likely the Lord's brother, since James the brother of John had been put to death by Herod Agrippa I sometime earlier. (Acts 12:1-2.) Cephas is the Aramaic name corresponding to the Greek Petros or Peter. (Cf. John 1:42.) "The right hands of fellowship" means he was extended complete acceptance and brotherhood with the saints and was entitled to all the privileges and blessings of the gospel with the community of believers.

2:11-12. Whether his assumption was right or wrong, Paul felt that Peter was hypocritical because Peter got up and left the Gentiles' table when Jews from Jerusalem entered the room where he was eating. This caused others to do the same. The action made Paul so angry that he "withstood him [Peter] to the face"—meaning Peter was scolded for his seeming hypocrisy.

2:14. Bruce R. McConkie declared: "Peter and Paul—both of whom were apostles, both of whom received revelations, saw angels, and were approved of the Lord, and both of whom shall inherit the fulness of the Father's kingdom—these same righteous and mighty preachers disagreed on a basic matter of church policy. Peter was the President of the Church; Paul, an apostle and Peter's junior in the Church hierarchy, was subject to the direction of the chief apostle. But Paul was right and Peter was wrong. Paul stood firm, determined that they should walk 'uprightly according to the truth of the gospel;' Peter temporized [i.e., temporarily compromised] for fear of offending Jewish semi-converts who still kept the law of Moses." [^15]

2:15. "Jews by nature" includes not only those born of the lineage of Judah, but also those who are politically Jews. (Acts 22:3.) Paul, for example, was of the lineage of Benjamin. (Philip. 3:5.)

2:19. Being "dead to the law" means that a person has nothing to do with it or is totally separated from it. [^16]

2:20. "Crucified with Christ" is a figurative way of saying he has crucified the old man of sin and lusts of the flesh and is now living a life of faith.

3:1. Brigham Young said: "Now, let us help the poor, bring them here, place them in good, comfortable circumstances, so that they can strut up and say, 'I guess I am somebody, and I ask no odds of the Lord.' O, fools! When I hear such expressions, or see such a disposition manifested, I think, 'O, foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you?' Who has turned your brain and made you believe that you are independent of that Being who bought you and all the human family on the earth? Who has instructed you to believe that God has nothing to do with us, that everything that is by the providence of chance, or no providence at all, and that man is all there is?" [^17]

3:3. According to Brigham Young, "We often find persons among us who have borne testimony of the truth of their religion by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, who again fall backwards into darkness by beginning to express doubts whether their religion be true or false; they begin to exchange the substance for the shadow—the reality for a phantom." [^18]

3:7. Those who exercise faith in Jesus Christ and enter the waters of baptism thereby enter into the Abrahamic covenant, becoming the children of Abraham by spiritual adoption, and are legal heirs to Abraham's blessings.

3:8. According to John Taylor, "It was through the medium of the Gospel that Abraham obtained these promises." [^19]

3:10. Review Deuteronomy 27:15-26.

3:13. "Being made a curse for us" means that Christ paid the penalty for sins, and symbolically the curse or punishment was laid on him.

3:14. The "blessing of Abraham" specifically refers to Abraham's being justified, and generally to the promises of the gospel, priesthood, posterity, and eternal life. (Cf. Abr. 2:11.)

3:16-29. Details are discussed in the body of the text.

3:17. The word disannul means the same thing as annul or make void.

3:19. "What, we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the Gospel?" the Prophet Joseph Smith asked. "It must be plain that it was added to the Gospel, since we learn that they had the Gospel preached to them." [^20]

3:28-29. "We witnessed something wonderful in the great Munich conference," President Harold B. Lee reported. "They were members from countries whose political differences had caused war and bloodshed. And yet we brought them all together in one congregation with a peaceful, sweet spirit! I was moved to repeat what the apostle Paul said to the Galatians. . . . I paraphrased to them, 'You are neither German, nor Austrian, nor French nor Italian, nor Dutch, nor Spanish, nor English, but you and I are all one in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^21]

4:1-2. The heir is the one who inherits something. Though the Jews were literal descendants of Abraham, as long as they were under the law of Moses they were likened unto an heir who had not yet come of age. That is, they could not exercise their prerogatives as the lord and master or executor of the estate until they came of age and entered into the covenant. As explained in the preceding verses, this was done by exercising faith in Jesus Christ and entering into the waters of baptism. It is in this sense that Paul said, "For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel: neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children. . . . They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed." (Rom. 9:6-8.) As in the allegory of the tame olive tree, only those branches which produce good fruit will be preserved; the others will be cut off and in their place will be grafted others (e.g., the Gentiles) who will produce good fruit.

4:4. Jesus' coming to earth made it the "fulness of the time," which should be distinguished from the "fulness of times" referring to the last dispensation.

4:5-6. The adoption of sons refers to becoming sons and daughters of God by being "born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters." (Mosiah 27:25.)

4:7. Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "As sons and daughters then, we are heirs of his kingdom and shall receive by right the fulness of the glory and be entitled to the great blessings and privileges which the Lord in his mercy has revealed to us in the dispensation of the fulness of times." [^22]

4:9. Cf. 5:1.

4:10. This is partly an allusion to the fasts, feasts, festivals, and other days of celebration under the law of Moses. It might be something like modern saints continuing to observe the feast of the Passover, which Christ fulfilled. (Cf. 1 Cor. 5:7.) To keep him in our remembrance, we partake of the emblems of his flesh and blood in the sacrament.

4:12. "Brethren, I beseech you to be perfect as I am perfect; for I am persuaded as ye have a knowledge of me, ye have not injured me at all by your sayings." (JST, Gal. 4:12.) Paul sees perfection in this life as a process of total dedication to living the commandments. The person who is so living is perfect. (Cf. Philip. 3:12-15.) In this regard we must distinguish between finite perfection here and now and the infinite perfection possible in the eternities to come. [^23]

4:13-15. Apparently Paul was suffering some kind of physical affliction, which he referred to as a "thorn in the flesh." (2 Cor. 12:7.) He told the Corinthians some would say that his "bodily presence is weak." (2 Cor. 10:10.) However, the Galatians received him wholeheartedly and would have given their all for him.

4:19. Paul is laboring with concern and anxiety for the spiritual rebirth of those converts who are going astray as a result of the false doctrine relating to the law of Moses.

4:20. The expression "desire . . . to change my voice," judging by what follows, means that Paul was now going to be very pointed and employ strong language in challenging the new views the Galatian saints were accepting from the Judaizers.

4:22-26. This is discussed in the text.

4:27. The allusion here is to Isaiah 54:1, which refers to the "married wife." The concept is that of Israel married to Jehovah by the covenant. The Gentiles are referred to as coming from the "desolate" wife. There is a lament that because of transgression and ignoring the covenant, the married wife cannot claim many true children—faithful in the covenant—but there are "many more children" coming from the wife (Gentiles) without any husband.

5:1. The gospel is the "perfect law of liberty." (Cf. James 1:25.)

5:3. That is, Paul has made himself responsible to keep all of the laws given to Moses.

5:7. That is, "You Galatians did so well when you first accepted the gospel, but what have you allowed to happen to you?"

5:13. That is, do not use your freedom from the demands of the law of Moses to exercise license in fulfilling the worldly lusts of the flesh.

5:14. It is ironic that the greatest commandments are to be found in the law of Moses: Deuteronomy 6:5, "Love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might" and Leviticus 19:18, "Love thy neighbour as thyself." If we would completely live the latter commandment, we would fulfill the spirit of the law of Moses.

5:16-26. David O. McKay explained: "Man is a dual being, and his life a plan of God. That is the first fundamental fact to keep in mind. Man has a natural body and a spiritual body. . . . Man's body, therefore, is but the tabernacle in which his spirit dwells. Too many, far too many, are prone to regard the body as the man, and consequently to direct their efforts to the gratifying of the body's pleasures, its appetites, its passions." [^24]

5:17. Brigham Young commented: "It is a constant warfare. . . . The spirit that is put into man is pure and holy; but through the power of evil with the flesh, it is more or less contaminated, influenced, seduced, and brought into bondage by the evil that exists upon the earth. Let the spirit overcome and come off conqueror." [^25]

6:1. Joseph Smith said, "I charged the Saints not to follow the example of the adversary in accusing the brethren, and said, 'If you do not accuse each other, God will not accuse you. If you have no accuser you will enter heaven, and if you will follow the revelations and instructions which God gives you through me, I will take you into heaven as my back load. If you will not accuse me, I will not accuse you. If you will throw a cloak of charity over my sins, I will over yours—for charity covereth a multitude of sins.'" [^26]

6:8. David O. McKay told the Saints: "In their yearning for a good time, young people are often tempted to indulge in the things which appeal only to the baser side of humanity, five of the most common of which are: First, vulgarity and obscenity; second, drinking and petting parties; third, unchastity; fourth, disloyalty; and fifth, irreverence." [^27]

6:9. We must never put a timetable on the Lord. He is the Lord of the harvest, and in due time he will pay those who labor. It is only for us to know that we will be fully rewarded for what we do.

6:12. In other words, "those who want to make a good impression want to compel you to be circumcised so that they will not have to suffer any persecution for their allegiance to Christ."

6:15. The important thing is to be born again. "Because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters." (Mosiah 5:7.)

6:17. This is probably an allusion to the scars in Paul's flesh received during persecution, attesting to his faithfulness in testifying to the gospel of Jesus Christ even in the face of death.

Notes

George A. Horton, Jr., is associate professor and chairman of the Department of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The four letters are Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon.
[^2] Ephesians, Colossians, and Philemon were written in the same time period and delivered by Paul's companion, Tychicus. (Eph. 6:21; Col. 4:7.) Colossians and Ephesians are much alike in subject matter and phraseology. Ephesians builds upon ideas found in Colossians, being an elaboration on the doctrine of Christ's preeminence and its implications for the saints. Some scholars believe that Ephesians is actually the missing letter to Laodicea. (Col. 4:16.) Others regard Ephesians as encyclical in nature. Paul headquartered in Ephesus for about three years (A.D. 54-57) and was well-known there. (Acts 19.) This fact has led some scholars to doubt that Ephesians was written to the church in Ephesus because the formality of the letter suggests a Gentile audience with whom Paul was personally unacquainted. (1:13, 15; 3:3-4.) However, his impersonal approach may simply reflect his concentration on the profound message he wanted to impress upon his Gentile audience.
[^3] Joseph Smith said: "Unconditional election of individuals to eternal life was not taught by the Apostles." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 189.)
[^4] In arguing that the early Christians believed in the doctrine of a premortal Church, Richard L. Anderson cited a portion of the "Shepherd of Hermas," dating from the late first century: "Hermas saw the Church in the form of an old woman because, as his messenger [an angel] said, 'She was created the first of all things. . . . God . . . created the world . . . and by his own wisdom and forethought created his holy Church . . . and everything is becoming level for his elect in order that he might keep for them the promise which he made with great glory and joy, if they keep the commandments of God, which they received in great faith.'" (Richard L. Anderson, Understanding Paul [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983], pp. 275-76.)
[^5] Predestinate appears only in Romans 8:29-30 and Ephesians 1:5, 11, where the more correct translation of the Greek proorizo would be foreordained. Some modern translations render the word destined, planned, chosen, and so forth. Foreordained, referring to Christ, appears but once in the King James version: 1 Peter 1:20.
[^6] The primary scriptural basis for this doctrine is Romans 9:8-21, wherein Paul defends the justice of God in choosing Jacob over Esau before either was born, and in granting or withholding mercy according to His will: "Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?" Throughout the entire chapter Paul is defending God's righteous sovereignty, his divine agency. He fails to explain that the determining factor in how God expresses his sovereignty is how men exercise their own agency both before and after entering mortality. While God wills as he pleases, he wills only that which is just. He can be merciful only when people are obedient—not because he is arbitrary, but because his commitment to eternal law dictates his varying responses regarding mankind. (See Alma 42:21-25.)
[^7] For an extended treatment of Paul's teachings on grace, see the writer's article, "Paul: Apostle of Grace," in the Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, January 1983, pp. 113-24.
[^8] The term Gentiles (meaning "the nations") first appears in connection with events following the Flood. (Gen. 10:5.) Israel, the covenant people, descend from Shem; Japheth's posterity constitute the Gentiles. Noah prophesied: "God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem." (Gen. 9:27.) The adoption of Gentiles into Israel via the gospel covenant fulfills this prophecy. (See Rom. 11:13-26; 1 Ne. 10:12-14.)
[^9] A dispensation is a presentation of saving truths and a delegation of priesthood authority to one or more agents of God and the labors accomplished by those so authorized.
[^10] Paul's seemingly reluctant approval of marriage in 1 Corinthians 7 must be understood in context. He was deeply concerned for the spiritual welfare of the Corinthians and believed, rightly or wrongly, that they were in a crisis situation calling for singleness of purpose. (1 Cor. 7:29-31.) His statements on the relationship of women vis-a-vis men (1 Tim. 2:9-15) probably reflect his awareness of growing tensions within Gentile branches over the ecclesiastical roles of women and, to an extent, his own cultural background. The Joseph Smith Translation of 1 Corinthians 7 also helps to show that the "present crisis" pertains to the pressing need for single-minded, unhindered missionaries.
[^11] For an extended treatment of this doctrine, see the writer's article, "The Doctrine of Godhood in the New Testament," The Principles of the Gospel in Practice (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book, 1985), pp. 21-37.
[^12] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 346-48.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 305-6.
[^14] Ibid., p. 298.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 149-50; 2 Pet. 1:10.
[^16] 16. Cf. Roman 6:2 and Clarke's The Holy Bible . . . with Commentary and Critical Notes, 6 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, n.d.), 6:76.
[^17] 17. Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 14:82.
[^18] 18. Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 10:266.
[^19] 19. John Taylor, Journal of Discourses 13:18.
[^20] 20. Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 60.
[^21] 21. Harold B. Lee, BYU Speeches of the Year, September 1973, pp. 102-3.
[^22] 22. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:38.
[^23] 23. Cf. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 512.
[^24] 24. David O. McKay, Improvement Era, September 1949, p. 558; emphasis added.
[^25] 25. Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 7:268.
[^26] 26. Joseph Smith, History of the Church 4:445.
[^27] 27. David O. McKay, Conference Report, April 1949, p. 14.
