Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

7

GRACE, MYSTERIES, AND EXALTATION

(Ephesians)

RODNEY TURNER

Paul was an aged man. (Philem. 1:9.) Nearly thirty years of unwearying labor for Christ had taken its toll. Now Paul was in Rome under house arrest, awaiting the outcome of his "appeal unto Caesar." (Acts 25:11.) Nero was that Caesar; he had ruled since A.D. 54 and would commit suicide in 68, about six years hence. Paul would precede him in a martyr's death by a year or two (66-67).

In the meantime there was still much to do: the Gentile branches scattered throughout Greece and Asia Minor continued to require the apostle's steadying hand. Persecution, heresy, apostasy, and apathy were ongoing realities; instruction and admonition had to be relentless. Such was the background of the so-called "letters of imprisonment" written by Paul from Rome between the years 61 and 62. [^1]

Of the four, and indeed of all of Paul's fourteen extant letters, Ephesians is the broadest in scope and loftiest in conception. [^2] It is Paul's climactic summation of the plan of salvation, encompassing the premortal, mortal, and postmortal estates of man. Time is swallowed up in eternity as Paul declares the ultimate destiny of the saints to be nothing less than union with the Father and the Son in nature, purpose, knowledge, power, glory, and dominion.

The theme of Ephesians is summed up in a famous passage: "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all." (Eph. 4:4-6.) The achievement of this oneness in all things via God's grace and man's foreordained works is the heart of the message of Ephesians.

While unity is the keyword in Ephesians, it is multifaceted in that it involves the unity of peoples, doctrines, ordinances, dispensations, the church, and, above all, the Father with his eternal family.

Saints Foreordained

Paul writes his fellow saints that the Father "hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world." (Eph. 1:4.) The truly converted among these Gentiles were part of the "elect of God" of whom Peter also spoke. (1 Pet. 1:2.) They were noble spirits who, because of their commitment to Christ in their premortal (first) estate, had been elected or foreordained by the Father to be identified with Christ's church on earth.

Having received the principles and ordinances of the gospel as administered by the earthly priesthood, they had been born again into the Father's heavenly family through Christ, his Firstborn Son. (Eph. 1:5, 11; compare D&C 93:22; Moses 6:59.) They possessed a "hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised [them] before the world began." (Titus 1:2.) Their election to membership in the Lord's church constituted a foreordained opportunity, not a guarantee, of realizing that hope. [^3]

In an earlier letter Paul had written: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Cor. 2:9.) Only the Holy Spirit, which "searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God" (1 Cor. 2:10), could make them known to any mortal. Therefore, Paul's prayer for the Gentile saints was that they would be granted "the spirit of wisdom and revelation" so that they might more fully comprehend the true nature of that eternal life for which they hoped. (Eph. 1:15-18.)

Like Israel itself (Deut. 32:8), Christ's church was first organized in the premortal world ages before it was organized on earth in the time of Adam. It is an eternal principle that all things are first organized in a spirit state before they are organized temporally. (D&C 29:30-32.)

The divine Shepherd knows his sheep "by name" and they "know his voice," having become familiar with it in the premortal world. (John 10:3-5, 27; compare Mosiah 26:21.) Jesus told the Jews: "I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine." (John 10:14; compare 1 Ne. 22:25.) He told the Nephites: "I know my sheep, and they are numbered." (3 Ne. 18:31.) And he told the Latter-day Saints: "You are of them that my Father hath given me; and none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost." (D&C 50:41-42; compare D&C 27:14; 84:63.) [^4] These souls were doubtless "given" to Christ in those councils of heaven in which they personally participated before the physical earth was organized. (Abr. 3:22.) All was done without compulsion on the Father's part; his children acted as free agents in the matter.

The doctrine of election has been distorted by post-apostolic Christians who, in affirming the immateriality of God, deny the premortal existence of man. Prominent theologians have compounded these errors with another: the doctrine of unconditional election or predestination to salvation or damnation as touted by Augustine in the fourth century and later by John Calvin in the sixteenth. [^5]

It is argued that since fallen man, being depraved, can be saved only by divine grace, it logically follows that God must determine who will and who will not partake of that grace. One is numbered among "God's elect," not for any act of his, but by God's good pleasure.

This view of predestination is based on a highly selective (sectarian) interpretation of Paul's theology. [^6] It robs God of his indispensable attribute of justice, rendering him a respecter of persons who, contrary to his own disavowals (Acts 10:34; D&C 1:35), overwhelms and negates the agency of mankind by his sovereign will. But what father worthy of the name would capriciously consign one child to wealth and another to poverty? (D&C 38:26.)

If God functions as an absolutely omnipotent being as viewed by sectarian religions (which he does not), he has the power to predestine all mankind to salvation. On what basis does he fail to do so? Why does he choose to damn anyone? Is he vindicated by his very omnipotence on the grounds that might makes right? If so, then he is not a god of law, justice, or mercy. (Alma 42:13, 21-25.) The god of Augustine and Calvin is not the God and Father of Jesus Christ.

Grace: The Power of God

The preeminence of Jesus Christ over all things in heaven and on earth (treated in Col. 1:16-18) is reemphasized in Ephesians. "The Father of glory" displayed his awesome power in resurrecting his Son, in exalting his Son above all things, and in appointing his Son the eternal head of the eternal church—the church of the Firstborn. (Eph. 1:17, 19-23; compare Heb. 12:23; D&C 76:94.)

The power that exalted the Son is the same power that exalts God's elect. Pertaining to man, this power may be summed up in one word: grace. The gospel, "the power of God unto salvation" (Rom. 1:16), is the message of grace. By pure grace, mankind is redeemed from physical death. (1 Cor. 15:20-23.) By qualified grace (grace by covenant), the sinner is redeemed from his sins; he is justified. (Rom. 5:1, 9; 6:3-11.)

What then is grace? The term is derived from the Greek charis, which suggests condescension, kindness, generosity, charity, and so forth. In essence, divine grace consists of divine works. Broadly speaking, grace is everything the Father and the Son do to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Pertaining to man's redemption, it is centered in the atonement and resurrection of Jesus Christ.

While Paul uses the term grace ninety-five times in his letters, his critical passages on the subject are found in Romans 3:23—4:5 and 11:5-6, Galatians 2:21, and, most especially, in Ephesians 2:8-10, which reads: "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them." [^7]

Paul's phrase "not of works" applies not only to the law of Moses, but to all human works, even gospel works. Ephesians was not written to Jews under the law, but to Gentiles who had been baptized into the organized church of Christ. Paul wanted these Gentiles who had come out of heathenism to understand that the ultimate source of their salvation was Jesus Christ, not their own efforts or those ordinances, however essential, they had received. Self-salvation, like self-righteousness, is an illusion for Jew and Gentile alike.

The Jew erred in seeking salvation wholly through the killing letter of a law centered in the symbolic blood of animals, rather than the redeeming blood of Christ. (2 Cor. 3:6-8; Heb. 8:12-14; 10:4.) The law, being Levitical or Aaronic in nature, was not enlivened by the gift and powers of the Holy Ghost. (See Gal. 3:2-5, 14; Jer. 31:31-34.) Then, too, the law had become irrelevant; it had been fulfilled by the One who had given it. (Matt. 5:17; Gal. 2:19; 3:13-25; 3 Ne. 15:4-5.)

Understanding this fact, Paul cites Abraham (a symbol of the saved Jew and Gentile) as one who obtained justification (remission of sins and salvation) seven centuries before the Mosaic code was instituted. (Gal. 3:5-18.) In Romans, Paul reasons that if righteousness is something men earn, then salvation is something God owes them: "Now to him who is justified by the law of works, is the reward reckoned, not of grace, but of debt." (JST, Rom. 4:4.)

But we can never put God in our debt no matter how diligently we labor. All are, at best, "unprofitable servants." (See Luke 17:7-10; Mosiah 2:21.) Consequently, eternal life is "the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7; compare 1 Ne. 15:36.) A gift is not a debt. Without the atonement and resurrection of Christ, all mankind would be forever lost to God, no matter how diligently his commandments were kept. (2 Ne. 9:5-9.)

The Book of Mormon is emphatic in declaring that salvation is centered in the redemptive mission of Christ. For example, Lehi told his son Jacob, "There is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah." (2 Ne. 2:8.) Nephi wrote that we must rely "wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save." (2 Ne. 31:19; see also Alma 24:10; Hel. 14:13; Moro. 6:4; D&C 3:20.) The combined good deeds of the entire human race cannot save a single soul, for we can no more save ourselves than we can create ourselves.

Foreordained Works

Yet the fact remains that no one is saved without prescribed works any more than he is saved exclusively by them. Salvation is a joint venture between the Savior and the sinner, a truth stated in simplicity by the prophet Nephi: "We labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23; emphasis added. Compare Moro. 10:32-33.)

However, in maximizing what Christ does, most Protestants (following Martin Luther's lead) minimize what man must do. The assumption seems to be that in freeing the Jews from the onerous demands of the hard-to-bear law of Moses (see Acts 15:10), Christ freed mankind from virtually all sacraments or ordinances. For example, baptism becomes purely symbolic, being but the "outward sign of an inward grace." Thus, what matters is not what one does, but what one believes. Faith in faith is the path to salvation. Works died on the cross.

But Paul writes: "We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them." (Eph. 2:10.) "Good works" are God's works, those he prescribed in mankind's first estate for mankind's salvation in the second, or mortal, estate. Contrary to Luther, James is not "an epistle full of straw." Paul saw eye to eye with James. The issue was never faith or works, but faith with works. (James 2:14-26.) More to the point, it was the right faith with the right works. The Father foreordained precisely what those right works would be for the elect when he chose the elect "before the foundation of the world." (Eph. 1:4.)

These mandated labors take several forms and consist of far more than those desirable virtues derived from Christian ethics. For as vital as these are—and they are essential—of themselves they cannot save anyone. If they were sufficient of themselves, there would be no need for apostles and prophets or for any doctrines and ordinances.

There isn't enough water in all of the baptismal fonts in eternity to put out the fires of damnation for an unrepentant sinner. (D&C 29:44;D&C 88:35.) Consequently, the repentance of one's sins and the acknowledgment of Christ as one's Savior is the minimum requirement for any measure of salvation. God cannot save us in our sins, only from them. (See Alma 11:36-37; Hel. 5:10.) Paul made it abundantly clear that practicing sinners would not be saved in the kingdom of God. (Eph. 5:3-6; 1 Cor. 6:9-10; Gal. 5:19-21.)

Those works designed to exalt us in the presence of the Father begin with faith, repentance, and baptism (Mark 16:15-16; Rom. 6:3-5), and "go on unto perfection" (Heb. 6:1) in those ordinances for the living and the dead performed in holy temples. They also include all that must be done "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, [and] for the edifying of the body of Christ." (Eph. 4:12.)

The critical distinction between a true saint and other religious people is not morality, but truth. The saint is prepared to receive and internalize all the light and truth, the intelligence, that God reveals. For the saint, revelation is an unbound book to which new pages are added as the Lord directs. (2 Ne. 29:11-12.) On the other hand, religionists in general (like the Shakers of Joseph Smith's day) "desire to know the truth in part, but not all." (D&C 49:2.)

Practicing Christians are good men and women. However, people can be good in the normative sense of the word without belonging to any religious organization. There are many good men and women who seldom, if ever, darken the doors of a church. However, the goal of the saint is not mere goodness, but holiness. (Eph. 4:24; 1 Thes. 4:7; Heb. 12:10.) And holiness requires not only personal morality but also those doctrines and ordinances through which the saint is endowed with the holiness of the Godhead. Only those who accept and live the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ can be sanctified. And only the sanctified are heirs of the celestial kingdom. (D&C 88:20-21.) They alone are members of the heavenly church, the Church of the Firstborn. They alone partake of a fullness of the grace of God.

Heirs of exaltation are those "who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true." (D&C 76:53.) Paul assured the elect Gentiles that they had been "sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest [guarantee] of our inheritance until the redemption [claiming] of the purchased possession." (Eph. 1:13-14; compare 2 Cor. 1:22; 5:5; D&C 88:3-4.) The "possession" is eternal life, "purchased" by the atonement.

The seal of the Holy Spirit is initially conditional in that its retention is dependent upon one's faithfulness. But as long as it remains unbroken, it is conclusive proof that we have God's immutable promise of eternal life (the "inheritance"). Our "hope of the glory of God" (Rom. 5:2) is fully justified.

The Church on Earth

The chief cornerstone of the church is Jesus Christ; apostles and prophets constitute the remainder of its authorized foundation. (Eph. 2:20; 1 Cor. 12:28.) The superstructure of lesser authorities cannot viably rest upon any other foundation. When God removed that foundation, the edifice collapsed and its debris was used to build the many churches now dotting the Christian landscape.

Paul knew that the church was destined to become much more than a human enterprise, however elaborate, clothed in clerical robes. When finally completed, the "building"—and each man and woman in it—would be nothing less than a holy temple in which God, through the Holy Ghost, would dwell. (Eph. 2:21.) It was for this reason that the church had to be built upon the solid foundation of apostles and prophets, who would not only teach correct principles and administer correct ordinances, but who would also safeguard those principles and ordinances against heresy. In addition to apostles and prophets, Christ provided evangelists (patriarchs), pastors (bishops), and teachers in his church "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying [upbuilding] of the body of Christ." (Eph. 4:11-12.) The word perfecting implies oneness. A divided church, much less a fragmented Christianity, can never become perfect. Christ declared: "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) The hallmark of the true church is unity.

Mystery: Salvation of the Gentiles

Paul employs the term mystery twenty times in his letters in discussing Christ, the gospel, the resurrection, Israel, the Gentiles, speaking in tongues, iniquity, and godliness. A mystery is a divine secret or unknown truth. Three mysteries are discussed in Ephesians.

The first mystery pertains to a process that began in the days of the apostolic church. For the first time since the Flood, the non-Israelitish nations (Gentiles) were to be given the opportunity to receive the gospel and be adopted into immortal Israel. (Rom. 11:11-26; 1 Ne. 10:12-14.) In doing so, they would partake of "the unsearchable riches of Christ." (Eph. 3:2-8.) [^8] This proselytizing period is called "the times of the Gentiles." (Luke 21:24; D&C 45:25-30.)

Paul reminded the Gentile converts of their pre-grace condition when they were spiritually dead, "children of disobedience," ruled by Satan, and gratifying "the desires of the flesh and of the mind." (Eph. 2:1-3; compare Col. 1:21.) In that lost state, they were "separate from Christ, excluded from citizenship in Israel and foreigners to the covenants of promise, without hope and without God in the world." (Eph. 2:12, New International Version [NIV].)

But now, "by the blood of Christ," the dividing wall that separated the Gentiles from Israel, and the sinner from God, had been "broken down." The "iron curtain" of the Mosaic law of carnal commandments—"the letter [that] killeth"—was no more. It had been replaced by the unifying law of Christ—"the spirit [that] giveth life." (2 Cor. 3:6; compare Gal. 3:2.) Jeremiah's prophecy had been fulfilled; the Lord had made a new covenant with Israel, one in which the Gentiles could fully participate. (Jer. 31:31-34; compare Heb. 8:8-13.) The Prince of Peace had reconciled Jew and Gentile to God and to one another. The two had become one. The Gentiles were "no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God." (Eph. 2:13-19.)

Mystery: "The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times"

Paul looked far down the corridors of time and prophesied: "In the dispensation of the fulness of times" the Father would "gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth." (Eph. 1:10.) [^9] Paul understood that his own dispensation (the meridian of time—D&C 20:26) would end in a general apostasy (Acts 20:28-31; 2 Thes. 2:1-12; 2 Tim. 3:1—4:4). The fullness of the gospel would then be restored in a subsequent, all-encompassing dispensation that would be the sum of all previous dispensations.

The finest description of this culminating dispensation was given by its president, Joseph Smith. It consists, he stated, of "a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories . . . from the days of Adam even to the present time. . . . [Also] things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world . . . shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times." (D&C 128:18; compare 27:13.) This is what is meant by the restitution or restoration of all things. (Acts 3:21; D&C 27:6; 86:10.) Christ is the focal point, the magnetic center, around which all things, including the worthy living and dead, will assemble in this last dispensation. As God of the terrestrial order (D&C 76:71, 77-78), the Son of Man will come to the redeemed earth, which will have been renewed with paradisiacal (terrestrial) glory, and will rule as king and lawgiver for a thousand years (D&C 29:11; 45:59).

Thus all dispensations under the jurisdiction of Jesus Christ will be welded together in "a whole and complete and perfect union." This will bring to pass the perfection of "the dispensation of the fulness of times," or, in other words, the perfection of Zion. (Moses 7:31.)

Mystery: Marriage and the Church

In Ephesians, Paul expands upon those human relationships discussed in Colossians: husband and wife, parent and child, master and slave. Pertaining to the latter, he reminds the Christian slave and owner alike that they are first and foremost followers of Christ, seeking the same reward. "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." (Gal. 3:28.) Such was the underlying principle that should dictate all interpersonal relationships within the body of Christ. Master and slave were expected to be guided by that principle. (Eph. 6:5-9; compare Col. 3:22—4:1; 1 Pet. 2:18-23.) The important thing was not their transitory situations in life, but their conduct toward one another in those situations. The same principle applies in the parent-child relationship, where one is also temporarily subordinate to another. It is right for children to obey their parents "in the Lord." It is wrong for fathers to be overbearing and to provoke their children to anger and rebellion. (Eph. 6:1-4.)

Paul is accused of being a misogynist who had little regard for marriage. [^10] Nothing could be further from the truth. Nowhere in scripture is the marriage relationship defined so beautifully as in Ephesians. As with masters and slaves, parents and children, he applies the principle of stewardship to marriage. The wife in Christ (meaning, a gospel covenant wife) is to follow her husband as she would follow the Lord himself. (Eph. 5:22-24.)

To put the principle in proper perspective, Paul draws an analogy between the relationship of a priesthood husband to his wife and of Christ to the church. Christ and the husband "in Christ" constitute the "head" in their respective callings. For marriage is more than a partnership; it is also a priesthood stewardship. Since every steward is accountable for his stewardship, he must be able to exercise righteous dominion over it. There can be no legitimate responsibility without legitimate authority.

Historically, arbitrary domination has been exercised by countless supposedly Christian husbands who defended their conduct by citing Ephesians 5:22-23. However, husbands do not derive their authority from their sex, but from Christ. They are the "head" of their wives because Christ is their "head." A man's authority and the right to exercise that authority in righteousness originate in Christ, not in the man. Consequently, a wife's commitment to her husband imposes a profound obligation on him to be worthy of her commitment. To justify the wife's commitment, Paul commands: "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it. . . . So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church. . . . Let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband." (Eph. 5:25, 28-29, 33; emphasis added.)

Obviously, a wife's righteous submission to her husband should stem from her husband's righteous submission to Christ. When this occurs, a divine triangle exists with Christ at its apex. Husband and wife are one flesh with each other because they have become one flesh with Christ. This is the foundation of all eternal unions. Paul had such a union in mind when he wrote: "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.) To be in the Lord is to be eternally one with him and, therefore, with one another. Only through this three-way union can men and women achieve exaltation in the celestial kingdom. (D&C 131:1-4; 132:19-25.)

In summary, just as the saints become "members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones," so those married for eternity "in the Lord" become "one flesh" with each other. (Eph. 5:30-31.) Consequently, the union of man and woman is meant to be as eternal as the Church of the Firstborn (D&C 76:54-59, 94) of which exalted men and women will be immortal "members."

Celestial marriage is the key to a fullness of divinity. In declaring the preeminence of the Son of God over all things in heaven and on earth, Paul wrote: "For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell. . . . For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." (Col. 1:19; 2:9.) In other words, the attributes and powers of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are possessed by the risen Christ.

These same attributes and powers will be possessed by those who become one with the Father and the Son. (John 17:20-23.) Consequently, the process of perfecting the Saints must continue "till we, in the unity of the faith, all come to the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (JST, Eph. 4:13.) Knowledge of the Son of God is more than knowledge about him; it is knowledge of him. And knowledge of him is acquired only as we partake of his divine nature and thereby become spiritually one with him. Only in doing so can we obtain a fullness of eternal life. Hence, Jesus' prayer: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

It is only when the human spirit is baptized by the Holy Spirit (John 3:5-8) that one is born again as a son or daughter of God and empowered to attain "the stature of the fulness of Christ" (Eph. 4:13; compare 1 Jn. 3:1-3). To be so baptized is to have "Christ in you" (Col. 1:27; compare Gal. 2:20), not literally, but as the sanctifying power (or companionship) of the Holy Ghost.

In attaining the spiritual stature of Christ, the saints will, perforce, become one with him and also "be filled with all the fulness of God." (Eph. 3:19.) Acquiring a celestial fullness of the Father's nature means that they will become exalted even as he is exalted. They will be Gods. [^11] Christ confirmed this doctrine in a modern revelation: "For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father." (D&C 93:20; compare Rev. 3:21.) This doctrine, once lost but now restored, was the crowning revelation of the Prophet Joseph Smith to the Church. He sealed it with his blood.

While it may seem incredible to the rational mind that fallen mortals with all of their weaknesses could dare hope to attain the moral and spiritual stature of the very Son of God, yet this is precisely what must occur if the saints are to become "joint-heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:17) to the riches of eternity. Hence the indispensable need for divine grace as primarily manifest in the atonement, the resurrection, and the sanctifying gift of the Holy Ghost. (Alma 5:54; 3 Ne. 27:20.)

The Pursuit of Perfection

Ultimate perfection is unobtainable in this fallen world. The ascent to oneness with the Father was begun in eternity past and will not be achieved until eternity future. Salvation is not achieved in one effortless moment of fervent commitment; it is a matter of climbing step by step from one level of exaltation to another. Said Joseph Smith: "It is not all to be comprehended in this world; it will be a great work to learn our salvation and exaltation even beyond the grave." [^12]

Even though he had seen the risen Christ and beheld the "third [celestial] heaven" (2 Cor. 12:1-4), [^13] Paul did not presume to be saved. He knew the difference between a man's testimony of God and God's testimony of the man. As Joseph Smith observed: "Though they might hear the voice of God and know that Jesus was the Son of God, this would be no evidence that their election and calling was made sure, that they had part with Christ, and were joint heirs with Him." [^14]

Paul was well aware of this principle. He knew that accepting Christ was but the beginning of the long race for eternal life. Over twenty years after his conversion he wrote: "Everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training. They do it to get a crown of laurel that will not last; but we do it to get a crown that will last forever. Therefore, I do not run like a man running aimlessly; I do not fight like a man shadow boxing. No, I beat my body and make it my slave so that after I have preached to others, I myself will not be disqualified for the prize." (1 Cor. 9:25-27, NIV.)

About five years later he wrote the Philippians: "Continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling. . . . Brothers, I do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it [salvation]. But one thing I do: Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead, I press on toward the goal to win the prize for which God has called me heavenward in Christ Jesus." (Philip. 2:12; 3:13-14, NIV; compare 2 Ne. 31:20.) Only when facing certain death did Paul finally write: "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will award to me." (2 Tim. 4:7-8.) Paul then knew that his calling and election into the eternal church and kingdom of God was, at last, made sure. [^15]

The Whole Armor of God

Having shown the saints the heights the Father would have them attain, Paul, as he was wont to do, closed his letter with practical counsel designed to safeguard them against "the god of this world." (2 Cor. 4:4.) Because that god is yet to be dethroned, our modern world is an astonishing replay of the Roman world of the first century. The vices that ail us ailed them. The things living prophets warn against today are the same things Paul denounced in Ephesians.

He admonished the Gentile converts to forsake the corrupt ways of their unregenerated neighbors and then proceeded to catalogue the more blatant of those ways: lying, theft, idleness, anger, rage, brawling, slander, obscenities, coarse humor, lightmindedness, greed, and licentiousness or sexual impurity in all of its manifestations. (Eph. 4:25-5:4.) "Be sure of this, that no immoral or impure man, or one who is covetous (that is, an idolater), has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God." (Eph. 5:5, Revised Standard Version.)

The very body of a truly repentant soul is transformed into a spiritual temple wherein dwells the influence of the Holy Spirit. But that Spirit cannot dwell in an unclean house. (1 Cor. 3:16-17; Alma 7:21.) Therefore, should that temple become defiled by unrepented sins, the Spirit is forced to forsake it. It is a temple no longer; it is destroyed. (D&C 93:35.) If the offenses are grievous enough, the body that once housed the Spirit of God becomes the habitation of devils. (JST, Matt. 12:37-39.) To prevent such a tragedy, Ephesians ends with Paul's resounding call to "put on the whole armour of God." (Eph. 6:11.) The spiritual war that began in the premortal world continues to rage on earth. The enemy that the spirit children of God once confronted face to face is no longer visible; he has become the "prince of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:2), meaning the invisible or unseen ruler of this fallen world. Nevertheless, he and his cohorts are very real and very deadly. They must be faced and vanquished. Being spiritual enemies, they must be fought with spiritual weapons.

Like the gladiator of the Roman arena, the saint must be fully armed (the panoply), both offensively and defensively. The wide belt to which the gladiator fastened all of his equipment symbolizes eternal truth. The heart-protecting breastplate is personal righteousness. The hobnailed sandals (for sure footing) represent the gospel of Jesus Christ. The movable shield of faith protects the spiritual gladiator from Satan's fiery arrows, regardless of their origin. A firm-minded hope of salvation is represented by the gladiator's helmet, protecting against any fatal blows the enemy might attempt to strike. But the spiritual gladiator's offensive power lies in "the sword of the Spirit"—the directing, sustaining word of God provided to the saint day by day. As the Spirit is God's means of communicating wisdom and power to the saint, so is the prayer of faith the saint's means of assuring that that divine support will be forthcoming. (Compare D&C 27:15-18.)

Victory is possible only when the spiritual gladiator puts on the whole armor of God. Failure to be fully armed may make the saint, like Achilles, fatally vulnerable. The "whole armour of God" had enabled Paul to win his own victory. He had, indeed, "fought a good fight." (2 Tim. 4:7.) He prayed a like victory for those he left behind.

Gracious Paul closed Ephesians with a characteristic expression of affection: "Peace to the brothers, and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace to all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love." (Eph. 6:23-24, NIV.)

At the present time, we do not know the specific outcome of his appeal to Caesar. But one thing we do know: he faced his uncertain future with faith, hope, and love. "These three" were his constant companions in those long years of unwearying labor he had known since he first beheld his Redeemer that foreordained noonday on the road to Damascus.

Notes

Rodney Turner is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] J. R. Dummelow, A Commentary on the Holy Bible (New York: Macmillan Co., 1930), p. 969.
[^2] Ibid., p. 969.
[^3] Edgar J. Goodspeed, Paul (Philadelphia: The John C. Winston Co., 1947), pp. 199-200.
[^4] Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 132.
[^5] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-70): 2:530.
[^6] Francis M. Lyman, Conference Report, April 1904, p. 11.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 347.
[^8] Ibid., p. 345.
[^9] Ibid., p. 346.
[^10] Ibid., p. 346-47.
[^11] Improvement Era 22 (June 1919): 660-61.
[^12] McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary 2:534.
[^13] Conference Report, October 1973, p. 151.
[^14] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), p. 700.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 701-2.
