Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

10

HOPE FOR THE "CHILDREN OF LIGHT" AS THE DARKNESS DESCENDS

(1, 2 Thessalonians)

JO ANN H. SEELY

The glorious Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ was anticipated by Paul and the Thessalonian converts with hope and joy. Paul mentions this great event many times as he exhorts the saints in righteous living and instructs them concerning the dark events of the great apostasy. It is this sustaining hope that enables them to endure persecution and continue in faithfulness when left alone as a new branch of the church. The Lord prepared the people of Thessalonica for the visit of Paul and to receive this marvelous message, and Paul himself was guided to them by inspiration. "And a vision appeared to Paul in the night; there stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them." (Acts 16:9-10.)

Following the direction of the Spirit, Paul and his companions left Asia Minor from Troas and sailed across the Aegean Sea to Macedonia—a small part of a missionary journey, yet this one small trip opened the door for the gospel of Jesus Christ to go beyond its Asian home and enter a new continent. The missionaries were very successful in their efforts in these first European cities and established churches at Philippi, Thessalonica, and Corinth, to which Paul later wrote several of his letters. The two letters to the Thessalonians are full of tender concern and further instruction for the new converts and provide us with an invaluable window into the development of the early church.

Paul began his second missionary journey with the intention of visiting the cities where he had previously taught. (Acts 15:36.) After a disagreement with Barnabas, he chose Silas (Silvanus in Thessalonians) to accompany him, "confirming the churches" through Syria and Cilicia. (Acts 15:41.) Silas, a member of the church in Jerusalem, had been sent by the apostles along with Judas (surnamed Barsabas) to carry the news of the Jerusalem Conference to Antioch both by letter and by word of mouth. (Acts 15:22-23, 27.) He is also noted as a prophet who exhorted the brethren there. (Acts 15:32.) Paul and Silas were joined by Timothy (Timotheus in Thessalonians), a convert from Galatia who became a trusted companion of Paul. Timothy was sent by Paul on several ecclesiastical errands to new converts and was liaison between the converts when Paul was unable to visit. (1 Thes. 3:2, 6; 1 Cor. 4:17; 16:10; Philip. 2:19.) Paul commended him to the Philippians, saying, "For I have no man likeminded, who will naturally care for your state . . . . As a son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel." (Philip. 2:20, 22.)

Twice the Spirit altered the paths of Paul and his companions, first directing their path away from Bithynia (Acts 16:7), and then through Paul's vision to come to Macedonia (Acts 16:9). They left Troas and went through Neapolis to Philippi, where they spent some time teaching the gospel, and then continued about ninety miles along the Via Egnatia—the major Roman road through Macedonia—to Thessalonica.

Thessalonica was a major city in Macedonia. Founded by the Macedonian king Cassander in 315 B.C., it was named after his wife, who was the daughter of Philip and half-sister of Alexander the Great. It became the seat of Roman administration when Macedonia was made a Roman province in 146 B.C. and was declared a free city by the Romans, which meant that it enjoyed a status free from taxation or military occupation, and the privilege of self-government. [^1] Because of its location on the Via Egnatia, which ran from the western side of Greece all the way through Macedonia, it was a center of commerce, as demonstrated by its prolific coinage; being situated on the coast, it was the chief seaport of the area.

Two inscriptions found at Thessalonica have significance for the scriptural record. The Vardar Gate inscription from a Roman arch spanning the Via Egnatia, dating to the period of Paul (between 30 B.C., and A.D. 143), notes city officials called "politarchs." These officials were responsible for the autonomous rule enjoyed at Thessalonica. Acts 17:6 refers to these officials as "the rulers of the city." Other occurrences of this term have been found epigraphically at Thessalonica, but it had otherwise been unknown in Greek literature. [^2] Although no remains of the synagogue mentioned in Acts 17:1 have been found, another inscription with a Greek translation of Numbers 6:22-27 (the Aaronic benediction) and other Hebrew phrases attest to the diaspora community at Thessalonica. [^3] As noted by one scholar, "Meletius long ago said, 'So long as nature does not change, Thessalonica will remain wealthy and fortunate.'" [^4] It remains a large and prosperous city to this day.

At Thessalonica there was a synagogue, indicating a population with a substantial number of Jews, and Paul first went there to "reason" for three sabbath days. (Acts 17:1-2.) The scriptures record that he went right to the heart of the matter. He taught that the Messiah must suffer and be resurrected, "and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ." (Acts 17:3.) The simple truth of these words had a powerful yet divisive effect.

Paul's testimony converted Jews, a great multitude of Greeks, and many of the chief women. (Acts 17:4.) The Greeks are described as "devout," probably referring to the Gentile "god-fearers" who attached themselves to the synagogues of the diaspora because they preferred the worship of Israel to pagan practice. These believers were the early members of the church at Thessalonica who became examples "to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia." (1 Thes. 1:7.)

Those who did not believe were so incensed that they not only forced the departure of the missionaries from Thessalonica and Berea, their next stopping point (Acts 17:10, 13-14), but they also persecuted the Thessalonian converts as they struggled to get established. There are many references to these afflictions in Paul's letters to this branch. (1 Thes. 1:6; 2 Thes. 1:4.) One of these incidents involved Jason, a convert who had offered hospitality and perhaps a kinsman of Paul. (Rom. 16:21.) The Jews in the city who "believed not" gathered an unruly mob and assaulted his house, searching for Paul and his companions. Unable to find the missionaries there, they seized Jason and took him before the "rulers of the city"—politarchs. (Acts 17:5-9.) There they charged him with harboring those who were guilty of treason, who proclaimed another king, "contrary to the decrees of Caesar." (Acts 17:7.) The other king was "one Jesus," and the charge was a serious problem in the Roman Empire at the time. Such rioting among the Jews over a certain "Chrestus" (probably a reference to Christ) had caused Claudius to expel them from Rome about this same time. [^5] One writer comments: "The trouble in Rome had not been spontaneously generated there; it had been carried by visitors from the east. It was from the east, too, that these alleged troublemakers had come to Thessalonica, carriers of what the emperor himself had described a few years earlier as 'a general plague which infests the whole world.'" [^6] It is clear from Paul's letters that the Thessalonian saints had been somewhat confused concerning his teachings about the Second Coming of Jesus, and perhaps their overanxious enthusiasm had contributed to this problem.

The politarchs resolved the issue by making Jason responsible for the behavior of the missionaries, which in effect meant they must leave the city. Paul left and went to Athens and then on to Corinth, where he wrote his two letters to the Thessalonians. Timothy apparently accompanied him to Athens and then returned to Thessalonica. (1 Thes. 3:1-6.)

Paul passed through Macedonia on a few other occasions, but there are no specific details of other visits to Thessalonica. (Acts 19:21; 20:1-3.) References to the Thessalonian saints found in other letters by Paul are positive reflections of his joy in their faithfulness and their generosity in sending gifts and support to other members of the church. (2 Cor. 8:1-5; 11:9; Rom. 15:26.)

The Letters

Paul's letters to the Thessalonians were written shortly after his visit there. (1 Thes. 2:17.) Timothy joined him in Corinth after visiting in Thessalonica, where he had been sent to see about the welfare of the young branch, and bore good tidings concerning the converts there. (1 Thes. 3:1-2, 6-7; Acts 18:5.) This report prompted Paul's first communication, and it appears that 2 Thessalonians was written not long after.

The record in Acts 18 of the events during Paul's visit to Corinth makes it possible to date these letters fairly accurately. Paul was arraigned before Gallio, the proconsul of Achaia, while at Corinth. An inscription from Delphi preserves a letter from the Emperor Claudius to Gallio dating his tenure from July 1 A.D. 51. According to Acts 18:11, Paul spent a total of eighteen months in Corinth, and since he had already been there a considerable time before this incident, it is generally thought that he wrote the epistles to the Thessalonians in late A.D. 50 or in A.D. 51. [^7]

1 and 2 Thessalonians are considered to be the earliest of Paul's epistles, and his authorship is virtually uncontested. Their canonicity is attested in the earliest lists of scriptural works, including that of Marcion the heretic and the Muratorian Fragment. [^8] The dating between A.D. 50 and 51 means these letters were written less than twenty years after the resurrection of the Savior and thus provide invaluable primary information concerning the growth and trials of the very earliest Christians.

1 Thessalonians: Structure and Content

First Thessalonians is a brief letter consisting of four parts: a formal opening; an account of the missionaries' visit to Thessalonica; exhortations to righteous living and doctrinal exposition on the Second Coming of Christ; and a formal letter closing. It is positive in tone and concerned with the development of a new branch of the church.

a. Salutation (1:1)

b. Thanksgiving (1:2-10)

a. Missionaries' visit (2:1-12)

b. Reception of the gospel (2:13-16)

c. Concern for welfare of the saints (2:17-3:8)

d. Thanksgiving and blessing (3:9-13)

a. Sexual purity (4:1-8)

b. Brotherly love (4:9-12)

c. Christ's Second Coming (4:13-5:7)

d. Various Christian duties (5:8-22)

a. Blessing (5:23-24)

b. Salutation (5:25-28)

"Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father; knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God." (1 Thes. 1:3-4.) This one short verse encapsulizes the essence of Paul's feelings, aspirations, and concerns for the Thessalonian saints. In his first letter to these new converts, he demonstrates that they are present in his mind and that he is aware of their good works. He instructs them in their labors and tries to strengthen them in their trials, knowing that all will be well if they are patient and continue in hope, whether they are present or among those who "sleep" at the coming of the Lord.

The seed of the gospel has been planted in new soil in Thessalonica, and Paul instructs the believers that faith, hope, and love will nourish it so that it may grow strong and bear good fruit. Paul repeats this message several times in his letters to the Thessalonians, helping them to cultivate the characteristics of faith, to purify and sanctify their lives, to establish a firm hope in the Second Coming, and to build a foundation of brotherhood and love to enable them to overcome the tribulations they face.

The opening of the letter, typical of first century letters, refers to the sender and the receiver and has a special salutation from Paul. Paul's greeting (1:1) carries a uniquely Christian message of grace and peace that is a variation of the usual letter of the time. [^9] He next includes a formal thanksgiving (1:2-10), expressing gratitude to God for the faithfulness of the Thessalonians, and this becomes a theme throughout these two letters. Between nearly every section of his writing Paul reiterates his thanks, especially for the faith and belief of the saints, and his fond feelings for them and happiness at knowing their spiritual state. He writes of the election of his brethren, stating that they not only received the message of the missionaries, but also received the gospel through the power and confirmation of the Holy Ghost (1:4-5). The spiritual strength derived from such a manifestation of the Spirit is evident in that they have remained steady even in much affliction (1:6), they have been examples of this new faith to those around them (1:7-8), and they have been able to divorce themselves from their former life of idol worship (1:9).

The noun used here for affliction (Gr. thlipsis) means tribulation caused by outward circumstances, and in extra-biblical Greek it takes the sense of pressing or pressure. [^10] One scholar explains, "The corresponding verb, for example, was used of pressing the grapes in winemaking till they burst asunder, and so metaphorically came to mean very great trouble." [^11] The persecution of the saints was a major challenge, as evidenced by the repeated references Paul made to it in his letters to the Thessalonians.

The converts not only set an example for believers, as noted in verse 7, but they also became missionaries to nonbelievers beyond the province of Macedonia and into Achaia, for Paul found their reputation had preceded him there. It is significant that among these new missionaries there were not only converted Jews and god-fearers, as one might surmise from the record in Acts, but there were also a number of Gentile converts, for Paul says they have "turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God." (1:9.) The conviction that caused these saints to turn from their false gods came through the power of the Holy Ghost and gives further assurance to the truth of the gospel and reconfirms the great conversion that had taken place here.

What better example of missionary service could the Thessalonians have had than that set by Paul, certainly the epitome of a virtuous minister of the gospel? And yet in the next segment of his letter he discusses the blameless behavior of him and his companions. It is possible that part of the persecution of the saints had been caused by accusations against Paul and his companions. In Thessalonica at that time were many zealous but ephemeral preachers of all sorts, persons with ulterior motives. Perhaps they had classified Paul and his companions in the same category, challenging the newly acquired belief of the saints. Dio Chrysostom (Cocceianus), an orator and philosopher of the late first and early second century, details what these religionists were like: "The normal heathen 'missionaries'. . . were itinerant apostles and miracle workers of the most varied persuasions, heralds of heathen gods, and dispensers of salvation, adroit and eloquent, ardent and evoking ardor, but also smart and conceited in extolling the mighty acts of their gods and fooling the masses." [^12]

In defending the saints' missionary labor, Paul perhaps purposely points out the gulf between them and the charlatans. He reminds them of his and his companions' suffering at Philippi, and says that although they were both persecuted and insulted, they still taught the gospel without fear, "with much contention" (2:2). This last phrase is somewhat misleading in the King James Version, for here the term contention (Gr. agon) means conflict. It has been translated in the Revised Standard Version as "in the face of great opposition." Paul and his companions taught without deceit or guile, without flattery or covetousness, and only to please God, not for the glory of men (2:3-6), he tells them. He also points out that they labored for their own support, disavowing any financial motives (2:6, 9). Yet their boldness in the gospel did not diminish their tender concern for the saints of Thessalonica. Several phrases give us a small glimpse of the intensity of their feelings: "We were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children" (2:7); "being affectionately desirous of you" (2:8); and "we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father doth his children" (2:11). Finally Paul calls upon both the converts (2:1) and God (2:5) as witnesses of all he and his companions said and of their irreproachable behavior. In verse 10, referring to the need to establish the truth by more than one witness, he uses familiar scriptural language, saying, "Ye are witnesses, and God also."

Following his defense of his missionary work, Paul focuses on the saints themselves. He writes of their sufferings for the second time, pointing out that they are suffering as others have, and in particular the churches established in Judea (2:14-16); both are persecuted of their own countrymen. This perhaps provides some comfort to the Thessalonians in knowing they are not alone in their plight. Having been prevented by his enemies from visiting them again, Paul also tries to comfort the saints by rejoicing in the converts they have made and the assurance that they will be present at the return of the Lord Jesus Christ (2:19). In a beautiful and eloquent passage in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord describes this very feeling to Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer. He tells them that they have been called with the same calling as "Paul mine apostle." Therefore, "remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God. . . . And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D&C 18:9-16.)

In chapter 3, Paul again notes that while he himself was not able to return to Thessalonica, he had sent Timothy, and Timothy's report had encouraged him. He again recognizes the tribulation of the saints and notes that those who are appointed to salvation (5:9) are also appointed to tribulation (3:3-4). Before continuing, he gives thanks again and prays for the privilege of seeing the Thessalonians in person. He is pleased with their faith, and prays also that brotherly love will be among them (3:9-12). He concludes this section with a petition for them to be established with "hearts unblameable in holiness," foreshadowing what he is about to say and looking again with hope toward the coming of the Lord (3:13).

The first two sections of this letter comprise an introduction to the body of the letter that follows. Paul has offered greetings, thanksgiving, and praise, and he has shown deep concern for the saints as well as defended his credibility and labor as a minister of the gospel. In the following passages he offers basic guidelines for Christian living and doctrinal explanations of particular concerns of the church at Thessalonica. He is judicious in mixing exhortations and reproofs with praises and encouragement. He also discusses unanswered questions on the Second Coming.

The first instructions are ones Paul indicates the saints have already received from him (4:1-2). He gives them with the preface, "For this is the will of God, even your sanctification" (4:3), and tells them that God has called the saints to holiness (4:7). These instructions form a short New Testament code of holiness (4:1-4), one that stresses cleanliness in body and spirit, reminiscent both in language and spirit of the much lengthier and more comprehensive code of holiness spelled out in the Mosaic law in the Old Testament (esp. Lev. 17-26). The saints must learn how to possess their "vessel" (body) in sanctification and honor (4:4), [^13] in order to be worthy of the Holy Spirit of which they are now heirs, being members of the church (4:8). Fornication is specifically prohibited, to clearly separate the saints from the Gentile society, which considered continence an unreasonable demand on men (4:3-4). The Greek porneia here refers not only to fornication but to any illicit sexual activity. According to the mores of the time, it was acceptable to have a mistress for sexual and intellectual companionship, and, further, certain religious rites promoted sexual activity outside of marriage. [^14]

An increase in brotherly love (4:9-10), peace, and industry are all extolled. "Study to be quiet" (4:11) could also be rendered "seek strenuously to be still," or in other words, avoid argument to bring about peace. [^15] The advice to work with their own hands so that they may "walk honestly toward them that are without" (4:12) seems to refer to a specific problem in this community of idleness, a discussion that is expanded in Paul's second letter to the Thessalonians. This might also be taken to mean that the believers must be good examples to others (4:9-12), or that there were idlers waiting for the imminent return of the Lord.

Next Paul addresses the questions concerning the Second Coming that apparently trouble the Thessalonians (4:13-5:7). It seems clear that he and his companions had taught about the resurrection and Second Coming while in Thessalonica, since in both of his letters he continually writes of this event. The initial question that caused doubt in this first generation of converts concerned those who had already passed on. Would they experience the great happenings of the Lord's return?

Although Paul obviously understood that a certain sequence of occurrences was necessary before this time, as seen in 2 Thessalonians 2, apparently these converts were confused and overly anxious. He clarifies the fact that all who believe—both the dead and the living—will be caught up to meet the Lord (4:14-17). In fact, the dead shall rise first, and those who are alive shall not "prevent" (pre—before, plus venio—come) or "come before" them (4:15). [^16] The Joseph Smith Translation provides a better understanding of these verses and makes Paul's meaning more precise. In verse 15 the words "we which are alive" have been changed to read "they who are alive at the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them who remain unto the coming of the Lord, who are asleep." The same change from we to they also occurs in verse 17.

The second question that naturally follows is, "When will Christ come?" Paul responds by declaring that the saints "know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night" (5:2). He cannot tell them the time or chronological moment; they have already been taught that the Lord's appearance will be unexpected and they must not be caught unprepared. The image of the thief was first used by Jesus, as recorded in both Matthew (24:43-44) and Luke (12:39). To allay their apprehensions, Paul reminds the Thessalonians that they need not fear, for they are "the children of light" (5:5).

This image was also used by Jesus in teaching his disciples about the imminence of his death and the preciousness of their time with him. Jesus is the Light, and to his disciples he juxtaposed the light of his presence with the darkness of his absence: "Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light." (John 12:35-36.) We become spiritually begotten of Jesus Christ through accepting the gospel, and in this sense we become his children, or "children of light." Paul reminds the saints at Thessalonica that they have already accepted the gospel and received confirmation of the Holy Ghost and are therefore children of light. They have been taught the way to go and are not left wandering in darkness (5:5). In the Doctrine and Covenants these two images of the thief in the night and the children of light are also found together in a warning that the Lord has issued for the Latter-day Saints: "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief." (D&C 106:4-5.) The same counsel is given to those who had known Jesus, to the first generation of saints after his resurrection, and to this present generation, as all must be prepared for the day of the Lord.

Those who are of darkness are associated with things of the night, such as sleep and drunkenness. "Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares." (Luke 21:34.) Children of light are cautioned to watch and be sober and to be wary of spiritual dangers. They are to put on "the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation" (5:8). Paul uses his famous armor imagery in conjunction with the triad of faith, hope, and love. He mentions only defensive armor, and these three traits are the defense par excellence against the darkness.

Following these doctrinal clarifications, Paul continues his instructions and counsel. The saints are admonished to love their leaders for their work's sake, to support the weak, to rejoice and pray, and to give thanks just as Paul has done throughout his letter. They are counseled not to hinder the Spirit or prophesyings, and to abstain from all appearance of evil (5:12-22). These directions, together with Paul's earlier exhortations for holiness, will lead the way to sanctification.

Paul aptly closes his letter with a blessing for God to sanctify the saints and a prayer that they be preserved blameless in spirit, soul, and body until the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. In his final greeting he tells them to greet one another with "an holy kiss" (5:26; rendered in the Joseph Smith Translation "an holy salutation"), and charges them to read the letter together.

2 Thessalonians: Structure and Content

Second Thessalonians is clearly a follow-up message to 1 Thessalonians, for it covers much of the same material and is only about half as long. It is also written as a formal letter with four parts: an opening, a doctrinal discussion on the Second Coming, prayers and petitions to the saints, and a closing.

a. Salutation (1:1-2)

b. Thanksgiving (1:3-4)

c. Judgment (1:5-12)

a. Apostasy (2:1-3)

b. Sons of Perdition (2:4-12)

a. Thanksgiving (2:13-14)

b. Blessing (2:15-17)

c. Request for prayer (3:1-5)

d. Instructions concerning idlers (3:6-15)

a. Blessing (3:16)

b. Salutation (3:17-18)

The Thessalonian saints' continued faithfulness and enthusiasm for the gospel are evident from Paul's second letter. He is joyful at their growth and goodness. His message is brief, dealing with few problems and again acknowledging his affection and concern for the converts. Silas and Timothy are included again as senders, indicating that the letter was written only a few months after the earlier letter, while they were still at Corinth, for Silas is not mentioned with Paul after this time. Paul is aware of continued persecution of the saints, further misunderstanding about the Second Coming, and a persisting problem with idleness, but he reaffirms his confidence in the branch at Thessalonica. (2 Thes. 3:4.)

Following the greeting, Paul expresses thanks to the saints, noting that their faith "groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every one . . . toward each other aboundeth" (1:3). He recognizes that they are developing in the most basic elements of the gospel even in the face of persecutions (1:4). He has acknowledged their tribulation several times in his first letter, and here he addresses it with two responses. First, he calls it a "manifest token of the righteous judgment of God," a sign or indication of the Lord that they are being prepared for his kingdom: "that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer" (1:5). Second, he points out that those who are inflicting the harm will find themselves divinely recompensed (1:6).

In both letters the Second Coming of the Lord is emphasized, and here Paul discusses it in terms of the final justice the Lord will dispense at his return. Those who "know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ" will be faced with "everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power" (1:8-9). Those who "know not God" does not seem to refer to those who are ignorant or have not had an opportunity to learn, but rather to those who refuse to know God, since this phrase is parallel with the next one, "that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." In his letter to the Romans Paul explains what happens to those who are unwilling to know God: "Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them . . . even his eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. . . . And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind . . . being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity." (Rom. 1:19-21, 28-29.)

Eternal life is the reward of those who come to know God: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) In modern revelation the Lord has appended to this the statement, "Receive ye, therefore, my law." (D&C 132:24.) To know God is to receive his law, and to obey the gospel of Jesus Christ is to eventually gain eternal life in the presence of the Father and the Son. It follows that those who do not receive and obey the law will be cut off from eternal life to "everlasting destruction." (2 Thes. 1:9.) In the Joseph Smith Translation this verse has been altered to read "punished with destruction from the presence of the Lord," meaning they are barred from the Lord's presence. The saints will then be glorified for righteously enduring their tribulation; great is their reward in heaven. (Matt. 5:11-12; Luke 6:22-23.)

As he ascended into heaven, the resurrected Lord promised that he would one day return in his glory. (Acts 1:11.) In Thessalonica there was much anticipation among the saints that his return was imminent. It is clear from Paul's letters to them that the focal point of the gospel for them was this eschatological event, perhaps encouraged by Paul himself, who, realizing that the Second Coming was in the distant future, continued to write with hope about the appearance of Christ. In chapter 2 he explains the sequence of things that must happen before the Second Coming in order to erase any ambiguity or false impressions that remained among the saints that the event was imminent. In the latter days the Prophet Joseph Smith made several significant changes in his translation of this passage that increase our understanding and further clarify this passage.

First, in his second letter Paul taught that the saints should remain firm in what they have already been taught and not allow themselves to be shaken by others in word, spirit, or by letter (2 Thes. 2:2). The Joseph Smith Translation renders this passage "or be troubled by letter, except ye receive it from us." Perhaps a forgery was circulating that reinforced the misunderstanding. In any case it is important that teachings or instructions come from those with proper authority. In the following verse the Joseph Smith Translation emphasizes the fact that the apostasy or falling away will come first—before the day of the Lord—by placing this phrase at the beginning of the verse (2:3). Richard Lloyd Anderson has written, "In Greek, 'falling away' is apostasia, derived from 'standing' and 'away' in the sense of evading and opposing authority. . . . Paul, of course, means a religious departure, just as the Greek translation of the Old Testament uses apostasia for a hypothetical 'rebellion' of all Israel against God (Josh. 22:22)." [^17]

This "falling away" comes with the "man of sin," the "son of perdition" who "sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God" (2:3-4). In the past, commentators have tried to interpret this verse in numerous ways, shedding little light on the subject. Recently, however, Dr. Anderson has given a lucid explanation of this difficult verse as an image of the apostasy. He finds the key in Paul's use of the word temple. "Almost always he used it figuratively—occasionally the body is a temple for God's Spirit, but usually the Church is the temple of God. . . . Elsewhere Paul teaches about Christ as cornerstone, apostles as foundation, and members fitting into their places as a 'holy temple in the Lord' (Eph. 2:21)." [^18] In other words, the temple here is representative of the church in which God dwells. When the "man of sin" is revealed, he will be in the midst of the temple; the church remains, but Satan is in the midst of it. This imagery demonstrates that the great apostasy will take place through the influence of Satan, making the restoration of the gospel and the church necessary in the latter days.

This "mystery of iniquity" was already at work at the time of Paul. The archaic form of "he who now letteth will let" found in verse 7 has been replaced in the Joseph Smith Translation by "Christ suffereth him to work, until the time is fulfilled that he shall be taken out of the way." Verse 9 of the Joseph Smith Translation summarizes the entire process: "Yea, the Lord, even Jesus, whose coming is not until after there cometh a falling away, by the working of Satan with all power, and signs and lying wonders."

Those who will fall in error after Satan are those referred to earlier (1:8) and also as those who "received not the love of the truth . . .that they all might be damned ["brought to account"—see footnote in LDS edition of the Bible] who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness" (2:10, 12). Seven or eight years later Paul noted, in writing to the Galatians: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel." (Gal. 1:6.) The great apostasy began very early and proceeded until there was only darkness, which was not pierced until the light of the First Vision.

After a serious doctrinal discussion, Paul breaks to express his continual thankfulness to God for the sanctification of the saints and the hope of the gospel (2:13-17). It is appropriate that he also asks for their prayers for the missionaries themselves, perhaps so they will not experience the difficulties that had driven them from Thessalonica. Before some rather direct exhortations, Paul takes one more opportunity to bolster the saints' spirits by praising their obedience and praying for their welfare (3:3-5).

The admonitions in 1 Thessalonians are gentle and given in the spirit of wise counsel: the saints are to do their own business, work with their own hands, and walk honestly toward those who are not of their group (1 Thes. 4:11-12.) In contrast, the language in the second letter is strong and to the point, even while addressing the same issues. The saints had already been reminded of the missionaries' hard work and orderly conduct, so the instructions are now given in the form of commands: to withdraw from those who are disorderly and from busybodies, to work and eat their own bread, and to not be weary in doing good (3:6, 10-11, 13).

Paul also indicts those who are disobedient: "If any would not work, neither should he eat" (3:10). This does not refer to those who are poor or unable to work, but those who would not work or who desire not to. Idleness is something the Lord has condemned throughout the scriptures. The Lamanites in times of disobedience were called an "idle people" (2 Ne. 5:24), and in the Doctrine and Covenants there are repeated warnings for the saints of latter days to "remember their labors, inasmuch as they are appointed to labor, in all faithfulness; for the idler shall be had in remembrance before the Lord" (D&C 68:30-31; see also 56:17; 60:13; 75:29). Paul ends on a positive note, enveloping the sharp reproval in verses 6 through 13 with the confidence he expressed in the saints earlier (3:4-5) and a gentle reminder to part company with the disobedient and to admonish them as brothers rather than as enemies (3:14-15).

Concluding with a blessing of peace, Paul's final words note his personal signature on this letter, assuring of its authenticity (3:17). Like the rest of the Pauline epistles, 2 Thessalonians was probably dictated to a scribe, perhaps to Silas or Timothy, and then signed by Paul himself. The concluding blessing of peace from the "Lord of peace" (3:16) and of the "grace of our Lord Jesus Christ" (3:18) adds an aesthetic touch—a nice chiasm to Paul's opening blessing, "grace unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ" (1:2).

Conclusion

The seed of the gospel found good soil in Thessalonica. The fruits of the Spirit were manifest in the faithfulness and love exhibited by the saints there. Paul rejoices affectionately and gratefully in their development. They have grown in experience as they endure the tribulations faced by the infant church, and in knowledge as they are instructed in correct doctrine by Paul. Their challenges seem in many ways similar to those of the early congregations of Latter-day Saints in New York, Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois.

Paul's wise counsel to these new converts to sanctify their lives (1 Thes. 4:3) and to make their hearts "unblameable in holiness" (1 Thes. 3:13) is equally applicable to us. President Brigham Young said, "Do not be too anxious for the Lord to hasten this work. Let our anxiety be centered upon this one thing, the sanctification of our own hearts, the purifying of our own affections, the preparing of ourselves for the approach of the events that are hastening upon us. This should be our concern, this should be our study, this should be our daily prayer. . . . Seek to have the Spirit of Christ, that we may wait patiently the time of the Lord, and prepare ourselves for the times that are coming. This is our duty." [^19]

The return of the Savior was a source of inspiration to both the first generation of saints and those of the Restoration. The knowledge that Christ would one day return sustained the Thessalonian saints as they faced persecution and the encroaching darkness of apostasy wrought by "the man of sin." Likewise, we as Latter-day Saints, confronted with the challenges presented by the darkness of an increasingly wicked world, are motivated to Christlike living by the knowledge of the return of the Light. The epistles to the Thessalonians provide insight into the pursuit of faith, hope, and love that must pervade the lives of all—past, present, and future—who would be called "children of light."

Notes

Jo Ann H. Seely has a master of arts degree in near Eastern studies at Brigham Yound University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), p. 239, discusses the possibility that Paul visited Colossae or at least made contact with some of the individuals there when "all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord" from Ephesus. (Acts 19:10.)
[^2] Onesimus is named as the letter carrier in both Colossians (4:7, 9) and Philemon (vv. 10-12). In addition, all the people mentioned in Philemon also are mentioned in Colossians 4:9-17. It seems almost certain that the two letters were written at the same time.
[^3] Anderson, pp. 240-42, gives a review of some of the documents from the period that illustrate ancient attitudes toward slavery. For a concise discussion of the practice of slavery in New Testament times, see W. G. Rollins, "Slavery in the New Testament," Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 4 vols. and Supplement (New York and Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1962-76), Supplement, pp. 830-32.
[^4] The ancient evidence suggests that such names, while not used exclusively for slaves, generally point to servile status or background. For a more complete list and discussion, see Rollins, p. 831.
[^5] The most recent and comprehensive work on the Apostle Paul and his writings by a Latter-day Saint scholar is Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul. The discussion of the epistle to Philemon can be found on pages 238-44. A useful non-LDS commentary is Eduard Lohse, Colossians and Philemon (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1971).
[^6] A short discussion of how some of these elements compare with the Near Eastern and Hellenistic letters can be found in Lohse, pp. 5-6, 12-14, where he discusses these elements in the epistle to the Colossians.
[^7] Anderson, pp. 393-98, provides a useful chronological reconstruction of Paul's life and ministry.
[^8] The subscript preserved at the bottom of the text in the KJV, "written from Rome to Philemon, by Onesimus, a servant," is an editorial addition probably added at a somewhat later date. In the Marcionite tradition this subscript reads that the epistle was written from Ephesus. Because of this and Paul's mention of great hardship in Ephesus (1 Cor. 15:32), some have postulated that one of the unspecified imprisonments referred to in 2 Corinthians 11:23 was at Ephesus. Proponents of this hypothetical imprisonment at Ephesus, which is in the same geographical vicinity as Colossae, claim that this would help to explain how Onesimus and Paul met, Paul's seeming reference in Philemon 1:22 to an imminent visit, and to the fact that Epaphras is a "fellowprisoner" with Paul—without having to suppose that Paul was much farther away in Rome. For a complete discussion, see Lohse, pp. 165-67. Sea transportation was readily available from Asia Minor to Rome, and therefore the argument that Rome was far from Colossae is not necessarily a compelling one.
[^9] The common historical context and the mutual relationship of the contents of these four epistles is accepted and demonstrated by Anderson throughout his discussion of each epistle, found in pp. 230-309.
[^10] While the letter is addressed in the plural to these three individuals and the other members of the church in the salutations at the beginning (1-3) and at the end of the letter (23-25), it should be noted that the body of the letter is in fact specifically directed to Philemon in the second person singular ("thee").
[^11] Lohse, p. 5, in his discussion of the similar phrase found in Colossians 1:2, cites a biblical example of the use of peace in the Near Eastern tradition from Daniel 4:1, where a letter opens: "Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all peoples, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you." The common Greek greeting chairein is found in James 1:1, where it is translated "greeting," as well as in Acts 15:23, 29, and 23:26, 30. While ultimately going back to a common root, charis and chairein are two different words with distinct meanings. The suggestion made here is that it may be significant that they sound the same and therefore their similar function creates an obvious word play.
[^12] Lohse, pp. 5-6, 10.
[^13] Lohse, p. 193, points out that verse 5 may be a nice chiasm a-b-b-a [a—love; b—faith; b—Jesus Christ; a—saints] "Hearing of the love and faith, which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all saints—"love toward all saints" and "faith toward the Lord Jesus."
[^14] The Revised Standard Version translates this verse "I pray that the sharing of your faith may promote the knowledge of all the good that is ours in Christ." Lohse discusses the difficulties of the passage (pp. 4-6) and renders "May your sharing in the faith become effective in the knowledge of all the good that is in us for the glory of Christ."
[^15] It is worthy of note that the Greek term for sister (as well as the Hebrew and Aramaic terms) does not derive from a different root than brother (as in English) but rather is simply the feminine form of the same word, emphasizing that brother and sister are two aspects of the same category rather than two different categories.
[^16] M. E. Lyman, "Letter to Philemon," in Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible 3:783.
[^17] Ignatius, Letter to the Ephesians 1:3 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library).
[^18] Ignatius's letter was written in the first decade of the second century, and therefore many argue that the Onesimus known from the New Testament would probably be dead by that time. If he was a young man at the time he returned to Colossae in A.D. 61 (Paul does call him his "son" or "child"), it is possible that he was an elderly man at the time of the letter to the Ephesians. Beyond this we can only speculate.
[^19] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards and Sons, 1851-86), 9:3.
