Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

14

A STRING OF GOSPEL PEARLS

(James)

LARRY E. DAHL

As one contemplates the book of James, several questions come to mind: Who wrote the book of James? To whom did he write? When? Why? What messages for them and for us are to be found in the book?

Background

There are several persons mentioned in the New Testament who have the name James. Although there is no conclusive agreement among Bible scholars, it is generally agreed that the author of this epistle is James, the Lord's brother, also referred to as James the Just. He occupied an important position in the church at Jerusalem: he was one of the three "pillars" of the church at Jerusalem (along with Peter and John) who extended the hand of fellowship to Paul after his remarkable conversion (Gal. 1:19; 2:9); he played a key role in the council at Jerusalem dealing with the question of whether Gentile converts were expected to be circumcised and abide by other requirements of the Jewish law (Acts 15); and he received Paul's report of his missionary labors among the Gentiles and counseled him concerning his associations with Jewish Christians (Acts 21). Is it possible that he was a member of the presidency of the church, replacing the other James, who was killed by Herod? (Acts 12:2.) If so, that would explain his prominent role at the Jerusalem Council, and the fact that Paul, an apostle, repeatedly reported to him when he was in Jerusalem. [^1]

In the opening verse of the epistle, the writer identifies himself simply as "James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ." That he did not explain himself more specifically suggests that he was well known to those he was addressing—"the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad." (James 1:1.) Did he mean literally the twelve tribes of Israel, or was he perhaps using the term to refer to covenant Israel—believers in Jesus Christ, members of the church—whether blood Israel or adopted "heirs according to the promise" (Gal. 3:29)? Because most of literal Israel had been taken captive, scattered, and "lost," and were therefore not apt to receive his epistle, it seems appropriate to believe that he was addressing covenant Israel, somewhat scattered, but known and available.

When did he write? If the author is indeed James, the Lord's brother, the epistle was written before A.D. 62. There is substantial evidence that James, the brother of the Lord, was killed about A.D. 62 by Jewish leaders who took the law into their own hands at a time when there was no Roman procurator in Judea (between the death of Festus and the arrival of Albinus, procurators). [^2] Richard Lloyd Anderson comments: "Eusebius quotes Josephus on the death of the brother of the Lord and adds: 'Such is the story of James, whose is said to be the first of the so-called general epistles.'. . . James' lack of warnings of apostasy verifies this early date—all the known later letters speak sharply of false teachers." [^3]

If James was not writing to denounce or warn against apostate teachers who evidently entered the scene later, why did he write? No reason is given in the epistle itself. The purpose does not seem to be to convince readers of the divinity of Christ or of the authority of the church or its leaders. These things seem to be assumed. The epistle is not a well-organized treatise on a major theme, or even two or three themes, but is more like a sermon, highlighting many gospel truths and exhorting readers to apply the principles they profess to believe. This is similar to some of the general conference addresses of President Spencer W. Kimball in the middle and late 1970s. Perhaps as a leader of the church in his day, James saw signs of spiritual sickness among the saints—lack of faith and certitude, buckling under the weight of trials and temptation, hypocrisy, selfishness, loose tongues, a strong attraction to the world with its standards of behavior and judgment, love of riches, violation of conscience—and felt pressed to counsel, correct, encourage and strengthen his fellow church members. Do you notice how hauntingly modern the problems sound? Undoubtedly, the epistle of James is as needed in our day as it was in his.

Seen in this light, rather than being an "epistle full of straw, because it contains nothing of the gospel," [^4] the book of James is an epistle that contains the very essence of the gospel—"pure religion" (1:27), the "royal law" (2:8), a guide to overcoming a "multitude of sins" (5:20)—and is timelessly current.

This brings us to an examination of the messages contained in the epistle. James speaks of several gospel truths. Among them, we may each find some that strike responsive chords in our hearts.

A Pattern for Finding Answers(James 1:5)

Perhaps the most familiar and most often quoted verse in the book of James as far as Latter-day Saints are concerned is James 1:5: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him." Of this verse Joseph Smith said, "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again." (JS—H 1:12.) The verse had such a profound effect on Joseph at that time because of his great need. Observing the "war of words, and tumult of opinions" concerning which church was right, he was troubled and yearned to know how he could find answers for himself. As he was reading the scriptures, the Spirit of the Lord penetrated his mind and heart when he came to the particular passage that would direct him toward resolving his difficulty. He was humble enough to follow the message of the scripture, and the result was a new dispensation of the gospel on the earth, a restitution of all things, a restoration of truth, power, and priesthood with inestimable eternal significance for all mankind.

Is there a pattern for truth seekers here? An honest, troubled heart yearning for resolutions, scriptures, the Spirit, humility and courage to receive and obey the message. Surely we too can be directed toward answers to our questions, as Joseph Smith was. Our answers may not be found in this particular verse, because our needs may not be the same as his (on the other hand, they may be very much the same); and the results of our endeavors may not stretch as far and deep as did Joseph's. But there can come to each of us a kind of personal dispensation of truth and power (even a "restoration" if we have become casual or have strayed) that for us is glorious, with eternal significance. But we must follow the pattern: we must search the scriptures with real intent, humility, and courage, setting the stage for the Spirit to focus our minds and our hearts upon those truths which are of particular importance to us now.

Trials and Afflictions(James 1:2-4, 12-19; 5:7-11)

"My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations." (James 1:2.) The Joseph Smith Translation changes "divers temptations" to "many afflictions." To many persons, this seems to be strange doctrine. Why "count it all joy" when we are afflicted in one way or another? Why do faithful people, who are earnestly striving to do all they know they should do, suffer hardship and heartbreak, sometimes for long periods, or repeatedly? Does it have to be this way? Couldn't an omnipotent God pave the road of life, at least for those who would obediently and happily walk thereon? Further, why did the Savior, who was fully obedient and totally innocent, have to endure incomprehensible suffering? That suffering and trials are essential in the plan of salvation is unmistakably clear, though not always easy to accept. It has to do with "law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundation of this world." (D&C 130:20.) It has to do with the "justice of God" in executing that law with exactness (Alma 7:20; 42:14; Jacob 4:10), making it possible for us to have unwavering faith in Him. [^5] It has to do with agency and its misuse by us and by others. (Alma 14:11; 60:13; D&C 103:3-4.) And, painfully, it has to do with our being tested and tried, proven "to see if [we] will do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command [us]." (Abr. 3:25.)

Father Lehi taught, "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things," stressing that without opposition, neither righteousness nor happiness nor the eternal purposes of God (and therefore, our own purposes) could be brought about. (2 Ne. 2:11-13.) The Lord has reminded us repeatedly in this dispensation that he will have a tried people:

My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion; and he that will not bear chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom. (D&C 136:31.)

For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and I will try you and prove you herewith . . . for I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. (D&C 98:12-14.)

Therefore, they must needs be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who was commanded to offer up his only son. For all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified. (D&C 101:4-5.)

As we experience and observe trials and afflictions, we often see what appear to be inequities. People are tested and afflicted in different ways, in different degrees. As Elder Boyd K. Packer explains, "Some are tested by poor health, some by a body that is deformed or homely. Others are tested by handsome and healthy bodies; some by the passion of youth; others by the erosions of old age. Some suffer disappointment in marriage, family problems; others live in poverty and obscurity. Some (perhaps this is the hardest test) find ease and luxury. All are part of the test, and there is more equality in this testing than sometimes we suspect." [^6]

Understanding this principle, James could truly encourage his readers to "count it all joy" and remind them that "trying of [their] faith worketh patience . . . that [they] may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." (James 1:3-4.) Perhaps also because he understands that such trials are difficult, James admonishes that we "stablish [our] hearts," or be resolute, firm, and anchored, and look to the prophets "for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience." (James 5:7-11.)

James reminds us that we must not blame God for every trouble. Much of what we suffer is because of our own doing, "being drawn away of [our] own lust, and enticed." (James 1:14.) He assures us that in God there is "no variableness, neither shadow of turning" (James 1:17; see also Alma 7:20), and that God's gifts to us are good and perfect (James 1:17). "Wherefore, my beloved brethren," he says, "let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. . . . Lay apart all filthiness . . . and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls." (James 1:19-21.)

Faith and Works(James 1:22-27; 2:14-15;JST [^7])

"Be ye doers of the word." (James 1:22; emphasis added.) Anything less than this is self-deception. James points out the incongruency of claiming to have faith in God without doing the works of God. That is as foolish as the position of the devils who "believe and tremble," who acknowledge God and his power, but who do not obey the laws that bring the blessings. In the final analysis, our works (our thoughts, feelings, and actions) identify the object or objects of our faith. Correctly understood, faith and works are not the same thing, but they are inseparable companions. To have faith is to have confidence and trust in something sufficient to motivate us to action. If there is no action, there is no faith. We can exercise faith in a myriad of things, but faith in anything but the God of Israel is powerless to save us.

James also teaches us that faith and works serve to build one another—faith leads to works, and by works, faith is made perfect. (James 2:22.) If we can generate enough faith in the promises of God to obey, he is bound to bless us. (D&C 82:10.) Experiencing those blessings will in turn build our confidence that his promises are sure, leading to further obedience. How do we start the cycle? "Faith cometh by hearing" (Rom. 10:17), through studying the scriptures (Hel. 15:7-8), as a gift of the Spirit to those who ask in humility and with real intent (1 Cor. 12:9; Alma 22:15-18), and if we will simply "awake and arouse [our] faculties, even to an experiment upon [God's] words" (Alma 32:27).

With these things in mind, the seemingly endless debate over whether we are saved by faith or by works is almost meaningless. The truth is, we are saved by grace—the grace of God and of Jesus Christ as expressed in the reality of the plan of salvation made possible through the Infinite Atonement. Our resurrection ("salvation" from the grave) is assured totally by grace, without regard to faith or works. (1 Cor. 15:22.) However, our "salvation" from hell and the devil, and the level or degree of that salvation, depend a great deal upon our faith and works. There are eternal rewards commensurate with every level of faith and works, from perdition to exaltation. But grace is essential here too, to make faith and works efficacious. Hence, Nephi's testimony that "it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23) and James's exhortation to be "doers of the word" make sense. Indeed, "pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father" is not contained in vain and unbridled claims of belief (James 1:26); rather it is exemplified in works: "to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep [oneself] unspotted from the vices of the world." (JST, James 1:26-27.) [^8]

Loose Tongues (1:26; 3:3-18; 4:11-12)

"If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, . . . this man's religion is vain" (James 1:26); "And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity" (3:6); "The tongue . . . is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison" (3:8). James points out that mankind has learned to control or tame almost everything—ships, horses, beasts, birds, serpents, and things in the sea—except the tongue. (3:3-7.) He decries the fact that with the same mouths we bless God and curse men, producing both sweet and bitter fruit, a condition that is against the natural order of things, and "ought not so to be." (James 3:9-12.) Rather than stirring up "bitter envying," "strife," and "confusion" with falsehoods, James reminds us that the "wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy." (James 3:13-17.)

An unruly tongue can fan the flames of rumor, spread gossip, betray confidences, destroy trust, and cause embarrassment and pain, even if what is talked about is true. President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Lies and gossip which harm reputations are scattered about by the four winds like the seeds of a ripe dandelion held aloft by a child. The degree and extent of the harm done by the gossip is inestimable." [^9] Whenever we are tempted to speak ill of another, perhaps we should remember the Savior's teachings about what has become known as the golden rule (Matt. 7:12), and about motes and beams (Matt. 7:1-5). Also we should note James's explanation that when we speak evil of another, we are in a sense judging that person and putting ourselves in God's place. After declaring that there is but one lawgiver, he asks, "Who art thou that judgest another?" (James 4:11-12.)

Another dimension of loose talk is profanity and vulgarity. Elder Dallin H. Oaks, a modern apostle, addressed that issue in general conference in April 1986. Some excerpts from his discussion follow:

For many in our day, the profane has become commonplace and the vulgar has become acceptable. Surely this is one fulfillment of the Book of Mormon prophecy that in the last days "there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth." (Morm. 8:31.) The people of God have always been commanded to abstain from language that is profane or vulgar. . . .

Satan seeks to discredit the sacred names of God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, the names through which their work is done. He succeeds in a measure whenever he is able to influence any man or woman, boy or girl, to make holy names common and to associate them with coarse thoughts and evil acts. Those who use sacred names in vain are, by that act, promoters of Satan's purposes.

Profanity is profoundly offensive to those who worship the God whose name is desecrated. We all remember how a prophet reacted from a hospital bed when an operating room attendant stumbled and cursed in his presence. Even halfconscious, Elder [Spencer W.] Kimball "recoiled and implored: 'Please! Please! That is my Lord whose name you revile'" (Improvement Era, May 1953, p. 320.) . . .

Profanity also takes its toll on the one who uses it. . . . The Spirit of the Lord . . . is offended and withdraws. . . .

Vulgar and crude expressions are also offensive to the Spirit of the Lord. . . .

A speaker who mouths profanity or vulgarity to punctuate or emphasize speech confesses inadequacy in his or her own language skills. Properly used, modern languages require no such artificial boosters. A speaker who employs profanity or vulgarity to catch someone's attention with shock effect engages in a babyish device that is inexcusable as juvenile or adult behavior. Such language is morally bankrupt. It is also progressively self-defeating, since shock diminishes with familiarity and the user can only maintain its effect by escalating its excess. [^10]

There is yet another aspect to controlling the tongue that is worthy of serious consideration. Our ability and willingness to control our tongues is directly related to how much revelation the Lord is willing to give us. "Remember that that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken with care, and by constraint of the Spirit." (D&C 63:64.) Promising that marvelous signs and healings would follow true believers in the early church, the Lord cautioned: "But a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation." (D&C 84:73.) Later he declared: "Talk not of judgments, neither boast of faith nor of mighty works." (D&C 105:24.) The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "the reason we do not have the secrets of the Lord revealed unto us, is because we do not keep them but reveal them; we do not keep our own secrets, but reveal our difficulties to the world, even to our enemies, then how would we keep the secrets of the Lord?" [^11] President Brigham Young counseled as follows:

Should you receive a vision or revelation from the Almighty, one that the Lord gave you concerning yourselves, or this people, but which you are not to reveal on account of your not being the proper person, or because it ought not to be known by the people at present, you should shut it up and seal it as close, and lock it as tight as heaven is to you, and make it as secret as the grave. The Lord has no confidence in those who reveal secrets, for He cannot safely reveal Himself to such persons. [^12]

That man who cannot know things without telling any other living being upon the earth, who cannot keep his secrets and those that God reveals to him, never can receive the voice of his Lord to dictate him and the people on this earth. [^13]

President David O. McKay called special spiritual experiences "heart petals." [^14] Surely it would take some special inspiration to share them with others. The spirit of the occasion would have to be right, and the motive would have to be to build another or to build the kingdom, not self-aggrandizement.

Whether the tongue is undisciplined in the area of gossip, profanity and vulgarity, or the unwise telling of sacred things, it needs to be controlled. Great blessings can flow from schooled tongues; great harm can come from loose tongues.

Double-mindedness(James 1:6; 3:10; 4:1-12)

Double-mindedness means being torn between two enticements, being tossed to and fro by divided loyalties, attempting to give attention to both simultaneously, or devoting oneself to one and then the other, alternately. Either approach is fruitless, leaving the person fragmented and ineffective in both camps. Such an approach pleases the devil but not the Lord. The Lord's way is to "have no other gods" before him (Ex. 20:3), to "seek . . . first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness" (Matt. 6:33), to "serve him with all [our] heart, might, mind and strength" (D&C 4:2), to yield "to the enticings of the Holy Spirit" (Mosiah 3:19), to prove that we are "determined to serve Him at all hazards." [^15] We must put on the whole armor of God (D&C 27:15-18; Eph. 6:10-18), experience a change of heart that will make us "firm and steadfast" (Hel. 15:7-8), "sure and steadfast" (Ether 12:4), anchored and immovable in proclaiming and defending the truth of heaven. In a pluralistic world, some may see this posture as narrow, even bigoted and arrogant, wooden, uncaring, self-righteous. But the Savior was none of these, and none was more unbending and resolute in the cause of right doctrine and right behavior than he. By his own words, we are to follow his example. (Matt. 4:19; 5:48; 3 Ne. 27:27.) But how can we judge and be tolerant, preach justice and mercy, be uncompromising and cooperative, advocate faith and reason, be heaven-bent and world-concerned, have our heads in the clouds and our feet on the ground, as it were, all at the same time, and not be double-minded? This can be done only with a gospel view of things—a view that admits to a God in heaven, a purposeful creation, a plan of salvation, a Savior, continuous revelation to prophets and to individuals, and the wisdom and ultimate necessity of everyone's yielding to that system.

Temporarily, the world may reject God and the gospel view. James tells us that "whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God." In fact, he indicates that those who give their allegiance to the world rather than to God are "adulterers and adulteresses." (James 4:4.) Although he may be referring literally to sexual immorality, it is more probable that he is speaking figuratively of adultery—that is, the bride (the Lord's covenant people) has been unfaithful to the bridegroom (Christ), has given her heart or part of it to another suitor (the world). (See Isa. 54:5-6; Jer. 3:14, 20; 31:32; Ezek. 16; Hosea 2.) Such double-mindedness is not acceptable to the Bridegroom; he desires and expects complete loyalty—single-mindedness. Single-mindedness toward God does not preclude concern for and efforts to improve the world, but it does require an uncompromising commitment to doing things the Lord's way. And that way is offensive to some. One simply cannot fully serve God without offending the devil—and one cannot be double-minded without offending God.

James points out several cases of double-mindedness: faith versus lack of faith in prayers (1:5-6); blessings versus cursings from the same tongue (3:10); allegiance to God versus allegiance to the world (4:1-4); being subject to the one lawgiver versus judging the law and others (4:11-12); and submitting to God versus yielding to the influence of the devil (4:6-7). He challenges those affected to overcome their double-mindedness by submitting themselves to God—to be humble, draw near to him, and purify their hearts—promising that in response, God will draw near to them and lift them up (4:6-10). James also admonishes the appropriate reaction to the devil and his temptations: "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you" (4:7).

Keeping the Whole Law(James 2:10)

"For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." (James 2:10. [^16]) Does that mean that those who are not perfect are considered guilty concerning even the laws they have not broken? How are we to interpret this passage? James uses this statement to emphasize the fact that the "royal law" requires that we love our neighbors as ourselves; and regardless of whatever else we may do toward our neighbor that is decent and right (even if we keep every other aspect of the law as it pertains to our neighbor), if we "have respect of persons" because of riches, we have broken that royal law and thereby deny ourselves the blessings that keeping it would bring. (James 2:1-9.)

Another scriptural example of someone's keeping all the law but one point, and thereby missing all that he could have had, is the sad story of the rich young man who came to Jesus asking what he had to do to gain eternal life. (Matt. 19:16-26.) Jesus reminded him of the critical commandments. The young man responded: "All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?" When told that to be perfect he must give up his wealth, the young man "went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions." Several issues and lessons could be extracted from that exchange, but the point to be made here is that failing in any requirement of the law can rob us of eternal life. Joseph Smith said: "Any person who is exalted to the highest mansion has to abide a celestial law, and the whole law too," and "I spoke to the people, showing them that to get salvation we must not only do some things, but everything which God has commanded." [^17]

Those who attain exaltation must be "cleansed from all their sins." (D&C 76:52; emphasis added.) Certainly there are eternal kingdoms and rewards to correspond with every level of obedience. However, it only takes one area of deficiency to keep us from "all that [our] Father hath." (D&C 84:38.) That seems to be the point James is making. Thankfully, we have been given a probationary time to learn total obedience. It is not required by Monday morning, as it were—at least not next Monday. But we should not use the Lord's willingness to be patient with us as an excuse to be casual or lazy about self-improvement. King Benjamin taught the proper balance: "See that all these things are done in wisdom and order; for it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength. And again, it is expedient that he should be diligent, that thereby he might win the prize; therefore, all things must be done in order." (Mosiah 4:27.)

Riches(James 1:9-11; 2:1-13; 5:1-6)

At three different points in his epistle James discusses riches, twice to warn about how transitory they are (1:9-11; 5:1-6), and once to decry using them as the reason for giving respect or honored social position (2:1-13). Immediately a defensive chorus (usually made up of those who are rich and those who intend to become so) swells in unison: "There is nothing wrong with having money. It takes money to help build the kingdom. Many of the leaders of the church are wealthy." No contest! The Lord does not condemn riches. In fact, he promises them to the obedient and is pleased when he can bestow them. (D&C 59:16-20.) However, he has repeatedly warned—and history has proven—that worldly wealth brings with it the potential, and more often than not the reality, of the very evils James identifies in his epistle: social distinctions based on wealth and oppression of the poor (2:1-9), foolish reliance upon and unwarranted stockpiling of wealth (5:1-3), selfish withholding of honest wages by fraud (5:4), and wanton hedonism, enjoyed at the expense of others (5:5-6).

The Lord promised the early saints of this dispensation "the riches of the earth," but warned them to "beware of pride, lest [they] become as the Nephites of old." (D&C 38:39.) What did riches do to the Nephites? "There began to be some disputings among the people; and some were lifted up unto pride and boastings because of their exceedingly great riches, yea, even unto great persecutions. . . . And the people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning; yea, some were ignorant because of their poverty, and others did receive great learning because of their riches. . . . And thus there became a great inequality in all the land, insomuch that the church began to be broken up." (3 Ne. 6:10-14.)

Such a condition prevailed among the Nephites just prior to the coming of the Savior to them and the destruction of the more wicked part of the society. For about two hundred years after the Savior's visit, the Nephites lived prosperously, both spiritually and temporally: "They had become exceedingly rich, because of their prosperity in Christ." But "in this two hundred and first year there began to be among them those who were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel, and all manner of fine pearls, and of the fine things of the world. And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them. And they began to be divided into classes; and they began to build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ." (4 Ne. 1:23-26.)

Evidently riches were causing problems for the early Christians at the time James wrote. Are there any worrisome signs today? In the church there are both rich and poor. Perhaps some are selfishly rich, but many freely share their good fortune to further the Lord's work and help those in need. It takes a constant vigil, however, to see that worldly riches do not rob us of the riches of eternity. The prophet Jacob gave us a key that can unlock the door to the simultaneous enjoyment of both temporal and spiritual prosperity. (Jacob 2:17-18.)

Position and Knowledge Bring Responsibility(James 3:1; 4:17)

James cautions against seeking to be "masters" because of the greater condemnation that could attend. (James 3:1.) Later he adds, "To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin." (James 4:17.) That position and knowledge bring responsibility is taught repeatedly in the scriptures. "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." (D&C 82:3.) "Therefore repent ye, repent ye, lest by knowing these things and not doing them ye shall suffer yourselves to come under condemnation." (Hel. 14:19.) "For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them. . . . But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state!" (2 Ne. 9:26-27.)

Two notable examples are Corianton and Joseph Smith. Corianton was a missionary who left his labors to go after the harlot Isabel. In reproving his wayward son for this conduct, Alma said, "Yea, she did steal away the hearts of many; but this was no excuse for thee, my son. Thou shouldst have tended to the ministry wherewith thou wast entrusted." (Alma 39:3-4.) Joseph Smith succumbed to the pressures of Martin Harris's pleadings about taking the 116 pages of the Book of Mormon to show others. Though the Lord finally permitted the request, he sharply censured Joseph in these words: "For, behold, you should not have feared man more than God. Although men [that is, men without your calling and knowledge] set at naught the counsels of God, and despise his words—yet you should have been faithful." After inviting Joseph to repent, the Lord added, "Except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift." (D&C 3:7-8, 11.)

Sometimes young Latter-day Saints question why their friends can do wrong things and seem to live quite contentedly, while the Latter-day Saint who joins them in these activities suffers much guilt and unhappiness. The truth of the matter is that the Latter-day Saint knows better and has been called out of the world and blessed with knowledge and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Joseph Smith taught that "God judges men according to the use they make of the light which He gives them." [^18] We are not judged by the light God gives others, and others are not judged by the light he gives us. To violate true conscience is sin, regardless of what others know or do. We know and God knows the measure of light we have been given, and our spiritual health depends upon our giving heed to it.

Forgiveness of Sins(James 5:14-20)

In the last few verses of the epistle, James talks about a relationship between healings and forgiveness and between saving souls and forgiveness. Concerning the forgiveness of sins that can accompany a healing, Joseph Fielding Smith said: "If by the power of faith and through the administration by the elders the man is healed, it is evidence that his sins have been forgiven. It is hardly reasonable to think that the Lord will forgive the sins of a man who is healed if he has not repented. Naturally he would repent of his sins if he seeks for the blessing by the elders." [^19] James's instructions support the idea that a spirit of faith and repentance is present with such forgiveness—the sick person is to "call for the elders" (5:14), the prayer is to be a "prayer of faith" (5:15), and contrition is suggested by the "confess your faults" passage (5:16). Forgiveness is predicated upon law as are all other blessings (see D&C 130:20-21) and must be assumed in this instance. But what a great comfort it is to those who are repentant to know that when hearts are right, anointings are given, and healings are granted, not only the body but also the soul is made well.

How does saving souls relate to forgiveness? James says that "he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins." (James 5:20.) Whose sins? The converted sinner's sins, or the sins of the one who helped to turn him around? The answer is yes. Sins of both parties are taken care of in the process. The converted sinner changes his life as past sins are forgiven and not repeated in the future. And the one who helped the sinner is undoubtedly affected by the experience—commended, uplifted, encouraged by the Spirit, and inspired to new levels of righteousness. After quoting James 5:19-20, Spencer W. Kimball wrote:

Every person who is beginning the long journey of emancipating himself from the thralldom of sin and evil will find comfort in the thought expressed by James. We could expand it somewhat and remind the transgressor that every testimony he bears, every prayer he offers, every sermon he preaches, every scripture he reads, every help he gives to stimulate and raise others—all these strengthen him and raise him to higher levels.

The proper motivation for missionary work of any kind, as for all Church service, is of course love for fellowmen, but always such work has its by-product effect on one's own life. Thus as we become instruments in God's hands in changing the lives of others our own lives cannot help but be lifted. One can hardly help another to the top of the hill without climbing there himself. [^20]

Truly a multitude of sins is hidden—not winked at or covered over, but dealt with, repented of, and forgiven, not to be mentioned again. (See Ezek. 18:21-23).

Conclusion

The epistle of James has much substance, and James has a way of saying things that impresses them upon the mind. Some of these impressive statements include:

"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God" (1:5).

"A double minded man is unstable in all his ways" (1:8).

"Be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath" (1:19).

"Pure religion and undefiled before God . . . is this, To visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world" (1:27).

"If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself" (2:8).

"Faith, if it hath not works, is dead" (2:17).

"By works was faith made perfect" (2:22).

"The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity" (3:6).

"Ye have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss" (4:2-3).

"The friendship of the world is enmity with God" (4:4).

"Resist the devil, and he will flee from you" (4:7).

"Who art thou that judgest another?" (4:12).

"To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin" (4:17).

"The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much" (5:16).

Perhaps the summary of the epistle is captured in James's exhortation: "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only" (1:23).

Notes

Larry E. Dahl is associate professor of Church history and doctrine and director of Doctrine and Covenants research in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, Conference Report, April 1981, p. 3.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 301.
[^3] Ibid., p. 151.
[^4] Conference Report, October 1960, p. 115.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, "Peter, My Brother," Speeches of the Year (Provo: BYU Press, 1971).
[^6] Some scholars question Peter's authorship of this epistle because he calls himself an elder. However, as shown in D&C 20:38, an apostle is an elder and is addressed as such in the Church today.
[^7] Conference Report, October 1960, pp. 115-16.
[^8] Conference Report, April 1963, p. 95.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 297.
[^10] Ibid., p. 304.
[^11] Ibid., p. 298.
[^12] Ibid., p. 306.
[^13] Ibid., p. 149.
[^14] Ibid. For a detailed treatment of this subject, see Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 3:325-55.
[^15] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 150.
[^16] The Joseph Smith Translation renders this verse "For whosoever shall, save in one point, keep the whole law, he is guilty of all," which is technically a more accurate statement of the principle.
[^17] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 331-32.
[^18] Ibid., p. 303.
[^19] Doctrines of Salvation 3:177-78.
[^20] The Miracle of Forgiveness, p. 205.
