Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

15

THE SUBLIME EPISTLES OF PETER

(1, 2 Peter)

MONTE S. NYMAN

The writings of Peter are often neglected in a study of the New Testament. This is not by intent but by circumstance. Because these writings are located near the end of the New Testament and because Paul's letters are so intriguing and challenging, many just never get to Peter's. Some people also have not realized the significance of Peter's writings and thus have not given them proper priority. To neglect Peter's writings in a study of the New Testament epistles is similar to eating a roast beef dinner without a serving of roast beef. There are lots of potatoes, vegetables, rolls, butter, and salad, but the meat is missing. An analysis of Peter and his writings illustrates why this is true.

Peter's writings concern the three main missions of the church, as outlined by the First Presidency:

To proclaim the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people;

To perfect the Saints by preparing them to receive the ordinances of the gospel and by instruction and discipline to gain exaltation;

To redeem the dead by performing vicarious ordinances of the gospel for those who have lived on the earth. [^1]

Peter deals with these purposes in a succinct and specific manner.

Peter was the most important figure in the meridian of time after the death of the Savior. He was the president of the Church of Jesus Christ and held the "keys of the kingdom" in that dispensation. (Matt. 16:18-19; 17:1-9; 18:17-18; D&C 7:7; 27:12; and Preface to D&C 13.) The words of the president of the church are to be received as if from the Lord's own mouth. (D&C 21:5.)

Further justification for giving Peter's writings a prominent place is found in the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Peter penned the most sublime language of any of the apostles." [^2] Sublime means elevated in thought, noble, majestic, inspiring. This fits not only the language of Peter but also the doctrine he teaches. The Prophet Joseph said many other things about Peter's writings that will be quoted later.

Another reason for giving Peter's writings a high priority is that many other presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have singled out Peter's writings. President Joseph F. Smith was pondering over the scriptures when his mind reverted to the writings of the apostle Peter. To those who believe that revelation consists of "sudden strokes of ideas" coming into one's mind, [^3] it is not difficult to believe that President Smith's attention to Peter's testimony was inspired by the Lord. When he opened the Bible and read the third and fourth chapters of the first epistle of Peter, he was greatly impressed with 1 Peter 3:18-21 and 4:6, more so than he had ever been before. As he pondered these things, one of the great revelations of this dispensation concerning the work for those in the spirit world and one of the major missions of the latter-day church was revealed. (D&C 138:1-11.)

Other presidents have also been inspired by Peter's writings. President David O. McKay said: "I have a great admiration in my heart for Simon Peter, president of the Twelve Apostles," [^4] a response that came as he also reflected upon Peter's writings. These reflections will be treated below in the context of Peter's writings. President Spencer W. Kimball, speaking to the Brigham Young University student body in 1971, gave one of his many classic addresses entitled "Peter, My Brother." [^5] This talk, given in response to a negative statement on a church marquee, is a must for those who want to appreciate the man Peter and his writings.

The First Epistle of Peter

Peter's first epistle was written to members of the church scattered throughout parts of Asia. In his salutation, he calls them strangers because he had never met them; yet he acknowledges that they are the elect according to the foreknowledge of God. In other words, the elect are those who have been chosen or foreordained to receive salvation through their faith. The theme of this epistle is that through the sanctification of the spirit and faith in the grace of the atonement of Jesus Christ, members can endure their trials and temptations and attain salvation (1:2-9). This is another way of bringing about the perfection of the saints. In the rest of the epistle, Peter gives counsel and reminds the people of doctrines and blessings that can enable them to attain this most precious gift of salvation. The beauty and the power of these admonitions remind us that we, as members of Christ's church today, can also attain our salvation if we heed the same counsel. It becomes more realistic to us if we equate this epistle with the opening addresses of our modern-day prophets, seers, and revelators at general conference.

After he reminds the saints that all of the prophets have taught, testified, and prophesied of salvation through the coming of Christ (1:10-12), Peter's first admonition is that they be holy in all their conversations as was Christ (1:13-16). He warns against reverting to their former habits, which they had practiced in ignorance, and emphasizes this by quoting from Leviticus 11:44.

Peter's second admonition is that the saints are to love one another fervently and with pure hearts (1:22). He bases this counsel upon the love the Father shows to his children "without respect of persons" (1:17), the love of Christ who was chosen or foreordained to redeem them. This love, which they have experienced in accepting the truth taught to them, has led to their rebirth. The love between a convert and a missionary can be understood only by those who experience it, just as God's love and Christ's love for us is only truly appreciated when experienced. Peter substantiates this statement with a scripture, citing Isaiah 40:6-8 as evidence that the word of God, which they had obeyed to bring about their newly born condition, is eternal. Having known these experiences, "the object of [their] faith, even the salvation of [their] souls (JST, 1 Pet. 1:9) was based upon their ability to lay aside malice, guile, and hypocrisy and to love one another according to the sincere "milk" or basic teachings of the word of God (2:1-3).

Before giving his third admonition, Peter lays a foundation upon which to build his other admonitions (2:4-9). He compares the listeners to stones out of which "a spiritual house, an holy priesthood" is built to offer sacrifices unto God through Jesus Christ (2:4-5). The chief cornerstone of this house is Jesus Christ, as the scriptures had foretold (2:6; Ps. 118:22). As a part of this spiritual house, the cornerstone will prevent them from being confounded, while, to the disobedient, that same cornerstone will become a stumbling block and an offense (2:7-8). Peter reminds them that they are a chosen generation, the foreordained house of Israel to whom this blessing was promised. (See Deut. 32:7-8.) Further, the priesthood, or authority to offer sacrifices in this house, is a royal priesthood, the priesthood of the king, or what the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants call the priesthood of the Son of God. (Alma 13:7-9; D&C 107:1-4.) He also declares them to be a holy nation, a people who have been forgiven of their sins and are collectively accepted as a righteous people of God. He tells them they are a peculiar people, meaning that their ways are different from the ways of the rest of the world (2:9). Such things as following a health code (the Word of Wisdom) or wearing a temple garment are examples of this, as is acceptance of such doctrines as the premortal life and a personal God. It should be noted that a similar description of people was revealed to Moses on Mount Sinai. His people were to be a "peculiar treasure" unto God on condition that they accept the opportunities revealed to them. (Ex. 19:5-6.) Paul also speaks of the time when Jesus Christ will appear again and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. (Titus 2:13-14.) God's people are always considered peculiar in the eyes of the world. Peter reminds his readers that in times past they, a foreordained people (the house of Israel), were rejected as God's people because of their failure to follow His counsel, but now they have again been extended the arm of mercy. With this foundation laid, Peter delivers his third admonition: to abstain from the lusts of the flesh, which war against the soul, and thus be good examples among the Gentiles (2:11-12).

Peter's fourth admonition is for the saints to submit to the ordinances of man or, as the following verses disclose, to the laws of the land—the will of God, that which will silence the ignorance of foolish men (2:13-16).

The next series of admonitions were addressed to specific groups. The fifth admonition is to those who were servants. Since, under the laws of the land, servitude was legal, Peter's advice was for them to submit themselves to their masters and endure whatever suffering this may bring. To comfort them, he refers to the suffering Christ endured, as was prophesied by Isaiah. (2:18-25; Isa. 53:4-11).

The sixth admonition is to wives, encouraging them to be good examples in a spiritual sense rather than through worldly or physical enticements (JST, 3:1-4). This example will win to the Lord others who might tend to go astray. Peter cites Sarah's obedience to righteous Abraham as an example for the women (3:5-6).

In the seventh admonition, Peter turns his attention to husbands, reminding them that they are to honor their wives, for they are heirs together of the grace of life (3:7). This is undoubtedly a reference to the eternal nature of the marriage covenant in the Lord.

Peter's eighth and final admonition to the members is an affirmation of the Savior's golden rule: "Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." (Matt. 7:12.) In Peter's words, "be ye all of one mind" and look to the blessings of God that will follow the righteous even if it requires that they suffer for their righteousness. He admonishes the saints to shun evil and do good, for the Lord is with the righteous. Their good conduct will lead to missionary work (JST, 3:8-17). To give them support in the face of suffering, he cites the suffering to which Christ subjected himself in order to bring us to God. Then, in an apparent attempt to show how good things will come from the enduring of suffering, he gives a treatise on Christ's going into the spirit world while his body was in the tomb, in order that all people might have the opportunity to receive the gospel. (3:18-22.) This great section of writing was what led President Joseph F. Smith to receive his revelation about Christ's mission in the spirit world. (See D&C 138.) The Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the Bible also clarifies Christ's mission (see JST, 3:20; 4:1, 6): it stresses that the Savior ministered to only some of those in the spirit world—namely, the righteous. (Cf. D&C 138:20-22, 29-30.) In Peter's final counsel to be "all of one mind," he urges them to have charity, which will prevent a multitude of sins, and to use their individual gifts of the Spirit to help each other (JST, 4:7-10). He further counsels them to speak or minister as the oracles of God, having authority as his servants, according to the ability with which God has blessed them (4:11).

After pronouncing a probable hearty "Amen" (4:11), Peter adds a postscript: They will face trials, as worthy candidates for the celestial kingdom; but they should rejoice rather than despair because they are suffering for Christ. He warns against suffering for the wrong reasons but tells them that it is good to suffer as Christians. In other words, we do not seek for suffering or persecution, but if it comes to us because we are living as Christians, we need not be ashamed. Peter reminds us that judgment must begin at the house of God and the righteous will scarcely be saved (4:12-19; compare 1 Ne. 22:16-19; D&C 112:23-26).

In another apparent postscript, Peter addresses the elders, [^6] those in leadership positions, and tells them to feed the flock of God, not by constraint nor for filthy lucre, but as shepherds, until the chief Shepherd shall appear (5:1-4). Several other admonitions are given to the elders, including the comment that the younger (perhaps in service rather than age) are to submit to the elder. This system of hierarchy is also followed in the church today.

The first epistle of Peter is full of timely admonitions that will bring us salvation if we will exercise our faith and follow them. This theme of the epistle is just as significant to us today as it was to the members in Asia in Peter's day.

The Second Epistle of Peter

Peter's second epistle is addressed to a more select audience than the first: to members of the church who had attained the same faith in God and Jesus Christ as had Peter and the apostles. The main theme of the letter is that through the grace of God and of Jesus their Lord, many great and precious promises had been extended to these members, and by attaining these promises, they could be "partakers of the divine nature" and escape the corruption of the world. This theme was also a theme of President David O. McKay. In general conference in October 1960, after quoting 2 Peter 1:4, President McKay said: "I have a deep admiration in my heart for Simon Peter, President of the Twelve Apostles, . . . who was only two and a half years—a little more—in the personal presence of his Lord. Before that he did not care much for the Church, but before this writing he had a testimony of the divinity of the Sonship of Jesus Christ. More than that, he had experienced that communion of the spirit with his Resurrected Lord, and speaks here of being a partaker of the divine nature." [^7] On another occasion, President McKay declared: "Peter was quite a doubtful man as he grew to manhood before he knew Christ, but long afterwards he was praying and said that we have been made partakers of the divine nature. He knew it, and you will know it some day if you will do the will, be true to self." [^8] To be a partaker of the divine nature is to know the power of God and to experience the Holy Ghost in one's life. (D&C 76:31, 35.)

In the rest of chapter 1, Peter gives instructions on what a member of the church should do after having been a partaker of the divine nature. He explains that, having escaped the corruption of the world, the saints should give all diligence to "add to [their] faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity." (2 Pet. 1:5-7.)

In commenting on these verses, Joseph Smith said: "It is not wisdom that we should have all knowledge at once presented before us; but that we should have a little at a time; then we can comprehend it. . . . The principle of knowledge is the principle of salvation. This principle can be comprehended by the faithful and diligent; and every one that does not obtain knowledge sufficient to be saved will be condemned. The principle of salvation is given us through the knowledge of Jesus Christ." [^9]

The Prophet acknowledged the depth and complexity of this chapter of Peter's epistle, declaring: "There are three grand secrets lying in this chapter which no man can dig out, unless by the light of revelation, and which unlocks the whole chapter as the things that are written are only hints of things which existed in the prophet's mind, which are not written concerning eternal glory. I am going to take up this subject by virtue of the knowledge of God in me, which I have received from heaven. The opinions of men, so far as I am concerned, are to me as the crackling of thorns under the pot, or the whistling of the wind." [^10]

He then summarized the grand secrets or keys to unlocking Peter's writings. The first, "knowledge is the power of salvation," is the essence of the statement just quoted. The second key is based on 2 Peter 1:10, making one's calling and election sure. The Prophet explained this principle:

Notwithstanding the apostle exhorts [the saints] to add to their faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, etc., yet he exhorts them to make their calling and election sure. And though they had heard an audible voice from heaven bearing testimony that Jesus was the Son of God, yet he says we have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed as unto a light shining in a dark place. Now, wherein could they have a more sure word of prophecy than to hear the voice of God saying, This is my beloved Son.

Now for the secret and grand key. Though they might hear the voice of God and know that Jesus was the Son of God, this would be no evidence that their election and calling was made sure, that they had part with Christ, and were joint heirs with Him. They then would want that more sure word of prophecy, that they were sealed in the heavens and had the promise of eternal life in the kingdom of God. Then, having this promise sealed unto them, it was an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast. Though the thunders might roll and lightnings flash, and earthquakes bellow, and war gather thick around, yet this hope and knowledge would support the soul in every hour of trial, trouble and tribulation. Then knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. [^11]

The experience of hearing an audible voice, to which Peter refers (as does Joseph Smith), is undoubtedly that of the Savior taking Peter, James, and John up on the mountain where he was transfigured before them. (Matt. 17:1-9.) From the Prophet's explanation, it seems that the three apostles did not have their calling and election made sure on that occasion. If not, this experience pointed their souls to that third key of Peter's writings given by the Prophet: "It is one thing to be on the mount and hear the excellent voice, etc., and another to hear the voice declare to you, You have a part and lot in that kingdom." [^12] The Joseph Smith Translation does not settle the issue but does give a further consideration: "We have therefore a more sure knowledge of the word of prophecy, to which word of prophecy ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scriptures is given of any private will of man." (JST, 2 Pet. 1:19-20; italics indicate changes in JST.) The disciples' more sure knowledge was the voice declaring their assured part and portion of the kingdom. The record does not say when this happened, but Peter reminds his readers that this does not come through the private or personal desires of man, but through the revelation of the Holy Ghost (v. 21), or the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Holy Ghost's stamp of approval upon an ordinance or experience (D&C 132:26; Eph. 1:13-14). [^13]

Though the Prophet did not comment on the other chapters of 2 Peter, the same keys seem to apply.

In his epistle, Peter warns against assuming that eternal life can be attained automatically or easily. As the Lord explained in the latter days, mankind "may fall from grace," therefore, "even let those who are sanctified take heed." (D&C 20:32, 34.) Peter points out the dangers of following false prophets and some of the ways in which they may attack. Using examples from the Old Testament, such as Noah and the citizens of Sodom and Gomorrah, he talks about those who, "with feigned words," would "make merchandise" of the saints. (2 Pet. 2:3.) He assures the saints that the Lord will deliver those who are godly out of such temptations and speaks of the punishment that will come upon the ungodly (2:9), particularly those who "walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness," and "despise governments" and speak evil of dignitaries (2:10). In support of the idea that these are warnings to those who are sanctified or whose calling and election is made sure, Peter declares that if such individuals are overcome by temptations after gaining the knowledge of the Lord, their "end is worse with them than the beginning," and "it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness." (2 Pet. 2:20-21.)

Having delivered his timely warning, Peter now turns to the preventive measures for not being overcome. The saints are to be mindful of the words spoken by the holy prophets and of the commandments of the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ. (2 Pet. 3:2.) This is, of course, another example of many admonitions in the standard works to search the scriptures. He warns of those scoffers in the last days who will question the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ (3:3), and gives three guidelines or reminders of his first coming: first, "that one day with the Lord [is] as a thousand years" for man; second, that the delay of his coming is such that all will have an opportunity to repent; and third, that Christ "will come as a thief in the night" to the wicked, when the people of the world are not looking for him or least expect him (3:8-10; cf. D&C 106:4).

As a conclusion to his comments, Peter admonishes the people to be "holy" in their conversation and godly in their actions as they look for and work for the coming of the Lord. Those who are diligent will be "found of him [the Lord] in peace, without spot, and blameless." (2 Pet. 3:11-14.) Peter points to Paul as a second witness to his testimony, while acknowledging that some who are unlearned and unstable wrest with Paul's writings and other scriptural writings as well.

The second epistle of Peter is full of timely instructions that are quite different from those of the first epistle, and contains important and perhaps deep doctrine that the Prophet Joseph Smith has unlocked through revelation. This doctrine of making one's calling and election sure, said the Prophet, "ought (in its proper place) to be taught, for God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them." [^14]

Such are the epistles of Peter. He was the president of the Twelve Apostles, president of the Church of Jesus Christ, and he penned the most sublime language of any of the apostles. May we each study his writings and learn how we may be elevated in thought and become more noble and majestic subjects in the kingdom of God.

Notes

Monte S. Nyman is professor of ancient scripture, associate dean of Religious Education, and director of Book of Mormon research in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] David Hurst, editor, Corpus Christianorum 121A (Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 1984).
[^2] Eusebius Hist. Eccl. 3.33.7; see 1 Tim. 6:20.
[^3] Didache 11.6: "And when an Apostle goes forth let him accept nothing but bread till he reach his night's lodging; but if he ask for money, he is a false prophet."
[^4] More literally the verses read: "Because those who witness [or, the witnesses] are three, the spirit and the water and the blood, and the three are for the one [that is, are for one purpose or goal]."
[^5] Bruce M. Metzger, The Text of the New Testament, 2nd ed. (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1968); Bruce M. Metzger, A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament (London and New York: United Bible Societies, 1971); Raymond E. Brown, The Epistles of John, Anchor Bible, vol. 30 (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1982): 775-87.
[^6] "Fear does not exist in true love, but rather whole or complete love casts out fear because fear has [—brings] punishment [or, eternal retribution], and he who fears has not been made perfect (teteleiotai) in (God's) love."
[^7] Telestial in this sense probably means the last or final kingdom (of glory). In the New Testament, Paul uses the word katachthonion (Philip. 2:10) for telestial, in contrast to epigeion (terrestrial) and epouranion (celestial). Other contemporary documents may use the adjective hypogeion in the same sense.
[^8] Conference Report, April 1963, p. 95.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 297.
[^10] Ibid., p. 304.
[^11] Ibid., p. 298.
[^12] Ibid., p. 306.
[^13] Ibid., p. 149.
[^14] Ibid. For a detailed treatment of this subject, see Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 3:325-55.
