Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

16

THE EPISTLES OF JOHN

(1, 2, 3 John)

THOMAS W. MACKAY

Three of the letters known as the General Epistles (that is, James, 1 and 2 Peter, 1, 2, and 3 John, and Jude) were apparently written by the apostle John. While the second and third epistles are very brief, the first is much more extensive in its development of doctrinal themes. The major messages in 1 John are fellowship, obedience, light and darkness, love, anti-Christ, being like God, and the intercession of Christ. Before discussing these points, we appropriately examine in a cursory fashion questions of textual reliability, authenticity, and authorship, including date and setting for the three epistles. Our body of evidence includes biblical manuscripts, patristic citations, and some historical notes by Eusebius. Although a few commentaries were composed on individual General Epistles, such as Augustine on 1 John, nothing systematic and comprehensive was produced before the Venerable Bede of Jarrow, who wrote in Anglo-Saxon England during the first two decades of the eighth century. [^1]

Authorship and Authenticity

The Johannine authorship of the three Epistles of John is strongly attested. Polycarp and other sources of the second century quote from the first epistle. By the fourth century, the epistles were among the homologoumena or generally accepted books, while 2 Peter, Jude, and the book of Revelation were still not universally received. Since the unnamed author is an eyewitness (1 John 1:1-4; 4:14), since the style and language are similar to that of John's Gospel, and since the references in the second century name the author as John, this has been practically unanimously accepted through the centuries.

While the language itself is similar, however, the arrangement of thoughts and ideas does differ. The first epistle does not have the same unified grouping of ideas and motifs that we immediately detect in the Gospel of John. Consequently, in discussing the epistle, we will reach out to draw together different passages somewhat removed from each other.

According to Irenaeus, a late second-century writer, John spent the latter part of his life in and near Ephesus. We also note that the letters to the seven churches in Revelation 2 and 3 were addressed to Ephesus and six important cities in surrounding Asia Minor: Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea. Although the precise destination of 1 John is not given, we may safely presume that it was to people in those areas. Further, the content of 1 John presupposes an acquaintance with the Gospel, and it also refers to doctrinal problems from apostates. Thus, the date may be between about A.D. 70 and 90, probably closer to the latter date. But the problems of anti-Christ were already being signaled by Paul in the fifteen years before A.D. 62, when he was taken to Rome. Second Peter prophetically and Jude historically both point to the incipient apostasy of the "Great Gap" of 70 to 100; 1 John is to be dated to that period. According to Hegesippus, who compiled an early history of the Christian church and whose writings were quoted and used by Eusebius in the beginning of the fourth century, this is the time when the Gnostics began to flourish and to teach openly what they had secretly been espousing:

Until then the church remained a pure and uncorrupted virgin, for those who attempted to corrupt the healthful rule of the Savior's preaching, if they existed at all, lurked in obscure darkness. But when the sacred band of the Apostles and the generation of those to whom it had been vouchsafed to hear with their own ears the divine wisdom had reached the several ends of their lives, then the federation of godless error took its beginning through the deceit of false teachers who, seeing that none of the Apostles still remained, barefacedly tried against the preaching of the truth the counter-proclamation of "knowledge falsely so-called." [^2]

The author of 2 John is an elder (Greek presbyteros), a term used in the late first and early second century for apostle, even as it is used today by the Latter-day Saints. (See D&C 20:38.) In writing to the "elect lady and her children" John warns against deceiving teachers and false doctrines. In the Didache (an authentic Christian text of the late first century, first discovered and published about a century ago), the anonymous author warns members of the church to shun anyone who taught for pay. [^3] Again, the circumstances of 2 John fit best about A.D. 90, and 3 John, addressed to a local leader named Gaius, was probably composed about the same time.

Textual Reliability: The "Johannine Comma"

The text of the epistles is fairly well attested in the early manuscripts of the fourth to sixth centuries, and there are no early papyri such as we find particularly for the Gospels and the Pauline corpus. There are just a few words in the "Received Text," used by translators for the King James Version, that have quite probably been added to what John originally wrote, but for the most part they make no appreciable difference to most readers. However, one significant passage in 1 John 5:7-8 has clearly been added, the so-called Johannine Comma. Translated, the text for those two verses should read as follows, using the words of the Authorized Version: "For there are three that bear record, the spirit and the water and the blood, and these three agree in one." [^4] As the textual problem of the passage has been adequately treated elsewhere, we restrict our observations to noting that (1) there are only four late Greek manuscripts in which the passage is found, and three of the four have had it added by someone writing centuries later than the original scribe of the manuscript; (2) patristic evidence for the passage is scanty at best, for it is not in the Greek Fathers, and the Latin Fathers use it only in the later period; (3) the earliest attestation of the passage is in a late fourth century Latin treatise composed by the Spanish heretic Priscillian or one of his followers; (4) it is found in none of the manuscripts of the ancient translations of the Bible except progressively in Latin manuscripts emanating from North Africa and Italy, but not in the manuscripts that preserve Jerome's Latin Vulgate translation, namely the Fuldensis (ca. 541-47), the Amiatinus (ca. 690 and before 716), or the Vercelli (early ninth century). [^5] So the more expanded passage in the Authorized Version does not accurately represent what John wrote.

Doctrinal Themes

Fellowship. The primary purpose of 1 John is to state the terms and effects of our fellowship with God or our failure to develop such a relationship. In Greek, the word for fellowship is koinonia, a noun from the adjective meaning common or shared. The corresponding verb, koinoneo, means to share, to have a share, to participate, and so the agent or person who does such an action is a companion, partner, or sharer (koinonos). Therefore, the abstract noun translated fellowship also means association, communion, close relationship, participation, or sharing and was appropriately used regarding the marital relationship.

Inherent in the notion of Christian fellowship is the idea of sharing property and livelihood such as characterized the Saints, as recorded by Luke in Acts 2:44-45: "And all that believed were together, and had all things common [koina]; and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need." Ignatius, writing in the first decade of the second century, reaffirms this Christian association. Such an ideal was also practiced in some of the early Greek philosophical brotherhoods, and Plato's famous saying is that "friends have things in common" (koina ta ton philon) or "the possessions of friends are shared."

For John, there are natural consequences of having a fellowship with God: we do not walk in the darkness but rather in the light of God (1 John 1:5-7), and so the atoning blood of Christ cleanses us if we acknowledge and confess that we as mortals have sinned (1 John 1:7-9). Otherwise we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us. We love; we do not hate. We foster light and truth; we shun deception and darkness.

The sinner who confesses his faults has Jesus for an advocate or intercessor, a mediator who is called to intervene and help (Greek parakletos, Latin advocatus). This is the term used in John's Gospel for the Spirit (John 14:16, 26; 15:26; 16:7), and at John 14:16, his calling the Holy Spirit "another comforter" (parakletos) implies that Christ, too, is a comforter or mediator, just as he is so identified at 1 John 2:1.

Since fellowship includes the notion of personal acquaintance or knowledge, John states that we who know him will have our manner of life in accordance with God's commandments (1 John 2:3-5); we "walk in the light" (1 John 1:7).

Again, the whole idea of knowing God and associating with him after mortal death is one that can only be in truth, light, and obedience. We cannot fake our way into the kingdom. Therefore, perhaps the single most transcendent statement in the epistle is in 1 John 3:2-3: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." The natural consequence of coming to know God is to desire to emulate him, to have our closest friendship with him. And to be like God is to know him. Thus we more fully understand Jesus' prayer in John 17:3 where he defines eternal life as knowing God and Christ: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." In this verse the form of the Greek verb for know emphasizes the continuing personal acquaintance and friendship between God and man, a fellowship that commences in this life. Eternal life, therefore, becomes the natural continuation of a close association enjoyed in this life into the eternities. By John's definition, we ought definitely not to think of eternal life as something thrust upon a person unprepared or unacquainted with God and his ways. So at 1 John 3:2, "we shall be like him" points to the integrity of life by obedience to God's commandments, changing our nature to resemble God more closely. We cannot deceive God, who knows all things. (1 John 3:20.)

Hope. Another of John's doctrinal words is hope. In Greek there is a much stronger sense of expectation and anticipation than our word hope conveys. A preferable translation is "firm or confident expectation." In 1 John 3:3 we learn that those of us who expect to become like God and resemble Christ when we see him are motivated to purify ourselves, that is, to emulate God all the more. Our hope is founded on a literal sense of Christ's intercession: we come to know him and desire to follow his ways, and in turn, he plants deep in our hearts the confident expectation that "we shall be like him."

Love. Of all the characteristics of God, love is supreme. Christ's disciples are to love one another. (1 John 3:11; cf. John 13:34; 5:12, 17; 2 John 1:5.) By contrast, the works of darkness are hatred, anger, and jealousy, and such were the influences on Cain that motivated him to slay his brother. True love manifests itself by deeds of kindness and mercy, exhibiting compassion in very fact and not just in word. By manifesting toward our fellow mortals a sense of love, not hatred, we demonstrate that we have fellowship with God and emulate and mirror his love for us. (Cf. 1 John 4:16-21.)

Perfection. Elsewhere in the epistle, John (1 John 4:18) [^6] uses a Greek word meaning perfect, complete, whole, adult, married, or one who had received his initiation ordinances (Greek verb teleioo from the adjective teleios; the baseword noun is telos from which the word telestial seems to have been formed). [^7] The same verb is also found in John 4:34, where it means to fulfill or make complete. As an adjective, this word was a strong part of the Christian vocabulary, for Matthew uses it in Matthew 5:48: "Be ye therefore [or, ye shall then (accordingly) be(come)] perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."

Anti-Christ. In 1 John we encounter the word anti-Christ (e.g., 1 John 2:18-23; 4:1-3). While we ordinarily associate the prefix anti with opposition and antagonism, the base meaning in Greek is "instead of" or "in place of." In John's words, it is as though Satan were setting himself up as a mirror image imitation of Christ, and that the falseness of the imitation intensifies the opposition that motivates Satan while also being a manifestation of the conflict of light and darkness. Since we must have the true intercessor and be filled with his true light and love, the counterfeit is the more reprehensible, for it provides a false security as it repulses God's own emissary.

And how are we to detect this anti-Christ? John's simple statement of confessing that Jesus has come in the flesh is disarming but precise. Already during the last decades of the first century there was a growing heresy of Docetism (from the Greek word meaning to seem or to appear)—the notion that Jesus only seemed to be mortal. Clearly, John does not mean that someone must merely mouth the words that Jesus came in the flesh. The intent is that in such a confession, an entire range of doctrines is accepted, including the divine fatherhood of God, the literal atonement and resurrection of Christ, and the concomitant promise of resurrection and glory for mankind redeemed by the great expiatory sacrifice. And beyond words and doctrines, implicit in John's statement is the notion that the hearers will be able to discern the commitment and spirit underlying the confession—whether it is motivated by and reflects the love and spirit of God. Otherwise, it is another manifestation of the apostasy that was creeping into the church, for, as Paul's words to the Ephesian saints in Acts 20:29-30 indicate, the apostasy (a Greek word meaning an overthrow of political power, a deliberate defection of loyalty or a coup d'etat) resulted from a revolution within the church, not external persecution: "For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them."

This prophecy finds answer in the historical reflection by Hegesippus quoted earlier in this article. Thus, John indicates that "many false prophets" have already "gone out into the world" (1 John 4:1). He therefore encourages his readers to overcome the world (1 John 5:4-5) and to possess for and in themselves the witness or testimony of God. We are to be bearers of light, full of love, growing to become like God, so that he may receive us as his own, for "when he shall appear, we shall be like him."

Notes

Thomas W. Mackay is professor of Greek and Latin at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3:20.
[^2] Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Jude and His Letter," Guide to Acts and the Apostles' Letters (Provo: BYU Press, 1983), p. 115.
[^3] James H. Charlesworth, The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, vol. 1 (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1983).
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 3:423.
[^5] H. C. Thiessen, Introduction to the New Testament (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 1971), p. 294.
[^6] R. H. Charles, Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, vol. 2 (London: Oxford University Press, 1913), p. 408.
[^7] J. D. Douglas, ed., The New Bible Dictionary (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 1965), p. 712.
