Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

17

REFUGE IN GOD'S LOVE

(Jude)

CATHERINE THOMAS

Jude's little letter evokes several intriguing questions for gospel students: Who was Jude and what was his authority to write to the saints? Why do several passages in Jude's letter bear strong resemblance to verses in 2 Peter? Why would Jude use apocryphal sources for his message? These are the main issues of Jude's letter, as well as his insight into the close of the early Christian dispensation, which revelation speaks also to us as we near the end of ours.

Who Was He?

"Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James." (Jude 1:1.)

He was modest. Instead of writing that he was the brother of the Lord, which he was (Matt. 13:55), he wrote that he was servant to the Lord and brother of James the apostle, who was also a brother of the Lord (Gal. 1:19). Was Jude an apostle? The Prophet Joseph Smith adds to this verse, "Jude, the servant of God, called of Jesus Christ, and brother of James." The Greek of Luke 6:16 and Acts 1:13 lists one of the apostles as "Judas of James," which is translated "Jude . . . brother of James" (JST, Jude 1:1). The Greek name "Judas" is rendered "Jude" in English to distinguish him from the traitor and from the patriarch Judah of the tribe of Israel. He was married and apparently traveled with his wife in his apostolic duties. (1 Cor. 9:5.) The fourth century historian Eusebius records (quoting Hegesippus) that the Roman emperor Domitian (A.D. 81-96) searched out any survivors of the family of the Lord to ascertain whether there was any threat to his reign among them. He found grandsons of Jude, simple farmers, whom he dismissed as harmless. [^1]

Because of many similar passages in Jude and 2 Peter, scholars contend over which came first. Stylistic and other evidence suggests that Peter wrote first; somewhat later, Jude wrote his letter, using some of the senior apostle's ideas. A comparison of the two letters reveals that Jude added his own insights, that he was not merely derivative, but made a significant contribution of his own to the canon. Where Peter's letter points to the future when serious apostasy will infest the church, Jude's letter conveys the urgency, the crisis, of the actual present infection. If Jude indeed quoted Peter's letter, he must then have written some time after about A.D. 67, for 2 Peter is dated toward the end of Nero's reign (A.D. 54-68). Since Jude was apparently dead when Domitian went searching for members of the Lord's family, and the Apostasy had progressed, Jude's letter may be dated roughly at A.D. 80. [^2]

The Love of God

"To them that are loved by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied." (Jude 1:1-2.)

The King James Version reads sanctified instead of loved. The two words in Greek, respectively, (h)agiasmenois and agapemenois, are so similar that a scribe could easily mistake the one for the other. Manuscript evidence supports the word loved here. Further support for this correction comes from the end of Jude's letter where he says, "Keep yourselves in the love of God" (1:21), making the theme of God's love serve as a frame for his message. Another possible translation for this passage could be "to those who are loved in God the Father," or united in God the Father's love.

Jude comes right to his point: the crisis of apostasy is upon the saints. They live on a battlefield, though many saints then, as now, may not have realized the intensity of the conflict, so subtle, so sense-numbing are the adversary's weapons. Prophecies written earlier, for example, in 2 Peter or in Matthew 24:24 (or in 1 Enoch, which we will consider further on) declared that false teachers would seek to deceive and dismantle the church. The leaders also knew that they would succeed, but the fight was for individuals, not for the organization itself, and the messages written may have been at least as much for our day as for theirs. Satan and his colleagues had earnestly joined battle, turning God's love into lasciviousness and denying the Savior, the very personification of God's love. The saints too must be aware of the gravity of the contest. Paul declared, "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand." (Eph. 6:12-13.) Jude's letter teems with words about preservation, salvation, protection, guarding in God's love. Here he identifies a potent weapon against apostasy: the power of the love of God.

Jude and Apocryphal Works

"And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day." (Jude 1:6.)

Jude cites examples of those delivered out of Egypt who later lost faith, of angels in the premortal world who left their high position and rebelled against God, of Israelites who perished in Sodom and Gomorrah, of the devil himself, and of Cain, Balaam, and Core. (Jude 1:5-11.) What do all these have in common? Once they all had knowledge of salvation, but they rebelled against it. Anarchy, then, is Jude's counter-theme.

It seems likely that Jude had before him, whether in mind or on desk, at least two apocryphal works. His reference to the angels who fell is quite similar to passages in the Jewish apocryphal book 1 Enoch. Compare Jude 1:6 with 1 Enoch 12:4: "Enoch, scribe of righteousness, go and make known to the Watchers of heaven who have abandoned [same Greek word as in Jude 1:6, apolipontes] the high heaven, the holy eternal place. . . . There shall not be peace unto them even forever." And 1 Enoch 10:11-14: "And to Michael God said . . . 'Bind [the Watchers] . . . underneath the rocks of the ground until the day of their judgment and of their consummation, until the eternal judgment is concluded. In those days they will lead them into the bottom of the fire—and in torment—in the prison (where) they will be locked up forever.'" [^3]

The Watchers is Enoch's name for the fallen angels. We shall find additional references to 1 Enoch in Jude. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie observes, the apocryphal 1 Enoch "contains many remarkable and inspired teachings and also considerable trashy nonsense." [^4] Many apocryphal works were available to the early Christians. Several of these works (some of which the Lord warned Joseph Smith about in D&C 91) retain vestiges of truth that were only alluded to in the canon or were absent altogether. The doctrine of the premortal existence and the fall of Satan's followers was one of these truths. Called of God, Jude knew how to sift the truth. The Apostle Paul quoted from Greek poets, obviously not endorsing their works as scripture, but rather quoting from them what was true. [^5]

"Likewise also these (filthy) dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. . . . In those things they corrupt themselves." (Jude 1:8, 10.)

These apostates defile the flesh ("filthy" does not occur in the Greek text) on the one hand and reject authority on the other. The two go together. Where one has forsaken internal discipline, he also rejects the external. Anarchists, these apostates reject all restraint on their desires. The Greek word arche in the passage, "the angels which kept not their first estate (arche)" has several meanings: beginning, origin, ruler, authority, rule, or office. Thus an anarchist is one who rejects authority. In a context similar to Jude's, Peter elaborated on anarchists: "[The Lord knows how to deal with] them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government. Presumptuous are they, selfwilled, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities." (2 Pet. 2:10.)

"Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil. . . about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee." (Jude 1:9.)

Here Jude clarifies a text in 2 Peter. Peter refers obliquely to the event of Michael's and Satan's dispute in his letter: "Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not railing accusation against them before the Lord." (2 Pet. 2:11.) Jude's reference is more specific, and again it is from an apocryphal book, the Assumption of Moses. This book survives only in fragments, and this reference to the dispute between the devil and Michael is not preserved, but ancient writers give it as coming from the Assumption of Moses. Apparently in this apocryphal text Michael was commissioned to bury Moses. Satan opposed the burial on the ground that, as he was the lord of matter, the body should be given to him. He also slandered Moses by calling him a murderer (of the Egyptian). [^6] But even where the devil acted in his usual anarchic role, Michael determined to leave the rebuke to God. Jude's allusion provides a helpful warning for zealous saints. Alma gives similar advice: "I would exhort you to have patience, and that ye bear with all manner of afflictions; that ye do not revile against those who do cast you out . . . lest ye become sinners like unto them." (Alma 34:40; emphasis added.) And Alma again: "Now, as ye have begun to teach the word, . . . I would that ye would be diligent and temperate in all things. . . . Use boldness, but not overbearance; and also see that ye bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love." (Alma 38:10, 12.) This battle for souls then is not to be waged with rebukes and confrontations, but on a different front: in the heart of the saint.

"These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding [Gk. shepherding] themselves without fear." (Jude 1:12.)

Just what the agape feasts or love feasts (see also 2 Pet. 2:13-14) of the earliest Christians were is not entirely clear. The saints have always been commanded to gather together in fellowship, to provide for needy saints, and to take the sacrament. Among the Jews, meals for fellowship and brotherhood were common; the Gentiles also had such gatherings. [^7] As both groups became Christian, it was natural for them to continue this practice in what may have been sacrament-type meetings with the addition of fellowship suppers. Jude warns of licentious persons who enter into these member gatherings, outwardly saintly but inwardly rapacious.

This warning speaks to us in more than one way. We may not entertain many rapacious people in our gatherings, but we surely face the problems of licentiousness among us, some in our number being seduced in more subtle ways. Because spiritual experience taps our deepest feelings, and because intimacy arises in shared spiritual experience, the distinctions between God's love and human desire may blur. Satan, the great counterfeiter, deceives many through desire. The Greek word translated lust (epithumia) in the King James Version (see, for example, Jude 1:16) does not mean unlawful sexual desire, but may refer to any strong desire. Therefore, "lusts of the flesh" can refer to a craving for anything that pertains to the mind or the body. Under the adversary's influence, these cravings can become deeply compelling and begin to feel like real needs. His victims are tossed and driven and chained by desire, and they cannot remember their former spiritual knowledge. Deluded, some may try to give what they call love in order to get love. Jude makes the distinction between carnal and spiritual clear: those who prey on others to satisfy their own emotional or physical desires, even using love to get love, lack godly love and will feel forever hungry. God himself died to break these chains of hell and redeem us from the delusion and the grasp of the "awful monster." (2 Ne. 9:10.)

"Clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever." (Jude 1:12-13.)

Second Peter 2:17 calls the apostates "wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest." Jude seems to recall Peter's letter from memory, for he has mixed some of Peter's images, or perhaps he has deliberately modified them for his own purposes. Again Jude apparently alludes to 1 Enoch, where water and clouds and trees and the motions of stars and seas obey God according to divine law and harmony, but blasphemers and harsh speakers of the Lord (cf. Jude 1:15) are out of harmony with eternal law and must perish (1 Enoch 2:1-10; 18:14-16). Jude's apostates are like nature that operates outside God's law, representing spiritual barrenness and anarchy.

There is really only one law: the law of God. It governs the development to Godhood, preserving and sanctifying all who obey it. Many seek to become a law to themselves, and their private laws do not have power to protect them. "That which is governed by law is also preserved by law . . . [and] that which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself . . . cannot be sanctified by law." (D&C 88:34-35.) Jude urges the saints to find refuge in God's law and in his love. Lehi exclaims, "But behold, the Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell; I have beheld his glory, and I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love." (2 Ne. 1:15.) Within that circle we have abundant inner life—richness of life. Jesus came to make entrance into the circle possible: to connect us with the Father and with his love. Outside the circle, the life we have is described as "nothing" by Nephi: "Wherefore, the Lord God hath given a commandment that all men should have charity, which charity is love. And except they should have charity they were nothing." (2 Ne. 26:30.) The Savior declared, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.)

"And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints." (Jude 1:14.)

As we have seen, several of Jude's themes and figures occur in more than one apocryphal book. For example, both the book of Enoch and the Assumption of Moses treat the coming of the Lord in glory, the judgment of the wicked, and similar nature motifs alluding to the wicked. Jude may have had access to both books, but in what forms it is impossible to say. The most that can be safely said is that he shows familiarity with material traditional in his culture. [^8] Of course, direct revelation is another significant source. Joseph Smith said that Enoch himself appeared to Jude and thus Jude was able to bear record of the vision of Enoch. [^9] Compare Jude's Enoch prophecy (1:14-16) with Enoch's vision of the coming of the Lord as contained in the book of Moses:

And the Lord said unto Enoch: As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you. . . . Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other. . . . And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the space of a thousand years; but before that day he saw great tribulations among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgments of the Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked. (Moses 7:60, 63, 65-66.)

The similarities between the apocryphal book of Enoch and the inspired vision of Enoch are remarkable, as Hugh Nibley has observed. [^10]

"To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage [Greek for profit or gain]." (Jude 1:15-16.)

This verse also recalls a passage in the Assumption of Moses (the parentheses indicate places where the editor has tried to restore missing text): "But really they consume the goods of the (poor) saying their acts are according to justice, (while in fact they are simply) exterminators, deceitfully seeking to conceal themselves so that they will not be known as completely godless because of their criminal deeds (committed) all the day long, saying, 'We shall have feasts, even luxurious winings and dinings. Indeed, we shall behave ourselves as princes.' They, with hand and mind, will touch impure things, yet their mouths will speak enormous things, and they will even say, 'Do not touch me, lest you pollute me in the position I occupy.'" [^11]

The very presence of these apostates signals the arrival of the "last time." (Jude 1:18.) This may refer to two periods in history: the termination and apostasy of the early Christian era, and the latter part of our own dispensation prior to the Second Coming. Compare here 2 Peter 2:13 and 18, which treat the same subject in similar vocabulary. Peter also seems to allude to this apocryphal work.

The Power of the Love of God

"But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life." (Jude 1:20-21.)

The earlier verses in Jude have been primarily a warning against and a description of hard-core apostates. No rebuke, no confrontation with them will avail any good thing. But Jude indicates now that to build oneself up in the faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, and keeping oneself in the love of God, especially extending refuge to others, are the most potent armaments in the battle against apostasy.

"And of some have compassion, making a difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." (Jude 1:22-24.)

This passage is difficult in the Greek and may have preserved a scribal error. A more likely translation may be, "Be helpful to the doubting (or hesitating) souls; save some by snatching them from the flames; on others have mercy in fear (be cautious), hating even the garment spotted from the flesh." Jude calls us to exercise discernment in offering love. We must love like God in order to be preserved and developed by his law. "Except ye have charity ye can in nowise be saved." (Moro. 10:21.) Through our personal gift of the Holy Ghost, we receive that divine element known as God's love. The use of this love prevents as well as covers a multitude of sins because of the power and insight God's love imparts. (JST, 1 Pet. 4:8.) God's love is not based on feeling, but transcends human emotion and is extended by true saints to all. It is based on godly perception and the intent to nurture spiritual growth; it embraces reverence for human agency.

What then is the nature of the battle? It is to cut through the delusions of our own power and submit to God's power and will. We may learn what love is not. It is a delusion to think that we can fix up or save another. If we try to change another, seeking to shape too specifically what we feel that person ought to be, say, give, or do, our help may really be interference. The more anxious, the more militant we are, the more we may turn away those who need our love. We want to attract others to the gospel. Those who practice kindness and tolerance draw others to the Lord. Through them, godly love flows as a spiritual gift. Such persons, revering agency, avoid feeling responsible for, or too anxious about, others' choices or behavior, no matter how closely related they may be. We learn to leave to God's tender care those whom we cannot influence. The prophet Jacob feared that his overanxiety for his charges would shake his firmness in the Spirit. (Jacob 4:18; cf. Alma 29:3-4, 7-8.) We can do God's work effectively only by doing it his way.

The Lord instructs those who would embark on soul-saving: "Faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work. Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence." Then the Lord, acknowledging that we might feel deficient in a number of these qualities, adds, "Ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." (D&C 4:5-7; emphasis added.)

George F. Richards, president of the Council of the Twelve, related a unique experience with the love of God:

More than 40 years ago I had a dream which I am sure was from the Lord. In this dream I was in the presence of my Savior as he stood mid-air. He spoke no word to me, but my love for him was such that I have not words to explain. I know no mortal man can love the Lord as I experienced that love for the Savior unless God reveals it to him. I would have remained in his presence, but there was a power drawing me away from him.

As a result of that dream, I had this feeling that no matter what might be required at my hands, what the gospel might entail unto me, I would do what I should be asked to do even to the laying down of my life. . . .

If only I can be with my Savior and have that same sense of love that I had in that dream, it will be the goal of my existence, the desire of my life. [^12]

"Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen." (Jude 1:24-25.)

Observe the parallels in the foregoing verse with this verse from Enoch's vision: "I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven, which is broad as eternity; whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by me shall never fall; wherefore, blessed are they of whom I have spoken, for they shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy." (Moses 7:53.) Jude and Enoch have foreseen that a day when the soul devoted to the study and dissemination of God's love will be crowned with that final perfection which so eludes us in this life. (See Moro. 10:32-33.)

Jude's instruction to the early church and also to us is essentially this: (1) Let each saint beware, for in the battle for souls, even the very elect can fall; (2) let each seek refuge in the Spirit and love of God, ever refining himself; (3) let each get involved in providing loving refuge for others. Jude reminds us of our agency as well as our power to wield God's love. In this dispensation it is our great opportunity to assist in the preparations for the Second Coming of our Savior. As world conditions worsen and more refugees flee from the lusts of the flesh, the saints must provide the refuge.

Notes

Catherine Thomas is an instructor in ancient scripture and a doctoral candidate in ancient history at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] We must develop a sensitivity to spiritual promptings as they relate to the study of the Revelation of John. Do the scriptures themselves give the key to the esoteric language? The vision given to John revealed the history and destiny of the earth in chronological order. Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, pp. 57, 323.
[^2] We must have a broad knowledge of the gospel and the standard works. Do the prophets give the key to the esoteric language? The major emphasis of John's vision is only a small part of the chronology. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938), p. 290.
[^3] We must diligently study the book of Revelation itself, probing, pondering, and searching for understanding. Does the nature of the symbol give insights into its significance? The chronological narrative of the vision is interrupted periodically with "teaching interludes." Bruce R. McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," Ensign, September 1975, p. 87.
[^4] Ibid., p. 89; emphasis added.
[^5] Ibid., p. 86.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 553.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 291.
[^8] Ibid., p. 289.
[^9] James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, 3d ed. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1916), p. 308; Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 3:527-29.
[^10] Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation 1 (Salt Lake City: The Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1953): 264; see also D&C 133:23.
[^11] Eldred G. Smith, Conference Report, April 1970, p. 142; see also 1 Nephi 22:26.
[^12] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 290.
