Robert L. Millet, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 6: Acts to Revelation ( 1987)

19

WHITHER THE EARLY CHURCH?

S. KENT BROWN

The one fact uniformly attested by the early Christian writers themselves was that the church would not survive. The New Testament authors, as well as those of succeeding decades, continually underscored this theme. The earliest Christian writer, Paul, was one of the best witnesses of the eroding forces that were already washing away the foundations of the church. In one letter we read that within two or three years after he had spent considerable time in central Asia Minor, many Christians there had turned from the gospel he had preached to something else. (Gal. 1:6-12; 3:15.) Near the end of his ministry, Paul wrote to Timothy that "all they which are in Asia" had turned away. (2 Tim. 1:15.) His epistles to the church at Corinth illustrate how unstable were the Christians there. When we read his letters to the saints in Colossae, Thessalonica, and Ephesus, we sense that an intra-Christian struggle over points of doctrine and policy persisted and festered continuously. Further, a great portion of chapters 2 and 3 of Hebrews is devoted to warning the Christianized Jews lest they lose what they had received from the Savior's atonement.

In a related vein, as we read the first letter to Timothy we are impressed that here Paul was calmly laying down straightforward instructions to his longtime friend who had recently been called as an ecclesiastical authority in Ephesus. However, in 2 Timothy we sense that Timothy had by now become deeply discouraged because of the severe problems that faced the church, for people were turning away from the true path in droves.

One cumulative impression we receive from reading these letters, then, is that Paul and his companions spent considerable time and energy trying to smother the flames of apostasy. The writings of Paul and the book of Acts, however, sketch only the briefest outline of what happened during a few short decades in Palestine, Syria, Asia Minor, and eastern Greece. And these areas comprise but a modest segment of the territory around the Mediterranean Sea. Thus, the question comes to mind: What about the rest of the church during this and later periods?

At best, our sources of information about the church in other areas are meager and, frequently, rather late. Although the Christian movement had its origins among Galileans, we know most about the Jewish Christian community in Jerusalem from the early chapters of the book of Acts. Of Gentile converts, Cornelius was the most notable (Acts 10), but he was not the first. Nicolas of Antioch, one of the seven men chosen to manage temporal affairs among Christians in Jerusalem (Acts 6:2-6), seems to have had that honor, although one could build a case that the man possessed by the "legion" of demons in the country of the Gadarenes was probably a Gentile (Luke 8:26-39). In Acts 6:5, Nicolas is called "a proselyte." This means that he had once been a convert to Judaism from paganism. Only afterward did he become a Christian.

It was in Nicolas's hometown, Antioch, the capital of the Roman province of Syria, that Gentiles first joined the church in large numbers. We are told that Christian missionaries in Antioch initially preached only to Jews. (Acts 11:19.) A short time later, Jewish Christians from Cyprus and Cyrene began preaching there and "spake unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord." (Acts 11:20-21.) Subsequently, Barnabas and Paul preached at Antioch for a year, a period during which members of the church there came to be known for the first time as Christians. (Acts 11:25-26.) It was the success of proselyting efforts among Gentiles in Antioch that formed one key point in the official decision of the church to allow Gentile converts to become members without having to live the law of Moses. (Acts 15:1-29; Gal. 2:1-10.)

When this decision was made at the Jerusalem Conference, it was also agreed that Paul would go to the Gentiles and Peter would preach among Jews. (Gal. 2:7-9.) A question arises in this connection: What about Paul's habit of preaching in Jewish synagogues when he first arrived in a city, even after the agreement? Was he breaking this understanding with Peter and others? To understand his actions, we must determine whether the agreement applied to proselyting among Jews in contrast to Gentiles or whether their agreement involved a geographical division of labor. That is, was Paul to preach in localities that had few Jewish inhabitants and Peter in those where large Jewish communities were established? From what Luke narrated in Acts about Paul's missionary efforts after the agreement was made, Paul and Peter must have understood that their division of labor included a division of territory. For it was rare indeed that Peter, or any of the twelve apostles, spent time in areas where Paul was proselyting. Even when Peter visited Antioch (Gal. 2:11), he did not appear to be engaged in missionary work.

Peter's part of the agreement would have pertained to the members of the Twelve. (Gal. 2:9.) Though we have to rely principally on apocryphal works to learn where some of these apostles preached, [^1] it is worth noting that only in the case of John was there any real overlapping of the territory assigned to Paul, namely, in and near Ephesus. And this exception arose only after Paul's death.

Later tradition unanimously agrees that John worked out of Ephesus during the last half of the first century. Hence, we can feel reasonably safe in understanding that the three letters of John also reflect conditions among Christians of western Asia Minor after the death of Paul. These three epistles outline a portrait almost identical to that in Paul's letters: the church was riven with competing factions.

Among John's letters, we can also include the seven short notes in chapters 2 and 3 of the book of Revelation. These were addressed to specific congregations in cities near the west coast of Asia Minor. Moreover, they allow us a glimpse of how the church fared there until about A.D. 90. Interestingly, Paul had preached in many of these cities some thirty or forty years earlier. The fact that, when John was instructed to write these letters, he had been exiled to Patmos, an island fifty or so miles southwest of Ephesus, indicates that the churches in western Asia Minor had been undergoing serious persecutions. And the evidence from these brief letters themselves supports this. What is more, the Lord accused some of these churches of having fallen headlong into apostasy.

Except for the letters of Paul and John, the remaining letters in the New Testament leave us to guess concerning Christian activities in various places during the first century. The only possible exception is the first epistle of Peter, which was written "at Babylon." (1 Pet. 5:13.) Since we know from Revelation 17:5-18 that the name of Babylon was often used by Christian writers to refer to Rome, we are apparently safe in believing that Peter wrote his letter from Rome in A.D. 63 or 64, near the time of the persecution of Christians there under Nero. We know from 1 Peter 1:1 that this document was written to the saints in central and northern Asia Minor. We learn of no serious defections or schisms in the church there, but it is clear that the Christians had been enduring a period of local persecutions that Peter encourages them to bear. (1 Pet. 1:6-7; 3:14; 4:12, 14.)

We also discover that such persecutions had been borne by various congregations in many different localities prior to the writing of Peter's letter. (1 Pet. 5:9.) This can be seen in other New Testament sources as well. In addition to the persecutions Jews heaped upon Christians in Judea (Acts 8:1-3; 1 Thes. 2:14), we also know that Jewish opponents of Paul hounded his footsteps during much of his ministry (for example, Acts 9:23-25; 13:50; 14:19; 17:13; 21:27-30; 2 Cor. 11:24). On the other side of the coin, Paul also suffered at the hands of the Gentiles. (For example, Acts 16:19-23; 19:23-31; 2 Cor. 11:26.)

Persecution was thus the frequent lot of early Christians from the time of Jesus, and such continued to the last great empire-wide pogrom begun under Diocletian in A.D. 303. Often, Christians would meet resistance as soon as they joined the church. For example, we read in Hebrews 10:32-33: "Call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions; partly, whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly, whilst ye became companions of them that were so used." From this, it is apparent that some, as soon as they joined the church, became a public spectacle, or "gazingstock," through public harassment.

No full-scale persecution was initiated against Christians in the Roman empire until A.D. 257 under the emperor Valerian. Before this time, all Roman persecutions, as well as Jewish, were limited to certain localities. In the first century, the most severe of the devastations suffered by Christians was that under Nero. During the night of July 19, A.D. 64, a fire broke out in some shops in the southeast portion of the Circus Maximus in Rome. The fire burned out of control for seven nights and six days, sweeping generally northward through the city. The blaze then broke out afresh on the estate of Tigellinus, a close associate and friend of Nero. Because of this and because of Nero's reported happiness over the conflagration, he was accused by Seutonius and Tacitus, two notable Roman authors, of having started the blaze so that he could rebuild the crowded city according to a grander and more organized scheme.

Naturally, Nero did not want to be thought of as the instigator of the blaze, so he blamed the destruction on the city's Christians, a hated and misunderstood sect who were thought to have broken away from the ancestral religion of the Jews. Nero was condemned for this unjust action, again by Tacitus. This famous Roman historian, along with the Christian writer Clement of Rome, described in some detail the horrible sufferings of the Christians in this period. Clement, in fact, reported that it was in connection with the persecution by Nero that Peter and Paul were martyred on account of their testimonies. (I Clement 4-5.)

The earliest mention of the Christian community at Rome occurs in the epistle Paul wrote to the Romans about A.D. 58 or 59. By this time, there was a substantial group of Christians in the city. Although we have no account of the first missionaries who preached there, we can infer from the way Paul arranged his greetings that by the time he wrote, at least five separate congregations or branches were meeting in the homes of various members. (Rom. 16:3-5, 10, 11, 14, and 15.) Since no Christian chapels were built until after the first century, it was natural for branches to meet in private homes for worship.

It is clear from Paul's letter to Rome that the church there was made up of both Jews and Gentiles. The church would not have been firmly established there until after A.D. 54, when Jews, who had been banned from the capital city by an imperial edict in 49, were allowed to return. From this time the church grew in size and importance until Nero took serious notice of it in A.D. 64. After the Gospel of Mark was written in Rome about A.D. 68-69, the sources fell silent on the Christian movement in that city until Clement wrote his letter from Rome to the church at Corinth about A.D. 96. This letter, called I Clement, hints that the Roman church had gone through sporadic persecution in recent years but that, in Clement's view, the saints had increased as a result in both numbers and devotion.

Although Clement did not comment much on the internal situation of the church at Rome, the reason for his writing was that a serious schism had arisen in the Corinthian congregation, concerning which Clement and other leaders in Rome had been consulted. Clement claimed that the schism arose because of jealously and envy on the part of apostates. (I Clement 1-4.) But in another place it is evident that the interpretation of the Resurrection had been a central issue: some were denying the bodily resurrection while others were affirming it. (I Clement 24.)

A different misunderstanding of the resurrection had occurred some thirty years earlier in Ephesus. Paul wrote to Timothy concerning two men, Hymenaeus and Philetus, "who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some." (2 Tim. 2:17-18.) Rather than denying the resurrection, as did those about whom Clement later wrote, these men were teaching that Christians had already experienced this renewal of life, presumably through baptism, and that they did not need to look forward to it at all since it was now past.

Much of the misunderstanding about the resurrection must be attributed to erring notions of docetism that came to be more and more influential during the second century. The term docetism derives from the Greek infinitive dokein, which means "to seem." Adherents of docetism, known as docetics, maintained that Jesus only seemed to live among men, to suffer, and to die. In reality, they said, the heavenly Christ did not come into contact with the world of matter, for that would have defiled his divine nature. We can readily see that such a view of the Messiah negates the idea that salvation came as a result of Jesus' suffering, death, and resurrection. In fact, in place of this concept of salvation, the notion evolved that the Christ was merely a messenger or teacher who had brought to earth a special, secret knowledge that would allow the elect to escape the evil and corrupt world and to make their way back to the presence of the Father. This special knowledge was denoted by the Greek word gnosis and those who championed such a view of the Messiah became known as gnostics.

There were indications in the New Testament that the apostles were already trying to combat these false conceptions about the Savior. Both 1 and 2 John were written partly to correct such ideas. For instance, in John's first letter we read: "Many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world." (1 Jn. 4:1-3; emphasis added.) Later, John repeated the following in his second epistle: "Many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist." (2 Jn. 1:7.) In addition, we should note that many modern interpreters of John's Gospel believe that the sentence "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us" (John 1:14) was directed against those who were then denying that Jesus had possessed a mortal body that was later resurrected. These illustrations, then, demonstrate that docetism had made deep inroads into areas of Christian thinking well before the end of the first century.

In its earliest forms, gnosticism had begun to make an impact within certain areas of Christianity even before Paul's death. Some modern students of Paul's letters have observed that Paul employed many terms familiar to Gnostics in his letters to Ephesus and Colossae in an effort to reverse their errant understanding of the Savior's mission and of the nature of the church. In addition, we can look to his first letter to Timothy for an explicit attack on Gnosticism. In the Revised Standard Version, which is clearer than the King James translation at this point, we read: "O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid the godless chatter and contradictions of what is falsely called knowledge [gnosis], for by professing it some have missed the mark as regards the faith." (RSV, 1 Tim. 6:20-21.) Here Paul sounds a warning against the gnosticism that would develop into such a powerful influence in many Christian circles during the second century.

What we see at the end of the first century is a church full of problems and dissensions. All of the apostles were now gone, and no one could appeal to the "living voice" of God that came through his appointed servants. It is interesting to note that Eusebius, writing in the fourth century, knew of only one person, a man named Quadratus, who possessed the gift of prophecy as late as the middle of the second century. [^2]

We lack information about the first-century church in places such as Egypt, Spain, and North Africa. We are dependent solely on apocryphal traditions to color in the Christian portraits of these areas. Paul supposedly spent time in Spain after his imprisonment in Rome and, according to information repeated by Eusebius, [^3] Mark, the Gospel writer, established the first church in Egypt at Alexandria. The major doctrinal disputes centered on the resurrection and the nature of the mission of the Savior. These items were the very issues concerning which the apostles were to stand as witnesses. (Acts 1:8, 21-22.) We can see how serious the absence of the apostles became, since such questions continued as whirlpools of controversy among Christians until the fifth century A.D.

Most of the difficulties arose from within the church, as Paul said they would. (Acts 20:29-30.) Clement of Rome, for instance, implied that in his day it was impossible to tell a true Christian from a false one unless his attitude toward the resurrection was known. (I Clement 14, 24ff.) Persecutions against the church must have had some effect as well. We possess evidence from a letter written to the emperor Trajan by Pliny the younger, when the latter was proconsul of Bithynia and Pontus in A.D. 111-112, that many Christians had turned against the church when threatened with death; they were obviously unwilling to remain true to the faith. This situation was repeated in numerous instances after Pliny's time and, no doubt, had occurred occasionally before. Persecution also had an opposite effect: those who were committed to the Lord became even more firm in their devotion.

In summary, early Christians suffered much at the hands of persecutors, a fact attested to by both Christian and Roman writers. Moreover, although such persecutions were severe and led to loss of life, they were limited to specific geographical regions until that begun by Diocletian in A.D. 303. Naturally, such outbreaks both drove some out of the church and cemented the faith of others. Internally, however, the early Christian movement overflowed with serious difficulties, difficulties that split congregations and led to compromises in doctrine and worship. In the New Testament, problems like these not only were prophesied as being future by the early apostles and disciples but were also attested to as already having a disabling presence in the Christian communities of the first half of the first century A.D., less than fifteen years after Jesus' death and resurrection. And the crippling difficulties within the church did not cease. On the contrary, they continued until the church was transformed into something other than what it had been in the days of the apostles. For after the deaths of these leaders, the church was left to wander, making its way haltingly until its original form and makeup were lost.

Notes

S. Kent Brown is professor of ancient scripture and director of publication for the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See S. Kent Brown and C. Wilfred Griggs, "The 40-Day Ministry," Ensign, August 1975, pp. 6-11.
[^2] Eusebius, History of the Church III.37.1.
[^3] We must diligently study the book of Revelation itself, probing, pondering, and searching for understanding. Does the nature of the symbol give insights into its significance? The chronological narrative of the vision is interrupted periodically with "teaching interludes." Bruce R. McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," Ensign, September 1975, p. 87.
