John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

9

How Is A Testimony Kept? Lost?

How may a testimony be kept?

39Since a testimony is a compound of knowledge and the use of knowledge, it is much as a living thing. It is never static, like a stone. The small testimony may grow larger, the large testimony become smaller. Therefore, it must be cared for, as any other type of life. Our treatment of it is of prime importance.

39First, to keep our testimony we must feed it, regularly and plentifully. The steps that lead to a testimony: desire, prayer, study, and practice, must be trodden continuously. The desire for truth should stamp our every act; help from God in all things must be invoked; the study of the gospel, which has not been plumbed to its depth by any man should be continued; and the practice of gospel principles, in all our labors, must never be forgotten.

39He who would retain his testimony is required to give constant study to the gospel. He cannot live forever on that which he learned yesterday. By a little such study every day, light will follow light, and understanding will increase. This is doubly important since we live in a changing world, which requires continuous applications of gospel truth to new conditions.

39To keep his testimony, a person must increase in the use of gospel principles. There must be stricter conformity with the higher as well as the lesser laws of life -- more activity in Church service; increasing charity and kindness; greater sacrifice for the common good; more readiness to help advance the plan of salvation; more truth in all we do. And as our knowledge of gospel law increases, our activity under gospel law must increase.

39By such feeding, a testimony may be kept; may remain whole and sound; and may grow to become an increasingly certain guide, and a constant joy in life. There is no other way to preserve a testimony. Look about you. Have you not seen people who have fed their testimonies? Is it not good to be with them?

39How may a testimony be lost?

39A testimony, being a living thing, may die. Sorrowfully, all of us may have seen such a passing. Witness the life of any apostate. Refuse to do the things that lead to a testimony, and, gradually, it will starve, wither, and perish. It does not matter how strong it may have been. It must be fed to be kept alive.

40Starvation of a testimony usually begins with failure to keep properly in touch with divine forces, to pray. Then, desire to learn and to live the gospel law soon weakens. Sacred covenants are forgotten. Study of the gospel is set aside for some other study or activity. There is less and less participation in the life of the Church. Eyes are blurred so that the laws of life are forgotten.

40There are many attacks by the evil one upon a weakening testimony. Commonly, a feeling of superiority, ending in ambition for office, overshadows all else and leads to testimony starvation. Personal ambition has always been a destructive force in human lives. Sometimes, and closely related to the feeling of superiority, are false interpretations of scripture. These rise to such magnitude, though at variance with accepted, revealed doctrine, that they endanger the spiritual life of the individual. The various cults that arise, like mushrooms, from time to time, are but variations of this manner of destroying a testimony. They can a I ways be recognized, for they are in opposition to some principle or regulation of the Church.

40Most frequently, however, the loss of a testimony is due to finding fault with one's fellow believers, and with the leadership of the Church. Every action of bishop, stake president, or General Authority seems wrong, to such unfortunate people. Their vision distorts the world and all in it.

40The dying testimony is easily recognized. The organizations and practices of the Church are ignored; the television takes the place of the Sacrament meeting; golf or motion pictures, the Sunday worship; the cup of coffee, instead of the Word of Wisdom; the cold, selfish hand instead of helpfulness, charity for the poor, and the payment of tithing.

40Soon, the testimony is gone, and the former possessor walks about, somewhat sour and discontented, and always in his heart, unhappy. He has lost his most precious possession, and has found nothing to replace it. He has lost inward freedom, the gift of obedience to law.
