John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

3

Are Communism And Its Related "Isms" Preparatory To the United Order?

The United Order is the popular name of an economic system revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is sometimes called the Order of Enoch, since it was practiced by that patriarch and his people. It is also spoken of, and more correctly, as the Law of Consecration because of its vitalizing, directing principle. (D. & C. 42:32) Its structure and operation, as far as given, are described in the Doctrine and Covenants notably in D&C 42, 51, and 104.

374The United Order rests upon the doctrine that spiritual and temporal activities are based upon the same or similar eternal laws. The laws that prevail in a spiritual sphere must measurably govern temporal existence. A Zion on earth can be built only by the application of the laws of the celestial kingdom. (D. & C. 105:5)

374Therefore, since the gospel holds out to all men the promise of eternal life and the possibility of the same degree of exaltation, if certain laws are obeyed, it seems reasonable that there must also be laws which, if obeyed, will enable all men to attain the same degree of temporal salvation. Equality in the life to come is promised the faithful; equality in life on earth is also promised if the way of the Lord is followed. This must be so. "For it ye are not equal in earthly things ye can not be equal in obtaining heavenly things." (D. & C. 78:6; also 104:15-17)

374A full understanding of the United Order requires careful study of the revelations on the subject. In briefest outline it is formed and operated as follows: It is organized under Church authority by the voluntary action of a group of men holding the Holy Priesthood, for themselves and their families. All officers are drawn from the membership of the order. All members, upon entrance into the order, pool their resources, that is, place them, as a consecration, in the common treasury of the order (D. & C. 42:32, 33). Each man is then given, from the treasury, his "portion" or "inheritance," that is, the means or capital with which to make a living for himself and his family -- a farm and implements for the farmer, a shop and tools for the mechanic, etc. (D. & C. 51:3) As the youth within the order grow into maturity they are likewise given their "inheritances" from the common treasury. His "inheritance" is deeded to each member; it is his very own; it is private property. This "inheritance" he is free to use as he chooses. His free agency is carefully guarded. (D. & C. 51:4; 104:73-75) He is under one obligation only: to be loyal to the order and to be wise and industrious in the use of the "portion" given him. Especially, the idler has no place in the order. (D. & C. 75:29)

375Should the use of a man's "inheritance" yield a surplus above the needs of himself, his family, and his business, such surplus is placed in the common treasury, for the benefit of the order, to provide inheritances for the young, to care for the unfortunate, and for all ventures and institutions for the public benefit, as may be approved by the membership of the order.

375Should a man, because of insufficient natural endowment, or caught by uncontrollable circumstances, fail to make his inheritance yield enough to meet his needs, he would receive assistance from the common treasury. The fortunate would thus assist the unfortunate. None would be allowed to suffer.

375The principles operating in such a "United Order" are almost self-evident. The order rests upon the acceptance of the gospel, faith in God, Jesus Christ and the prophet of the restoration, and the moral and spiritual life required by the gospel. It is formed for the benefit of each individual member. The members do not exist for the welfare of the order but the order for their benefit. The equal rights of men to seek prosperity are recognized. The right of free agency is strictly respected. Every man is given an equal chance in life as he is given his "inheritance." The unequal powers of man are acknowledged; but no man is allowed to suffer because of lack of capacity or natural inhibitions. Relative equality in possessing the material joys of life is preserved by returning the surplus to the common treasury.

376Love of man for man is ever present. In structure the system is not involved, and in practice relatively simple. But it requires, on the part of every member, a recognition of the brotherhood of man, and a rigid will for the common good.

376Clearly, the results of the United Order would be most beneficial and glorious. Not only would the poor and weak be assisted, but that earthly equality would be brought about which is a necessary preparation for the celestial world. (D. & C. 78:6, 7) All would have the opportunity of improving their talents; they would seek one another's interest and do all things with an eye single to the glory of God. (D. & C. 82:18, 19)

376The United Order, under somewhat differing organizations, has actually been tested by the Church, during short periods, in Ohio, Missouri, and Utah. Its power to benefit humanity has been demonstrated. But it was also found that few men were prepared to render full service in such a venture. Men must cast off their selfishness to be worthy members; they must revise many traditions handed down through generations of time; and they must build in their hearts an unwavering love for their fellow men. All this requires self-discipline over many years. Then, too, persecution from the outside made it difficult to live under the United Order.

376These and other conditions led to the suspension of the order, as a mode of life. While it is in abeyance, the law of tithing and wise and earliest cooperation in all affairs of life partially take its place. Yet the United Order remains the ideal under which Latter-day Saints hope some time to live.

376Today it has a practical value as an ideal by which any proposed economic system may be tested for the degree of its worthiness. The nearer any scheme for economic betterment conforms to the principles of the United Order, the more likely it will be to assist mankind in their efforts to attain material happiness.

376It may be observed that the principles appearing in the United Order are those which are applied more or less completely in a democracy. They are certainly in opposition to any form of regimentation or dictatorship, since the order provides personal freedom of action and common consent in all affairs. (D. & C. 104:21, 71) The student of history will further observe that the periods of greatest human prosperity have been those in which these principles have been most nearly approximated.

377An emphatic "No!" is the answer to the question at the head of this chapter. Untruth is never a preparation for truth. Modern communism, facism, nazism, socialism, and other related systems, are all the same in essential theory. They oppose religion, except as they themselves claim to be revelations, and they reject Christian morality. They prohibit free speech and action; eliminate private ownership and initiative; hold without exception the state above the individual; regiment the people; allow the strong to dominate the weak; they take government out of the hands of the governed, and place it in the hands of a self-appointed, selfish, self-styled, super-group, and they culminate in dictatorships. The free agent has no place in their systems. Their claim that they believe in human equality, as shown by their tyrannical behavior, is false. Force and terrorism are their weapons. All that makes for human security and happiness is destroyed.

377One need only read the published philosophies of these "isms," and observe them in action, to confirm the above statements. From Plato to Marx and Nietzsche, the same story is told, one of high-sounding objective, but in practice one of subjection of the common man to a self-appointed guardian, masquerading in the stolen robes of human equality -- wolves in sheep's clothing.

377In stern opposition to these political "isms" is the plan provided by the Lord. As one studies the United Order, the more evident becomes its power for human welfare, for developing human lives, and for providing the prosperity needed on the path of progress. It makes possible the things for which the human soul most hungers. It stands secure and firm above the imperfect inventions of men. It is a mighty and marvelous evidence of the divine inspiration of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

377Not communism and its brood, but faithful living within the Church of Christ reestablished in these latter days, is the preparation for the coming of the United Order. There is no other adequate and acceptable preparation. And let it be remembered that the coming will be authorized through the revelation of the Lord to the President of the Church and not from any other source.
