John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

XI

Miscellaneous

1

Wherein Lay the Greatness of Brigham Young?

Brigham Young is recognized the world over as a man who rendered high service to his generation. Generally he is looked upon as a mighty leader of men, and the world's foremost colonizer. More careful students of his life and labors hold him also to be a master in religious philosophy. (See Discourses of Brigham Young.) All admit, whether friend or foe, that he belongs among the world's greatest men.

381Since Brigham Young, to the age of thirty-three, was a modest carpenter, painter, and glazier in the humble villages of Port Byron and Mendon, New York, men have wondered how he was able to perform the Herculean labors of his life, and to rise to world eminence. The usual explanation has been that he was highly gifted, and that his life's accomplishments were due to the exercise of this natural endowment.

381However, this explanation of Brigham Young is not sufficient. Gifted he was, there can be no doubt about that. But, the world is full of gifted men. Hosts of people, performing the average duties of life, have rich talents. The gifts of God are widely and profusely distributed. That is one reason why, when emergencies arise, leaders are found without much searching. Something more than a high natural endowment is necessary to achieve greatness in world or private affairs.

381Some say that opportunity is necessary for a person to rise to greatness. True, when the gospel found Brigham Young, he began to show the power within him. Later, when he was called into the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, responsibility and opportunity shaped his talents to meet the issues of the day. When, in the prime of his manhood, he was made the leader of the Church, he met the then overpowering problems of the Church in the masterful manner that has made him one of the earth's great ones. But, another man, of equal ability and under similar circumstances, might have failed where Brigham Young succeeded. There was something more than natural endowment and opportunity that lifted the colonizer of the West into huge accomplishment, winning world-wide acclaim.

382Two basic qualities made Brigham Young capable of his tremendous world service. All other qualities utilized by him were derivatives of these two.

382The first of these was his love of truth. Truth, the impelling passion of his life, was placed above all else. From his youth to the end of his days, he sought truth to guide him. When the Book of Mormon first came to him, with its attendant restoration, in its purity, of the gospel of Jesus Christ, he did not accept the offering at once. Through two long years he studied the book and examined the foundations of the newly organized Church. At last, convinced of the truth of the claims of Joseph Smith, he entered the waters of baptism. When he did so, he sacrificed much of a temporal nature. He became a humble member of a small, already hated group, with no prospects of earthly advancement. He could not then foresee that within three years he would be called to a position of leadership in the Church. But, all that did not count, for he had found the truth!

382Throughout his life he spoke of truth with an exuberance of love that thrilled his hearers, and thrills the readers today.

382"Our doctrine and practice is, and I have made it mine through life -- to receive truth no matter where it comes from." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 11, 1943 edition)

382"The Gospel is a fountain of truth, and truth is what we are after." (Ibid., p. 9)

382"`Where is your code, your particular creed?' says one. It fills eternity; it is all truth in heaven on earth or in hell. This is `Mormonism.' It embraces every true science; all true philosophy." (Ibid., p. 2)

382"There is no truth but what belongs to the Gospel. It is life, eternal life; it is bliss; it is the fulness of all things in the gods and in the eternities of the gods." (Ibid., p 3.)

382"Be willing to receive the truth, let it come from whom it may; no difference, not a particle. Just as soon receive the Gospel from Joseph Smith as from Peter, who lived in the days of Jesus. Receive it from one man as soon as another." (Ibid., p. 11)

382In eloquent words he placed God as the source of all truth: "God is the source, the fountain of all intelligence, no matter who possesses it. All have derived what intelligence, light, power, and existence they have from God. (Ibid., p. 18)

383"He is our Heavenly Father; he is also our God, and the Maker and upholder of all things in heaven and on earth. He sends forth his counsels and extends his providences to all living. He is the Supreme Controller of the universe. At his rebuke the sea is dried up, and the rivers become a wilderness. He measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meteth out heaven with a span, and comprehendeth the dust of the earth in a measure, and weigheth the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance; the nations to him are as a drop in a bucket, and he taketh up the isles as a very little thing; the hairs of our heads are numbered by him, and not a sparrow falleth to the ground without our Father; and he knoweth every thought and intent of the hearts of all living, for he is everywhere present by the power of his Spirit -- his minister, the Holy Ghost. He is the Father of all, is above all, through all, and in all, he knoweth all things pertaining to this earth, and he knows all things pertaining to millions of earths like this." (Ibid., p. 19)

383This surrender to truth with the existence of God as the supreme truth, is the first key to Brigham Young's achievements. There is really no other approach to lasting eminence in attainment or leadership. Fame based upon untruth is transient and worthless. This is confirmed by human history. Only those whose feet have rested upon truth, and whose weapon in every affair has been drawn from truth, are secure in the halls of fame.

383The second quality that explains the remarkably successful career of Brigham Young was his strict and complete obedience to truth. He held, and correctly, that truth unused has no value in human life.

383Truth once found was eagerly obeyed, that is, used. Obedience to truth, whether discovered by man, or received by revelation from God, became the pattern, practice, and concern of Brigham Young's life. His every act and decision squared with truth. He did not therefore choose the easiest path to personal welfare; he followed the way of truth though sometimes thorny.

383He understood that many a man knows truth, but does not obey it. Many know that the restored gospel is true but fail to join the Church. Thousands violate the demands of truth, to satisfy their appetites or improper impulses.

384Brigham Young is reputed to have had a strong will. That was needed in the conquest of the desert. Many have failed to understand that in the exercise of his will power he was not autocratic, but firmly determined that truth should be obeyed, so that success could be won in the fierce battle with the wilderness, and with the appetites of men.

384The whole world would prosper exceedingly if every man in his life had a will for truth. It is the flabby adherence to truth, or righteousness, the expression of truth, that lies at the bottom of all human disasters.

384"Truth is obeyed when it is lived." (Journal of Discourses, vol. 7, p. 55)

384"A mere theory amounts to but little, while practice and obedience have to do with stern realities." (Ibid., vol. 9, p. 330)

384"Some of you may ask, `Is there a single ordinance to be dispensed with? Is there one of the commandments that God has enjoined upon the people, that he will excuse them from obeying?' Not one, no matter how trifling or small in our own estimation. No matter if we esteem them non-essential, or least or last of all the commandments of the house of God, we are under obligation to observe them." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 222)

384Since the restored gospel contains truth, its welfare necessarily was foremost in all that he did. So complete was his obedience to external truth that all earthly desires had to take second place. Thus:

"I am not bound to wife or child to house or farm, or anything else on the face of the earth, but the Gospel of the Son of God. I have enlisted all in this cause, and it is in my heart, and here is my treasure." (Journal of Discourses, vol. 14, p. 19)

384His life was laborious, especially after the burden of leadership fell upon him. Change, travel, service to others crowded his life. But, it was done cheerfully in the cause of truth. He must obey the truth that he had found.

384"As I have frequently thought and said, when duty requires I am happy in going from home, and I am happy in returning, for it is my greatest joy and comfort to do what the Lord requires of me, and what I know to be my duty, no matter what it is, if the Lord requires it of me. This course gives joy and peace. When this principle becomes the acting principle of all the Saints, we shall find that Zion is here; we shall be in the midst of it; we shall enjoy it." (Ibid., vol. 3, p. 191)

385These two governing principles of his life -- loving truth, as God's gift, above all else; and obeying truth at any cost -- explain the success that attended Brigham Young. He cannot well be understood unless it is comprehended that these two principles gave power, to every motive and action of his life. That which he did, temporally and spiritually, was hammered out on the anvil of obeyed truth.

385Not all are called to high positions of leadership, but everyone can attain honorable distinction in his calling, whatever it may be, if his life is governed by these two principles. That is the important lesson from the notable life of Brigham Young.
