John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

What Did the Pioneers Contribute To the Welfare of Others?

In their westward march from New York State to the Salt Lake Valley, and by ocean to California, the Latter-day Saints established farms, founded cities, and built notable public buildings. Civilization followed in their trail. The states of New York, Ohio, Illinois, Missouri, Iowa, Nebraska, Wyoming, Idaho, Utah, Nevada, Arizona, and California have all profited directly from the pioneers. When at last they found partial peace in the valleys of the Great Basin of North America, they set up practices for their own survival which have become of worldwide benefit. Their pioneer toil became a blessing to all the peoples of the earth.

386In all their journeyings the living power of the restored gospel was manifested. Despite a persecution unequalled in modern history, the Saints remained faithful to the new-found truth. They might be driven brutally from place to place into the heartless desert, their cities destroyed, their women ravished, their temples violated, their homes laid waste -- but their certain knowledge of the truth of the gospel restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith remained unchanged. Indeed under persecution this knowledge flamed higher, and became an increasing witness of the reality of the new message from heaven to earth. Thoughtful people everywhere, seeing this, knew that in their religion lay the power of truth, which may yet restore peace on earth. This will always be the main contribution of the Latter-day Saints.

386In the conquest of the arid and semi-arid area of America, the Latter-day Saints made the United States one land. The two seaboards, Atlantic and Pacific, were at the time of the pioneers separated by a vast area supposed to be unsuitable for successful human settlement. There was no continuity of home and industrial life between the two seaboards. They were separated by deserts and mountains that promised to remain hunting grounds for the trapper and pleasure seeker. Then came the Latter-day Saints and showed how the desert could be tamed. The lessons of the pioneers were quickly taken up; the West was invaded by settlers, by slow but steady degrees, until today "from sea to sea" homes touch homes, and America is one continuous land of prosperous people. It was a glorious gift of the pioneers to their country which they believed to have been founded under divine inspiration.

387The experiences of the pioneers served also the needs of the people beyond the seas. One-half of the earth's land surface receives a precipitation of less than twenty inches of water annually. We live on a dry earth. This is true on every continent. America is no exception. Fully two-fifths of the United States lie under an annual rainfall of less than twenty inches.

387A precipitation under twenty inches, annually, is insufficient, unless conserved by special methods of tillage, to support crops in any degree comparable with crop yields of the humid region. Since water is so important a factor in plant growth, it has followed that the more humid regions of earth have been sought out as places for human settlement, not because of the greater attractiveness from the point of view of climate or soil fertility, but because of the greater ease in securing large crop yields. The civilized world was waiting, when the pioneers undertook their work in the American west for modern methods by which the equally attractive other dry lands of the earth might be made to serve human needs better than in the past.

387This was the first problem of the pioneers. Naturally they turned first of all to the ancient art of irrigation -- the artificial application of water to lands for the purpose of producing large and steady crop yields whenever the rainfall is insufficient to meet the full water requirements of crops. A system of irrigation was set up through the pioneer years, on which rest nearly all later irrigation developments throughout the world. Ancient, time-honored laws, like the one that water in a flowing stream must not be diverted from its main channel, had to be abrogated; substitute laws, like that of the beneficial use of water, fitting the needs of the day needed formulation; proper supervision of the delivery and use of water on lands were to be devised; questions of ownership of water, whether a separate commodity or adhering to the land required answer; and methods of human social organization under the canal demanded attention.

388Courageously and intelligently, the pioneers tackled these problems, and in the end gave to the world a set of irrigation principles and practices, used in one form or another by every section under a low rainfall which means every continent of earth.

388Irrigation, however, did not solve the whole agricultural problem. There is not enough water flowing in streams and rivers, anywhere in the arid and semi-arid regions to irrigate more than perhaps one-tenth of the lands in need of the artificial application of water. What about the remaining nine-tenths of this fertile but dry area? With irrigation well under way, many pioneers turned to this problem. It was found that under certain methods of tillage fair crops could he obtained when the annual rainfall was twelve inches or even less, depending on various conditions. This system became known as dry farming. Like irrigation, dry farming is of great antiquity, but primitive methods have limited its practice, and made it hazardous. The work of the Latter-day Saints, in this field has been heralded far and wide, and been the means of bringing under profitable production millions of acres of land in every continent.

388The pioneers belonged to the civilization that Anglo-Saxon peoples had won for themselves through centuries of struggle. The gains in that struggle they must maintain. The stark, forbidding desert must be subdued, but not at the price of civilized life and living. Somehow, they must hold on to their social, economic, and spiritual possessions on the conquered desert as well as they had in humid regions. That was the challenge to the pioneers -- to build communities of modern, civilized people under the ditch, comparable or superior to those of the rainfall regions from which they came. That accomplishment was a great contribution to the world's welfare, a great lesson to the workers on the half of the earth's surface lying under a low rainfall.

388How that was done will yet be the theme of many a book and lecture. Hundreds of peaceful villages, with schools, churches, and the public park; remains of factories and other industries; a people who stand foremost among all people, anywhere under the sun, in educational standing -- all these are silent witnesses of the success of the pioneers in learning how, though in the desert, to live a full life.

389As their work is studied, the eternal principles of their success stand out boldly. Only by co-operation can the tasks beyond the strength of a single man be accomplished. Industry is demanded by every successful enterprise. Education enables work to be done properly. Faith in God brings to weak, mortal man power to do, and happiness to enjoy, that make all effort worthwhile. These were the cornerstones on which they built faith, education, industry, and co-operation.

389The pioneers came to the Great Basin of North America in search of a land of peace. Out of their necessary toil for self-support, came great contributions to general human welfare America was made one continuous land; the one-half of the earth lying under a low rainfall was taught how the desert can be conquered; all mankind were shown the cornerstones of success in every endeavor; and the path to divine joy on earth and beyond was laid bare.

389Thank God for the pioneers!
