John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

Where Was the Garden of Eden?

Adam and Eve, the progenitors of the human race, were placed by God in the "Garden of Eden."

394And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. (Gen. 2:8-9)

394This very brief statement would lead the reader to believe that Eden may have been the name of a large area of land, perhaps a country or continent, in which a garden of limited area was set aside and "planted" for the use of Adam and Eve.

394For many generations Bible students have searched for the location of this home of our first parents. The geography of every continent has been studied minutely in the hope that the location of Eden and its garden might be found. Articles, pamphlets, and books have been written on the subject, but without acceptable conclusions.

394The clues that might lead to a discovery are few. The account says that the garden was "eastward" in Eden. What is east or west in such a story depends on the place of the author at the time of writing, since no fixed point is mentioned. It is a fair assumption that the word "eastward" has quite another meaning, so far unknown, than the usual one of direction.

394Another clue, which at first promised more, is the statement that

. . . a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads. The name of the first is Pison . . . which compasseth the whole land of Havilah . . . the name of the second river is Gihon . . . that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel which goeth toward the east Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates. (Gen. 2:10-14)

394Despite the apparently specific descriptions given, this clue has not led to the location of the Garden of Eden. Careful scholars have not been able to identify any of the four rivers with certainty. None of the rivers mentioned fits into the lands now known. Since the historically well-known names of Euphrates, Assyria, and Ethiopia do not fit into the use of them in the Garden of Eden story, it is more than probable that they are ancient names variously applied in later times. Clearly, these rivers and countries belong to early ages of the world's history, and do not apply to present-day terminology.

395The river which watered the Garden of Eden "went out of Eden," probably out of the country of Eden, not necessarily out of the Garden of Eden. The following statement, that it was parted into "four heads," may refer to a condition at the headwaters area, not within the garden.

395In dismay at the failure to locate the garden of Adam and Eve from the description given in Genesis, many students have attempted to spiritualize the whole story. The garden was not, they say, a place on earth, but a heavenly abode, in which the drama of "the fall" was enacted. Others insist that everything in the Bible account of the Garden should be given a symbolic meaning. That is, the events recorded did not really happen anywhere; they were invented as symbols of truth.

395In short, the world's scholarship admits that it cannot answer the question, where was the Garden of Eden.

395In 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation designating the place called Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, as the center place of the kingdom of God on the western hemisphere. A city called Zion or the New Jerusalem would there be built. There also, the foremost temple to the Lord should be erected. From the temple in Zion the law of the Lord would issue, as the word of the Lord would come from Jerusalem. (D. & C. 57:1-3; Isa. 2:3; Micah 4:2; History of the Church, 1:188)

395Later, the Prophet designated "Spring Hill," a hill of eminence about fifty or sixty miles north and somewhat to the east of Independence, as Adam-ondi-Ahman, . . . the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet." (D. & C. 116) In a revelation to the Prophet, an early event in the history of mankind, occurring near Adam-ondi-Ahman, was told:

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. (D. & C. 107:5)

396Since Adam called together seven generations of his descendants at Adam-ondi-Ahman, it can well be believed that there was his old homestead. If so, the Garden of Eden was probably not far distant, for it was the entrance at the east of the Garden which was closed against them at the time of the "fall." (Gen. 3:24) In fact, it has been commonly understood among the Latter-day Saints, from the teachings of the Prophet, that the temple was to be built in or near the location of the Garden of Eden.

396That the Prophet actually taught that the Garden of Eden was in or near Independence, Missouri, is amply testified to by many who knew and heard him. Heber C. Kimball, close associate and friend of the Prophet, said on one occasion:

The spot chosen for the Garden of Eden was Jackson Country, in the state of Missouri, where Independence now stands; it was occupied in the morn of creation by Adam and his associates, who came with him for the express purpose of peopling this earth. (Journal of Discourses, 10:235)

396Brigham Young, also a close associate of the Prophet, testified similarly:

In the beginning, after this earth was prepared for man, the Lord commenced his work upon what is now called the American continent, where the Garden of Eden was made. In the days of Noah, in the days of the Boating of the ark, he took the people to another part of the earth. (Discourses, p. 102)

396In conversation with Orson Hyde, on March 15, 1857, President Young said:

You have been both to Jerusalem and Zion, and seen both. I have not seen either, for I have never been in Jackson County. Now it is a pleasant thing to think of and to know where the Garden of Eden was. Did you ever think of it? I do not think many do, for in Jackson County was the Garden of Eden. Joseph has declared this, and I am as much bound to believe that as to believe that Joseph was a prophet of God. (Journal History, March 15, 1857)

396That is the position of the Latter-day Saints today, with respect to the much-discussed location of the Garden of Eden.

396Adam, after his expulsion from the Garden of Eden, lived in the vicinity of the great Missouri and Mississippi rivers. As his descendants multiplied, they would naturally settle along the fertile and climatically acceptable river valleys. When the flood came in the days of Noah, the Mississippi drainage must have increased to a tremendous volume, quite in harmony with the Biblical account. Noah's ark would be floated on the mighty, rushing waters, towards the Gulf of Mexico. With favorable winds, it would cross the Atlantic to the Eastern continents. There the human race, in its second start on earth, began to multiply and fill the earth.

397The location of the Garden of Eden in America, and at Independence, Missouri, clears up many a problem which the Bible account of Eden and its garden has left in the minds of students.
