John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

5

Who Are the Children of Abraham?

Abraham, the son of Terah, lived in the city of the Chaldees. The family of Abraham had turned from righteousness and had become idolators. Abraham therefore, himself a follower of God's truth, preached righteousness to them but without avail. For his insistence upon the worship of the only true and Living God, he was persecuted and his life sought. So intense was the hatred of the idolators that it was only by the intervention of the Lord that he was saved from being offered up as a sacrifice to the idols of the people.

398 Abraham was a chosen spirit, destined to be a great leader of the work of the Lord. He was commanded to move into another land to be shown him, where he might be free to worship the Lord of earth and the heavens. The Lord at that time gave Abraham a blessing which has sounded through the centuries and to which all Christians cling: "And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

"And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed."

398In obedience to God's command, Abraham, with believing members of his family, moved into the promised land known to us as Palestine.

398In this new and strange land, Abraham became a mighty prince. He received the higher priesthood from Melchizedek himself, to whom he also paid "tithes."

398After he was well settled, the promise that the Lord had made to him was reiterated, especially on an occasion when the Lord communed with him.

398"And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

398"Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?

399"For I knew him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him."

399The promise that in him all nations should be blessed, brought Abraham's work beyond that of flesh and blood relationships. It made of him a universal figure in the Lord's plan of salvation for all who were sent upon the earth. It would seem that the acceptance of the knowledge of the gospel, and the possession of the priesthood which Abraham bore would make all mankind heirs to the blessings promised Abraham.

399Modern revelation has confirmed this view and has cleared up the true meaning of the phrase, "in thee and thy seed." In the Book of Abraham, translated from Egyptian papyrus by Joseph Smith, the following statement is made: "My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

399"And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

399"And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father:"

399There can be no misunderstanding of this statement. All who accept the gospel become by adoption members of the family of Abraham.

399Moreover, there is in the opinion of many, in this process of adoption, a subtle change in the body as well as in the spirit which makes a person a true heir of the promises to Abraham. This was the view also of the Prophet Joseph Smith, in a discourse on the two comforters. "The effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham." This is reflected in the patriarchal blessings of the Church which generally assign nearly all persons to one or the other of the tribes of Jacob, direct descendants of Abraham.

400This understanding of the promise to Abraham places a heavy responsibility upon all who accept the gospel. As children of Abraham, they are under obligation to do the works of Abraham. The waters of baptism carry with them the promise on the part of the candidate that he will conform his life to the gospel of Jesus Christ, which of course was the gospel given, accepted, and practised by Father Abraham.

400The oft-asked question, "Who are the children of Abraham?" is well answered in light of the revealed gospel.

400All who accept God's plan for his children on earth and who live it are the children of Abraham. Those who reject the gospel, whether children in the flesh, or others, forfeit the promises made to Abraham and are not children of Abraham.
