John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

6

Are There Guardian Angels?

There are hosts of personages in the unseen world.

401Among these, many are used by the Lord as messengers to accomplish his purposes. This doctrine is substantiated by numerous statements in the standard Church works and in sermons by Church leaders.

401There are at least three classes of angels: spirits who have not yet attained to the earth estate, and do not possess celestialized earthly bodies; personages who have lived on earth, but have not yet been resurrected; and those who have gone through the earth experience and have been resurrected. Occasionally, also, holy men, yet living, are spoken of in the scriptures, as angels.

401It is generally believed that angels who come on earth for any purpose whatsoever are beings who have lived on it. This is confirmed by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said, "There are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it." (D. & C. 130:5)

401President Joseph F. Smith said:

Therefore, when messengers are sent to minister to the inhabitants of this earth, they are not strangers, but from the ranks of our kindred friends, and fellow-beings and fellow-servants. The ancient prophets who died were those who came to visit their fellow creatures upon the earth. They came to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; it was such beings -- holy beings if you please -- who waited upon the Savior and administered to him on the Mount. The angel that visited John, when an exile, was one who had been here, who had toiled and suffered in common with the people of God; for you remember that John . . . was about to fall down and worship him, but was peremptorily forbidden to do so. "See thou do it not: for I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets. . . ." (Rev. 22:9) (Gospel Doctrine , pp. 435, 436)

401President Joseph F. Smith suggested that it is possible that our departed loved ones may be sent to help us who yet live on earth.

401Our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit their friends and relatives upon the earth again, bringing from the divine presence messages of love, of warning, of reproof or instruction, to those whom they had learned to love in the flesh. (Gospel Doctrine , p. 436)

402The purposes of angelic visitors are many. An angel was set to guard the way of the tree of life (Gen. 3:24) to remonstrate with Balaam (Num. 22:22-27) to announce the birth of Samson (Judg. 13), of John the Baptist (Luke 1:11-20) and of Jesus (Matt. 1:20-21) to warn Joseph to escape with Jesus into Egypt (Matt. 2:13) to teach Peter the universality of the gospel (Acts 10:3). Angels were means of revelation in ancient days. They guided Nephi and other Book of Mormon characters. In our day Moroni visited Joseph Smith; and he had other angelic visitors, who instructed him in the gospel and in his work.

402It would appear also from numerous statements that angels have often been sent out to execute judgments upon the wicked. David sang, "Let them be as chaff before the wind: and let the angel of the Lord chase them. Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the angel of the Lord persecute them." (Ps. 35:5, 6) Angels were sent to destroy Sodom (Gen. 19:1-25) and to smite the Assyrians (2 Kgs. 19:35). The Savior himself said, "The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity." (Matt. 13:41)

402However, the main service of angels on earth is clearly to be helpers to humankind. They are watchmen, protecting and ministering to us in hours of need. John Taylor says, "The angels are our watchmen, for Satan said to Jesus: `He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.' (Matt. 4:6) It would seem from a careful perusal of the scriptures, that the angels, while God has Saints upon the earth, stay in this lower world to ward off evil." (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 31) The scriptures are replete with evidence, that these heavenly visitors are ministering angels for the righteous. Thus an angel brought courage to Hagar (Gen. 16:7) food to Elijah (1 Kgs. 19:5-8) protected Daniel against the lions (Dan. 6:22) and secured the release of Peter from prison. (Acts 12:17)

402Undoubtedly angels often guard us from accidents and harm, from temptation and sin. They may properly be spoken of as guardian angels. Many people have borne and may bear testimony to the guidance and protection that they have received from sources beyond their natural vision. Without the help that we receive from the constant presence of the Holy Spirit, and from possible holy angels, the difficulties of life would be greatly multiplied.

403The common belief, however, that to every person born into the world is assigned a guardian angel to be with that person constantly, is not supported by available evidence. It is a very comforting thought, but at present without proof of its correctness. An angel may be a guardian angel though he come only as assigned to give us special help. In fact, the constant presence of the Holy Ghost would seem to make such a constant, angelic companionship unnecessary.

403So, until further knowledge is obtained, we may say that angels may be sent to guard us according to our need; but we cannot say with certainty that there is a special guardian angel, to be with every person constantly.
