John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

Why Is Jesus the Christ Sometimes Called the Eternal Father?

Three distinct personages, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, constitute the Godhead, or Presiding Council in the heavens. That is the settled doctrine of the Church. In the first vision of Joseph Smith, he saw "two Personages," the Father and the Son. Each one spoke to the boy. There was no confusion of form or substance. Two separate individuals stood before him. (Writings of Joseph Smith in Pearl of Great Price 2:17, 25) In the revelations that followed, there is always a clear distinction made among the three members of the Godhead.

58In numerous references in the Book of Mormon, the members of the Godhead stand out as distinct personages. The Bible, if read fully and intelligently, teaches that the Holy Trinity is composed of individual Gods.

58The early Christian Church, on its way to apostasy, departed from this truth. Several church councils, in which men fought for their own theories, foisted upon the Church the incomprehensible and unnatural doctrine of "one in three and three in one." They twisted the doctrine of unity of nature and of purpose among the Trinity into a oneness of personality. They would quote Jesus' prayer to his Father, that his disciples "may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us." (John 17:21) Yet at the same time they ignored the clear evidence in the prayer that Jesus was on earth, at that time, speaking to a Being elsewhere; and the equally clear meaning of the prayer that he did not propose that his disciples should be fused into one personage, but that they should be of one mind with him and his Father. This false doctrine, which has been nurtured through the centuries is an excellent illustration of philosophical-theological error and nonsense. Latter-day Saints prefer to cling to the revealed word, and to read the word of God intelligently. Only that which we can understand can be used safely by mortal men; that which is incomprehensible is useless to us.

58A definite purpose with respect to humankind emanates from the Godhead. It was clearly stated to Moses: "... Behold, this is my work and my glory -- to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39) To accomplish this purpose, a plan, the plan of salvation, was proposed by the Father.

59In full conformity with the eternal law of free agency, the plan would not be attempted without the consent of those concerned. Consequently, the great council in the heavens was called. So vast a "work" would be of wide extent and manifold requirements. Someone would be needed to supervise and carry to conclusion the divinely formulated plan. Organization belongs to heaven as to earth. The chief episode in that famous event, after the plan had been proposed, is simply told in the words of the Lord to Moses: "... Satan ... came before me, saying -- Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor. But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me -- Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:1, 2)

59Thus, by the will of the Father, the leadership of the plan was entrusted to Jesus. He was appointed the head of the execution of the plan on earth. He was to organize the earth, place man upon it, atone for human errors, and bring men back to God, all according to the plan. By this appointment he became the maker or creator of the earth, the Savior and Redeemer of men, our advocate with the Father -- in short, the member of the Godhead in charge directly of affairs and people on earth.

59The scriptures declare this commission of Jesus Christ. In ancient Nephite days it was stated that he is the creator of the heavens and the earth. (Mosiah 3:8) When he visited the American continent, he declared, "I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are." (3 Ne. 9:15) To the Prophet Joseph Smith he said, "I am Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who created the heavens and the earth." (D. & C. 14:9) Jesus is the central figure of the plan of salvation. It was Jesus the Christ who at sundry times revealed himself to prophets of former and latter days.

60Necessarily, all that Jesus Christ has done and will do in behalf of the earth and its inhabitants, is in conformity with the plan of salvation, with the consent and under the direction of the Father. Jesus cannot rise above his Father; Jesus is, in these matters of man's salvation, not only one with the Father, but also in a sense his agent. The time will come, when the plan has been completed, that Jesus, his mission ended, will present the results of his stewardship to the Father, the presiding authority in the council of the Godhead.

60The commission thus given to Jesus explains why, for example, we pray to the Father in the name of the Son. It explains also why the revelations to Joseph Smith after the first vision, were received through Jesus the Christ; that is, he was the speaker. That explains many a saying in the scriptures which otherwise would be difficult of understanding. It makes clear why, in pursuit of his assignment, he may be called the Father of the earth and all upon it.

60Whenever or wherever in the history of the world, the gospel has been taught in its fulness, the place of Jesus Christ in the plan of salvation has been understood. With that knowledge in mind, writers have often spoken of him as the Eternal Father, or God of this world. Thus Isaiah, in his famous prophecy concerning the coming of Jesus, says, "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6) The ancient Nephite prophets, who understood well the mission of Jesus, called Jesus the "Son of the Eternal Father." (1 Ne. 13:40) They also, speaking of the mission of Jesus, gave Jesus the title Eternal Father. Ether speaks of him as "the God of this land." (Ether 2:12.) Mosiah says that he is the "Father of all things;" (Mosiah 7:27) and the "very Eternal Father." (Mosiah 16:15) Alma relates that Zeezrom asked Amulek bluntly, "Is the Son of God the very Eternal Father?" Amulek answered, "Yea, he is the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are." (Alma 11: 38, 39)

60In the use of the title Father for God, the Father of Jesus and of us all, the presiding authority of the Godhead, and in the use of the same title for Jesus, with reference to his mission of earth, there need be no confusion. One need only understand which Being is discussed. Then the term may as properly be applied to one or to another. The word eternal, of course, denotes Godhood, and the everlasting nature of the plan of salvation.

61In the light of the mission of our Elder Brother, the appellation to him by prophets of old, of the title of the Eternal Father, is understood, and is found fully justified. Only those who know not the fulness of the gospel fail to comprehend it.
