John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

3

How Does God Have Constant Knowledge of the Whole Universe?

It is an established doctrine of the Church that God is in constant communication with the whole universe, and every person therein. He may, himself, as he has done at various times, appear to men. But, since God is a personal being, he must use helps and helpers to secure complete, constant contact with all creation. His associates in the spirit world, angels and other personages, may be sent out to administer God's purposes. There may also be other means beyond man's present knowledge.

62While little has been revealed on the subject, it would appear that the Holy Ghost, the third member of the Godhead, is, as it were, in charge of the divine system of communications. It is one of his functions to manifest the will and power of God to the children of men.

62Joseph Smith, the Prophet, speaking of the Priesthood says that, "The Holy Ghost is God's messenger to administer in all those priesthoods." (Teachings, p. 323) Brigham Young speaks similarly of the Holy Ghost: "He is God's messenger that diffuses his (God's) influence through all the works of the Almighty." (Discourses, p. 30-1941 edition) James E. Talmage says: "The Holy Ghost may be regarded as the minister of the Godhead, carrying into effect the decisions of the Supreme Council." ( Articles of Faith , p. 160.) Such a commission is of vast importance, and justifies the dependence on the Holy Ghost, by believers in God and Christ.

62The Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit, and of limited dimensions, who cannot, himself, be everywhere present. (D. & C. 130:22) Therefore, President Joseph F. Smith says, "The Holy Ghost as a personage of Spirit can no more be omnipresent in person than can the Father or the Son. ... The Holy Ghost in person may visit men." (Gospel Doctrine , p. 61) Consequently, the Holy Ghost needs must use agents in performing his mission.

62The chief agent or agency by which the Holy Ghost accomplishes his work, is usually spoken of as the Holy Spirit or the Spirit of God. It is a universe-filling medium, or influence, by which divine messages may be transmitted to man, and man's desires carried to the powers of heaven. It may be comprehended, to a limited degree, in our day, by recent discoveries and inventions. Any one of us may send messages by wireless or telegraph to persons far distant, or actually speak with them over the telephone. By radio devices, far distant objects may be controlled and directed in their movements, in the air or on land or sea.

63This agent is also called the light of truth, as in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space -- the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (D. & C. 88:12, 13)

63This divine universe-filling medium, which holds all things together, places every soul born into the earth in communication with the members of the Godhead. Through it flow the truth and power that touch the intelligence and conscience of men.

63That we understand the nature of the Holy Spirit cannot be claimed. Yet, its effects are well known. Only by analogy with discovered phenomena of nature does it become somewhat understandable. We know the effects of electricity or magnetism, but their nature is yet far from human comprehension.

63In summary, the Holy Ghost, a personage who cannot be everywhere at the same time, may at will visit any individual in person; but by the universe-filling influence radiating from God, or the Light of Truth, the Holy Ghost may be in constant touch with all creatures. In reading the scriptures, one should carefully determine whether the writer has in mind the person of the Holy Ghost, or the means by which he performs his mighty work among men.

63It has caused some confusion that the terms, Holy Ghost, Holy Spirit, and Spirit of God, as rendered by Bible translators with an imperfect knowledge of the gospel, appear to be interchangeable. In common speech, also, the tendency has been to use these terms loosely, without exact definition. This has confused students of the gospel and has led to frequent questions. With the restoration of the gospel, this confusion vanished. We can now better understand the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that, "The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim, ... where all things ... are manifest, past, present, and future." (D. & C. 130:7, 8) This place is in our poor human words, the control station of God's all-pervading influence.
