John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

Are There Many Gods?

The Latter-day Saints believe in one supreme God. He is God the Father, to whom we direct our prayers, in the name of Jesus, the Christ. Associated with the Father are his Son, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. These three separate and distinct personages constitute the Godhead, the governing council of the universe.

65The Church believes and teaches that the personages of the Trinity are distinct personalities but that they are as one because they are united in all things of faith and action.

65Undoubtedly, in working out the Father's plan of salvation, the three members of the Godhead may have had different assignments. Jesus was commissioned to organize the earth, to place man upon it, to secure for man eternal association with his body, through his atonement upon the cross, and when the time comes, to present to the Father the results of man's journey on earth so that proper judgment may be rendered.

65The Holy Ghost was given the high office to help weak man searching for truth win salvation. This he would accomplish by establishing contact between himself and every person on earth. By that contact he may warn against sin, point out the path to righteousness, give guidance to all who really love the gospel, and become a witness of truth when it is found. Thus, through the influence from the Holy Ghost, man is never alone but may always be in the presence of divinity.

65This revealed doctrine of the composition and nature of the Godhead teaches that there are at least three Gods. The Prophet Joseph Smith, challenged by unbelievers that he taught a plurality of Gods, replied in a sermon, "I will preach on the plurality of Gods. I have selected this text for that express purpose. I wish to declare I have always, and in all congregations when I have preached on the subject of the Deity, it has been the plurality of Gods. It has been preached by the elders for fifteen years.

65"I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ, a separate and distinct personage from God the Father and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods. If this is in accordance with the New Testament, lo and behold! we have three Gods anyhow, and they are plural; and who can contradict it?"

66However, in the restored gospel the word god does not always refer to the governing council of the Gods: the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. There are in the universe innumerable intelligent beings, some of whom have come to this earth. These beings, if faithful to the law of the Eternal Father, are steadily progressing toward his likeness. Those who have risen high in their progressive development are often spoken of as gods. This is thoroughly consistent with the doctrine that all are children of God the Father, therefore of his nature, and capable of rising towards his image. This promise is clearly stated in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, wherein the destiny of the faithful is discussed:

"Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God."

66Likewise, speaking of the faithful, "then shall they be gods, because they have no end."

66The plurality of gods is further stated in contemplation of the wonderful laws, things, and properties of the universe.

66"According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was."

66While then, there are many gods there should nevertheless be a clear distinction between the Holy Trinity and those who because of righteous labors have won the title of gods.

66With this doctrine in mind, President Brigham Young preached the sermon which has been construed by enemies to teach that Adam is the God to whom we pray and whom we worship. President Young merely followed the sound doctrine taught by Joseph Smith that when the earth story is finished, the heads of all the dispensations will deliver their stewardships to Adam, who in turn will deliver them to Jesus the Christ, under whose commission the earth work has been done. That places Adam, the first man, foremost in the family of men (Jesus excepted, who was begotten of God the Father) The Prophet Joseph said that:

"The Father called all spirits before Him at the creation of man, and organized them. He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply. The keys were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship, and they to him."

67"Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times; i.e. the dispensation of all the times [that] have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of dispensations that are going to be revealed." ...

67Certainly, under Christ, Adam stands at the head of the human race; as certainly, he will be blessed with the title God.

67Moreover, in the sermon referred to, Brigham Young spoke of Adam as Michael, the archangel, the Ancient of Days, so that nowhere can an intelligent reader confuse Adam with either member of the Godhead.

67The answer to the question at the head of this writing is that there are many gods.
