John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

6

What Is the Meaning of the Atonement?

The universe is dual: spiritual and material, composed of "spirit-element" and "matter-element." These two realms are closely interwoven, perhaps of the same ultimate source; yet they are distinct in their nature. Mastery of the universe means acquaintanceship with and control of both of these elemental divisions of the universe in which we live.

72All men had a spirit birth, and, before the earth was created, lived in a pre-existent life, often called the first estate. In that existence, the spirit children of God, later to become the men and women of earth, possessed the faculties we enjoy here. They could learn, choose, grow or retrograde even as on earth. God, their Father, provided means for their development, but did not rob them of their free agency. (D. & C. 29:35)

72These pre-existent beings possessed only bodies of "spirit-element." Therefore, they were limited to an intimate acquaintanceship with the spirit world. The material world could not be satisfactorily explored, nor known and controlled by beings having only spirit bodies as their means of communication and labor. Nevertheless, their divine destiny was to know the whole universe to which they belonged -- to become like their Father. To do this they needed to acquire bodies of "matter-element" -- later to become refined and celestialized. Such material bodies would be tools by which the world of matter might be known, and controlled for man's progress.

72When God, the Father of the spirits of men saw that His children were ready for the experiences of the material world, He called them together to discuss their further education. In the great council which followed (Pearl of Great Price, Moses, 4:1-3; Abraham, 3:22-28; D. & C. 29:36; 76:25-29), the Father presented a plan for this further education known as the Plan of Salvation, or the gospel of Jesus Christ. This plan was accepted by two-thirds of the council, and rejected by one-third. There was no chance for neutrality. The plan had to be accepted or not accepted. The sorrow of the opponents to the plan is that they cannot acquire matter-bodies which would give them knowledge and power that they must now be without.

73The plan provided that "matter-element" should be collected and made into an earth, as a schoolhouse, upon which the spirits of men might dwell with bodies of earth-element, in pursuit of their preparation for the more complete mastery of the universe. The eldest spirit-son of God, known to us as Jesus, the Christ, was chosen to lead in the execution of the plan; and Adam, another among the chief sons of God and Eve were chosen to be the first to go down on earth to take upon themselves earth-bodies, and to become the earthly parents and heads of the race of men to be born on earth.

73The education of the spirit children of God was to be exacting. For a great gift one must give much. They would go to the earth in forgetfulness of the past, depending upon their own free agency, to be clothed in bodies of "earth-element," provided by their earthly parents; subject to the conditions of earth, instead of the perfected state of their spirit home.

73More terrifying was another requirement. Sometime in their earth career their earth-bodies would be separated from their spirit-bodies, in a process called death, and they would for a time be so separated until divine forces acting under a higher law, would reunite the earth-body, purified and celestialized for an eternal existence, with the spirit-body, which because it is a child of God, is also eternal. All this was planned for the education of man, and to insure his eternal progress amidst the elements and forces of the universe.

73Clearly, the processes involved in the operation of the plan are beyond the full comprehension of man. Yet enough has been revealed to make the essentials of man's entrance upon earth, and progress in the hereafter, understandable to the human mind.

73To subject an eternal being to the dominion of "earth-element" -- that is, to forgetfulness, the many vicissitudes of earth, and eventual death -- appeared to be a descent in power and station. The first man, to bring himself under such dominion and domination would have to break, or set aside, an established law; hut unless this were done, the plan could not be inaugurated. Man, made to walk upright, must bend his back through the tunnel through the mountain which leads to a beautiful valley. Adam and Eve accepted the call to initiate the plan, and subjected themselves to earth conditions. That was the so-called fall of Adam, an act necessary for the winning of bodies of earth-element by man, and for the fulfilment of divine law. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses, 4:7-13; 5:10, 11) Just how this "fall" was accomplished is not known, and probably cannot be understood by the mortal mind. One thing must be kept in mind: The fall was not a sin in the usually accepted sense of that word. It was a necessary act in a series of acts by which ultimately all men will win an eternal possession of their earth-bodies. In the gospel sense, the fall of Adam brought life, not death, into man's eternal existence.

74Here then would be the condition of man after he had acquired an "earthly body" and then was separated from it by the process called death: He was rich in earth experience but without the earth-body to be used by him as an eternal tool to help him win his place among the realities of the universe. The "fall of Adam" had made possible the earth experience, but another act was necessary to restore to the eternal spirit the body of the earth, purified and fitted for eternal life. Someone had to secure this reunion of body and spirit and fit the body for eternal existence. Someone must cancel out the effect of the fall.

74It was one of the tasks of Jesus Christ to accomplish this return of body to spirit. He was born of a mortal woman, but begotten by God, an Eternal Being. Hence, He was both man and God, of earth and of heaven. By His death and subsequent resurrection, the bodies of all men, laid in the grave by Adam's act, were or will be raised into eternal life. In this matter he atoned for the "fall."

74The death of Jesus, who had immortality within His reach, was not as the death of mortal men. Just how His death brought about the resurrection is not known, and, as with the "fall," is probably beyond human understanding.

74Yet, vicarious acts, faintly comparable to the vicarious acts of Jesus and Adam, appear in daily life. One man may for certain purposes cut the wires that supply a city with light, leaving multitudes to find their way in darkness. Another man may reunite the wires, and again flood the city with light. The cutting of the wires, and especially the reuniting of them, is often done with peril to life.

75Jesus died that men, all men, may recover their earthly bodies from the grave. Despite our frailties, follies, or sins, our bodies will be raised from the grave and given to the waiting spirits. Every person born into the world will be so resurrected. The effect of Adam's act is cancelled out by Jesus, by His willingness to pass through death and the resurrection.

75Men must do many things to win salvation in the kingdom of God. Jesus, the Christ, as head of the plan of salvation, under His Father, has many duties besides the resurrection of the bodies of humanity to perform for the blessing of man; and consequently has many titles. He is known as our Elder Brother, our Redeemer, our Advocate with the Father each title referring to a special service for man and meriting special discussion. His compensation for Adam's necessary act, by which He brought about the resurrection, is the most direct meaning of His title, Redeemer.

75The "fall" of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ are necessary key concepts of the gospel. Christianity stands or falls with them. Neither of these concepts can be understood except as they are placed in their proper places in the whole plan of Salvation. Yet we know that they were equally necessary, as are the beginning and end of a journey.

75Adam and Eve, who began the earth work in sacrifice and courage, are the greatest and noblest of the human race. Jesus, the Christ, our Master and Brother, who gave His very life for man, is the great divine Leader of the plan formulated by God for man's good. In His name, through the appointment of the Father, are done all things pertaining to the earth and the race of men.

75(Read President John Taylor's The Mediation and Atonement of Our Lord, Jesus Christ.)
