John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

7

What Is the Difference Between the Holy Spirit And the Holy Ghost?

The Holy Spirit is the agent, means, or influence by which the will, power, and intelligence of God, and the Godhead, personal Beings, may be transmitted throughout space. The Holy Spirit, variously called the Spirit of God, the Light of Christ, the Spirit of Truth, proceeds from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. It is a spirit of intelligence that permeates the universe and gives understanding to the spirits of men. The phenomena of existence are but expressions of this divine medium.

76By the Holy Spirit, the Lord is in communication with all His children and can touch their hearts everywhere. It "giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father." (D. & C. 84:46, 47) Enlightenment, direction warning, reproof, and approval come to man from the loving' Father of humankind, through the agency of the Holy Spirit.

76The phenomena of nature, whether on earth or in stellar fields, are manifestations of the Holy Spirit. The light from the sun, heat, electricity, thunder, lightning, the placidly flowing brook and the raging torrent are expressions of the divine will, through the operations of this holy, universe-filling influence.

76And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

76Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space --

76The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (D. & C. 88:11-13)

76The Holy Ghost, sometimes called the Comforter, is the third member of the Godhead, and is a personage, distinct from the Holy Spirit. As a personage, the Holy Ghost cannot any more than the Father and Son be everywhere present in person. Little has been revealed as yet concerning the Holy Ghost; but it is evident that His mission is to bear witness to men of the existence of God and the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and also to fill men with knowledge and power and to inspire them to works leading to happiness. "The Comforter beareth record of the Father and of the Son." The labors assigned to this member of the Godhead are high and holy, and necessary for man's eternal progress. It seems not improbable that He uses the Holy Spirit to perform His labors.

77The presence and power of the Holy Ghost are promised all who have faith in God, repent of their sins, are baptized for the remission of their sins, and have hands laid upon them by constituted authority in the Priesthood. The act of confirmation of the newly baptized person always includes the words, "Receive the Holy Ghost." It is the baptism of fire, the great gift, the reward for obedience to the preparatory ordinances of the gospel.

77The gift of the Holy Ghost confers upon a person the right to receive, as he may desire and need, the presence, light, and intelligence of the Holy Ghost. It gives, as it were, an official claim upon the mighty assistance and comforting assurance of the Holy Ghost. When the servants of the Lord display a spiritual power beyond the command of man; when the grief-laden heart beats with joy; when failure is converted into victory, it is by the visitation of the Holy Ghost. It is the Spirit of God under the direction of the Holy Ghost that quickeneth all things.

77The gift of the Holy Ghost remains inoperative unless a person leads a worthy life. Worthiness determines whether a person shall enjoy the privileges promised when the "gift" is conferred. It is useless to expect this high official assistance unless there is daily conformity to the laws of the gospel. In addition, faith and prayer, out of the heart and unceasing, are required to fit a person for the presence of the Holy Ghost. To such a life He will respond in power. Only those who "hearken" will be enlightened by the spirit.

77Latter-day Saints have received, under the hands of those divinely empowered, this inexpressibly glorious "gift," which will lead them if they are fitted, into the companionship of the Holy Ghost, and win for them intelligence and power to win joy in life and exaltation in the world to come. Those who have been so blessed have not always understood the greatness of that which has been given them, or have not earnestly sought its help. So powerful a gift, with such boundless promise, justifies every attempt to cleanse body and soul. Certain it is, that only with the aid of the Holy Ghost shall we be able to rise to the heights of salvation of which we dream and for which we pray.
