John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

8

Why Do We Partake of the Sacrament? Who Should Partake of the Sacrament?

A sacrament means a solemn, sacred religious ordinance. There are many of them. The sacrament as understood by the Church, and discussed here, is the partaking of bread and water (or unfermented wine) as emblems of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.

79The central figure of the plan of salvation is Jesus, the Christ. To Him is committed the supervision of the Plan -- from the making of the earth to the final report of work accomplished. His atoning sacrifice makes possible the eternal possession by the spirits of men of their earth-won bodies. All things pertaining to the welfare of the earth and its inhabitants are done through Him. Every commandment for salvation is administered by Him. Therefore, all petitions to God, every prayer, should be offered in the name of the Son of God, Jesus Christ.

79Every person who accepts the divine plan for human salvation must accept the leadership of Jesus, and covenant to keep the laws of the plan. As Christ is accepted with all the attendant obligations of the gospel, in spirit and in deed, so man may win salvation (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 5:8-9), and there is no other way.

79All this was explained to Father Adam, the first man; and it has been explained whenever a new dispensation of the gospel has been opened on earth. Adam was further taught that to keep constantly alive the knowledge of Jesus and His gospel and man's covenant under the gospel law, he should offer sacrifices in "similitude of the [coming] sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 5:7)

79From that time onward, until Jesus Himself came on earth, wherever the Priesthood was present, men offered sacrifices in memory of their acceptance of Jesus, the Son of God, and of their covenants with God. The Mosaic law and ritual were built around the offering of sacrifices, which were the most sacred parts of the system. (Leviticus, chapters 7-9; Exodus, chapters 29, 30)

80After the coming of Jesus and His sacrificial death, it continued to be important to keep alive among men the meaning of the gospel of Jesus Christ and man's obligations to God. Yet, since the "sinless sacrifice" had been accomplished, and the old and partial law had been superseded by the more complete law, a new form of witnessing to Christ's supreme place and man's acceptance of Him and His law was instituted.

80President Joseph F. Smith said:

It was instituted by the Savior in the place of the law of sacrifice which was given to Adam, and which continued with his children down to the days of Christ, but which was fulfilled in his death, he being the great sacrifice for sin, of which the sacrifices enjoined in the law given to Adam were a similitude. (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , p. 252)

80Shortly before His crucifixion, in an upper room in Jerusalem, Jesus ate His last supper with His chosen Twelve. The first three evangelists tell the story. Matthew says,

80And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat: this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them saying, Drink ye all of it: For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom. (Matt. 26:26-29; also Mark 16:14; and Luke 22:14-20)

80Thenceforth, under the "New Testament," this has been the type of memorial of Christ's sacrifice and man's acceptance of Christ and obedience to Christ's law. It is the Sacrament of man's communion with God -- a most sacred ordinance

80The restoration of the gospel through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith clarified the use and meaning of the Sacrament, which through the dark periods of apostasy had suffered many perversions. In the revelation on Church organization and government it is declared that "the church meet together often to partake of bread and wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus." Further, the meaning of the ordinance is made clear in the set prayers to be pronounced upon the bread and water which follow. For the bread it is:

81O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (D. & C. 20:77)

81To remember the sacrifice of Jesus, to accept Jesus as the Leader; to keep His commandments -- these are the covenants made; and the reward is the guiding companionship of the Holy Spirit. This makes of the partaking of the sacrament a renewal of the covenants we made at the time of baptism into the Church. Thus, by the sacrament we declare repeatedly, ordinarily weekly, our allegiance to the plan of salvation and its obligations. Thus we keep ourselves as one with Christ our Elder Brother in seeking to consummate the purposes of the Father with respect to the children of men.

81The Sacrament should be taken with sincere acceptance of all that it means. The partaker should seek to cleanse himself from all evil. Otherwise the expected blessings may not be realized. In the words of Paul,

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself. (1 Cor. 11:28, 29)

81The statement that "the Church" meet together often to partake of the sacrament, implies that properly it should be administered in authorized Church gatherings. The meeting may be small in number, for "where two or three are met together in my name, . . . there I will be." (D. & C. 6:32; Matt. 18:20)

81The authority to administer the Sacrament is possessed by all holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood and also by priests of the lesser Priesthood. It is customary for two persons to officiate, one for the bread, the other for the water. However, one elder or priest may bless both emblems, if necessary. (D. & C. 20:76)

81Early in the history of the restored Church, the question of the use of wine in the sacrament was discussed. By revelation it was learned that "it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory -- " (D. &C. 27:2)

82 Consequently, the Church uses water instead of wine. Should wine be used it should be "made new among you." (D. & C. 27:4)

82While only those who have entered the Church can renew their covenants, yet to avoid singling out children who may be present, and to accustom them to the ordinance, they are taught to accept the emblems of the Sacrament.

82The Sacrament is intended for the members of the Church. The covenants in the prayer of blessing are those made when entrance into the Church is consummated. Where there are many non-members present in a Sacrament meeting, the presiding officer usually announces that the Sacrament will be administered to members of the Church, without further comment. There should, however, be no attempt to withhold the bread and water from non-members. If such persons partake, it will be upon their own responsibility; and to some extent at least they then accept the meaning and covenants of the ordinance.

82President Brigham Young, speaking upon the sacrament, said, "Its observance is as necessary to our salvation as any other of the ordinances and commandments that have been instituted in order that the people may be sanctified." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 266)

82Members of the Church should delight in the privilege of partaking of the Lord's sacred supper, thereby affirming their faith in Jesus the Christ and their allegiance to the Church of Christ.
