John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

III

Revelation

1

Why Can Not Things of God Be Known Except By the Spirit of God?

The Savior while on earth declared that "It is the spirit that quickeneth" (John 6:63) and in modern times, speaking to Joseph Smith the Prophet, He said, "the Spirit beareth record" (D. & C. 1:39; 59:24); and "the Spirit giveth light to every man. (D. & C. 84:46)

85The Apostle Paul, interpreting life in terms of this doctrine, wrote "the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (1 Cor. 2:11)

85This profound yet almost self-evident truth is the beginning of an understanding of the gospel.

85The radio now found in almost every household illustrates the meaning of this doctrine, broadcast throughout space are countless messages, music or the spoken word -- some good, others bad. We are immersed in these radio waves or radiations or whatever they may be; they beat upon our senses as waves upon the ocean shore. Yet, we are not conscious of them unless our receiving set is tuned to catch them. Then they are converted into sound waves that activate our eardrums. That which eluded our senses, suddenly enters our world of hearing.

85Similarly, the astronomer must have his telescope to scan the depths of space; the biologist, his microscope to perceive the minute things of life; the physicist, his electron-microscope to bring the world of molecules within his range of vision. There would be no progress unless this were done. If the astronomer should attempt to survey the heavens with a microscope or the biologist set out with a telescope to make the world of small things visible, only confusion or blackness would result.

85This is a universal law. In every department of knowledge the seeker for truth must choose his tools with reference to the field to be explored; and the procedure of his studies must fit the needs of the search. While instruments, aids to the senses, are important, indeed often indispensable, they are of little value unless the senses themselves are in a condition to receive that which the instruments transmit. Eye, ear, and all other sense organs must be normal for dependable observation. Otherwise the observations may be misleading.

86In addition, man himself must also be able not only to receive but also to interpret that which comes through his senses. The mental interpretation is as important as the physical observation. Unless he can do this, his knowledge is but as rain splashing upon a granite dome, when it might fall upon friendly, absorbing soil to germinate seed or to induce plant growth. In every pursuit of knowledge, therefore, the fitness and power of the man to observe and to interpret become of first consequence. The inner meaning of phenomena is revealed only to one competent to receive the truth sought.

86It is so in the pursuit of spiritual truth. There, the seeker deals with living, personal realities; not primarily with the inert, impersonal things and forces of science. The Holy Spirit, which is in touch with every person born into the world, is the communicating agent. In this field, man, a living being, must be the chief instrument of reception as well as the interpreter of the knowledge offered by the Spirit of God. Therefore, the individual must be properly prepared, tuned, if he is to receive and to comprehend spiritual truth. In short, to understand "things of God," a person, who is the receiving apparatus, must qualify himself spiritually.

86Mere knowledge of spiritual truth, information that may be drawn from the encyclopedia, for instance, that there is a God, that prayers may be heard, or that it is wrong to steal, is never really understood unless the person is spiritually prepared. The absence of such preparation explains why many who can glibly recite the Ten Commandments or the Beatitudes may violate them with equal ease; or why, though reared in a religious atmosphere, they are irreligious. Such persons believe that spiritual knowledge may be poured into them with no consideration of their fitness and with no effort on their part. That cannot be done in the lower fields of knowledge and less so in the highest, the spiritual field. It would be in opposition to natural law. Such people are out of spiritual focus, and their impressions are blurred, much as a telescope out of focus gives only indistinct and confused images. Or, to use another figure of speech, there is static in their lives which mars the beauty of life's melody. On the contrary, when a person does fit and qualify himself, spiritual messages, waiting to be revealed, come to him. Then, and only then, is spiritual knowledge quickened into living comprehension leading to activity. When there is such correspondence between an individual and the spiritual world, the real joy of life appears. Otherwise, something is missing from our daily desire. We live incompletely.

87What, then, can a person do to qualify himself to receive and to understand things of the spirit, to become an instrument through which spiritual messages may be made intelligible? An answer is given in a glorious latter-day revelation:

But great and marvelous are the works of the Lord, . . . Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him. (D. & C. 76:114, 116)

87Speaking to the same subject the ancient American Prophet Moroni gave this well-known guide:

. . . I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. (Book of Mormon, Moro. 10:4)

87The formula seems simple: Faith, obedience, and prayer. But, as with all good things, it requires personal effort. The seeker after spiritual truth must first have faith in God, that is, in His existence and His relationship to mankind. This is the beginning of all wisdom. Frequently, the difficulty with those who struggle to believe this or that gospel principle, is that they have not yet found full faith in God. Next, love of God must characterize him who would know the things of the spirit. That means surrender of self to the requirements of the Lord. In other words, obedience to law is required, which is the only way to freedom. Knowledge of itself is never sufficient; it must be made alive by obedience, the fruit of love. By obedience to the law of the Lord, we purify ourselves, and become fitted to approach Him and to win His favor. All the while there must be prayer for help to the beloved Being whom we call God, and whom we are ready to obey to secure the knowledge desired. Such prayer must he sincere, of "real intent," otherwise it becomes a useless gesture. "Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you (D. & C. 19:38) is the promise of the Lord. In short, "living the gospel" fits a man to receive spiritual truth. Only then can he receive and understand things of the spirit. Upon that condition alone does the light of truth enter his life.

88Is it difficult to obey this formula, to qualify oneself spiritually? Nothing is easier or more enjoyable. When there is harmony between the instrument and the pounding message, there is joy in the heart. The world's confusion roots in discord, lack of harmony. To be out of focus or to live in the midst of static is to be in semi-darkness and chaos. To have control of self, to bid the baser appetites depart, is to walk through life in full light and with full power. They who think the path difficult, have not tried it. "Living the gospel" is the true way to the full and free expression of human powers, to the help that the Spirit of God can give.

88It may be added that all who yield such obedience to God's law undergo a real transformation, by the Holy Ghost, which enables them more and more, to receive and understand spiritual messages. Unless that transformation is accomplished, a person is opaque to spiritual truth, and the "things of God" are beyond his understanding.

88Great is the effect of such spiritual communication. Human experience as well as the divinely inspired word makes clear the overflowing blessings that follow possession of the "things of God." It transforms life. It makes the weak strong, the strong mightier. Every field of activity is illuminated by spiritual truth. The individual becomes filled with light as the incandescent lamp when the electric current passes through it. Moroni left for all truth seekers this world-sweeping message: "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Book of Mormon Moroni 10:5). Scientist and philosopher; farmer and tradesman; rich and poor; all will be aided in their life pursuits if they have contact with the inexhaustible intelligence of the spiritual realm. The wealth of eternity will be theirs. They who do not seek to make themselves receivers of spiritual messages, but thrash about for such truth as their unaided powers may reveal, do not learn the meaning and destiny of life, and fail to win the vision of the glory of the universe in which we live.
