John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

What Shall Be Done With Personal Spiritual Manifestations?

The doctrine that the Lord may and does reveal His will to men on earth is a cornerstone of the faith of the Latter-day Saints. The restoration of the gospel in these latter days was initiated by the direct appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith. Since that time every forward step of the Church has been the result of a revelation of the Lord's will by direct appearance of Himself or of other heavenly messengers or by equally direct inspiration from the Spirit of the Lord. The Church has ever been and is now led by revelation -- authoritative guidance from divine sources.

97It is a cornerstone of equal importance, that every member of the Church may and should obtain a personal testimony of the truth of the latter-day work. He must not rest his final convictions upon the testimony of others. The humblest member of the Church, if he seeks properly, may know with full assurance that the gospel is true. Hone need know it better than he. However, to secure such firm knowledge he must receive assurance of it from the Author of truth; that is, he must he guided by the spirit of revelation. The conclusion is clear: Every member of the Church of Christ may be guided by inspiration from the Lord in the affairs of his own life.

97This doctrine is beautifully set forth in several of the foundation revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

97For example:

And the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. (D. & C. 84:46)

97On another occasion the Lord said to the Church:

But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart. . . . seek ye earnestly the best gifts, . . . and always retain in your minds what those gifts are, that are given unto the church. . . . To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby. . . . He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done, even as he asketh. (D. & C. 46:7, 8, 10, 12, 30)

98Apparently every person has a gift, according to his needs or the service he may render.

98 Revelations are given for a two-fold purpose: to furnish guidance for the Church, and to give comfort to the individual.

98 Revelations for the guidance of the Church are given to officers of the Church, but only within the limits of their official jurisdiction. Thus, lay members of the Church cannot and do not receive revelations for the guidance of any Church organizations, but only for themselves. The bishop has a claim upon divine inspiration for the direction of ward affairs, but no further. The spirit of revelation directs the stake president in his official stake duties, but no further. The President of the Church alone, who may officiate in all of the offices of the Church, receives revelations for the Church as a whole, to which stake presidents, ward bishops, and all other officers of the Church are amenable. This preserves a full and logical order within all Church activities.

98True revelations come from the Lord. The evil one, ever vigilant in his work of destruction, tries to simulate with an evil purpose every gift of God. Therefore, he presents false doctrines of man-made commandments through the suggestions of evil spirits or evil-minded men. To protect the Saints, and to maintain truth within the Church, the power of discerning between truth and error is given to the officers of the Church. The bishop for his ward, the stake president for his stake, and the President of the Church for the whole Church have this gift of discernment given them. Note the clear, beautiful words of the Lord upon this subject:

And unto the bishop of the church, and unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church and to be elders unto the church, are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God. . . .

98That unto some it may he given to have all those gifts, that there may he a head, in order that every member may be profited thereby. (D. & C. 46:27, 29)

98By this power and in this order, evil inspirations within the Church are recognized and rejected.

98Divine manifestations for individual comfort may be received by every worthy member of the Church. In that respect all faithful members of the Church are equal. Such manifestations most commonly guide the recipients to the solution of personal problems; though, frequently, they also open the mind to a clearer comprehension of the Lord's vast plan of salvation. They are cherished possessions, and should be so valued by those who receive them. In their very nature, they are sacred and should be so treated. If a person who has received such a manifestation by dream, vision, or otherwise, feels impressed to relate it beyond his immediate family circle, be should present it to his bishop, but not beyond. The bishop, then, may decide upon its further use, if any, or may submit it to those of higher authority for action. The gift was a personal one, not for the Church as a whole; and the recipient is under obligation, in harmony with the established order, not to broadcast it over the Church.

99It is unwisdom, therefore, for those who have received such manifestations to send copies to others, to relate them by word of mouth in diverse places, and otherwise to scatter abroad a personal, sacred experience. There are times and places where testimony may be borne of our knowledge that the restored gospel is of the Lord, and of the goodness of the Lord to us, and when we may present evidence of our faith. It would be well to remember that the Lord jesus Christ, while on earth, usually instructed those whom He had healed or otherwise blessed, that they should not tell others of the occurrence. Some things are done for the public good, others for private welfare.

99It should also be kept in mind that a message is carried by every spiritual experience. Revelation always has a purpose related to man's eternal progress. The message should always be of more importance to the recipient than the substance or vehicle of the manifestation. Our spiritual experiences, if sound, point the way to our own salvation. Life's efforts should be directed towards the treading of that way to the satisfaction of the Giver of all gifts, from whom the spirit of revelation issues.
