John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

7

What Is An Angel?

Divine guidance may be communicated to man in several ways. God, the Father, may appear, Himself, as He has done at the opening of dispensations of the gospel. More frequently His Son, Jesus Christ, has appeared. On many occasions, messengers have been sent out from the spiritual domain to help men on earth. Often, mortal men have been delegated to help their fellows. Usually, however, the divine message is conveyed by the Holy Spirit, the influence radiating from God and touching every part and personality in the universe. Any or all of these means of communication have been employed in the wisdom of the Lord.

107Numerous references to angels are found in the sacred scriptures, ancient and modern. In the Bible, angels ministered to Abraham, Jacob, Gideon, Elijah, Zachariah, and many others. In the Book of Mormon, angels ministered to Nephi, to the sons of Helaman, to the twelve disciples, and to multitudes of others. In modern days, angels appeared to Joseph and others; and in the revelations to the Prophet, angels and their functions are repeatedly discussed. There can be no question about the important functions of angels in the course of human salvation.

107There is, however, much confusion in the use of the term angel. Yet an examination of sacred history makes clear that under the most general definition, angels are personages out of the spirit world, sent to earth as messengers of the Lord. This is in full accord with gospel doctrine. The spiritual, invisible world out of which man comes and into which he returns, is filled with uncounted hosts of such personages. There can be no reason why the Lord may not use them for His purposes in accomplishing the plan of salvation for His earth-children. Indeed, angels residing in the presence of God (D. & C. 130:7) are waiting to be sent forth in connection with this great work (D. & C. 86:5). Angels were sent to commit the gospel in this as in former dispensations (D. & C. 27:16; 20:10) God calls by the ministering of angels (D. & C. 43:25) They may minister also to personages in heaven (Ps. 103:20) With respect to the earth an angel is a messenger of God to assist in consummating holy purposes. He is a "ministering spirit" (D. & C. 136:37 )

108The term angel is applied to different classes of beings. Some appear to be spirits who have not yet attained to the earth estate, and do not possess celestialized earthly bodies. Others are personages who have lived on earth, but have not yet been resurrected. A third class are those who have gone through the earth experience and have been resurrected, as Moroni who visited the Prophet Joseph Smith. In all likelihood, personages, known as angels, are used according to their fitness to serve.

108A passage in the Doctrine and Covenants gives a more restricted or technical definition of an angel. "Angels, . . . are resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones" (D. & C. 129:1) This is confirmed by the doctrine that persons who have won the right to enter the celestial glory, but have not been sealed in marriage cannot receive the highest exaltation. They "are angels of God forever and ever" (D. & C. 132:17). This may be the most accurate definition of an angel.

108The duties of these messengers of God are many and varied, as set forth in Holy Writ. They may announce the truths of the gospel, or convey special messages to individuals or nations. They may act as guardians to protect thee righteous, or agents not inflict divine penalties upon the wicked. They may come, as at the beginning of a dispensation, with authority to bestow the Priesthood or to help in the development of the organized Church. In short, they go and do as they are bidden.

108The angels of God, or their influence, always come in light. It may be light to the eyes if it be a personal appearance, or the light that leads to righteous works if it be a spiritual message. It is an interesting observation of the Prophet Joseph Smith that "angels who minister to this earth . . . belong or have belonged to it. . . . The angels . . . reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord" (D. & C. 130:5-7).

108Satan also has his messengers. The hosts who fell from heaven in the preexistent council are busily engaged in opposition to God's purposes for man's salvation. They are sent out to lead men into sin. They are angels of untruth, therefore of evil. They feed on lies.

109These evil "angels" use deception as their main tool of destruction. They simulate all that is good. They urge the satisfaction of sensual appetites. In the words of Brigham Young, they tell a hundred truths so that the one lie may be accepted. Sometimes they may come as angels of light, in borrowed or stolen raiment. Always they fail to reveal themselves as they are.

109Satan and his evil angels are bodiless. That is their heavy punishment. Their power, now and hereafter, is greatly limited by this lack. Therefore, they often seek enhance into human bodies, even bodies of lower animals. Whenever this occurs, the individual thus made to share his body is caused much agonized suffering.

109However, one does not really need to fear the angels of evil. They are essentially cowardly. They fear light and truth. Darkness and untruth are their native habitat. Their successes always come when the mind of man is darkened by unbelief or unholy practices. A resolute determination to have nothing to do with them drains their strength. They are mortally afraid of the power of the Priesthood. The command, "Get thou behind me," coupled with righteous living, is sufficient to drive them away. Yet, one must always be on guard against new forms of temptation in which these messengers from evil and with evil may appear to offer transient satisfactions.

109Three keys for recognizing messengers out of the unseen world were given by the Prophet Joseph Smith:

There are two kinds of angels in heaven, namely: Angels, who are resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones --

109For instances, Jesus said: Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

109Secondly: The spirits of just men made perfect, they who are not resurrected, but inherit the same glory.

109When a messenger comes saying he has a message from God, offer him your hand and request him to shake hands with you.

109If he be an angel he will do so, and you will feel his hand.

109If he be the spirit of a just man made perfect he will come in his glory; for that is the only way he can appear --

109Ask him to shake hands with you, but he will not move, because it is contrary to the order of heaven for a just man to deceive; but he will still deliver his message.

110If it be the devil as an angel of light, when you ask him to shake hands he will offer you his hand, and you will not feel anything; you may therefore detect him.

110These are three grand keys whereby you may know whether any administration is from God (D. & C. 129:1-9).

110Deceit is the mark of evil. Even if the evil messenger does not appear in person, the test is the same. Compare the offering with the principles of truth. The sure sign of Satan will then appear.
