John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

Are the Early Books of the Bible (The Pentateuch And Joshua) Historically Correct?

Events and personages are of frequent mention in the Bible. The opinion has often been voiced that they are but creations of the imagination -- mythical figures and episodes, parts of Hebrew folklore. However, it has always been conceded that if they are found mentioned in contemporaneous documents, outside of the Bible, their historicity may well be accepted.

121Just that has been found to be the case. Recent archaeological study has uncovered ancient documents which certify to the correctness of the Bible accounts. Since World War I, such finds have been especially numerous. Every spadeful of earth removed from the buried past, every broken potsherd uncovered, every inscription deciphered seems to have added to the historical authenticity of the Bible, by direct or indirect proof. Indeed, these finds have made Bible times of four thousand years ago better known than English history of one thousand years ago. And, future discoveries may add much to present knowledge.

121This does not mean that every Bible historical statement has been confirmed, or that there are no errors in the Bible story. Latter-day Saints have long been taught to believe the Bible "as far as it is translated correctly"; and also that the Lord operates through imperfect human instruments. It does mean, however, that if the major historical statements are found to be correct, the verity of the whole story is enhanced. It has too often been the case that, because historical events in Holy Writ are but vehicles for moral truths, historians have studied the Bible under a cloud of prejudice. That is not the way of true scholarship.

121It is not to be expected that all the events recorded in the Bible, often of minor and local historical importance, should be recorded on the monuments of the past in other countries. Kings sought to make imperishable records of their own valor. At no time was Hebrew history of major concern to neighboring countries. It is therefore surprising that so many of the events of Israelitish history stand forth boldly in the recorded history of neighboring lands.

122Until a few years ago it was held that the compilation of the early books of the Bible was based upon oral tradition, corrupted throughout the centuries, since the art of writing was not invented in the days of Abraham. Now it is known beyond cavil that writing antedates Abraham by hundreds, if not thousands, of years. It may well be believed, therefore, that the early Bible books are based upon ancient documents written by Moses himself, and others.

122The Bible accounts of the creation of the earth and man, the early patriarchal days, the Garden of Eden, the flood, and the Tower of Babel occur in early Chaldean records. It is evident that the stories of these events were carried down from earliest antiquity. Actual deposits implying a great flood have been found in Babylonia. Towers of Babel, ziggurats, formerly crowned by temples, have been excavated in Babylonia. One of these may well be the Biblical Tower of Babel (Smith, The Chaldean Account of Genesis ; Woolley, The Sumerians, and Ur of the Chaldees).

122Ur of the Chaldees has been found and uncovered. A high degree of culture characterized Ur in the days of Abraham. It is clear now that Abraham might have been a learned man, amply able to write his own memoirs. The people of Ur were polytheistic. Abraham, a monotheist, left Ur in protest against the worship of false gods. The birth and presence of Abraham in Ur and his departure therefrom, as stated by the Bible, may unhesitatingly be accepted. The name Abram was in use in the days of the "Father of the Faithful."

122It is now well known that in antiquity there was regular, large intercourse among Babylon, Palestine, and Egypt. The journey of Abraham to the Promised Land does not now seem so difficult an undertaking. Many of the cities of Canaan mentioned in Genesis have been found and identified. "Uru-Salem" (Jerusalem) was a city of importance in Abraham's day. One uncovered story seems to tell of Abraham's coming to Canaan, which was looked upon as an invasion by some of the inhabitants of the land. The narrative of the battle of four kings has been shown to be authentic.

122Modern scholarship has revealed that in the days of Abraham, shepherd kings, the Hyksos, Semites of the blood of Abraham, had invaded Egypt and become its rulers. That may account for the friendly reception of Abraham by the then ruling Pharaoh, a shepherd king. The discovered records inform us that neighboring nations came in times of drought to buy foodstuffs from the fertile valley of the Nile, just as the Bible declares was done by Jacob and his sons. A man is mentioned who represented the Pharaoh in hoarding grain in years of plenty and doling it out in lean years as was done by Joseph.

123The shepherd kings, Semites akin to the Hebrews, ruled Egypt until the time of Moses. The Egyptian oppression of Israel began about the time the Egyptian rulers, not of Semitic blood, regained control of the country. The Pharaoh of the oppression of Israel was undoubtedly Thothmes II whose mummified body has been found. The Pharaoh who ruled at the actual time of the exodus from Egypt was Amenhotep II, whose mummy has also been found. There is even some fairly acceptable record of the tenth plague, the slaying of the first born. The princess who found Moses has been identified with great certainty, under the name of Hatshepsut. Dates and persons from the ancient records confirm the Bible story. That Egyptian and Biblical chronologies harmonize is of particular note in establishing the historicity of the Bible.

123The Midian to which Moses repaired after his exploit in Egypt was a country of high culture. The worship of Jehovah and Elohim was current there, justifying Joseph Smith's statement that Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, held the true Priesthood. In the Sinaitic peninsula the inscription on a rock has been found giving a date corresponding to the Exodus and a name corresponding to Moses.

123Research has revealed contemporary records mentioning the invasion of Palestine by the Hebrews after the long sojourn in Egypt. Even the name Israel, strictly a Hebrew name, has been found carved in a rock. The Canaanitish idolatrous civilization and religion have been shown to correspond thoroughly with the Bible record.

123Of especial note is the conclusion, after careful study that the Hebrew laws, such as the Ten Commandments are more primitive "than the corresponding laws of the Babylonians or Hittites." This confirms the Latter-day Saint belief that the gospel was given to Adam, and in many lands has come down in a corrupted form, but maintained in its purity among Israel (Barton, The Haverford Symposium on Archaeology and the Bible).

124The forty years' sojourn in the wilderness has been explained by the likelihood that the people settled temporarily in Midian, a friendly country, well known to Moses. This is more credible than a long wandering in the Sinaitic peninsula, covered with roads, mines, and quarries under the Egyptian government.

124The long discussions about the actual date of the fall of Jericho and therefore of the occupation of Palestine by Israel have been settled in favor of the Bible date. It has been shown that the walls of Jericho fell under a sudden catastrophe. Parallel walls surrounded the fortress of Jericho; wooden beams were laid from wall to wall upon which houses were built, as Rahab's house, "built upon a wall." The corroboration of the Bible account is then complete.

124A group of letters the Tell el Amarna tablets written about the days of Joshua, discusses repeatedly the invasion of Palestine of the "Habiru," the Hebrews. Cities and events conforming to the Bible story are there mentioned repeatedly.

124These, with many other examples that might be cited, go to show that modern Biblical archaeology supports better than could really be expected the historical claims of the Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua -- as well as the other books of the Bible. It must always be kept in mind that in its early history, the Israelitish nation was insignificant compared with the many important neighboring nations. At best, it was only another troublesome group of people to Egypt and other lands. It must be remembered, also, that monuments were built to celebrate the great deeds of king and country. The minor affairs as then conceived of the Hebrews, would hardly be expected to be memorialized in costly structures of stone, or in special writings on papyrus or clay.

124It may well be asked how the archaeological information of the day has been obtained. In Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, and other countries of antiquity, great stone monuments in the form of men, beasts, or shafts (steles) were built to commemorate the noble deeds of the rulers, notably the kings. On these were cut inscriptions relating historic events. Sometimes the proud monarch would cut the story into the face of a prominent cliff. The Egyptians wrote much on papyrus, which has been preserved under the dry climate of the Nile valley. In Babylonia and Assyria with a higher rainfall, symbols were pressed into tablets of clay, then dried or baked. Inscriptions on pottery have furnished many a clue. Through romantic and magnificent studies and efforts of scholarship, Egyptian hieroglyphics, cuneiform, and other writing may now be read.

125Several recent finds have contributed much to the knowledge of early Biblical days. In 1887, a country woman of Tell el Amarna, a village on the Upper Nile, found in a rubbish heap a collection of inscribed clay tablets, an ancient file of correspondence written chiefly from Egyptian overlords in Palestine to the Pharaoh of Egypt. These letters and dispatches were dated at the time of Joshua, when the Hebrews were settling in Palestine. Invaluable knowledge was gained from these tablets.

125In 1929, another collection of historical tablets was found in Ras Shamra in Asia Minor, opposite Cyprus. These are contemporary with the Tell el Amarna tablets, and throw further light on the conquest of Canaan by Israel. They emphasize the Semite culture and religion of that day.

125Equally important appear to be the glazed potsherds covered with writing discovered in Lachish, twenty-five miles southwest of Jerusalem in 1933. These have not all been deciphered, but they date from about 600 B. C., long after the days of Joshua, and reveal conditions of that time. From them may come also new knowledge concerning the early history of the Bible.

125The sources of Biblical archaeology are many. The finest and most praiseworthy scholarship has been applied to them. Much has been learned; more will be learned.

125The question at the head of this chapter may then be answered: As far as human learning has progressed, nothing has been found to discredit the historicity of the early books of the Bible; so much has been found in support of the historical claims of these books, that we are justified in looking upon them as correct historical documents, more accurate than other like documents dealing with the same period of human history. The Bible is an historical record accurate in its statements far beyond the expectations of scholars a generation ago.
