John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

Did the Sun Stand Still Upon Gibeon?

In the Book of Joshua, 10:12-14, the following occurs:

Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.

129And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day. And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.

129There is no good reason to doubt the historicity of this event that during a battle between Israel and the Amorites, daylight was extended far beyond the usual limits of day. The sun and moon seemed to be at rest. It is not the only account in history of similar phenomena.

129The explanation of the occurrence made by the writer or some later copyist, implies that the earth ceased its daily rotation and annual course around the sun, to bring about the needed additional daylight for Israel's victory in battle. This may well be questioned. Even limited human knowledge suggests several simpler methods -- refraction and reflection of light, for instance, by which the extension of daylight might be accomplished. Divine power may stop the rotation of the earth, let that be clearly accepted, but it certainly may have at its command other means for extending the hours of light in a day.

129A miraculous event, properly authenticated, must be accepted as any other occurrence. An explanation of a miracle must however be held in doubt until fully confirmed by acceptable knowledge.

129A miracle is an occurrence which, first, cannot be repeated at will by man, or, second, is not understood in its cause and effect relationship. History is filled with such miracles. What is more, the whole story of man's progress is the conversion of "miracles" into controlled and understood events. The airplane and radio would have been miracles, yesterday. All well-informed persons now admit that there may be countless forces in the universe not yet recognized by man. These forces in their operation may produce results baffling to man.

130We no longer speak of supernatural events, for the invasion of the unseen world by man has shown that all human experiences are but manifestations of the one world -- are natural though perhaps not understood.

130In the Old Testament are recorded fewer than one hundred in the New Testament about half a hundred events that can be called miraculous. That is not a large number for the thousands of years covered by Israel's history before Jesus. Many more uncommon events, that have seemed miraculous, have been recorded in every recent century of easy communication among men.

130In view of recent progress, many of these "miracles" do not now seem so strange. The cure of leprosy, making a barren woman fertile, the coming of quails, the plagues of Egypt, and many others, are quite within the limits of present human understanding. The floating of Elisha's ax ceases to be a wonder in a day of magnetism. Others, on the other hand, are yet beyond our comprehension, notably, perhaps, the two greatest miracles of all, the creation of the earth and the coming of man.

130It must also be kept in mind that some of the Bible miracles, especially in the Old Testament, may be poorly described by the historians, or incorrectly translated, and therefore confusing to us of a later day. Latter-day Saints will do well to remember that the Lord does His work through mortal men, subject to the weaknesses of the earth. Jonah in the belly of the fish may be such a one which if fully understood would leave no question behind.

130The real quibble in the field of miracles arises over the intervention of divine power in the affairs of men. As to this Latter-day Saints can take but one side, for they believe in the existence of God, whose intelligence permeates the universe. They believe that divine power and intelligence may and do help weak humanity, true sons and daughters of God. Latter-day Saints do not attempt to limit the extent of the Lord's intelligent power, to muzzle Him, as it were. As the possessor of infinite knowledge and power, the Maker of the heavens and the earth may at will set forces into operation to succor His children or to give witness of His power.
