John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

8

Does Science Contribute To Religious Faith?

It is A cardinal doctrine of our religion that the gospel of Jesus Christ embraces all truth. Truth may well be another name for the system of faith professed by the Latter-day Saints. In the words of Brigham Young: "Our religion is simply the truth. It is all said in this one expression -- it embraces all truth, wherever found, in all the works of God and man that are visible or invisible to mortal eye whether religious, political, scientific, or philosophical." (Discourses of Brigham Young, 1941 edition, p. 2)

170Such a doctrine eliminates any conflict between science and religion. Every statement must be tested for its truth. If found to be true, it is incorporated into the gospel structure. If found to be false, it is rejected and forgotten. That places factual knowledge high and inferences or theories much lower. Latter-day Saints must be certain of the truth the accept. To be ever searching for truth, and of course practising it, is the real business of Latter-day Saints.

170When man sets out to discover truth for himself, he must rely on the evidences drawn from a study of the external world. The whole of nature is a witness of the truth of things not visible to the naked eye, and of the directly revealed word of the Lord. Truth is always truth and must of necessity support its parts.

170That great truths may be found or confirmed by a study of the things about us, is verified by the scriptures. When Jesus faced unbelief in his divinity and mission on earth, he declared that his works would bear witness of the truth of his claims.

170Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very works' sake. (John 14:11)

170Later, the Apostle Peter made the same statement in emphatic words:

. . . the invisible things of him (God) from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.... (Rom. 1:20)

171It could not be otherwise in the minds of all who believe that the visible and invisible worlds are but manifestations of the one universe in which we have our being. In one sense, every worker in science, in any branch thereof, is contributing to the truth of revealed religion, and adding to our understanding of the words of revelation.

171The history of man's progress in knowledge shows that science may contribute to religious thought and faith.

171By recognizing our universe as one of law, order, and intelligence, science has driven fear from the hearts of men. Intelligence acts in intelligent ways. The intelligence at the head of all things may be trusted to act intelligently. There arises therefrom a trust in the things about us. The age-old horror, called fear, which has so long distracted humanity, vanishes. Superstition is laid low. Men come to understand better the love of God, and his offerings of goodness. Certainly, in so doing, science has contributed to religious faith.

171Likewise, faith in a world not visible to our natural eyes, another basic principle in religion, has been confirmed by the advances in science. The molecules from which all matter is made are in most cases far beyond the ordinary limits of human powers of observation. The atoms from which the molecules are made are in a world beyond human senses. They shall probably never be seen. They are known only by their effects. Yet they have been weighed and measured. The atoms in turn are composed of much smaller particles, the electrons, protons, and others of immeasurably small dimensions, and occupying a space utterly beyond human direct reach. Nevertheless, we know much about them. They also have to some degree been weighed and measured, marvelous as it may seem. Science has explored the invisible atomic and sub-atomic worlds. That has confirmed our faith in the invisible, spiritual world, the effects of which we have often been happy recipients. The discoveries of science have established more firmly our faith in the world from which we came and to which we shall return. That is another real contribution to religious thought.

171Many prophecies, often ridiculed by careless thinkers, are made to seem possible by the advancing front of science. For example, bearers of God's word in ancient and modern times have discussed the end of the earth. They have agreed that after the Lord's work on earth is finished, the earth shall pass away and be consumed as by fire. Then, there shall arise a new heaven and a new earth. Science, while not entering into the prophecy, does seem to make such events possible. It is now well known that within every particle of matter are inconceivably great forces. In some substances these may now be released, as in the recent atomic bomb. There is good reason to believe that by some methods, probably never to be in the hand of man, the hidden energies of the whole earth might be released. The earth then would be consumed by its own fearful fire. Such a conflagration would be a complete cleansing process.

172To restore the earth again, to rebuild it from its own released energy, a creative process comparable to that which at first built the earth, must be employed. That of course is far beyond human power. The explanations of science point to the possibility of such events. Again science contributes to faith.

172Science contributes help in numerous corners of religion. The fields of prayer, eternity of man, the resurrection, life hereafter have been made clearer to the human understanding by the facts of science. Indeed the progress of knowledge by the scientific method has been a handmaid to faith.

172It is a fascinating activity to check the truth discovered by man against the larger and more comprehensive truth which has come by revelation. No conflict will be found, if one uses only the facts of science. Instead, a series of confirmations of sound religions truth will be discovered. Faith will largely increase in such a study.

172So, the answer to this query is that science does contribute, helpfully, to religious faith.
