John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

9

Does the Progress of Science Diminish the Challenge of Religion?

Half a century ago science walked with lifted head, very proud. She had peered into many a dark recess of nature and had found precious truth there. She had won much mastery over nature's hidden powers. She had learned enough of the properties of matter to control some of the forces that act upon matter. The results in possible invention made the seven wonders of the world seem as child's play.

173Then, many of her followers, drunk with a sense of greatness, set up their own explanation of life. Blasphemously, they declared that all the wonders of heaven and earth, of the mind as well as the body, of the whole universe, seen and unseen, were but the operations of matter in motion. They lifted up the ancient evil of materialism; and worshiped at the feet of matter, force, and energy. God was not, nor was he needed.

173This was an evil day for mankind. It was the "dark age" of science. It was as if the sun had been blotted out of the sky. Men walked as never before in darkness. There was no intelligent direction of the universe. There was no hope for men who were at the mercy of lifeless, unintelligent forces, often unknown, and beyond description. That law prevailed did not give comfort, for the law was without a goal. Chance seemed to rule the world.

173This unholy doctrine, which tore at the hearts of men, could not continue, because it was untrue. Its death was inevitable. It did at last pass out, and is now as a memory of a moment of disorderly thought. It was killed by science, which had mothered it.

173This was the end also of the conflict between science and religion. Science is nothing else than a search for truth. When truth is found, it must be accepted, else the search fails in its purpose. With clearer eyes and better spirit, unprejudiced men saw in science nothing out of harmony with the more encompassing field of religion. If former beliefs crumble under the power of truth, it does not matter. Truth alone matters. So, God was restored in scientific thinking. The fog before man's eyes was lifted.

174As science advanced, new wonders appeared. The atom was opened, and infinitely small particles moved within it according to unchanging law. The heavens were opened; stars and planets of illimitable numbers were found, were weighed, measured, and analyzed. The earth became but as a particle of star dust in the cosmic assembly. By new helps to the senses the processes of life in living things -- plants and animals -- were revealed and elucidated. With every day, in laboratories far and near, science grew, and revealed a new world to our human eyes. Knowledge was multiplied until the mind wavered before its comprehension.

174The wonder grew, for wherever students turned, from the infinitely small to the immeasurably vast, whether to dead or living objects, the forces involved moved in orderly operation. A harmonious system was revealed in which every part moved with precision along with every other part. Whether in sky or atom, there was concord, not discord There was no reading back in nature. Every law seemed overshadowed by a universal law of laws -- the law of united action.

174It became apparent that the multitude of phenomena were fitted into one another as to a common end. The picture of nature became more and more that of an immense purpose in which man played an important part. Such universal harmony could not come from the operation of blind forces. The mind refused to believe it. The harmony of nature could not come by chance.

174Scientists, who above all else are honest, saw this harmony, this direction of discovered truth towards a definite goal. They acknowledged that to the best of their powers, they observed purpose in nature, else there would be clashes in everyday phenomena. Where there is a purpose, there must be a purposeful thought. The universe, with its contents, emerged in human thinking as a great thought. And, where there is thought, there must be someone who thinks! Thus in our age, with the help of science, an ancient truth again took its proper place in the minds of the body of truth-seekers. There is intelligence dominating the universe. There is a God.

174So, materialism in science was laid low. Thoughtful men turned again to faith in God. True, all did not define God alike, but all agreed that he is, that he is intelligent, and that his intelligence explains the metes and bounds, and the forms of operation of the forces of nature within the unbounded universe. When men come to a belief in God, the beginning of wisdom is reached. It is then easy to reconcile any new truth with true religious principles or practice.

175Science did more in this time of increasing knowledge and clearer thinking. Theories or inferences drawn from discovered facts, were no longer placed first. It was recognized that, though necessary for scientific progress, they were but tentative explanations of observations made, subject to change with every new discovery. The observations themselves, the facts of science, were given first place, for, under like conditions, they do not and cannot change. This has relieved science of much controversy. Science now admits that its theories are but guesses until reinforced by more facts, and no longer casts derision upon those who will not swallow them holus-bolus.

175The conduct of man among the innumerable forces of nature is the objective of religion. Science stops short, at present, with the discovery of the phenomena of nature. It has touched only lightly upon the proper use of its discovered facts -- whether powder, for example, shall be used to secure a foundation for a home, or to destroy life. Yet, a short while ago a number of scientists concluded that the work of science is not complete until it considers the proper use of its hard-won knowledge -- for the good of man. That conclusion was published to the world.

175Progressive science has steadily confirmed and is confirming the claims of religion, the basic one of which has been discussed here. It cannot gainsay them; but only fortify them. Whenever there seems to be a conflict, it is not in the facts discovered, but in man's feeble changing explanations of them.

175There was never a time when religion was so well equipped as now to serve humanity, for every available truth is as a tool in the hands of those who labor for human good, and there is more known today than at any other time on earth. So, the question propounded at the head of this writing may be answered with certainty: The progress of science increases the challenge of religion -- the science which includes all lesser sciences.
