John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

10

Is Religion Needed In An Age of Science?

We live literally in an age of science. In every factory, farm, and home are helps undreamed of a century or two ago. On every man's table today are things beyond the reach of kings or potentates before science began its onward march. The change in human life, in comforts and luxuries, since the scientific age began, is beyond understanding. All this is received gratefully by the people of the world.

176This has come about because about three hundred years ago men began to search out the laws of nature. With every new discovery came other discoveries. The knowledge of man grew so rapidly that many new sciences were born. Today the multiplicity of knowledge won from the study of nature is bewildering. No one man can know all that has been discovered. The best a person can do in our day is to occupy some little corner of human knowledge and make himself strong therein.

176It was a great day for human welfare when people began to replace traditions and imaginations with answers of nature herself to questions asked by man. Since that time we have seen the universe with clearer vision, and now we refuse to accept any statement which has not been tried out by the powers with which nature has endowed man.

176Through the advancement of science man has not only learned to understand the laws of nature, but he has also obtained great power over the surrounding forces of nature. Trees are blown out of the ground; rock is blasted out of the mountain; falling water now turns turbines and motors to perform much of the work that man formerly had to do with his hands.

176These great achievements filled men with a sense of pride. They were masters of nature. They forgot the higher power -- God. They sought more knowledge and paid little attention to the proper use of increased knowledge. Unfortunately, therefore, as powers multiplied, they were not always used for the best interests of humanity. Powder, for example, useful in clearing forests or tunneling in mountains for coal or valuable minerals, became also a tool in the hands of evil. Guns and cannons were made to destroy human beings. The release of atomic forces with their promise of tremendous service to mankind was first used only in terrible, unspeakable destruction of life. The wars of the present are a thousandfold more horrible than those of past ages when men fought with simple instruments, each one against his opponent.

177It must be confessed that while science has brought ease into man's daily work, it has also often reduced man to beast-like conditions. This misuse of new discoveries has become so grievous as to make man wonder if science is really an unmixed blessing; for example, the discovery of how the atomic forces of certain elements may be released has therefore been received with fear rather than joy.

177The situation has become so serious that many scientific men have at least accepted their full responsibility and have set up the dogma that a man who makes a discovery in science must thereafter concern himself with its proper use among men. It must be watched over so that it may help advance the welfare of men. Gradually, this conception is moving in upon all workers in science. Scientific men are being held responsible, in part at least, for the use to which their discoveries are put.

177What are the standards of right and wrong? What is the common good? To these questions science is silent. There is but one field, the field of religion, in which the standards of right and wrong of human behavior, are set up and where the seeker may find courage to cling to the right and eschew wrong in discoveries made.

177The doctrine of the common good, which is the essence of religion, is a basic principle in the plan of salvation, laid out by the Lord for his children on earth.

177It is left to man to apply facts as they may be discovered, for human benefit. That is a religious process, for the common good implies the existence and purpose of God, and man's relationship to him.

177Religion is able to answer the question that may be asked by delvers of science into the mysteries of nature. Religion asserts that all men are the children of God; that they were placed on earth to become acquainted with the elements of earth; and to learn to control themselves, by directing the laws of nature to the good of man.

178Every discovery of science should be used for the good of man, in harmony with his divine plan. That is a thought greatly needed by science. The vastness of the discovered universe is an evidence of the fathomless nature of the supreme Intelligence who made this universe possible. Science may become a faith-promoting subject of consideration if tied in with the spirit and practice of religion. Standing alone, it is cold, lifeless, inert, soulless; placing itself under the direction of religion it becomes warm, helpful, inspiring, a means of blessing to the human soul.

178As science advances and increases, as new discoveries are made, as more complete command is obtained over the forces of nature, the more necessary it becomes that we have a religion to guide us in employing these discoveries. To save the world from science, and to make science the builder of a good world, we must hasten our progress towards the fuller acceptance of God. So, the answer to the question at the head of this article is very simple. In an age of science we have greater need than ever before of religion. A conscience of science is a present need.
