John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

11

Are We Progressing?

The determining law of the gospel is the possibility of eternal progression. The plan of salvation was formulated to enable those present in the pre-existent great council to progress.

179Progress means a moving forward from place to place, from knowledge to knowledge, from action to action. It is a process of adding to that which we now possess, by the elimination of errors, by the actual accretion of new truth, and by the development of greater self-mastery. It is a process by which increased power of every faculty is gained. It is a process of growth and development, a movement towards greater maturity. It is a steady approach to the likeness of God.

179Progress is active and increasing. That which is static does not come within the province of advancement. They who are satisfied with the past, or who hesitate to toil for added knowledge, or who are unwilling to give life to their possessions by constant use, are not in a state of progress. Effort is required to lay by the errors of the past, to invade the kingdom of increasing truth, and to set every new gain into action. Such persons alone are progressing. Activity in conforming to and using truth, God's commandments, is the first condition for joining the advancing hosts.

179Progress must be rounded. Some choose one corner of the field of life, and progress in it to the exclusion of all else. That is not true progress. If the seven primary colors are painted in proper proportion on a revolving disk, it appears to be white. Remove one of the colors, or change its proportion, and the result is a reddish, blueish, or yellowish disk, Or, a beam of the white light of our existence passed through a glass prism is broken into its constituent colors. In just such a manner progress in several fields is necessary for the complete progress which will win divine approval. Unhappiness, and often misery, follow the failure to recognize the necessity of complete progress in life.

179The spectrum of parts of rounded or complete progress has often been given by revelation. One of the most direct and inclusive is found in section four of the Doctrine and Covenants.

180 The primary principles of progress there given, which "qualify a person for the work" are: 1. Faith; 2. Hope; 3. Charity; and 4. Love. A person in a state of progress has faith in the existence of an unseen world in which God and other beings dwell; a faith which makes him ready to yield obedience to the requirements which issue from that world. He has the hope or certain trust that God's purpose overshadows all the acts of man. He proceeds to help his frail fellow men in their attempts to progress; thus becoming a partner with God in working out the plan of salvation. His every act is directed by the spirit of love for God, the divine gospel with its requirements, and all the creatures of the Lord. These are cornerstones in a progressive life.

180These basic principles are in turn broken down into secondary propositions derived from the primary ones: 1. Virtue; 2. Knowledge; 3. Temperance; 4. Patience; 5. Brotherly Kindness; 6. Godliness; 7. Humility; 8. Diligence. That is the person who really desires to progress, keeps himself clean morally; he is a seeker after knowledge; he is master of himself; he is able to wait until the Lord gives results; he is kind to all men, who, like himself, are children of God; he strives in all things to do God's will, to keep his commandments; he recognizes his own limitations and the limitations placed upon all children of the earth; and in all righteous endeavors he is constantly active.

180Combine these in a human life, and new paths to progress will be seen, constant development will follow, and the white light of full progress will shine brightly and steadily. Those who so live are the elect of God who shall receive a fulness of glory, have eternal increase, and be as the Gods.

180There is nothing difficult about this program for progress. They who follow it, find it easy, for when they ask, they shall receive, when they knock, it shall be opened unto them. Besides, the test of progress is whether we do earnestly seek to comply with this program. Our actual achievements count for little compared with the efforts for progress we put forth.

180Under this program the individual is of foremost importance

181How the man behaves, how he uses the facts or forces at his command determines his progress.

181It is a wholesome exercise to test oneself, at regular times with these and other divine tests of progress. It gives courage to go on.

181The frequent question, "Are we better than in the past?" really means "Have we progressed since the past?" The answer is not easily found, since it lies in the heart and actions of each individual man. Moreover "comparisons are odious," because so many things involved can not be clearly seen.

181Our problem is, the unending one, to keep in the path of progress, as stated by Brigham Young:

The principle of increase, of exaltation, of adding to that we already possess, is the grand moving principle and cause of the actions of the children of men."
