John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

12

What Is Eternal Progression?

Latter-day Saints find great joy in the doctrine that man will retain eternally the power that he possesses on earth. Forever he may learn. Forever he may accept or reject any offering. As he uses these endless gifts of personal existence he will progress, or retrograde.

182The doctrine of eternal progression was a tremendous addition to Christian belief and thought. For centuries the churches had promised man eternal existence; but Joseph Smith promised man through the restored gospel possible endless activity and development. That gave heaven, often conceived as a static psalm-singing place, a new and desirable definition.

182Man's powers, after his earth journey, may be keener, sharper, than here. There he may see and understand more clearly. That is granted. But, his right to exercise his powers or to choose remains inviolate. He may ascend or descend. He may rejoice in or scoff at the offerings of the Lord. Therefore the retention of his powers does not necessarily protect him. Lucifer, high in the councils of heaven, fell to the low estate of Satan.

182To insure progress the powers of man must be exercised for the achievement of the great objective of existence. He must become by every act more and more like the Lord of heaven. That is the highest hope and highest conception of joy by every thinking person. In a small degree this is attainable by man, through strict obedience to the laws of the Lord.

182They who so employ their time and talents properly, whether here or hereafter, increase in knowledge. That is the beginning of wisdom. There is no end to knowledge. The field of available knowledge is much like the ten digits, from 0 to 9, the combinations of which are infinite in number. By using or combining simple principles he may likewise multiply knowledge, without limit.

182But, as knowledge is gained, whether here or in the infinities, it must be used. Man must not only learn, but he must also apply his learning to a worthy purpose. The uses to which knowledge may be put are also infinite. Knowledge unused is dry and tasteless. Use gives it life and value. When knowledge is used correctly, properly, righteously, towards the great objective, it enables man to progress. The law of God ever rises above the desires of man.

183This then is eternal progress: To add truth to truth; and to use truth, insistently and persistently for the accomplishment of the Lord's plan for the perfection of his willing children. That is how progress is attained.

183Now, such progress can with full propriety be called growth. Eternal progress is really eternal growth. To progress forever a man must eternally grow in power to develop the plan of salvation. Then he moves towards the likeness of the Lord. That is growth; that is progression.

183In the path of eternal progression there are, of course, degrees of achievement. Though the powers of every living soul will remain undiminished, they who have won an exaltation in the celestial kingdom alone will have the blessing of increase of their kind. That is the great blessing vouchsafed to those who learn most, do best, and bend their will to the purposes of the Lord.

183What then is eternal progress? It is an eternity of active life, increasing in all good things, toward the likeness of the Lord. It is the highest conceivable form of growth.
