John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

13

Is There Progress In Heaven?

During the long centuries of apostasy after the time of Jesus the Christ, many misleading beliefs had fastened themselves upon the people. Among them was the doctrine that those who won salvation in the hereafter would be in a state of eternal, inactive joy. In the presence of God they would worship him and sing praises to him eternally, but nothing more.

184In a world of struggle and sickness such a promise was hailed by unhappy humanity. But it seemed incomplete. It did not conform to the laws of existence. As far as human experience knows, life is always active. Inactivity spells death. Associated with life, in the higher realms of existence, is the power to progress or retrogress. Among human beings this is called the power of choice or free agency.

184The question forced itself upon thoughtful people that eternal worship of the Almighty must mean more than an everlasting placid life of psalm singing. The life hereafter promised by the Savior must be as life is on earth; active, achieving, and purposeful. So it seemed to many, though teaching and tradition remained silent on the subject.

184The restoration of the gospel of Jesus the Christ by the Prophet Joseph Smith cleared up the subject. He taught that on the "other side," in the hereafter the individual retains the power to learn, think, and act, and to use or to ignore that which has been learned. That means that the right of choice is everlastingly an attribute of life and intelligence. Therefore, the possibility of progress is eternal.

184The question then arises: Since active men in the hereafter are grouped according to their works on earth in one or the other of three ascending glories, is there the possibility of progress in each group or glory?

184Since those assigned to each glory are living, intelligent beings, the answer must be yes. In each glory, the power of free agency remains. For them the field of truth is open. The spirit of man is never fettered in his search for truth. It may be that they are self-fettered by the deeds that brought them into a lower glory.

185It does not follow, as some have suggested, that the possibility of progress in all the glories might enable the inhabitants of the lower glories to overtake those in the higher glory. Righteous living gives power greater than that possessed by those who were assigned to the lower glories. The deeds of those of the lower glories were less in harmony with God's law, hence they possess less power. Therefore, with lesser power to progress they cannot overtake those who travel with more power in the path of progress; for example, it is common practice to set the maximum speed at which an automobile may travel. If two automobiles start out together, the one set at twenty-five, the other at seventy-five, miles an hour, the slower cannot overtake the faster machine, if both travel at full speed. It is so with progress.

185What may happen if the man with less power uses it steadily in the spirit of repentance through the eternal years is not known to man. That knowledge rests as yet in the bosom of God.

185One thing is known through the revelations of God. Those in the higher, the celestial glory, the one that we all hope to achieve, are in full activity. Their worship of God manifests itself in doing the will of God, hence the works of God.

185Those of the celestial kingdom or glory will be occupied in building their own kingdoms as parts of God's greater kingdoms. They will have "increase." Not so in the lower glories; progress they may, but increase will not be theirs.

185There is also a difference in possible achievement in the different glories. Granite cannot be carved with wooden tools. So it is in the glories of the hereafter. Those of the celestial kingdom have so lived as to achieve Godhood itself. Those of an inferior glory cannot reach that far. The deeds on earth become tools of achievement in the heavens.
