John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

VI

Salvation

1

What Is the Meaning of Salvation?

Before the Church was organized, the Lord said to the Prophet Smith, "there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation." (D. & C. 6:13) This was repeated in several later revelations. On another occasion, also while the young prophet was receiving his preparatory training, the Lord further declared that "eternal life . . . is the greatest of all the gifts of God" (D. & C. 14:7). It would appear, therefore, that salvation is eternal life; or that to obtain salvation, one must win eternal life. In the Bible and Book of Mormon, also, eternal life, or everlasting life, is promised those who accept the Lord and His Son Jesus Christ. Life and salvation are forever intertwined. Indeed, our own Church leader's, have spoken and speak of the "gospel of life and salvation."

189The conception of the meaning of salvation requires a definition of life. Man had a pre-existent state, and will live on throughout eternity. He is immortal. It becomes necessary therefore to distinguish clearly between life as mere existence, and life as something greater that may issue from existence.

189Brigham Young has furnished a definition in thrilling words: "Salvation is the full existence of man, of the angels, and the Gods; it is eternal life, the life which was, which is, and that which is to come." Life, then, is more than mere existence; it is "full existence." Life is active, existence is static. Life is warm; existence, cold. Life uses its powers to secure progress; it moves upward. Existence is today where it was yesterday, or lower. Life is the increasing realization of man's highest ideals. The Lord Himself has made clear the distinction, for He said to Moses, "This is my work and my glory -- to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 1:39) And Jesus, the Christ, made the same distinction when He said, "I am the resurrection, and the life." (John 11:25) Life in contradistinction to existence has always been the objective of Latter-day Saints. Life, implying a future of endless development, is the ultimate goal of the Church.

189The Prophet Joseph Smith in his discourses gave added meaning to this definition of salvation. "Salvation," he said, means a man's being placed beyond the power of all his enemies" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 301), and "Salvation is nothing more or less than to triumph over all our enemies and put them under our feet. And, where we have power to put all enemies under our feet in this world, and a knowledge to triumph over all spirits in the world to come, then we are saved, as in the case of Jesus, who was to reign until he had put all enemies under His feet and the last enemy was death" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 297). There is no thought of inertia, mere existence, in such words. Instead, these statements imply action, a battle for triumph over enemies without and within.

190The conditions which enable man to win eternal life are included in the plan of salvation. In fact, the plan is but a series of invariable, unalterable laws, obedience to each of which increases man's power to triumph over evil. That means that there is knowledge to be acquired (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 297); principles of action to be accepted; ordinances to he received (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 12, 331); duties to be performed through life; and the complete acceptance of Jesus, the Christ (John 17:3) that is, full health of body, mind, and spirit to be won. All this that man "might be raised in immortality unto eternal life" (D. & C. 29:43)

190The man who uses his powers in obedience to law to fight all enemies of progress, whether ignorance, temptation, appetites, or personalities, rises above existence; he lives; he is on the way to salvation. For him who does not so use his powers, though he exist, life does not function fully; the light of truth is blotted out; the enemy may defeat him; he is retreating from salvation. Salvation then is conditioned under the divine plan and with divine help, upon the proper exercise of the will of man. Complete salvation, which is full and eternal life, results from man's full endeavor to conform to the laws of life, the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. That is why we often say that men save themselves with the aid of the Lord (D. & C. 29:44, 45).

190Since men differ in their obedience to law there must be stages of salvation. Mankind may win any degree of salvation, from mere inert existence, beyond a kingdom of glory, to the celestial kingdom or highest glory. In my Father's house are many mansions [kingdoms]." (John 14:2) They who use only a part of their powers, or use them improperly, do not live life fully. Only those who render obedience to all the duties required of them, who are in process of full living, can expect complete salvation. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 332) They become the sons of God. They will be where God and Christ dwell.

191If salvation is eternal life as here defined, it may begin on earth, or may have begun in the pre-existent state of man. To the degree that a person uses his powers for progress on earth, and lives fully under the law, he is daily achieving salvation and in a state of salvation. But, the summation of our efforts will be made on the great day of judgment, and will determine the degree of our salvation, our final place in the hereafter.

191This meaning of salvation is simple, easily understood. If the body is to be kept healthy, and fit for the work of life, certain definite laws must be obeyed. If the mind is to render full service, it must be properly fed and exercised. If the spirit is to lift man into joy, spiritual tasks must be performed. Only under such conditions of fully functioning powers can full life be lived. If salvation is to be gained, all the powers of life must be used, under the laws of truth, so far as in mans power lies. There must be a coordination of these powers for steady progress. As we seek salvation, an active eternal life, we must prepare ourselves for it by proper activity on earth.

191This conception of salvation explains why the activities of the Church on earth enter into every phase of man's life, and why activity must characterize the life to come.
