John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

Was the "Fall" Inevitable?

According to the plan of salvation, accepted by the hosts of heaven in the great pre-existent council, Adam and Eve were placed on earth to become the parents of the human race. They could not, however, perform this mission, unless they themselves became subject to mortality. Why, then, did the Lord command them not to partake of the tree of good and evil, the gateway of mortal life? There has seemed to be a contradiction between God's purpose as embodied in the plan of salvation, and this command to Adam and Eve.

192Perhaps a full explanation is not possible with our present knowledge, yet modern revelation has shed light upon the subject.

192First, there is the certain knowledge that without the "Fall," Adam and Eve would have remained in a condition in which children with earthly bodies, for whom the earth was made, could not have been begotten by them. The plan of salvation would have been defeated.

192This is the emphatic view of the prophet Lehi. His terse statement leaves no other meaning. "Adam fell that men might be." (2 Ne. 2:25)

192Equally direct are the words of Alma: ". . . if it had been possible for Adam to have partaken of the fruit of the tree of life at that time, there would have been no death . . . they would have been forever miserable, having no preparatory state; and thus the plan of redemption would have been frustrated" (Alma 12:23, 26).

192Further evidence is supplied by Adam and Eve themselves. After their expulsion from Eden into the earth as it is, Adam exults: ". . . Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." And Eve seemed almost jubilant: ". . . Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:10-11)

193These were not the words of sinners or of repentant sinners. This was spoken by people who had met and accepted a great challenge, with which, as they imply, God was pleased.

193President John Taylor recognized that the "Fall" resulted in good for Adam and Eve, and the whole human family: "They would have been incapable of increase; and without that increase the designs of God in relation to the formation of the earth and man could not have been accomplished; for one great object of the creation of the world was the propagation of the human species, that bodies might be prepared for those spirits who already existed, and who, when they saw the earth formed, shouted for joy." (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 96)

193In the joy of Adam and Eve after the "Fall" lies hidden, perhaps, a principle which disputants about this subject have not understood and which may not as yet be full comprehended. However, in modern revelation, a clue to understanding of the "Fall" is given, which may be the key to the apparent contradiction.

193After Adam had been supplied with a body made "from the dust of the ground," and placed in the garden of Eden, instructions were given him:

"And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." (Moses 3:16-17)

193Though a command had been given, Adam was permitted to exercise his free agency. "Thou mayest choose for thyself." The eternal power of choice was respected by the Lord himself. That throws a flood of light on the "Fall." It really converts the command into a warning, as much as if to say, if you do this thing, you will bring upon yourself a certain punishment; but do it if you choose.

193Such was the problem before our first parents: to remain forever at selfish ease in the Garden of Eden, or to face unselfishly tribulation and death, in bringing to pass the purposes of the Lord for a host of waiting spirit children. They chose the latter.

194This they did with open eyes and minds as to consequences. The memory of their former estates may have been dimmed, but the gospel had been taught them during their sojourn in the Garden of Eden. They could not have been left in complete ignorance of the purpose of their creation. Brigham Young frankly said: "Adam was as conversant with his Father who placed him upon this earth as we are conversant with our earthly parents." (Discourses, p. 104) The Prophet Joseph taught that "Adam received commandments and instructions from God; this was the order from the beginning." (Teachings, p. 168)

194The choice that they made raises Adam and Eve to pre-eminence among all who have come on earth. The Lord's plan was given life by them. They are indeed, as far as this earth is concerned, our loving father and mother. The "Fall" and the consequent redeeming act of Jesus became the most glorious events in the history of mankind.

194In the heavens above, as in the earth below, law prevails. No one can escape the consequences of the acceptance or rejection of law. Cause and effect are eternally related. The Lord had warned Adam and Eve of the hard battle with earth conditions if they chose to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. He would not subject his son and daughter to hardship and the death of their bodies unless it be of their own choice. They must choose for themselves. They chose wisely, in accord with the heavenly law of love for others.

194In life all must choose at times. Sometimes, two possibilities are good; neither is evil. Usually, however, one is of greater import than the other. When in doubt, each must choose that which concerns the good of others -- the greater law -- rather than that which chiefly benefits ourselves -- the lesser law. The greater must be balanced against the lesser. The greater must be chosen whether it be law or thing. That was the choice made in Eden.

194This view of the "Fall" is confirmed by the scriptures. For example, ". . . if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden . . . forever . . . And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." (2 Ne. 2:22-23)

195The role of Satan in this drama is not difficult to understand. He seeks to overthrow the work of God. By inducing Adam and Eve to disobey the Lord, he thought to have them in his power. He forgot, or did not know, that by their very "disobedience" the purposes of the Lord with respect to his spirit children would be accomplished. The temptation of Eve turned upon him to the defeat of his evil designs. This often is the fate of evil.

195The Lord himself in these latter days has spoken of the place and mission of Adam: ". . . Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days." (D. & C. 27:11; 88:112; 116:1) "The Lord God . . . hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One." (D. & C. 78:15-16) These are eloquent words, which could not well have been spoken of a sinner; only of one who has filled his mission well. Indeed, in the true gospel of Jesus Christ there is no original sin.

195It is a thrilling thought that Adam and Eve were not coerced to begin God's work on earth. They chose to do so, by the exercise of their free agency. It is the lesson for all their children: Seek the truth, choose wisely, and carry the responsibility for our acts.

195Considering our full knowledge of the purpose of the plan of salvation, and the reason for placing Adam and Eve on earth, the apparent contradiction in the story of the "Fall" vanishes. Instead the law of free agency, or individual choice, appears in distinct view. God's command is qualified by his great purpose to bless his children. Adam and Eve rise to the position of helpers in initiating the divine purpose on earth. They become partners with the Lord in making eternal joy possible for the hosts of heaven.

195We, the children of Adam and Eve, may well be proud of our parentage.
