John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

3

What Is the Need of Ordinances?

If a person has faith in God, is repentant, and tries to live the moral code, why does he need to be baptized and receive other ordinances of the gospel? That is an old question.

196To this query, usually honestly made, there are several answers.

196First: The Church of Christ is divinely organized. It is not man-made. The conditions for membership have been clearly defined by the Lord. Among the requirements are several ordinances, baptism being the basic one. Ordinances are necessary because the Lord has so decreed. The Lord himself while on earth as an example to us, submitted to ordinances, as in baptism. There is no other way to membership in Christ's own organization.

196This, of course, should be a sufficient answer to those who believe that the Church was founded by the Lord, and that in all we do, we conform to his will. We cannot go beyond or around the Lord's plan.

196Members of the Church who ask about the need of ordinances should begin with a consideration of God, his existence, his hand-dealing with man, and his laws for human salvation. If these fundamentals are found to be secure, ordinances become a welcomed activity in achieving the high gifts of the Lord.

196There are two first principles, faith and repentance, and two first ordinances, baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost in the Church of Christ. These are closely interwoven. Faith is the first principle, upon which other principles rest, and in the end all ordinances are derivatives of faith. But faith must be expressed in human actions, else it cannot be known. A man proves his faith by his works; he has no other means of doing so. The ordinance of baptism for example may be viewed as man's signature to his compact with God, as an acceptance of the leadership of Jesus the Christ, and as a promise to live the law of the Lord -- the things that would be expected from one who has acquired faith. Baptism is a logical sequence of faith. Every ordinance becomes in like manner a necessary tangible outward evidence of some phase of that inward conviction called faith. Each ordinance, in its place, becomes a logical acquiescence with some part of the vast territory covered by faith. Each ordinance becomes a witness to man s surrender to his Heavenly Father.

197Being baptized into this Church is only like learning the alphabet of our mother tongue -- it is the very first step. But having received the first principles of the gospel of Christ, let us go on to perfection.

197Third: Ordinances give life to faith because they require a covenant from those who participate. Faith is a principle that demands action. Whether it is faith in a law doctrine, or plan relative to human affairs, it fails unless it leads to a practice, rite, or ceremony. Otherwise it remains an idle belief, an abstract conviction, a theory. The moment it is used, as in an ordinance, it flames into life, and leaps into the world of practical affairs, becoming a positive power, helpful in the world of men.

197Everyone who receives an ordinance must make a covenant, else the ordinance is not fully satisfactory. He who is baptized covenants to keep the law of the Church; he who is administered to for sickness, and the administrators, covenant to use their faith to secure the desired healings; he who receives the temple endowment covenants to use in his life that which he has been taught; he who is ordained to the priesthood agrees to honor it, and so on with every ordinance.

197That places covenants high, as they should be. Knowledge of itself has little saving power. Only as it is used does knowledge become of value. The man who learns and promises to use that knowledge is of value to society. To accept the plan of salvation without promising to comply with its requirements will result in something worse than ignorance. The world moves forward by the efforts of covenanted people -- who keep their covenants.

197So, whether from the point of view of obedience to the Lord's command, or of logical necessity, or of giving life to human knowledge for the good of mankind, ordinances are necessary and desirable.
