John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

How May Membership And Exaltation In the Celestial Kingdom Be Won?

It is a basic gospel doctrine that every person, except a very few, will be saved. It is an equally basic doctrine that salvation is graded. Every person will be placed in the hereafter according to his works.

198These truths had been forgotten in the dark ages of apostasy. It was then commonly believed that the sinner would forever remain in a torturing hell and that all who escaped that place of unending misery would receive equal places in God's kingdom. Soon after the coming of the Restoration a glorious manifestation revealed anew the ancient truths. While Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were engaged in the revision of the Bible, it became "apparent" to them "that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body, the term `Heaven,' as intended for the Saints' eternal home must include more kingdoms than one." While pondering upon this matter, the vision, known as D&C 76 in the Doctrine and Covenants, was received. It threw a flood of light upon the nature of God, and his dealings with his children on earth.

198In essence, this vision or revelation explains that all except the sons of perdition will be saved. The traditional hell with its threats of fire and brimstone, and of unending torture, has no existence. But the degree of salvation will vary with the just desserts of those who appear for judgment. Those who in life, or in the later spiritual domain, deliberately did evil, or refused to comply with gospel requirements, would not receive the rewards given to the just and obedient. By his own works, every person would place himself in a higher or lower eternal home. "For they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared."

199These gradations in salvation may be innumerable, since all members of the human family are different. The many gradations are however reduced to three classes: (1) the celestial, the highest, as of the sun in glory; (2) the terrestrial, the next, as of the moon; (3) the telestial, the lowest, as of the stars.

199The revelation details somewhat fully, and with much beauty of language, the conditions that place people in each of these kingdoms. Those of the celestial the place where God and Christ dwell, have accepted Jesus and the ordinances of his Church. Those of the terrestrial died without the law, or were not valiant in the testimony of Jesus. Those of the telestial kingdom did not receive Jesus but were content to follow falsehood.

199These kingdoms, though very different, are filled with the children of God the Father. Though those of the lower kingdom have not shown themselves worthy of the fulness of salvation, yet the love of the Father envelops them. Even the glory of the lowest, the telestial, "surpasses all understanding."

199To an apostate world this was a new conception of God and his relationship to his children on earth. It raised God to a new height in the thoughts of men. It invited a new love of men for their Eternal Father, a firmer response through righteous works to his love for us. The malignant god of apostasy was removed from the fears of humanity.

199Nevertheless, there remained the punishment that one in the lower kingdoms might by another mode of life have received and enjoyed a higher glory. The eternal memory, though terrible, is a more reasonable punishment than the fiery furnace taught through generations of time by false teachers.

199Moreover, those who are assigned to the lower kingdoms, have so lived, so misused their opportunities, that they could not adapt themselves to the prevailing conditions in the higher kingdoms. Their capacities, by their own acts have been changed to fit a lower glory. They would not he happy in a higher kingdom. They are unprepared for association with those whose lives have been in accord with God's truth. As we have made ourselves, so shall our judgment be.

200It is further recorded that though these kingdoms are separate, yet there is intercommunication among them. Those in the higher may minister to those in the lower kingdoms. But, the reverse cannot be done. Those in the lower kingdom cannot enter a higher one. Wherever a child of God may be placed, he is not forgotten. That is not the Lord's way. It shows again the infinite, never-ending love of God for his children.

200Despite this divine mercy, it must be remembered that though we shall in the hereafter find salvation in one of the kingdoms it is dangerous to allow sin to enter our lives.

200Now the concern of the Church is to bring all men into the celestial kingdom. It has no interest in the other, lower kingdoms. Every doctrine, principle, and item of organization within the Church pertains to the celestial glory. The manner of entrance into this the highest kingdom, is therefore made clear. Any person who wishes to enter it must have faith and repent from his sins. Then he must be baptized, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by one who has divine authority to perform such ordinances. There are principles and ordinances which in their entirety belong peculiarly to the higher kingdom.

200After having laid the foundation for his claim to celestial membership and association, he must, to receive all available blessings of this kingdom, comply with the many requirements of life within the Church. He belongs to "those who are valiant and inspired with the true independence of heaven, who will go forth boldly in the service of their God leaving others to do as they please, determined to do right, though all mankind should take the opposite course." All this having been done, he is qualified to enter the celestial kingdom. Indeed, he is then, even on earth, in the celestial kingdom of God.

200Naturally, those who enter the celestial kingdom are of various attainments. There is not absolute uniformity anywhere among the children of God. Their innate capacities and their use of the law of free agency make them different, often widely so. Therefore, the members of the highest kingdom are also grouped, according to the Prophet Joseph Smith into three "degrees."

201To enter the highest of these degrees in the celestial kingdom is to be exalted in the kingdom of God. Such exaltation comes to those who receive the higher ordinances of the Church, such as the temple endowment, and afterwards are sealed in marriage for time and eternity, whether on earth or in the hereafter. Those who are so sealed continue the family relationship eternally. Spiritual children are begotten by them. They carry on the work of salvation for the hosts of waiting spirits. They who are so exalted become even as the gods. They will be "from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue."

201To find entrance to the celestial kingdom, and be exalted therein, form the great hope of every true Latter-day Saint.

201The fate of the sons of perdition is not known. There will be few of them, for few know so much as to fall so low. The suggestion has been made, by Brigham Young and others that they will lose all that they have gained in the long journey, from the dim beginning. They must start over again. But their fate is sealed from us. In this matter we must accept God's own declaration: "Eternal punishment is God's punishment. Endless punishment is God's punishment."
