John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

5

Will All Men Who Lived On Earth Before Christ Be Resurrected Before Those Who Came After Christ?

The Prophet Alma, in a discussion of the resurrection, long before the days of Christ, declared:

Now, whether the souls and the bodies of those of whom has been spoken shall all be reunited at once, the wicked as well as the righteous, I do not say; let it suffice, that I say that they all come forth; or in other words, their resurrection cometh to pass before the resurrection of those who die after the resurrection of Christ (Book of Mormon, Alma 40:19).

202In this statement and its context, Alma bears witness to the basic Christian doctrine that all men shall be resurrected. The atonement of Jesus Christ was for all men, without exception. An express purpose of the plan of salvation was to provide means by which the spirit children of God could win eternal, imperishable bodies to serve them on their unending, progressive journey.

202So important an event, none more so in man's endless existence, would certainly be consummated in an orderly manner. All men will not be resurrected at once; but they will arise, under the divine voice, in groups according to their faithfulness in life. There will be the resurrection of the righteous and of the wicked, of the just and the unjust; the first resurrection and the last. Apparently a succession of such group resurrections will occur until all the earth children of the Father have reclaimed their bodies (D. & C. 76:17; 88:95-102; John 5:28, 29).

202 Alma appears to apply this orderly process of the resurrection to the individuals within each group. After all, resurrection is an individual matter. Who, in a group equally deserving, who have shown equal fidelity in life's journey, shall conquer the grave first? With simple, clear logic Alma seems to indicate that in each group those who finished their earth life first will first be called to arise from their graves. Thus, both justice and order are preserved in the resurrection of the human family.

203Meanwhile, little has been revealed concerning the means, methods, and times of the resurrection. With certainty we know only that all will be resurrected, and that the righteous will come forth from their graves first. That is the glorious testimony of Alma, the Book of Mormon prophet.
