John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

7

What Is Evil?

A library of books has been written on this subject. Philosophers have exhausted their ingenuity in explaining evil. Nevertheless, Latter-day Saints find the answer to be easily understood.

205First, there is "an opposition in all things." If there be a south, there must be a north; if there be light, there must also be the possibility of darkness; if a right side, also a left side; if activity, also quiescence; if good, there must be its opposite, which is evil; and so on with respect to every condition and act of existence. This is much like the positive and negative recognized in all mathematical and scientific work. It is because of this eternal "opposition" that man is alike to choose, thus doing good or evil.

205This doctrine is laid down in much clearness in the Book of Mormon. The Prophet Lehi, explaining man's free agency to his son Jacob, says:

For it must needs he, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. . . .

205And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there is no righteousness. And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness. And if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not there is no God. And if there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore all things must have vanished away.

205And to bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man, after he had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created, it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter.

205Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should he that he was enticed by the one or the other (Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 2:11, 13, 15-16).

205Second, man is on earth under a plan provided by God, the Father of the spirits of men. This plan is for the good and welfare of man. The ultimate purpose of the plan is to enable every person to develop his every power, and thus to progress eternally. Imbedded in every part of the plan is the right of every man to act for himself, to choose one or the other of the opposites which present themselves before him. If he chooses to do that which is for his welfare, which enables him to progress, he chooses the good. If he chooses that which retards his progress, he chooses the evil. Whatever conforms to the plan of God for His earth children is good; whatever is in opposition to the plan is evil. That is a simple, plain definition of evil.

206Third, our Father in heaven, who directs all things pertaining to His children on earth, often deals, and necessarily so, with matters beyond the clear understanding of mortal man. Commandments are sometimes given which at least at first must be accepted through our faith in God and His revelations. In any case, obedience to the will of God is good; refusal to obey the will of God is evil. In every instance evil is "inverted good or a correct principle made evil use of" (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 106).

206However, there can be, there is, no good or evil except by the intrusion of an intelligent being possessed of the power and right of free agency. Things and forces themselves are neither good nor bad. A current of electricity is neither good nor evil. Good results, however, when intelligent man uses the current to give light in darkness; and evil results when the current is directed through the human body to the hurt or death of man. Good and evil are not apparent, do not exist, apart from the actions of intelligent man.

206Whether the actions of men are good or evil may be determined by their effects on human life, and their conformity to God's will. Warfare, for example, is not for man's good. It destroys life and the products of life. It seeks for good in an incorrect manner. It violates the firm command of God. It is therefore evil. War is not of God.

206The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that all evil done by man was voluntary (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 187). Brigham Young taught the same doctrine (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 85). President Joseph F. Smith (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , p. 69) and all other leaders of the Restored Church have taught that by the actions of men possessed of free agency, good or evil is referred to the will of man. He who desires good, and seeks to become master of his will, will do good; while he who desires evil, and uses his will for that purpose, does evil. Men who love darkness do so because their deeds are evil.

207The great discourse of the Prophet Lehi already mentioned sets forth this doctrine in great plainness. Modern revelation is equally emphatic. "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence" (D & C. 93:30). Brigham Young declares:

Evil is with us; it is that influence which tempts to sin, and which has been permitted to come into the world for the express purpose of giving us an opportunity of proving ourselves before God before Jesus Christ, our Elder Brother, before the holy angels, and before all good men, that we are determined to overcome the evil and cleave to the good, for the Lord has given us the ability to do so (Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 107, 108).

207How man may desire to do good above all else, and so direct his will, is a subject for later treatment.
