John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

8

Is There A Personal Devil?

The devil has not escaped modern attempts to explain away old beliefs. Mormonism, however, has found it easy to answer the baffling question about the existence and nature of the devil.

208The beings in the "spirit world" -- whence humanity comes -- are alike in that they possess the right of free agency; they are unlike in that they do not choose, nor have they chosen, alike. Consequently, the inhabitants of the spirit world, as in our world, with the same beginnings and opportunities, differ in the degree or stage of their development. There is therefore in the spirit world as on earth a gradation among individuals in knowledge and power from the lowest to the highest, from the least advanced to the God who represents all knowledge, power, and good. Those who lag behind in the march towards progression are not necessarily evil. They are chiefly enemies to themselves as they loiter along the highway of eternity, though they do hinder the purposes of the Lord who seeks the ultimate salvation of all His children.

208The inequality or gradation among those who dwell in the domain of spirits is clearly set forth in the Book of Abraham:

And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all.

208Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

208And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born (Pearl of Great Price, Abr. 3:19, 22, 23; also 3:16-23).

208Another class of beings, using free agency improperly, are of more serious concern. A being may choose wisely and well, throughout ages of existence, until great progress has been achieved, and then he may turn against truth and actively reject that which made his rise possible and become opposed to those with whom he was formerly associated. This is not an uncommon experience among human beings; it occurs also in the spirit world. Such a change, or apostasy, results from sin -- negligence of duty, ambition, greed, selfishness, jealousy, impurity, or any of the many acts that defeat progress. Such persons become enemies of truth, opponents to progress, ready to use evil to defeat good. They become personified evil.

209The story of Lucifer is the most terrible example of such apostasy. Lucifer, son of the morning, through diligent search for truth and the use of it, had become one of the foremost in the assembly of those invited to undertake the experiences of earth. But, in that Great Council, his personal ambition and love of power overcame him. He pitted his own plan and will against the purposes of God. He strove to gain the birthright of his Elder Brother, Jesus the Christ. When his proposition was rejected, he forsook all that he had gained, would not repent of his sin, defied truth, and of necessity lost his place among the followers of God. He was no longer Lucifer, bearer of truth, who walked in light, but Satan, teacher of untruth, who slunk in darkness. He became the enemy of God and of all who try to walk according to the Lord's commandments. One-third of the spirits present in that vast assembly supported Satan and became enemies of the truth that they had formerly cherished. With him these rebellious spirits lost their fellowship with the valiant sons of God. What is more, they lost the privilege of obtaining bodies of flesh and blood, without which they cannot gain full power over the forces of the universe. In the face of that defeat, and that curse, they have sought from Adam to the present time to corrupt mankind and defeat the Lord's purposes.

209Now, under God's plan, the core of the meaning of human activity is that man, while winning his body, shall progress by overcoming surrounding conditions. He must learn to be master of every improper impulse. His right of choice remains with him; and as he chooses truth he rises toward his ultimate divine destiny. To accomplish this, our Father in heaven makes use of the evil designs of the devil. God allows His fallen son to tempt the children of men, so that they may more deliberately choose between good and evil. The Lord could banish Satan and his angels from earth, and remove temptation from men, but in His wisdom He permits His wayward bodiless children to come upon earth. Thus, despite their intentions, the followers of Satan are so used as to help accomplish the divine purpose. Whether understood by the evil one or not, in his efforts among mankind he is made an instrument to secure the very plan that he opposed in the Great Council.

210And it must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet (D. & C. 29:39).

210Man may of himself, with no outside temptation, choose between good and evil. The binding of Satan during the millennium means only that he is banished from earth and that no outside temptation is presented to man. Man's agency remains untrammelled. The devil, and his messengers, suggest evil, whisper to their victims, paint sin in glowing colors, make evil seem inviting, urge a momentary thrill against permanent joy -- in short, try to deceive, to make a lie appear as desirable as truth. In the words of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, "The devil has great power to deceive; he will so transform things as to make one gape at those who are doing the will of God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 227). But, he cannot compel man to do evil. Too many try to place the blame for their evil doing on the devil, when the fault lies within themselves. Touching on this subject the Prophet Joseph Smith declared:

Satan was generally blamed for the evils which we did but if he was the cause of all our wickedness, men could not be condemned. The devil could not compel mankind to do evil; all was voluntary. Those who resisted the spirit of God would be liable to be led into temptation. . . . God would not exert any compulsory means, and the devil could not (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 187).

210That leads to the principle that the devil is helpless, cannot lead men into error, unless his victims are willing. At the best, the devil is an intruder in the world: "The earth belongs to Him who framed and organized" (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 105). If one pursues truth always, seeks for help from the spirit of God, he can bid the devil get behind him knowing that the command must be heeded. Untruth may be blatant, but is always a coward. "The power of the devil is limited, the power of God is unlimited" (Ibid., p. 105).

211Recollect, brethren and sisters, every one of you, that when evil is suggested to you, when it arises in your hearts, it is through the temporal organization. When you are tempted, buffeted, and step out of the way inadvertently; when you are overtaken in a fault, or commit an overt act unthinkingly; when you are full of evil passion, and wish to yield to it, then stop and let the spirit, which God has put into your tabernacles, take the lead. If you do that, I will promise that you will overcome all evil, and obtain eternal lives. But many, very many, let the spirit yield to the body, and are overcome and destroyed (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 107).

211In summary: There are many gradations in knowledge, power, and integrity among the personal spirits in the spirit world. They who have learned truth, then oppose it, are evil. As far as this earth is concerned, Satan is the leader of the evil spirits who battle against the Lord's plan of salvation. They are as personal as the spirits who come on earth to assume mortal bodies, but they remain bodiless. If personality in the spirit world is accepted, the personal nature of the devil must be accepted. There is a personal devil.
