John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

10

What Is the Mormon Meaning of Hell?

Joseph Smith grew up at a time when preachers still taught the proverbial hell of everlasting torture. In the textbooks of his day in many nations were pictures of devils with pitchforks pushing sinners into the flames of hell, there to suffer the agonies of being burned but never consumed. With one hand the preacher offered a fragment of God's love, and with the other, the unutterable, never-ending torment from an angry, unforgiving God. Under such a cruel doctrine men would be frightened, so it was hoped, into a righteous manner of living. How men could devise so horrible a future for any one of God's children is a striking evidence of the apostasy from the simple, loving gospel of Jesus Christ.

215Naturally the correction of this evil doctrine had to be made. About a month before the organization of the Church, a glorious revelation was received by Joseph Smith which threw into limbo the illogical doctrine of eternal burnings for sins committed.

215In this revelation, Jesus Christ affirms that his commission was to carry out the Father's plan for man's salvation. It is explained that the plan includes laws that must be obeyed. In the final judgment every man will be judged "according to his works and the deeds which he hath done." This threw a flood of light on God's treatment of the sinner. The judgment passed upon any man will be great or small according to his works and deeds.

215Further, the breaking of any law brings punishment which, however, may be paid for through repentance. If repentance does not follow sin, full punishment inevitably follows. Whatever that punishment may be, under a higher law, the doctrine destroyed, completely the unnatural, ungodlike doctrine of past age.

215Two great revelations (Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 19 and 7 6) have completely changed the world's conception of the payment in the hereafter for sins committed on earth, and of the eternal destiny of man.

216The word hell, when used in these revelations, refers to the abode of the devil and his ugly brood. As used in the Bible, it has the same connotation.

216In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, there is no hell. All will find a measure of salvation; all must pay for any infringement of the law; but the payment will be as the Lord may decide. There is graded salvation, and this may be a more terrible punishment: to feel that because of sin a man is in one place, when by a correct life, he might be in a higher. The gospel of Jesus Christ has no hell in the old proverbial sense.
