John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

11

Why Does the Lord Permit War?

The battle of life is essentially a battle between obedience or disobedience to eternal law; between good and evil; between right and wrong. The Lord desires His children to win salvation; Satan, an apostate son of God, seeks to enslave them in his own dark kingdom.

217This warfare in one form or another has been going on since the days of Adam. Sickness and poverty; slavery of man, physical or mental; selfishness, pride, and unkindness; the attempt of man to rule others -- all are but phases of the struggle between light and darkness, the culmination of which is bloody warfare, when evil men seek to win their way at the sacrifice of human lives.

217All contention follows a departure from truth, gospel truth. Only when men yield to evil can Satan have power over them. War is always of man's making. The Lord abhors war or contention, whether in the household, office, or on the field of battle. The responsibility for war rests upon man, the free agent, not upon the Lord. Those who are the occasion of war may rightly be classed as murderers. Brigham Young said: "Of one thing I am sure; God never institutes war; God is not the author of confusion or of war; they are the results of the acts of the children of men. . . . If the people generally would turn to the Lord, there would never be any war." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 562)

217Since the law of free agency is ever uppermost in the plan of salvation, the Lord who gave the law must respect it, even though He weep at the errors of His children. It would be a violation of His own plan, should He step in, and, by His undoubted power, stop warfare among the children of men. He would then have to interfere in all contention, and ultimately reduce His children to the status of the unintelligent serfdom proposed by Lucifer in the great council in the heavens. Mankind, however sorrowful the condition, must fight its own battles, and win its own victories.

217Nevertheless, though the Lord will not deprive men of the right of free agency, even in the last extremity, He may, in His great mercy, ameliorate the terrors of warfare and turn the tide of battle in behalf of the righteous. In this sense do we pray to the Lord for victory. In the long run, the Lord is always the victor. The history of mankind shows that whatever the momentary result of contention and warfare has been, righteousness has ultimately triumphed. This will be so to the end of the world's story.

218There are wars and wars. If both contending parties are but seeking aggrandizement, in territory or power, they are both unworthy of divine help. It is a type of blasphemy under such conditions to offer prayers to heaven for relief. However, when human rights and freedom, the plan of salvation itself, are the issues, the raging battle becomes the battle of the Lord, and those who have truth, and fight for it, should then plead with the Lord for help, and in course of time will receive it, for it has been said: "The Lord shall fight for you" (Ex. 14:14).

218There would be no wars unless men had forgotten to live righteously. Even the nation that fights for divine principles, the nation on the Lord's side, may have forgotten the Lord in its material prosperity, and thereby have lost wisdom and strength. Thus, it is within the realm of thought that a nation, through war, may bring upon itself deserved chastisement for its own follies.

218At times men are justly engaged in war. The eternal battle has been between right and wrong. Whenever evil has girded itself for war, it may be necessary to use the same weapons to secure defeat of evil. Contrary as it may be to righteous feeling, in the fight for the right, cannon must often be used to meet cannon. Certainly, every means must be used to protect truth from the domination of untruth. The injunction of the Savior to turn "the other cheek," does not mean surrender to untruth, but patience, long suffering, before entering into controversy with one's fellow man. This doctrine is clearly taught in modern revelation:

And again this is the law that I gave unto mine ancients, that they should not go out unto battle against any nation, tongue, or people, save I, the Lord, commanded them.

218And if any nation, tongue, or people should proclaim war against them, they should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or tongue;

218And if that people did not accept the offering of peace, neither the second nor the third time, they should bring these testimonies before the Lord;

218Then I, the Lord, would give unto them a commandment, and justify them in going out to battle against that nation, tongue, or people.

219And I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and their children's children's until they had avenged themselves on all their enemies, to the third and fourth generation.

219Behold, this is an ensample unto all people, saith the Lord your God, for justification before me. (D. & C. 98:33-38)

219There is no suggestion here that evil shall be allowed to range unhindered in the world, to the injury of humanity. There comes a time when patience is no longer required. But, the righteous will show forbearance as long as it is possible or proper to do so.

219At best, this is a difficult question. It is imperative to remember that it is not given to man to read fully the divine mind. All that we can do is to use such truth as has been revealed for our guidance in our thought and action. Of one thing we may however be certain -- whatever happens to those who live righteously is permitted by the Lord. Man's only safety is to walk in faith with the Lord.
