John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

13

What Is the Meaning of Intelligence?

In everyday language we say that a person is intelligent who learns easily, comprehends quickly, or is an apt pupil in school.

223Latter-day Saints however are obliged by their religious philosophy to extend and expand the ordinary definition of intelligence. To them, intelligence falls into two parts. First, the possession of knowledge, and, second, the proper use of acquired knowledge for human welfare. That is a higher intelligence than that based upon readiness in learning. It pushes intelligence beyond the field of mere acquisition of knowledge. It includes the voluntary act of using knowledge in harmony with the laws of human happiness. In Mormon discussions of intelligence, knowing and using knowledge are as Siamese twins, fed by the same life stream. . . . A really intelligent person uses well whatever knowledge, however little, he possesses.

223Knowledge of itself is very dry. It gives scant comfort to the soul of man. It has no life. It is interesting to understand how dynamite may be made; but that knowledge becomes alive only when the substance is used in blasting the mountainside. It is interesting to know that certain forms of life may be destroyed by carbolic acid, but that knowledge is of living power only when the corruption in a sore on hand or foot is destroyed by the use of the chemical. Use makes knowledge blossom into life. Such intelligence becomes a universal process which builds the house of joy for man on earth and in the eternities.

223In this sense do we understand the famous statement in the Doctrine and Covenants that "the glory of God is intelligence." He, above all, has infinite knowledge; he, above all, fits knowledge into processes for man's welfare. His plan of salvation consists of knowledge directed into channels for the eternal blessings of humankind. That means the proper and correct use of knowledge to achieve the high destiny of man, declared in the gospel of Jesus the Christ.

223Joseph Smith the Prophet declared that "no man is saved faster than he gains knowledge." That is in full harmony with the Mormon definition of intelligence, for he lays down then the principle that law, the product of knowledge, must be obeyed if it shall serve mankind. Knowledge is the open door to full intelligence.

224Knowledge cannot be used until it is possessed. That places the gathering of knowledge high in the lives of men who seek intelligence. That explains the eagerness of the Church for education, throughout life, in schools and by other devices. That explains also why the Church holds a foremost place in educational circles. It is not for the sake of knowledge alone, but as a means to reach the larger intelligence required for acceptable active membership in the kingdom of God, that Latter-day Saints are seekers after truth.

224The high position of knowledge in the Church has ever been set forth. At the very beginning of the restored Church the Saints were admonished to "remember knowledge." A little later they were told to "grow . . . in knowledge." Then they were told to "obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, and of laws of God and man." Joseph Smith always urged the Saints to gather knowledge. His successors in office have spoken against ignorance and in praise of knowledge. Leaders of the Church have ever urged the people to gather knowledge.

224There are of course many kinds of knowledge; some of lesser, some of higher value. When Joseph Smith said that a man cannot be saved in ignorance, he meant naturally ignorance of the laws which all together lead to salvation. Such knowledge is of the highest value. It should be sought after first. Then other kinds of knowledge may be added to support and amplify the more direct knowledge of spiritual law. For example, it is a duty of the Church to preach the gospel to all the world. This however requires the aid of railroads, steamships, printing presses, and a multitude of other things that make up our civilization. A knowledge of the gospel is the missionary's first need, but the other needs, though lesser, help him perform better the divine injunction to teach the gospel to all people.

224In the history of the Church it has not been forgotten to emphasize the proper use of knowledge. Such use is commonly spoken of as obedience to knowledge and law. Indeed, obedience in the sense that all knowledge shall be directed to the salvation of man is the very cornerstone of Mormon philosophy Knowledge must be used for the good of man. Thereby hangs the valuation of man as an intelligent being. The leaders of the Church generally have emphasized as they have discoursed on knowledge that all truth won must be used in harmony with the requirements of the plan of salvation.

225Frequently, members of the Church have thought that the glorious revealed statement "the glory of God is intelligence," means merely the gathering of knowledge. That view must be enlarged in view of the Latter-day Saint definition of intelligence; a compound of knowledge and the proper use of knowledge.

225Indeed, this view is implied in the revelation itself, for it reads in full, "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." That is, the intelligence here discussed is a compound of light and truth. Sound knowledge is truth. Such truths become a light to guide man on his way, on every road, to meet every need.

225In the same revelation this view is further confirmed by the statement that "He that keepeth his (God's) commandments, receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things," In the correct life, light and truth travel together and are progressive towards the nature and power of God. Hence the beautiful statement: "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day."

225It is this light (intelligence) that Latter-day Saints need. This is the light that makes possible our entrance into celestial glory.

225It is the type of intelligence here discussed that has made this Church. Knowledge of the laws of God has been converted into the actions of everyday life.
