John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

14

Should Church Doctrine Be Accepted Blindly?

The obvious and emphatic answer is no. The question is admitted here only because recently it has been asked frequently. Apparently some explanations are necessary.

226It seems to be the opinion of some that Latter-day Saints do not think, but accept the doctrines and follow the practices of the Church without an intelligent consideration of what they believe and do. There could not be a more unfounded and erroneous view.

226The doctrine of the Church cannot be fully understood unless it is tested by mind and feelings, by intellect and emotions, by every power of the investigator. Every Church member is expected to understand the doctrine of the Church intelligently. There is no place in the Church for blind adherence.

226This is indispensable in a Church which rests upon the the individual testimonies of its members, and in which there is no professional ministry. Church government lies in the hands of the membership, every man of which may hold the priesthood. That requires more than a blind following.

226A Church member who does not study the gospel and try it out in his life is not really in good Church standing. Such a man cannot intelligently perform the work of the Church. With insufficient knowledge he sees things obliquely and obscurely. Indeed, he is a danger to the progress of the latter-day work.

226There is nothing new in this. From the beginning of its history the Church has opposed unsupported beliefs. It has fought half-truth and untruth. It has insisted that its members learn the gospel and its doctrine. It has demanded an intellectual as well as an emotional acceptance of the restored truth. It is today a great educational organization. It has urged and urges today, upon every candidate, a good understanding of the gospel before entering the waters of baptism. Though a person be touched in his heart and is baptized when first hearing the gospel, he must later give it further study, else he cannot become a useful member of the Church nor can he rise to the possible heights in personal joy. The case of President Brigham Young is but an example of the general rule. It took him two years of study, prayer, and reflection, after having the gospel brought seriously to his attention, before he asked for baptism.

227It is this open-eyed understanding of the gospel that makes the Latter-day Saints so certain of their faith. A blind acceptance is an incomplete acceptance, and usually leaves a person in doubt.

227After his two years of examination, Brigham Young remained throughout his life firm and unshaken in his faith. He knew from his careful study, beyond peradventure of doubt that the restored gospel is true. Those who in this Church waver in their faith, need to fortify themselves by prayer for truth, further study of the gospel and practice in gospel living. So clearly understood is the gospel and its principles, that there seldom is an apostasy from the Church except by those who have allowed sin to enter their lives.

227To understand the gospel a right beginning must be made. If God and Jesus Christ are accepted, the search for the truth of the restored gospel must be initiated by a study of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his work. Were his claims true -- that he had conversed with the Father and the Son; that the priesthood was conferred upon him legitimately by personages from the days of Jesus Christ; that he was authorized to organize the Church of Christ; and that a body of revelations was given him for the guidance of the Church?

227A certainty of the divine calling of Joseph Smith must be a foundation of faith in the Church.

227Then, it must be understood that some Church practices rest upon unchangeable gospel principles. We may not always understand these, but no amount of argument can change them. The strength of the gospel lies in these eternal, undeviating laws.

227Some prefer baptism by sprinkling, but the divine law is that baptism shall be by immersion. Some feel that an inward call is sufficient to perform such ordinances, therefore making the transmission of authority unnecessary. This view is beyond argument, since it violates divine law.

227Still others even in the Church may question the law of tithing. Why should not the requirement be a fifth or a twentieth? Why should there not be an upper limit for the rich man. Again, the Church is bound by the revelations of God through the Prophet of the Restoration, Joseph Smith.

228The labor question is a live issue. Some would have the Church take sides with one or the other of the many propositions of the day. Again, the Church rests its opinion on the eternal law: that the labor confusion will disappear when all men learn to do to others as they would have others do to them. Whatever leads in that direction invites Church support.

228All such queries, designed to question the propriety of the basic laws of the gospel, are a waste of time. Every future revelation of the Church will be in the nature of an extension of these spiritual foundation stones of the latter-day kingdom of the Lord. This is accepted open-eyed not blindly by Latter-day Saints.

228However, there are practices within the Church of less fundamental nature.

228The Saints must gather in meetings. That is a divine commandment. But the time of the meetings is set by the people of the Church upon the recommendation of the sustained leaders. There may in many cases be a justifiable difference of opinion as to the best time.

228The Saints must study and learn. That is in the revelations to Joseph Smith. But the value of the various study courses provided by the different Church organizations may with propriety be discussed by all.

228Whether tithing shall preferably be paid in kind or in cash, is a question dependent on existing circumstances. It is subject to lawful discussion.

228Every open-eyed Latter-day Saint, who refuses to accept things blindly, will distinguish clearly between the fundamental and the derivative, the essential and the non-essential, in the program and practices of the Church.

228Those who confuse the two are either immature, perhaps honest seekers after truth, or faultfinders, perhaps enemies of the Church.

228But Latter-day Saints who sustain their leaders, are always willing to try out debatable regulations, before passing judgment on them, and then report their objections, if any, to the proper Church officers.

228Latter-day Saints should not and do not accept Church doctrine blindly.
