John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

VI

Priesthood

1

Who Was Melchizedek?

The ancient history of the priesthood is only dimly known. Especially is this so for the period between Noah and Abraham.

231After the flood, Noah, who had himself received the priesthood (D. & C. 107:52; 84:14, 15; Moses 8:19), ordained his son Shem to the same priesthood (Gen. 9:26), and perhaps many others as the generations of faithful men increased. Shem and other priesthood bearers in turn undoubtedly ordained other faithful men who had a claim upon the priesthood. It is likely that whole communities of followers of the gospel which was taught to Adam existed at this time. Modern revelation confirms this view, for Moses received the priesthood from Jethro in Midian; and the descent of the priesthood from Abraham to Jethro is given in names that do not appear at that period in the Bible. (D. & C. 84:6-13.)

231In this period, Melchizedek springs suddenly into view. Abraham, after a victorious battle with Chedorlaomer, calls on Melchizedek, who is king of Salem (a place in or near the present Jerusalem), is entertained by Melchizedek, and finally pays tithing to him. In this act, Abraham recognized in Melchizedek a person of authority among the organized followers of the gospel, for he would not pay his tithing to one not authorized to receive it. This view is supported by Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the Bible, in which the statement is made that Melchizedek, "being the high priest, and the keeper of the storehouse of God; him whom God had appointed to receive tithes for the poor.

231Paul, the apostle says, ". . . this Melchizedec, . . . first being by interpretation King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace." (Heb. 7:1, 2.) The accepted Hebrew meaning of Melchizedek may then be taken as king of righteousness or peace. But, students of language suggested that the word is a title rather than a name, a title implying a high position of spiritual leadership. Linguists, dissecting the word and finding the syllable "el" in it, the Hebrew for God, interpret Melchizedek to mean a servant or king of the supreme God, a "King-priest." Paul tells the Hebrews to "consider how great this man was." (Heb. 7:4.) Through the ages Melchizedek has been a somewhat mystical figure, but one to whom the highest respect is given.

232Not only was Abraham entertained by Melchizedek but he received the priesthood from him. The priesthood which descended from Abraham to his descendants is thus traced back through Melchizedek. (D. & C. 84:14.) His priesthood is the most important thing about Melchizedek. David speaks of himself as "a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek." (Ps. 110:4.) Paul discourses at some length upon the high priesthood after the order of Melchizedek, and associates it with the mission of Jesus the Christ. (Heb. 5:6, 10; 6:20; 7:1) We of the restored Church of Christ, following divine revelation to avoid repeating the name of Deity too often, speak of the higher priesthood as the Melchizedek Priesthood or the priesthood of Melchizedek.

232A curious illustration of the result of missing or distorted or misunderstood scripture appears in Paul's epistle concerning Melchizedek. In the King James translation it reads, "For this Melchizedec . . . Without father, without mother without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life." (Heb. 7:1, 3.) This is an absurd statement about a mortal man. The statement refers, of course, to the priesthood of Melchizedek, which is eternal. The Prophet Joseph Smith rectified the error in his inspired translation of the Bible, as follows: "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God which order was without father without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life."

232There is an old Hebrew tradition that Melchizedek was none other than Shem, the son of Noah. As far as the age of Shem is concerned, that is possible. Shem lived five hundred two years after the flood, and Abraham was born two hundred ninety-two years after the flood. Abraham, therefore, must have known Shem. However, doubt is cast upon this claim by the revealed statement that "Melchizedek received it (the priesthood) through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah." (D. & C. 84:14.)

232Fortunately, modern revelation has given us information concerning this man great in sacred history:

233"Now Melchisedek was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness; and when a child he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire. And thus, having been approved by God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch, It being after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, nor the will of man; neither by father nor mother; neither by beginning of days nor end of years; but of God; And it was delivered unto men by the calling of his own voice, according to his own will, unto as many as believed on his name.

233"For God having sworn unto Enoch and unto his seed with an oath by himself; that every one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course; to put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers, and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world. And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven.

233"And now, Melchisedek was a priest of this order; therefore he obtained peace in Salem, and was called the Prince of peace. And his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world; And hath said, and sworn with an oath, that the heavens and the earth should come together; and the sons of God should be tried so as by fire. And this Melchisedek, having thus established righteousness, was called the king of heaven by his people, or, in other words, the King of peace.

233"And he lifted up his voice, and he blessed Abram, being the high priest, and the keeper of the storehouse of God; Him whom God had appointed to receive tithes for the poor.

233"Wherefore, Abram paid unto him tithes of all that he had, of all the riches which he possessed, which God had given him more than that which he had need." (Gen. 14:25-39, Inspired Version.)
