John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

What Is the Distinction Between the Priesthood And the Keys of the Priesthood?

A key unlocks the door to our house, or the cover of our jewelbox, or the ignition of our automobile. Without the key, we cannot have access to the house, possess the jewels, or drive the car. Our property is inactive, awaiting the coming of the key. A man, likewise, holds the Priesthood by which all the work in the Church is accomplished, but he can use it in certain Church activities only when the necessary keys are conferred upon him.

234Further, a man who owns a car may not be allowed, because of police orders, to drive down certain streets. Similarly, a man may receive the Priesthood, but can exercise its power, within the Church, only by the authority of the proper officials.

234On his own property and on open streets the man may drive his car without question. Similarly, in behalf of himself and his family, and for the general good, a man may exercise his Priesthood without reference to the official body of the Church.

234They who have the right to say when, where, and how the Priesthood shall be used for the Church have keys of authority. They may give similar authority or keys to others.

234Every priest has the authority to administer the sacrament; every elder has the authority to baptize; but neither can so officiate in the activities of a ward unless called to do so by the bishop who holds the keys of authority for the ward.

234Every high priest has the authority to preside, but cannot preside over any stake organization without being called to do so by the stake president, who holds the keys of authority for the stake.

234All members of a Priesthood quorum hold equal Priesthood authority, but in the president of the quorum is vested the authority to use the Priesthood for quorum purposes, for he holds the keys of authority for the quorum.

234A seventy by virtue of his Priesthood has authority to preach the gospel, but he cannot fill a mission unless he is called by the proper officers of the Church, and set apart for that purpose -- that is, unless the keys of that ministry are conferred upon him, within his specific field, by those who hold the general keys of spreading the gospel abroad, and can confer them on others.

235Therefore, it is customary and proper in ordaining or setting apart men to presiding offices to confer upon them the associated keys of authority. If in ordaining a man to the office of elder, seventy, or high priest, the keys of authority are conferred, it means that henceforth he has full right to the use of the power committed to him to meet his own needs, and in guarding and blessing his own family, and all who have need of help. But, when men are called to specific offices of responsibility, the corresponding keys of authority are conferred, even though the man already holds the Priesthood.

235President Joseph F. Smith has drawn the clear distinction between the Priesthood and the keys of the Priesthood:

The Priesthood in general is the authority given to man to act for God. Every man ordained to any degree of the Priesthood has this authority delegated to him.

235But it is necessary that every act performed under this authority shall be done at the proper time and place, in the proper way, and after the proper order. The power of directing these labors constitutes the keys of the Priesthood. In their fulness, the keys are held by only one person at a time, the prophet and president of the Church. He may delegate any portion of this power to another, in which case that person holds the keys of that particular labor. Thus, the president of a temple, the president of a stake, the bishop of a ward, the president of a mission, the president of a quorum, each holds the keys of the labors performed in that particular body or locality. His Priesthood is not increased by this special appointment, for a seventy who presides over a mission has no more Priesthood than a seventy who labors under his direction; and the president of an elders' quorum, for example, has no more Priesthood than any member of that quorum. But he holds the power of directing the official labors performed in the mission or the quorum, or in other words, the keys of that division of that work. So it is throughout all the ramifications of the Priesthood -- a distinction must be carefully made between the general authority, and the directing the labors performed by that authority (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , pp. 168-9).
