John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

Did the Nephites Have the Higher Priesthood Before the Coming of Christ?

There is no direct answer to this question in the Book of Mormon. Yet, the events recorded in the Nephite scriptures indicate that the Higher Priesthood was among the Nephites prior to the coming of Christ.

240The Nephites were descendants of Manasseh, the son of Joseph of Egypt. (Book of Mormon, 1 Ne. 5:14-16; Alma 10:3) The Nephite Priesthood therefore differed from the Levitical Priesthood which was assigned to the sons of Levi, the brother of Joseph.

240Lehi, father of the Nephites, held the Priesthood, for, while yet in the wilderness, he and his family offered sacrifice and burnt offerings, priestly ordinances of the Church before the coming of Christ. (1 Ne. 5:9) Nephi, the son of Lehi also held the Priesthood, probably conferred by his father. Nephi in turn ordained two of his brothers, Jacob and Joseph, to the Priesthood. "They should be priests and teachers over the land of my people." (2 Ne. 5:26) The elder and younger Alma (Alma 5:3), several of the latter's sons, and Nephi, the son of Helaman, together with many others, some of whom are not mentioned by name, held the Priesthood even to the coming of Christ. (2 Ne. 18:2; 25:4; Alma 30:20, 23; 46:38) At no time, it would seem, were the Nephites without the Priesthood.

240It would appear that not every man held the Priesthood yet it must have been rather widely distributed. Mosiah records that there was "one priest to every fifty of their number." (Mosiah 18:18) Every Church unit was presided over by the Priesthood. (Mosiah 25:21)

240The nature of the Nephite Priesthood is gathered from various statements made by Book of Mormon characters. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, declared that he had been "called of God, and ordained after the manner of his holy order." (2 Ne. 62) Alma, the younger, says, "I am called . . . according to the holy order of God, which is in Christ Jesus" (Alma 5:44), and he later states that he confined himself wholly to the High Priesthood of "the holy order of God." (Alma 49:30) This holy order was "after the order of his Son." (Alma 13:2; Hel. 8:18) The "holy order of God," especially when coupled with the order of the Son of God, has always been held to refer to the Melchizedek or High Priesthood. (D. & C. 77:11; 84:19)

241 Alma was a high priest. (Alma 8:23) His sons were ordained high priests, and also many others. (Alma 46:6; Hel. 3:25) Since there were many Nephite high priests, this office in the Priesthood could not refer to the one high priest, of the order of Aaron, required to stand at the head of the Lesser Priesthood. It is clear that Alma cited in his famous sermon (Alma 13) the story of earlier high priests of the Melchizedek order, to explain and to emphasize his own calling. The existence of numerous high priests is thus another evidence that the Higher Priesthood was among the Nephites.

241Under the authority of the Priesthood, the Nephites performed baptisms from the days of the first Nephi. (Mosiah 18:13-16; Alma 5:3; 15:13; 48:19) Now, baptism is by itself an incomplete ordinance. Its full value comes when it is followed by the reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost. Numerous references in the Book of Mormon indicate that the Holy Ghost was received by those who had been baptized. For example: "The gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost." (2 Ne. 31:17) "He that is baptized him will the Father give the Holy Ghost baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost." (2 Ne. 31:12, 14) Alma likewise says that he had labored "without ceasing" to bring souls unto repentance "that they might also be born of God, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." (Alma 36:24)

241The ordinance of baptism could be administered by holders of the Lesser Priesthood (priests), but the conferring of the Holy Ghost requires the authority of the Higher Priesthood. Again the conclusion seems warranted that the Nephites had the Higher Priesthood.

241President Brigham H. Roberts came to the same conclusion in his comprehensive study of the Book of Mormon. He says:

242Lehi held the Priesthood, the higher priesthood, which was after the order of Melchizedek, and was a prophet and minister of righteousness This, Lehi conferred upon his son, Nephi; and Nephi, shortly after his separation from his elder brothers on the land of promise, consecrated his two younger brothers Jacob and Joseph, to be priests and teachers unto his people. (Roberts, New Witnesses for God, Vol. 2, p. 219)

242Undoubtedly, various offices in the Priesthood were recognized by the Nephites. Teachers, priests, and high priests are specifically mentioned in the Book of Mormon. The terms teachers and priests probably refer to offices in the Lesser Priesthood; and the term high priest to an office in the Higher Priesthood. The Priesthood organization of the Nephites may not have been just as it is today, but it was such as to meet the needs of the people of that day. The Priesthood itself was, of course, the same.
