John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

5

Who Is Elias And What Is His Mission?

At the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in April, 1836, several ancient prophets appeared and delivered their keys of authority to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Among these worthies was Elias, who "committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." (D. & C. 110:12; see also, Matt. 17:1-13) From this reference to "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham," it has been concluded that Elias was a prophet who lived near the time of the patriarch, Abraham. Really, nothing more definite is known about the person Elias and his activity on earth. It is very evident that he was a personage of importance, for he held the "keys" of authority in a mission of vital importance in carrying out on earth the plan of salvation.

243More is known about the nature of the mission of Elias. In a revelation to the Prophet, in August, 1830, it is stated that the Lord has committed to Elias "the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days." (D. & C. 27:6) In the same revelation it is stated that the angel who visited Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, promised "that he should have a son, and his name should be John, and he should be filled with the spirit of Elias." (D. & C. 26:7; see also, Luke 1:17) Now, it has been made clear from a later revelation that the mission of John was "to prepare them [the Jews and others] for the coming of the Lord." (D. & C. 84:28; see also, Luke 1:5-17; John 1:19-28) It is concluded from this and other passages (D. & C. 77:9, 14) that the mission and spirit of the prophet Elias are to do the necessary preparatory work whenever the gospel dispensation or period is about to be opened. This is in full accord with the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith that "The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the Priesthood of Elias, or the Priesthood that Aaron was ordained unto. And when God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias. . . ." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 335, 336)

244This understanding of the mission and spirit of Elias has led many writers, ancient and modern, to speak of any person charged with preparatory work, one who goes before, as an Elias. Thus, John the Baptist was an Elias in his work as a forerunner of the Christ. Similarly, each personage, from Moroni to those appearing in the Kirtland Temple, who introduced the present, last dispensation of the gospel, may be spoken of as an Elias. Elias, then, is often used as a title, as the titles of bishop, prophet, or president are used, betokening a special position, mission, service, power, or authority. With this in mind, many otherwise obscure scriptural passages may be understood. (D. & C. 77:9, 14; Rev. 7:2, 3; 10:1)

244The names Elijah and Elias are but variations of one original name. Therefore, in many languages these names are translated alike, as Elias. This has tended to confuse many gospel students who do not use English Bibles as to the personality of Elias. Indeed, Elias and Elijah have been made to appear as one person. Yet it should not he so, for many different men in various historical periods may have borne the same name. For example, the Baptist and the Revelator were both named John.

244We do know that Elias was a mighty man of God charged in his day with a most important mission. We know also that any man who may be called to prepare the way for the consummation of the Lord's purposes is engaged in the mission of Elias, and therefore may be called an Elias.

244It should be said that some students believe that Elias who appeared in the Kirtland Temple was Noah, the patriarch. Modern revelation informs us that Elias visited Zacharias to inform him that he should have a son known later as John the Baptist. (D. & C. 27:7) The Bible says that it was the angel Gabriel who visited Zacharias. (Luke 1:19) Joseph Smith said that Gabriel is Noah. These students conclude therefore, that Elias is another name or title for Noah. This inference may or may not be correct. The name Gabriel may be borne by more than one personage or it may be a title as in the case of Elias. When Elias, the man, lived, and what he did in his life, must for the present remain in the field of conjecture.
