John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

6

Who Are the Sons of Levi, And What Is Their Future Offering In Righteousness?

The sons of Levi are the male members of the tribe of Levi, descendants of Levi, the third son of the patriarch, Jacob.

245While ancient Israel journeyed in the Sinaitic wilderness, they showed themselves unworthy to hold the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. Consequently the Lord took this Priesthood from them, but allowed the lesser Priesthood to remain. (D. & C. 84:23-37)

245This lesser Priesthood that remained was confined to the male members of the tribe of Levi; therefore, it is often spoken of as the Levitical Priesthood. Aaron, of the tribe of Levi, and his sons, were called to the office of priest, that is to the presidency of this Priesthood; therefore, it is also called the Aaronic Priesthood. The organization of the lesser Priesthood under the Mosaic dispensation must have been much like that of this day. Aaron and his sons served in offices similar to the priests and were so specifically designated. The other male members of the tribe of Levi served in offices similar to the teachers and deacons of this dispensation of the gospel. This seems to be borne out by the words of the Lord to Moses when the Levitical organization was perfected:

. . . from twenty and five years old and upward they shall go in and wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the congregation:

And from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the service thereof and shall serve no more:

But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. (Num. 8:24-26)

245The presiding priest, called the high priest, probably served as does the presiding bishop of our times. This is the view taken by President John Taylor. (Items on Priesthood)

245The activities of the lesser Priesthood among ancient Israel were designated to meet the needs and conditions then existing. The law of bloody sacrifice or burnt offerings, in witness of the coming Savior, was in operation from this time until the coming of Jesus, the Christ. The Levites performed the labors and ordinances pertaining to this law. Explicit directions for the duties of the Levites are found in the Books of Moses. In course of time, the ordinances under the Levitical law became largely corrupted and unacceptable to the Lord. Only a few of the Levites held the true authority of the Priesthood. At the coming of the Savior, John the Baptist held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, that is, he was the presiding officer of that Priesthood.

246On May 15, 1829, this John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and conferred upon them the "Priesthood of Aaron," that is, the keys of the lesser Priesthood. In so doing he declared that this Priesthood "shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (D.& C. 13)

246It does not seem probable that this offering will be a burnt offering. The coming of Christ ended the Mosaic law. The earlier sacrifices were in similitude of the coming sacrifice of Jesus, the Christ. After His crucifixion, death, and resurrection, the sacrament was instituted to keep His sacrifice in constant living memory.

246It seems more probable that the "offering in righteousness, which will terminate the functions of the sons of Levi under the Levitical Priesthood, will be the full acceptance of the gospel, when their Priesthood will come under the direction of the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood.

246This view seems borne out by Latter-day revelation. In the Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 84, verse 27, it is stated that this Priesthood the Lord caused "to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John ." This suggests a termination with the coming of Christ. In D&C 124, verse 39, where the work of the modern temples is summarized, "memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi" are mentioned as part of the temple service. No provision has been made in the temples for the ancient type of burnt offerings, and the word memorials would seem to exclude such an interpretation. A more explicit suggestion is found in section 128:

For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap; and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as old and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. (D. & C. 128:24)

247The "offering in righteousness" is here identified with temple work for the salvation of the dead, which encompasses all the principles of the plan of salvation.

247When, therefore, the sons of Levi accept Christ and His gospel, subject themselves to the ordinances of the Church, and become active in gospel requirements, they will offer the offering in righteousness of which has been spoken.

247Though the type of sacrifice connected with the Levitical Priesthood is no more, yet the law of sacrifice remains. The Prophet Joseph Smith made it clear that sacrifice is ever a part of the gospel. In the restored Church, this law is in full operation. None can retain the spirit of the gospel unless he gives to the cause of the Lord of himself, of his substance time and strength. (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 4:207-212)
