John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

8

Which Is Greater -- Priesthood Or the Church?

According to John Taylor, third President of the Church, priesthood ". . . is the power of God delegated to intelligences in the heavens and to man on earth." This definition has been confirmed by the leaders of the Church. For example, Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church, said that: "It is nothing more nor less than the power of God delegated to man by which man can act in the earth for the salvation of the human family." Under this definition nothing can be greater than priesthood. Nothing can transcend the power of God. All things must be the product of that power.

249Of course, man does not possess all of God's power. Enough has been bestowed upon him to perform every work connected with the plan of salvation for the human family. On earth, man needs no more.

249However, whenever the Church of Christ exists on earth, all priesthood activity operates within the Church. Only when the Church does not exist on earth, can men hold the priesthood "at large." The moment the Church is organized, all holders of the priesthood can use their priesthood only under the authority and direction of the Church. That is, at no time when the Church is organized can there be on earth two classes of priesthood bearers: those who use their power within the Church; and those who use it outside the Church.

249In fact, the Church is a product of priesthood, and can be organized only by those who hold the priesthood. It is the instrument through which priesthood operates. In a true sense, on earth, priesthood and the Church are as one -- neither can function without the other.

249This was clearly set forth in the beginning of the restored Church of Christ. On May 15, 1829, before the Church was organized, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were ordained by the resurrected John the Baptist, to the authority of the Aaronic or Lesser Priesthood. Under that authority they were then baptized. A short time later, the resurrected apostles, Peter, James, and John, conferred the Melchizedek, or Higher Priesthood, upon the young men. They were now baptized and had been given all necessary priesthood power, all that the Lord has seen fit to confer upon anyone on earth.

250But the Church of Christ had not yet been organized. Therefore, about this same time the Lord instructed Joseph and Oliver to organize the Church of Christ. This they were to do under the authority of the priesthood conferred upon them. However, it was made clear that when the Church was organized both of these young men must be baptized into the Church, and ordained elders in the Church. The instructions were explicit.

250This was actually accomplished, for on April 6, 1830, the Church was organized. The six organizers, including Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, were baptized into the Church, confirmed members of the Church, received the gift of the Holy Ghost, and ordained to an office in the priesthood.

250"I then laid my hands upon Oliver Cowdery, and ordained him an Elder of the 'Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints'; after which he ordained me also to the office of an Elder of said Church.

250". . . We now proceeded to call out and ordain some others of the brethren to different offices of the Priesthood, according as the Spirit manifested unto us."

250The baptism and ordinations already received, empowered Joseph and Oliver, under God's command, to organize the Church. But, thenceforth their power and authority could be exercised only within the Church, and under its authority and direction. Thenceforth the priesthood would be conferred only by the Church. No one in mortality could exercise priesthood rights outside the Church.

250Thus, without the priesthood there can be no Church; without the Church, there can be no priesthood in full operation on earth. Priesthood and the Church are as one, inseparable. Therefore, the question as to the relative importance of priesthood and the Church has no meaning for mortal man.

250There are those, who having been excommunicated from the Church, believe that they yet retain the priesthood which they received under Church authority. That is folly. Whatever has been received under Church authority is taken from a man when he is cut off from the Church. Only the memory remains to vex his soul.
