John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

9

What Is the Oath And Covenant of the Priesthood?

In the fall of 1832, meetings were held in Kirtland, Ohio, to hear the reports of groups of missionaries who had recently returned from the eastern states. These elders were filled with the spirit of their work. They had preached the doctrine of the restored gospel; they had been successful in bringing souls to a knowledge of the truth; their hearts were filled with joy.

252Under the influence of the missionary spirit, they had glimpsed the vast meaning of the Lord's plan of salvation for the human family. As their fervent testimonies were borne, many gospel questions were asked. Especially were these ambassadors of truth concerned with the priesthood, under the authority of which they had labored -- its history, extent, and power.

252The Prophet Joseph Smith inquired of the Lord, and received, on September 22 and 23, one of the great revelations on priesthood, now known as D&C 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants. While the Prophet called it a revelation on priesthood, it goes beyond the technical limits of the subject, and discusses many related or cognate items. The Lord then, as now, gave more than was asked for.

252After discussing the history and offices of the two divisions of the priesthood, the Aaronic and Melchizedek, the revelation continues:

For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies.

252They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God.

252And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord;

252For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

252And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

252And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

252And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood.

253Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved.

253These words clearly refer to the covenant which the Lord makes with all who receive the priesthood worthily, and who attempt to magnify it in their lives. "All that my Father hath shall be given unto him" -- the worthy priesthood bearer.

253Wilford Woodruff, fourth president of the Church, speaking upon this revelation commented upon the greatness of the promises made to faithful priesthood bearers.

253I often reflect upon the promises made concerning the priesthood . . . Now, I sometimes ask myself the question, Do we comprehend these things? Do we comprehend that if we abide the laws of the priesthood we shall become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ? -- Who in the name of the Lord can apprehend such language as this? Who can comprehend that, by obeying the celestial law, all that our Father has shall he given unto us -- exaltations, thrones, principalities, power, dominion -- who can comprehend it? Nevertheless it is here stated.

253However, a covenant concerns two persons. Both parties must do something to make the covenant effective. That principle is in full operation in the oath and covenant of the priesthood. He who receives the priesthood covenants to magnify his calling in the priesthood. That makes the covenant valid. That is too often forgotten.

253The revelation sets this forth clearly. A man who has received the priesthood and then fails to use it is a covenant breaker, subject to punishment.

253But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come.

253That makes it a most serious offense to dishonor the priesthood by not using it in the building of the Lord's latter-day kingdom.

253The oath and covenant of the priesthood is between man and God. The Lord promises him great blessings if he magnifies the priesthood he receives. The man in turn, when he receives the priesthood, promises that he will honor the priesthood received, by magnifying it.

254Every ordination to the priesthood implies this covenant between man and God, whether so stated or not. It would be well, if in all priesthood ordinations the oath and covenant of the priesthood were explained. Too many priesthood bearers feel that they have been given something without a corresponding promise by themselves. They forget too often that every ordinance in the gospel is accompanied by a covenant between God and man. We are a covenant people.
