John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

10

In the Event of the Death of the President of the Church Why Does the Council of the Twelve Apostles Take Over the Presidency of the Church?

The Twelve Apostles "form a quorum, equal in authority power" to the First Presidency. (D. & C. 107:23, 24)

255This doctrine was amplified in a revelation concerning the Twelve Apostles:

For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times.

255Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation; For verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you. (D. & C. 112:30-32)

255This authority of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles was frequently referred to by the Prophet Joseph Smith. He said: [I] "next proceeded to explain the duty of the Twelve, and their authority which is next to the present Presidency." (Joseph Smith, History of the Church 2:373) Later he said: "The time has come when the Twelve should he called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency." (Times and Seasons 2:521) He also said to the Twelve Apostles: Now, if they kill me, you have all the keys, and all the ordinances, and you can confer them upon others, and the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the Kingdom as fast as you will be able to build it tip; and upon your shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people rest." (Times and Seasons 5:651)

255The counselors in the presidency lose their presiding authority when the President of the Church dies. In the words of the Prophet: "The Twelve are not subject to any other than the First Presidency, and where I am not, there is no First Presidency over the Twelve." (Joseph Smith History of the Church 2:374)
