John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

11

What Is the Meaning of the Title "Prophet, Seer, And Revelator"?

The President of the Church is sustained by the people as "Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." This is in compliance with the revealed word of God. The first revelation received by Joseph Smith after the organization of the Church on April 6, 1830, specifically declares that "there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a seer a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ." (D. & C. 21:1)

256This was reiterated by revelation in 1835: "the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, ... yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church." (D. & C. 107:91, 92) and was further restated in 1841: "I give upon you my servant Joseph to be a presiding elder over all my church, to be a translator, a revelator, a seer, and a prophet." (D. & C. 124: 125)

256In current practice, the word "translator" is omitted, since should records appear needing translation, the President of the Church may at any time be called, through revelation, to the special labor of translation.

256The counselors to the President and the Council of the Twelve Apostles and, usually, the Patriarch to the Church are also sustained as "prophets, seers, and revelators." This conforms to the Priesthood conferred upon them, and to their official calling in the Church. That others than the president may hold these exalted titles also conforms to the revealed word of God. For example, speaking of Hyrum Smith: "I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my church." (D. & C. 124:94)

256On March 27, 1836, at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple the authorities of the Church were sustained:

I [Joseph Smith] made a short address, and called upon the several quorums, and all the congregation of Saints, to acknowledge the Presidency as Prophets and Seers and uphold them by their prayers. ... I then called upon the quorums and congregation of Saint', to acknowledge the Twelve, who were present, as Prophets, Seers Revelators, and special witnesses to all the nations of the earth holding the keys of the kingdom, to unlock it, or cause it to be done among them, and uphold them by their prayers. (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 2:417)

257When others besides the President of the Church hold the title "prophet, seer, and revelator," it follows that the "power and authority" thus represented are called into action only by appointment from the President of the Church, otherwise there might be a conflict of authority. This is well illustrated iii the practice of the Church. For example, a man may be ordained a High Priest, an office in which the right of presidency is inherent, but he presides only when called to do so. It is even so with the exercise of authority under these sacred titles.

257The three separate titles in the general title have much the same meaning in popular usage, yet there are differences sufficiently important to justify their use.

257A prophet is a teacher. That is the essential meaning of the word. He teaches the body of truth, the gospel, revealed by the Lord to man; and under inspiration explains it to the understanding of the people. He is an expounder of truth. Moreover, he shows that the way to human happiness is through obedience to God's law. He calls to repentance those who wander away from the truth. He becomes a warrior for the consummation of the Lord's purposes with respect to the human family. The purpose of his life is to uphold the Lord's plan of salvation. All this he does by close communion with the Lord, until he is "full of power by the spirit of the Lord." (Micah 3:8; see also D. & C. 20:26; 34:10; 43:16)

257The teacher must learn before he can teach. Therefore in ancient and modern times there have been schools of the prophets, in which the mysteries of the kingdom have been taught to men who would go out to teach the gospel and to fight the battles of the Lord. These "prophets" need not be called to an office; they go out as teachers of truth, always and everywhere.

257In the course of time the word "prophet" has come to mean, perhaps chiefly, a man who receives revelations, and directions from the Lord. The principal business of a prophet has mistakenly been thought to foretell coming events, to utter prophecies, which is only one of the several prophetic functions.

258In the sense that a prophet is a man who receives revelations from the Lord, the titles "seer and revelator" merely amplify the larger and inclusive meaning of the title "prophet." Clearly, however, there is much wisdom in the specific statement of the functions of the prophet as seer and revelator, as is done in the conferences of the Church.

258A prophet also receives revelations from the Lord. These may be explanations of truths already received, or new truths not formerly possessed by man. Such revelations are always confined to the official position held. The lower will not receive revelations for the higher office.

258A seer is one who sees with spiritual eyes. He perceives the meaning of that which seems obscure to others; therefore he is an interpreter and clarifier of eternal truth. He foresees the future from the past and the present. This he does by the power of the Lord operating through him directly, or indirectly with the aid of divine instruments such as the Urim and Thummim. In short, he is one who sees, who walks in the Lord's light with open eyes. (Book of Mormon, Mosiah 8:15-17)

258A revelator makes known, with the Lord's help, something before unknown. It may be new or forgotten truth, or a new or forgotten application of known truth to man's need. Always, the revelator deals with truth, certain truth (D. & C: 100:11) and always it comes with the divine stamp of approval. Revelation may be received in various ways, but it always presupposes that the revelator has so lived and conducted himself as to be in tune or harmony with the divine spirit of revelation, the spirit of truth, and therefore capable of receiving divine messages.

258In summary: A prophet is a teacher of known truth; a seer is a perceiver of hidden truth, a revelator is a bearer of new truth. In the widest sense, the one most commonly used, the title, prophet, includes the other titles and makes of the prophet, a teacher, perceiver, and bearer of truth.

258One who bears the title of prophet, and they who sustain him as such, are first of all believers in God, and in a divine plan of salvation for the human family; and, secondly, they commit themselves to the task of bringing to pass the purposes of the Almighty. They believe that the children of men are capable of receiving and obeying truth. Were it not so the title "prophet, seer, and revelator" would be empty, hollow words. As it is, they are clarion calls of the Church of Christ to a world walking in the dim shadows of misunderstanding.
