John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

12

Who Is President of the "Twelve"?

The members of the Council of the Twelve are of equal priesthood authority. Yet when they meet in their deliberations one is called to act as chairman or President.

260Since these men are of equal priesthood authority, it might be thought that any one of them might be called to the presidential office. Under the practice of the Church based upon the latter-day revelations of the Lord, this is not done. Instead the senior member of the council, that is, the one who has held the apostleship longest, is appointed and sustained as the President of the Council of the Twelve Apostles.

260The members of the first apostolic quorum in this day, all called at the same time, were arranged according to their ages. Elder Thomas B. Marsh became the senior member and President of the Council, but apostatized and was excommunicated from the Church. That left Brigham Young the ranking Apostle.

260The position of Brigham Young as President of the Council of Twelve was confirmed by the Lord in a revelation given January 19, 1841. This was little more than three years before the martyrdom of Joseph Smith. During these years Joseph was moved upon by the Lord to set up securely the order of organization within the Church. The presidency of the Twelve was not forgotten.

260In this revelation the main priesthood officers of the Church are presented to the Church for their acceptance. After presenting the Patriarch, and the President with his two counselors, the President of the Council of Twelve is presented, in the following words: "I give unto you my servant Brigham Young to be a president over the twelve traveling council." The names of the members of the Council are later given, thus preventing any misunderstanding.

260Since that time there has been no deviation from the rule that the senior member should preside over the Council. In the troublesome days following the death of the Prophet,

261Brigham Young became the President of the Council, which, until a new President was chosen, presided over the Church. When finally the Lord moved upon the Council to reorganize the First Presidency, Brigham Young, then President of the Council of Twelve, was called to be President of the Church.

261This order of succession to the presidency of the Council of Twelve, and to the presidency of the Church has been followed, and will continue to be the rule of the Church until the Lord speaks and commands another procedure.

261When Brigham Young became President of the Church, Elder Orson Hyde, a member of the original Quorum of Twelve Apostles, was sustained as President of the Council of Twelve. He was so sustained for many years. However, one fact had been overlooked. In October 1838, Orson Hyde, then just recovering from a serious illness, had yielded to the importunities of Thomas B. Marsh to sign a vicious paper against Joseph Smith. Brother Hyde was promptly cut off from the Church, and of course lost his apostleship. The charges against the Prophet were, however, shown to be unfounded. Brother Hyde repented and was restored to his position as an Apostle on June 27, 1839. This incident made Brother Hyde a junior rather than a senior member of the Council. In matters of seniority, in case of an excommunication, the length of service dates from the time of re-entry, should they occur, into the Quorum. When this matter was considered by the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve, John Taylor assumed the presidency of the Council.

261President Heber J. Grant succeeded President Joseph F. Smith as President of the Church in 1918. In the Council of Twelve at that time the next in order of seniority was Anthon H. Lund, who was serving as a counselor in the presidency of the Church. An Apostle does not surrender his rights in the Quorum of Apostles by being called to serve in the First Presidency. To preserve President Lund's rights in priesthood succession, he was sustained as President of the Twelve though retaining his place in the First Presidency. Elder Rudger Clawson, the next ranking member of the Council, was appointed acting president, and so served until President Lund's death when Elder Clawson became the President of the Council.

262So runs the story of the presidency of the Twelve. The principle followed in the past will no doubt be followed in the future, except as the Lord may speak and command changes. It is well for Latter-day Saints to understand these matters as they pertain to the Quorum of the Twelve upon which lies the responsibility of maintaining the presidential leadership of the Church.
