John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

13

How Is A President of the Church Chosen?

After the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, there were several contenders for the position of President or "guardian" of the Church. With the sustaining vote of the people, the Council of Twelve Apostles took over the leadership of the Church. Since that day, at the demise of the President, the Twelve have become the presiding body.

263That the Council of the Twelve actually hold the necessary "authority and power" was frequently set forth in the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors. For example, in a revelation concerning the Council of the Twelve, given in 1837, the following statement is made:

"For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times." (D. & C. 112:30)

263On several occasions this vital relationship between the Presidency and the Twelve was referred to by the Prophet. He said,["[I] ... next proceeded to explain the duty of the Twelve, and their authority, which is next to the Presidency. (D. H. C., 2:373) Shortly before his death the Prophet said, "The time has come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency." (Times and Seasons, 2:521) To the Twelve he said, "Now, if they kill me, you have got all the keys, and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others, and the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom, as fast as you will be able to build it up; and on your shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people rest." (Ibid., 5:651)

263However, the Lord has revealed the order of the government of the Church. "Three Presiding High Priests form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church." (D. & C. 107:22; see also 102:10; 124:125, 126.) In conformity with the revealed will of God, Joseph Smith Jr., was sustained January 25, 1832, as President of the Church, and on March 18, 1833, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were set apart as counselors to the Prophet. The Church is never fully organized if any of the quorums set up by the Lord is missing.

264It would not be proper, therefore, for the Twelve to continue indefinitely to preside over the Church. Under the spirit of revelation they should proceed to appoint another President of the Church, who should select his counselors. These actions then should be acknowledged "by the voice of the church" (Ibid., 102:9, 10)

264The revelations do not say directly who shall be chosen President of the Church. When the First Presidency was organized three years after the death of the Prophet, on December 27, 1847, the senior apostle and president of the Council of the Twelve, Brigham Young, was appointed. Since his day, whenever the First Presidency has been disorganized by death, the president of the Twelve has succeeded to the Presidency. (Before a U.S. Senate investigating committee, in the Smoot case, President Joseph F. Smith testified as follows: "It has been the custom, since the death of Joseph Smith, that the president of the Twelve succeed to the Presidency of the Church. It is just simply a custom."

264This is a wise procedure. It places at the head of the Church the apostle who has been longest in service. He is known well to the people and trusted by them. He himself knows the procedure of Church affairs. He is no novice to be trained for the position. He can call to his assistance, in addition to his counselors, any helpers from among the priesthood of the Church. It eliminates the shadow of politics from the operations of the Council.

264Should there be any deviation from the practices of the past, it would come by revelation to the President of the Twelve, who by virtue of his presidency, holds the keys of authority committed to this quorum of the priesthood. However, President Woodruff declared that in his opinion, the President of the council would never be set aside for someone else in appointing a president of the Church. (Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, p. 561.)

264Moreover, it has been found that a long interval of presidency by the Twelve is not for the best interests of the Church. Therefore, since the days of President John Taylor, the selection has been made within a few days after the death of the President.

265On Tuesday, May 15, 1945, the day after President Grant died, the Twelve assembled as the presiding authority of the Church, to arrange for the funeral, and to consider other matters. On the following Monday, the quorum met again, fasting and praying, and moved upon by the spirit of revelation, called Elder George Albert Smith to the position of First Elder, Prophet, Seer, and Revelator to the Church. This action was, of course, in due time confirmed by the Church.

265The Lord has so provided safeguards, that the continuity of his Church cannot be broken. Should all the Twelve disappear, there remain the First Quorum of the Seventy to carry on. Should the members of this quorum vanish from mortal life, the standing high councils of the stakes would remain to carry on. And should they be destroyed, the priesthood would yet remain, and the Lord would call upon a remaining elder to go forth to reorganize the Church according to the divine pattern. Indeed, the restored Church is a marvelous work and a wonder. (D. & C. 107:22-26, 36, 37; Discourses of Brigham Young, 1941 edition, page 128.)
