John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

VII

Freedom Versus Organization in the Church

1

Are the Latter-Day Saints A Free People?

The right to choose for himself what he will believe and do is the choicest possession of every intelligent man and woman. The unhindered exercise of this right is freedom.

269In Latter-day Saint terminology this is the right of free agency, which is valued above all else, for it insures a membership which thinks and acts for itself and stands upon its own convictions and conclusions. Because of this basic law, the Church is diametrically opposed to tyranny or dictatorships of any form or under any name, that enslave the minds and actions of men. The Church seeks truth, and more truth and believes that truth makes men free. And the Lord in these latter days has declared, "... Hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people ..." (D. & C. 38:22.)

269Nevertheless, freedom operates under many conditions or limitations beyond the power of any one person. There are laws of nature, society, and God, which must always be taken into account in the exercise of free agency. Under the right of choice a person may oppose them or obey them. It is not possible to abrogate them; nor can they be ignored with safety.

269A person may choose to jump from the mountain precipice to the jagged rocks below; or seize with naked hands the wires charged with high tension electric power; or cast himself into a living fire. The result is certain death. Or, he may decide to obey the laws of nature, and use them if he can. So he builds a parachute, to descend safely from the precipice; with insulated hands he makes the current do work for him; and he applies heat to confined water so that he may ride across the continent luxuriously in steam-driven trains. True freedom in the midst of the multiplicity of natural forces, comes from conformity to law. Thereby, man becomes also the master of nature.

269This principle is in equal operation in society. A person among his fellows, may think as he pleases; but in his actions he is limited. His inalienable right to free agency does not permit him to interfere with the same right of another individual. Even Robinson Crusoe had to consider his man Friday in all his actions. Therefore, a sound society sets up rules and regulations by which the right of freedom may be available to all people. To live happily in society these laws must be obeyed. If they are not the best laws, they may be improved; but while they do exist, they must be obeyed. Freedom in society waits only upon those who obey the laws of society.

270The Church, though essentially an institution for freedom, exists under many laws that govern the right of choice. These are the commandments of God to his children on earth. The best laws enacted by and for society are based upon divine law, such, for example, as the Ten Commandments. The very value of the Church to man comes from these laws based upon the will of our Heavenly Father, which may limit our right of choice, but which are for our good, if we choose to obey them.

270A person must exercise his right of choice when he enters the Church. The new convert is not baptized until he is well acquainted with the doctrine and practice of the Church. After he has been taught, he asks with open eyes for admission to Church membership. Children are likewise taught the meaning of the ordinance, before they are baptized at eight years of age.

270This means that the candidate for baptism accepts of his own free will and choice all that the Church has to offer, and all that it requires. He accepts the organization, code of doctrine, and manner of living within the Church. As by the free exercise of his agency he seeks baptism, so by that agency he becomes subject to the order of life within the Church. The requirements of the Church are not in any sense infringements upon his right of choice. He has made his choice. The principles of truth upon which the Church rests must henceforth determine his actions and conduct in life.

270In minor matters of Church regulations, when questions arise in his mind, he compares them with the basic truths he accepted in the waters of baptism, and judges them accordingly. He soon finds that every so-called Church requirement is for his good. For example, among other things, obedience to the Word of Wisdom yields health and spiritual power; the payment of tithing makes man master of selfish impulses, and a benefactor to others; and attendance at meetings feeds his spiritual nature. Every requirement, if obeyed, lifts man into higher realms of joy; helps him approach the likeness of God.

271Political differences show the freedom of action of the Latter-day Saints. Political issues usually touch matters which are not of fundamental importance. Whether Smith or Jones shall be mayor; whether a road shall be built south or north, are not ordinarily questions of principle. Church members act freely in deciding upon such matters. Likewise, they choose, without interference, from time to time, their political party affiliations, as party platforms change. Should larger political problems arise, such as involve fundamental Church doctrine or practice, they would be solved simply by comparing them with the essential doctrines of the gospel. Latter-day Saint people are free, politically.

271Another evidence of the freedom of Latter-day Saints is the manner in which all Church Authorities are sustained, whether general, stake, or ward. It is a law of the Church that all nominations for Church positions, or releases, must be made by the officers of the priesthood; but the men and women thus nominated must be confirmed by the people. Without such confirmation the nominees cannot act, and other choices must be made, as has occasionally happened. Therefore, at the conferences of the Church or Church divisions, officers are presented for the sustaining vote of the congregations; not only when the names are first proposed, but at regular, frequent intervals thereafter, to insure that the271 Church continues to be led by worthy men and women.

271This is more than an ordinary vote. It is a sustaining vote, which means that we not only accept the people as our leaders, but also that we support them with our good will, help, and prayers. Every person may vote freely, for or against a name; and should do so according to his convictions. The voting is not a perfunctory act, but one of great importance.

271However if a member votes against a nominee or officer, it must be for some good reason. If for acts unworthy of a Latter-day Saint, charges should be filed against him in the courts of the Church by those who know of his errors; if the charges are substantiated, and no reconciliation is effected the person may be removed from office. If the contrary vote is merely a distrust of the person's ability to perform the duties of the office, or because of personal dislike nothing further need be done. The new officer will probably grow in fitness, if he has the good will, faith, and prayers of the people. Moreover, the history of the Church shows that under the power of the Lord, weak men are made strong, and strong men stronger, to the joy of all. Any personal dislike should, of course, be overcome. Learning to love our neighbor is a sure path to happiness. Meanwhile, the Latter-day Saints know and trust their leaders so well that they are nearly always willing to accept their nominations, and to give those nominated a chance to succeed in the office which is not for life. The unanimous support of our Church officers is really an indication of the united feeling of the people to carry forward the latter-day work of the Lord.

272That the Latter-day Saints are a free people is further emphasized by the treatment given those who fail to keep the promises implied in their baptism. They are not cast out, nor held in ill repute. Apostasy and immorality are the usual causes that lead to excommunication. The purpose of the Church is to save souls. They who are weak should be helped into strength, and they who are straying, into the correct path of life.

272Those who prate about lack of freedom among Latter-day Saints, either do not understand the Church and its organization, or are trying to cover up their own weaknesses.

272The feeling of the people of the Church is summed up in the words of a vigorous thinker, and faithful Latter-day Saint: If we were not a free people, I would not be a member of the Church.
