John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

Is There Coercion In the Church?

Free agency is held by the Church to be the first of man's rights. Every human being should be free to act for himself. This doctrine is repeatedly stated in the revelations of God to man. "I ... have given unto the children of men to be agents unto themselves." (D. & C. 104:17.) "For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves." (D.& C. 58:28.)

273Brigham Young declared that:

All rational beings have a volition of their own. The volition of the creature is free. This is a law of their existence. (Discourses of Brigham Young, 1941 edition, p. 62)

273Coercion, which is in direct opposition to free agency, must not be applied in any form. Under whatever name it may be practiced, it is of the evil one. President Joseph F. Smith said:

The freedom of the Latter-day Saints has never been curtailed . . . rather it has been enlarged (Gospel Doctrine , 1939 edition, p. 47)

273There are, however, strict limitations placed upon the divinely established freedom of man. The man who jumps from the housetop will fall to the ground. Free agency does not cancel out the law of gravity. It merely determines whether the man shall make the jump or remain on the roof or descend in some other manner. That is the greatness of free agency. It gives power to conform to external law and thereby to benefit himself, or to oppose it and injure himself. This power, in the end, makes man the master of the universe about him.

273The gospel consists of a series of immutable laws. Church membership cannot be obtained or retained without faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. That is not a violation of man's right of free agency. It is the recognition of eternal principles and ordinances. He decides for himself whether on these conditions he desires affiliation with the Church. Once he has decided, he must conform to that which he has accepted, or else be prepared to lose his Church membership. Free agency is primarily a matter of decision -- how a man shall act in the midst of universal law.

274Further, the free agent must always remember that all men have the same right of free agency. Therefore, there must be no trespassing upon the freedom of others. There must be no attempt to force even a needed gift upon another. It is better that one live in darkness than to be forced into light. There is ample place among men for teaching but none for compelling others to accept what is taught. Every person is under obligation to respect the free agency of every other individual. Had that principle been observed throughout the years, the world would have been spared its bloody wars and dark miseries.

274The application of these principles to daily affairs sometimes leads to misunderstandings. Certain Church members may feel that a Church official is invading their personal liberties when he gives counsel. For example, the card player may say that the advice by successive Church Presidents against this form of amusement is an invasion of his right to act for himself. Advice on other matters of conduct by the constituted leadership of the Church may be questioned by those who are affected by the advice.

274The first answer to such person is that all advice is given for the good of the individual concerned, and that it is wise to follow those who have had experience and are unselfishly giving help to others. Properly analyzed, counsel and Church regulations are for the benefit of the people. The Church which exists for the welfare of man, would be derelict to its divinely imposed obligations did it not exercise its responsibility as a guardian against all evil and for all good.

274The second answer is that under the law of free agency no one is obliged to obey or disobey the counsel given. Man is always free to act for himself. But, to members of the Church, this answer may be misleading. They are under the necessity of acknowledging that consistency requires them to conform to counsel given and regulations set up.

274The members of the Church are free men and women. That may be said safely. But their joy in the gospel depends greatly upon their faith in the inspiration guiding the Church. If that faith grows dim or vanishes, the way of life must be traveled alone, in darkness. That leaves man helpless. Conformity to authorized Church counsel and regulation, on the other hand, lights the path and gives man joy in the whole journey. Those who do so, soon grow in faith and understanding. And it is really easy to choose to follow Church leadership, for nothing is required by the Church that does not in the end benefit humanity.

275Members of the Church glory in their freedom to think and act for themselves. Converts to the Church have dared to break away from inherited beliefs. They who are born into the Church have upon their own volition accepted the gospel as their guide in life. Both classes have acted for themselves.

275The spirit of man must not be fettered. Let a man believe as he chooses. That is gospel doctrine.

275Naturally, therefore Latter-day Saints look with horror upon the days of the inquisition, when men were tortured and burned at the stake for their beliefs; and with equal repugnance upon the similar persecutions and executions under Protestant rule in the early days of the Reformation. Such things were not of God.

275Matters of belief are between the man and his God. Should a member of the Church repudiate the principles of the gospel, or teach false doctrine to the people, the Church of course will discipline him; but the utmost punishment will be excommunication from the Church. Then, under his own flag, he may carry on as he chooses.

275But, if a member conforms to the principles, rules, and regulations of the Church, all founded in truth and in love of mankind, he will find great joy. There is no other way to taste the sweetness of the work.
