John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

3

What Is Orthodoxy?

The word orthodoxy is not applicable to Church doctrine or practice. Therefore it is seldom used within Church circles. Latter-day Saints should be careful in speaking about themselves or others as being orthodox or unorthodox in the Church. It is not an accurate statement of their position.

276Commonly, an orthodox member of any organization -- scientific, social, or religious -- is one who accepts the fundamental principles of the organization. One who does not do so, is sometimes called unorthodox, but this is not correct. Since he rejects the foundation on which the organization rests, he really does not belong to the group.

276Of course, when the foundations, not necessarily rooted in truth, are made by the group, differences in opinion may properly arise, and the contending parties may with some propriety be called orthodox or unorthodox. Likewise though the foundation be accepted, some may hold that it should be applied in one way, others in another. He who differs with the regulations of the organization often likes to call himself unorthodox, when really he is out of harmony with the group, playing the part of the "lone wolf." Those of the Church who call themselves unorthodox generally use the word to cover the fact that they are out of harmony with the established and accepted regulations of the Church.

276However, when the foundation rests on truth, there can be little contention. One cannot quarrel with truth. Two and two make four; there is light by day and there is darkness by night. This rose is red to the eye; that one is yellow. Such facts must be accepted; there is neither orthodoxy nor unorthodoxy about them.

276For example, Christians who do not believe in the divine mission of Jesus Christ, and his resurrection after the crucifixion -- basic facts of Christianity -- are not Christians at all. They should not claim the name. But if their differences hinge on opinions concerning the very nature of Jesus, or on the exact manner of his resurrection, neither fully understood -- they cannot justly be called unorthodox. They may only need to be taught that the universe is filled with things we do not fully know. At the worst, they may be spoken of as foolish people who seek to unravel mysteries yet closed to the human mind.

277It is so in the Church. A person who does not believe that Joseph Smith saw and heard God the Father, and his son Jesus Christ, or that he received revelations for the Church, or that he translated the Book of Mormon from engraved plates delivered to him by a heavenly being, is not a Latter-day Saint, and has no claim upon the name. There should be no question about these truths in the minds of Latter-day Saints. But differences of opinion about the application of a doctrine in daily life do not necessarily mean that people are unorthodox. Differences of opinion in the use of the truth may often lead to helpful discussions of life within the Church.

277The important matter is that Latter-day Saints must accept all the fundamentals of the Church. They cannot choose to believe a certain doctrine of the Church; they must accept them all. They cannot select the Church requirements they will obey; they must conform to all. They who do not do so are not unorthodox, they are weak in the faith. Usually they do not know enough, or their wills for righteousness are flabby. It is useless for them to try to escape by calling themselves unorthodox. Neither can they say that their rights as free agents have been violated, for the acceptance of truth is one of the limitations under which free agency operates.

277There are, of course, many persons, sometimes among those born in the Church, who are honestly seeking to win for themselves testimonies of the truth of the restored gospel, for people are not born with a testimony. Such seekers for truth are treading the road at one time followed by every believer that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. Their course is praiseworthy. They are not unorthodox. Happily, the gospel lends itself to searching and testing; it never fails the seeker if correct methods are followed.

277To summarize: They who accept basic doctrines of the Church are not orthodox; they are believers. They who deny the truth of the fundamentals of the restored gospel are not unorthodox members of the Church; they are unbelievers. They who have not yet found the truth, but are earnestly seeking it, are on the way and will find truth.

278The word orthodox is really foreign to the language of Latter-day Saints. No one should call himself unorthodox.
