John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

Why Does Not the Church Confine Itself To Spiritual Matters?

The Church exists for the welfare of its members. It holds to the doctrine that "men are that they might have joy." Therefore, whatever affects human welfare, temporally or spiritually, on earth or in heaven, is accepted as the concern of the Church.

279This doctrine leads the Church into problems of man's physical, mental, moral, economic, social, and political well-being, into his every need. It strives to bring about conditions that will promote general, rounded, complete welfare. It cannot look with favor upon one-sidedness in life -- one part of man's nature satisfied, another unsatisfied. It does not hesitate, because of individual prejudices or the danger of making enemies, to speak frankly and fully about any and every phase of human life. To cower in some one corner of human need is held in contempt by the Church; and certainly such a church should be held in contempt.

279The history of Mormonism can best be understood in the light of this doctrine. The attempts at the United Order in Kirtland and Missouri, the founding of wilderness universities in Nauvoo and Salt Lake City, the formulation of city planning recognizable everywhere in Mormon settlements the trek across the desert to the Great Salt Lake Valley, the cooperative enterprises in the building of the intermountain West, the present L. D. S. Welfare program, and innumerable other events and enterprises are but evidences of the conception that the Church must care for the whole man, not merely for a part of him.

279In the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith, this matter is made very clear. Man is engaged in an eternal journey. Life on earth is but an episode in everlasting life. Therefore, all things that touch this eternal traveler belong to the plan under which he is moving forward. The distinction between things spiritual and temporal vanishes; they become merged, as the palm and back of the hand, as the warp and woof of the cloth. Man's physical concerns acquire a spiritual value; and his spiritual activities have temporal counterparts. "Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal ... for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual" (D. & C. 29:34, 35). This makes the Word of Wisdom, tithing, prayer, or temple work, principles alike of spiritual essence. In that sense, the Church never departs from spiritual teachings.

280By this doctrine, Church leaders feel themselves free and under obligation to discourse on any and every need of the day and of man, no matter under what man-given name it appears. They would be poor leaders if silence was enjoined upon them within any field of human interest. Indeed, the very life of the Church is involved in this free discussion of man's welfare.

280However, let no misconceptions arise. The Church holds itself aloof from propagandists or parties. In politics, for example, it is neither Republican, Democratic nor "mug-wump." It tests and measures every man-made policy by the eternal, unchanging principles of the gospel. If a proposed policy is in harmony with these principles, it is approved by the Church, if in opposition to gospel principles it is disapproved. The ax hews at untruth no matter where the chips may fall. Whether Democrats wail or Republicans weep is of no consequence. The Church is not in politics, but up to the shoulders in the fight for truth, which is the battle for humanity's welfare.

280If the teachings of the Church be examined, whether of today or yesterday, and they are published far and wide, it will be found that they rest upon the principles of the gospel. That makes it safe to give and to accept them. The laws of the gospel root in truth. Just as, under the law of gravity, one who jumps from the house-roof will fall to his destruction, so the breaking of the laws of the gospel will bring inevitable punishment.

280Though all this be so, the principle of free agency remains. The Church may teach, but each member has the right to accept or reject, in his life, the truth propounded. There is no more basic law of conduct in the gospel. The Lord has formulated the plan of salvation; he offers His help, but each individual must act for himself in winning the salvation offered. Measurably, with the aid of the Lord, each one of us "works out his own salvation"; and we must each face the consequences of our disobedience to law.

281The Church cannot refrain from teaching eternal truth both in doctrine and in the practice of the doctrine; but it has no right nor does it attempt, to secure obedience by exercising compulsion upon its members. The severest punishment meted out to violators of the order of the Church is excommunication. But every such persona through the judicial provisions of the Church, has a full and free hearing. Moreover, any officer of the Church, from the highest to the least, found in default, may be brought before the tribunals of the Church. Fair justice, and the untrammeled will of man are dear to the heart of every Latter-day Saint.

281In no sense can the Church be called autocratic. No one, from the President down, can dictate to the Church. All must be done in harmony with gospel principles, and by common consent. Even new revelations from the Lord are presented to the people for acceptance as part of the doctrine of the Church. It is a Church of full freedom. However, the Church is the watchman on the tower for the people. It is its duty to preserve the gospel in its purity, to teach it with full courage, to secure gospel activity among Church members, to strengthen the weak, to care for the common welfare, and necessarily to cast out such iniquity as may have crept in among the membership.

281Without the use of autocratic methods, but with the fearless, and unhesitating voice of truth, it will continue, as in the past, to labor for the whole welfare of men, "that they might have joy."
