John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

5

Why Is It Undesirable To Join Secret Societies?

The Church ever operates in full light. There is no secrecy about its doctrine, aim, or work. It is open to all men who will conform to its requirements. Access to the temples, where the most sacred ordinances are performed, may be had by every member of the Church who lives the honorable life expected of faithful Latter-day Saints. No promise is exacted of any Church member except to live as nearly as may be in conformity with the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ. The activities of the Church, in all departments, are sacred, not secret.

282This point of view makes it difficult for Latter-day Saints to look with favor upon secret, oath-bound societies. The words of the Prophet Joseph Smith are sufficient answer to the question: (Note especially the last sentence.)

282And again, I would further suggest the impropriety of the organization of bands or companies, by covenant or oaths, by penalties or secrecies; but let the time past of our experience and sufferings by the wickedness of Doctor Avard suffice and let our covenant be that of the Everlasting Covenant, as is contained in the Holy Writ and the things that God hath revealed unto us. Pure friendship always becomes weakened that very moment you undertake to make it stronger by penal oaths and secrecy. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 146)

282Many secret organizations may be actuated by high ideals. None, however, can transcend the ideals of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Therefore, from the point of view of encouraging people to walk uprightly they would seem unnecessary. Besides, they are likely to take time that should be given to Church activities. Sometimes they cause loss of interest in Church duties, for no one can serve two masters with equal interest.

282Let it be remembered also that the authorized organizations of the Church for social and fraternal purposes, coupled with our professional and business organizations, will not only serve our needs, but will consume all the time that we can spare in these busy days. Divided allegiance is always unsatisfactory and often dangerous.
