John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

6

Why And How Should Tithing Be Paid?

Tithing means the voluntary giving of one-tenth of one's income, increase, or interest, for the furtherance of the Lord's work on earth. It is an ancient, divine law, which has been practiced in every dispensation of the gospel. In nearly every land, Christian or pagan, it has been recognized and practiced in some form.

283The law of tithing has been reaffirmed by the Lord in our day. (D. & C. 119) It is a binding commandment upon the Church.

283Like all divine commandments, the law of tithing is for the benefit of those who practice it. Great rewards follow the honest observance of this requirement.

283First, the tithepayer builds up loyalty to the Church. He becomes closely identified with the Latter-day movement. He is henceforth a party to the many activities of the Church. Temples, schools, missionary work, and all Church programs, the care of the poor, the widow, and the fatherless, are built and fostered by him in association with other tithepayers. He cooperates with the Lord in achieving his mighty purposes. He stands definitely for a great cause. He dares to sacrifice for beliefs that have for their objective the welfare of all men. Courage and power come to every man who sacrifices for a noble cause. He becomes a bigger man. The world is in sad need of men who believe and have the courage to give of their substance and of themselves for their founded convictions.

283Second, it trains the human will for more than material gains. The love of money and the material goods it can buy is one of the most powerful motives within man. When this love overpowers other normal desires, money indeed becomes "the root of all evil." Men must learn the relative values of things of earth and of spirit. To part with our earthly belongings seems to us to be a sacrifice -- but sacrifice always begets blessings. The first lesson in the art of happiness is to do without. Whoever lifts his affections above earthly things expands in spirit and begins to grow. Latter-day Saints are a happy people because they grow and progress. They must be able to control and subordinate the love of earthly things if they are to rise to greatness. Otherwise they become dangerous to society and destructive of their better selves. The regular payment of tithing creates unselfishness and lifts a man above the dross of earth. His capacity to do well is enlarged. His vision is freed from the blur of material things. He gains a truer perspective of life. Others recognize in him the subtle quality of greatness; the product of self-forgetfulness. He gains a new and larger freedom. Peace waits upon him. His will is disciplined for righteousness.

284Third, the tithepayer is brought into closer communion with the Lord. The offering is an acknowledgment that the earth is the Lord's, and men are but stewards of that which they possess. The Lord is the giver of all good things -- seed time and harvest. Payment of tithing is an admission by the tithepayer that his income came from the Lord. The return of the tithe is to say, "As evidence that this gift is from Thee, I return herewith one-tenth."

284This faith of every true Latter-day Saint establishes a nearness between God and man. Every payment of tithing builds a living faith. It becomes a testimony of the reality of the Living God, and his relationship to the children of men. To witness so of the Lord and his goodness gives increased spiritual power. Every tithepayer increases in faith and receives the attendant peace and joy. Prayer becomes easier. Doubt retreats; faith advances. Certainty and courage buoy up the soul. The spiritual sense is sharpened; the eternal voice is heard more clearly. Man becomes more like his Father in heaven.

284Fourth, the faithful tithepayer has a claim upon the needed blessings of life. Rewards, spiritual and temporal, flow abundantly from obedience to the law. The blessings may not always come as he may wish, but they come and are for man's good. They may be of a material or spiritual nature, as the Lord may design; but they will carry with them always the higher joys of life. Yet it may be safely said that whoever can lay aside the love of earthly things has the gifts of earth at his feet.

284The blessings of the Church are necessarily withheld from non-tithepayers. The Lord has so stated. They "shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of the children written in the book of the law of God." (D. & C. 85:5)

285In the last days there are also great upheavals. Destruction and death stalk the highways of earth. There is danger all about. But, the tithepayer has claim upon protection. "Verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned. For after today cometh the burning." (D. & C. 64:23, 24) The Lord in his mercy opens the windows of heaven upon his faithful children and repays a thousandfold according to their needs.

285The blessings promised the tithepayer are great.

285Fifth, the tithepayer senses the gladness of heart that comes from obeying the Lord's commandments. By obedience to the laws of heaven he secures harmony with the unseen world. He moves through the tasks of the day, looking the world in the face. He knows his path and destiny. He has the full assurance that all is well. This, the greatest effect of tithepaying, glorifies life in the midst of the world's tribulations. Only when a person's whole being is turned to the Lord, by free and full acceptance of divine law, does he hold full communion with heavenly things.

285Such are some of the benefits the tithepayer receives from the payment of tithing.

* * * *

285Every member of the Church who has an income, or earns money or its equivalent, should observe the law of tithing. The President of the Church is under the same obligation as the humblest member. Every boy and girl should be taught to give one-tenth of their income to the Lord. It should be as a joyous privilege, an expression of grateful confidence in the Lord, to contribute for the maintenance of the Church, the promulgation of the gospel, and the welfare of the needy.

285Tithing means one-tenth. Those who give less do not really pay tithing; they are lesser contributors to the Latter-day cause of the Lord. Tithing means one-tenth of a person's income, interest, or increase. The merchant should pay tithing upon the net income of his business, the farmer upon the net income of his farming operations; the wage earner or salaried man upon the wage or salary earned by him. Out of the remaining nine-tenths he pays his current expenses, taxes, savings, etc. To deduct living costs, taxes, and similar expenses from the income and pay tithing upon the remainder does not conform to the Lord's commandment. Under such a system most people would show nothing on which to pay tithing. There is really no place for quibbling on this point. Tithing should be given upon the basis of our full earned income. If the nature of a business requires special interpretation, the tithepayer should consult the father of his ward, the bishop.

286When tithing has been paid, there should be no question about its use. They who are sustained as leaders of the Church return all offerings to the people for various purposes. The tithing of the people make it possible for the Church to carry out the duties entrusted to it by the Lord in the development of the plan of salvation. By divine revelation the tithes of the people are administered by the Presidency of the Church, assisted by the Council of the Twelve and the Presiding Bishopric. These men exercise prayerful care in the use of tithing. It is disbursed with scrupulous care, for it is sacred. No moneys in all the world are more honestly administered.

286The quibbler about the use of the revenues of the Church is usually a part or non-tithepayer. The faith that leads to such voluntary contribution includes faith in the other principles of the gospel; including trust in the chosen and sustained servants of the Lord.

286Tithing should be paid only to the authorized agents of the Church -- the Presiding Bishopric, bishops of wards, presidents of branches and mission presidents. Technically, it should be paid in kind. That is, the farmer would give of his crops and herds, the professional man of his cash income. However, inconveniences of transportation, storing, and disposition, sometimes causing losses, make it permissible and often desirable to pay all tithing in cash.

286Tithing is a lesser law. The greater and more perfect law is the law of consecration, also known as the Order of Enoch or the United Order. The Latter-day Saints have not yet attained to a degree of perfection enabling them to live under this more comprehensive law. Until that time comes the Lord requires obedience to the law of tithing -- an equitable law under which the widow's mite counts for as much as the rich man's thousands. When all the members of the Church are full and honest tithepayers, we may begin to look for the establishment of the law of consecration. Then the Lord may re-establish the higher law.

287It is the invariable testimony of thousands that obedience to this law of tithing brings unalloyed happiness, the power to solve the problems of life, a nearness to God. All should covenant individually with the Lord who has given us life and all we have that we will obey all his laws, including the law of revenue. Let us trust the Lord. He will not fail us.
