John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

7

What Tithes And Offerings Were Required of Ancient Israel?

The practice of giving tithes and offerings was generally understood and observed among ancient Israel. In fact, the principle was so well known that it was taken for granted. The casual manner in which the Hebrew historians refer to it is evidence that it was of common knowledge.

288Adam and those who came immediately after him were taught the necessity of making offerings and sacrifices to the Lord. It is probable, however, that the early patriarchs lived under the law of consecration. It is known that Enoch and his people accepted this higher law, successfully, and others may have done so. (Moses 7:18; Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 178)

288The first mention of tithing in the Bible is in connection with the giving of tithes by Abraham to Melchizedek, a high priest, authorized to receive offerings. (Gen. 14:20; Heb. 7:2, 6) Abraham appears to have understood clearly the existence and necessity of the law. His grandson, Jacob, confirmed the family's adherence to the law after his meeting with the heavenly messenger, for he declared:

Of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee. (Gen. 28:22)

288Tithing was made a definite part of the Mosaic law:

And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord's: it is holy unto the Lord and concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flocks, even of whatever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord. (Lev. 27:30, 32)

288Israel ever after lived by the law of Moses, and consequently tithing was a standing law for the people, one that never was abrogated.

288Offerings and sacrifices to the Lord and the dedication of property to sacred purposes is mentioned frequently in the Old Testament history of Israel, from Joshua, through the times of Judges, during the reigns of the kings, and throughout the stirring times after the captivity, even to the coming of the Savior. The general terms, offerings or gifts to the

289Lord are ordinarily used, but tithes are mentioned specifically. The prophets Amos, Nehemiah, and Malachi, made direct reference to tithing in their discussions of the divine claim for offerings. (Amos 4:4; Neh. 10:37, 38; 12:44; 13:5, 12; Mal. 3:8, 10). The Talmud, the spoken and traditional law of the Jews, likewise makes frequent and often detailed mention of tithing as an established law of Israel. There can be no doubt about the knowledge and partial observance of the law of tithing among the descendants of Jacob.

289However, several tithes were enjoined upon the people under the law of Moses. The first already quoted, was the tenth of the produce of the land and the livestock, to be set apart for holy purposes by giving it to the Levites, the priestly tribe. The commandment for a second tithe, given in a passage in the Book of Deuteronomy, began as follows:

Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field bringeth forth year by year. And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord thy God always. (Deut. 14:22-23)

289From the context, it would appear that this tenth was to be used by the man and his family to enable them to visit the holy sanctuaries and to take part properly in the sacred celebrations of Israel, several of which occur annually under the law of Moses. That is, it was to be used to permit the people to engage in holy ordinances by which they might keep the Lord in remembrance, as indicated by the following passage:

And thither ye shall bring your tithes. ... And there ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your households. (Deut. 12:6-7)

289A third tithe was imposed upon ancient Israel, one that came every third year, and which was to be used for local purposes for the relief of human distress. (Deut. 14:28, 29) The existence and acceptance of these three tithes is recognized by competent writers of early days. For example, Josephus declares:

Besides those two tithes, which I have already said you are to pay every year, the one for the Levites, the other for the festivals; you are to bring every third year a third tithe, to be distributed to those that want; to women also that are widows and to children that are orphans. (Antiquities of the Jews, Book IV, p. 132)

290In addition to these tithes, the people were required, under the law of Moses, to make a variety of offerings; corners of the fields should be left standing, gleanings and forgotten sheaves in the field be available, all for the purpose, and estimated to amount to about one-sixtieth of the crop (Lev. 19:9, 10; 23:22; Deut. 24:19-21 ); the first fruits, estimated to be about one-fortieth of the harvest, should be dedicated to the Lord; and several other smaller but important offerings should be made. (Neh. 10:32-39; 2 Chr. 31:3-10; Deut. 12:17; 18:3, 4)

290In short, ancient Israel were expected to use for sacred purposes, such as the maintenance of the priesthood, holy festivals, and care of the poor, between one-fourth and one-third of their increase. And throughout the generations, many complied with these requirements and were blessed.

290In view of these historical facts, the requirements made of modern Israel do not seem so large.

290Those who had authority to receive the Lord's tenth clearly specified:

Behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even the service of the tabernacle of the congregation. (Num. 18:21)

290This refers to the selection of the tribe of Levi to perform the priestly service for the hosts of Israel. The importance of the principle of tithing is emphasized by the injunction that the Levites themselves were to give a tenth of that which they received to the priests. (Num. 18:26; Antiquities of the Jews, Book IV, p. 119) None were exempt from the law.

290Under the perfect law of the gospel all worthy men hold the priesthood, first the Aaronic, including the Levitical, and then the Melchizedek Priesthood. But the rebellion of the children of Israel in the wilderness caused the Lord to take away from them the high priesthood, and to change the remaining organization as outlined in the Pentateuch. Thus it came about that the Lord's tithe was to be given to the Levites.

290By divine revelation the tithes of the people are to be expended for the benefit of the Church by a council consisting of the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric, or through their agents. (D. & C. 120) Tithing is disbursed with scrupulous care -- it is sacred. At the general conference the President of the Church makes a report of expenditures made from the tithing of the people.
