John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

Why Not Marry Outside of the Church?

There are good people in every church, and among those who claim no church affiliation. But, good people, kind, honest, charitable people, may be in error concerning the meaning of life. That has always been the view and position of Latter-day Saints. The groom of one faith and the bride of another may be equally virtuous. It is their differing beliefs or convictions relative to the truths of existence that make the success of their marriage questionable or more difficult to attain.

302Love is the foundation of every truly happy marriage. The more genuine the love, the greater the joy of association between husband and wife. A loveless marriage, or one in which love diminishes with the years, always ends in grief.

302The beginning of love is usually physical attraction. There are gifts of body, of face and form, of eyes and voice, that awaken desire for acquaintanceship and possession. That is nature's way, respected by all sensible people.

302Above physical charm, love is begotten by qualities, often subtle, of mind and spirit. The beautiful face may hide an empty mind; the sweet voice may utter coarse words; the lovely form may be ill-mannered; the woman of radiant beauty and the man of kingly form may be intolerable bores on or nearer acquaintanceship; or, the person who looks attractive may really have no faults, may excel us in knowledge and courtesy, yet he is not of our kind, his ways are not ours. Under either condition, love wilts in its first stage. "Falling in love" is always from within, rather than from without. That is physical attractiveness must be reinforced with mental and spiritual harmony if true love is to be born and have long life -- from the Latter-day Saint point of view, to last throughout the eternities. The man and his wife, to make love secure, must have much the same outlook on the major issues of life; they must grow in the same direction. If one is an infidel and the other a believer in God, the resulting disagreement of spirit will tend to drive the two apart despite physical attractions. The association of husband and wife is so close and intimate that every difference becomes evident and important.

303This is especially true in matters pertaining to religious faith. Religion, under its wide definition, is the philosophy of life, by which we regulate our conduct. As we believe so we act. The past, the present, and the future, all that we are and shall be, are involved in our religion. We cannot by any means be in full sympathy with any person who in this most profound of man's concerns, is not in sincere harmony with us. Under circumstances of differing faiths, love rises only to its partial height. The fullness of love fails us. Drabness enters where only sunlight should be found.

303A common result of such a marriage is an attempt at compromise. Then, neither one lives religion properly. Both become lukewarm in their duties, unless, indeed, one through superior power of will or dominance, compels the other to follow his way. Iii either case, an inner disintegration follows; the sensitive plant called love withers and often dies. The surpassing joy of love comes only to those who are in harmony of belief and mutual understanding.

303Husband and wife of different faiths, however fine they may be in character, and earnest in their attempts to rise above their differences, become acutely aware of their situation when children come into the household. In what faith shall they be reared? Sunday after Sunday, and oftener, that question arises. When illness enters the home, the Latter-day Saint wife longs to call in the elders to administer to the sick, but hesitates because there is no unity of faith in the household; and the Latter-Day Saint husband hesitates to exercise his Priesthood for the same reason. The children themselves, grow up cognizant of a family strain, crowding their happiness, often compelling them to take sides for one parent as against another. The differences persist through more than one generation, often affecting great-grandchildren. Time and again, spoken or unspoken, under the many vicissitudes of life, the lack of common spiritual understanding becomes a torment to husband and wife and also to the children. Inward happiness of individual and family, so necessary to full joy, is stifled.

303Another mighty objection to "mixed" marriages rises before Latter-day Saints. Only members of the Church may be married in the temple of the Lord, and be sealed to each other for time and eternity. Marriage outside of the temple removes one of the sweetest promises of true love -- its eternal continuation. No promised gift feeds love so fully or helps so much to face the storms of life. To forfeit that privilege may mean eternal regret. True, the unbelieving wife or husband does at times join the Church and may then receive all the blessings of the Church. But, such cases are relatively rare. It is a remote chance.

304Human experience and safe counsel are clearly against "mixed" marriages. The countless cases on record are full evidence that more joy is realized, more usefulness attained, when persons of the same faith marry. Members of the Church, to conserve their own happiness, should marry within the Church. Usually, more deliberation, the avoidance of haste, will prevent many a contemplated marriage with someone outside of the Church. Such delay, with patience, will be well repaid in life's happiness. Certainly, any Latter-day Saint considering marriage outside of the Church should seriously count the cost, one that continues through life.

304We are regretfully mindful of the marriages within the Church which are unhappy. That probably, under the limitations of human weaknesses, cannot be avoided. Whether in or out of the Church, we are free agents, and to a certain extent, moulders and makers of our own lives. The fact remains, however, that the proportion of happy marriages is higher among those of the same faith, and highest among those married in the temple.

304Let there be no misunderstanding. The excellent people of differing faiths who have married, and who earnestly, sincerely are seeking to make their unions happy, are entitled to our highest respect. For them our hope is that they may come to a unit" of faith -- faith in the restored gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Yet, such couples are probably the first to admit, perhaps only inwardly, that the contentions made in answer to the question at the head of this chapter, are sound and worthy of serious consideration by all who look forward to matrimony.

304Youth of Israel! Marry within the Church!
