John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

3

What Is the Place of Woman In the Church?

The place of woman in the Church is to walk beside the man, not in front of him nor behind him.

305In the Church there is full equality between man and woman. The gospel, which is the only concern of the Church was devised by the Lord for men and women alike. Every person on earth, man or woman, earned the right in the pre-existent life to come here; and must earn the right, by righteous actions, to live hereafter where "God and Christ dwell." The privileges and requirements of the gospel are fundamentally alike for men and women. The Lord loves His daughters as well as He loves His sons.

305This doctrine of equality is confirmed in the ordinances of the Church which are alike for man and woman. Faith, repentance, baptism are the same for all. The rewards, such as the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the temple ordinances, are alike. The highest attainable glory cannot be won by man or woman alone. Only those who are united, as husband and wife, by the sealing power, can attain exaltation in the celestial glory in the hereafter. "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11) And provision will be made for the righteous who live unmarried to receive the sealing blessing in the hereafter, through vicarious work performed in our temples.

305This makes individuals of men and women -- individuals with the right of free agency, with the power of individual decision, with individual opportunity for everlasting joy, whose own actions throughout the eternities, with the loving aid of the Father, will determine individual achievement. There can be no question in the Church of man's rights versus woman's rights. They have the same and equal rights.

305This equality has been respected in the history of the Church. Equal suffrage within the Church has always been recognized. Church members men and women, have always been asked to sustain by vote, the uplifted hand, the persons nominated to fill the various offices of the church

306(D. & C. 20:65; 26:2; 107:22; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 75; Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , pp. 196, 197). Equal suffrage in civic life has likewise been defended by the Church. "Now, sisters, I want you to vote also, because women are the characters that rule the ballot box." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 563) The right to vote for national, state, and local officials was granted women in the early days of the territory of Utah, when Church members were in control of territorial activities. In fact, it was in Utah, in 1870, that women first exercised full political franchise in the United States. Brigham Young saw no objection to a woman's holding public office if compatible with her other duties.

306The right of woman to develop her native gifts through education has been held before the Church from its organization. Women have, indeed, been urged to train for the various life pursuits of society. The fine arts, music, painting, literature, teaching, business, science, mining, medicine, civil government, and law were mentioned by Brigham Young as suitable studies for women. (Discourses of Brigham Young, chapter 22) President Joseph F. Smith spoke similarly: "It is very important to the welfare, usefulness, happiness, and comfort of our daughters (in view of certain circumstances) that they learn some branch of industry that could be turned to practical account in the way of making a living, should circumstances require it." (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , p. 440) President Smith also declared his belief that "spiritually, morally, religiously, and in faith" woman is as strong as man. (Ibid.)

306However, the Church has never ignored, as many political and social theorists have done, the natural differences between men and women. These differences in function determine in a rational society the major duties of man and woman. The design of nature is that man and woman together shall form the unit of society, known as the family; shall beget and rear children to carry on the race; and shall find in family life not only their greatest joy, but also their chief incentive to useful activity. It is recognized that whenever this purpose is ignored, the frustrated functions lead to defeat in life.

306Therefore, the Church has taught and urged that man and woman accept their respective responsibilities as man and woman, husband and wife, father and mother. This really is another evidence of equality, since, in conforming to natural law, greater freedom and power are won by both. For the woman, it means that she, at least during a large part of her life devotes herself chiefly to the duties of home; for the man, that he devote himself chiefly to the providing of the means of support of the home. Naturally, this dos not prohibit outside interest for leisure or free time. The importance of such functional division of labor is set forth powerfully by President Heber J. Grant: "The mother in the family far more than the father is the one who instils in the hearts of the children a testimony, and love of the gospel -- and wherever you find a woman who is devoted to this work, almost without exception you will find that her children are devoted to it. She shapes their lives more than the father, because he is away much more." (Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards, pp. 150, 151)

307In harmony with this view the Church has always favored a system of education to fit man and woman for their respective spheres of activity -- that is, a practical education. Home-making, today a well-established applied science and art, is looked upon as the wise education for woman. Speaking on this subject, President Brigham Young said: "It is more necessary that they [women] should know themselves and the duties that will be required of them when they are wives and mothers." (Journal of Discourses, 10:370). This does not imply a narrowed education, for in the words of President Joseph F. Smith, the Church says to woman, "Seek to be educated in the highest meaning of the term; get the most possible service out of your time, your body and brains, and let all your efforts be directed into honorable channels, that no effort be wasted, and no labor result in loss or evil." (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , p. 439) In brief, the major education for life's duties may be supplemented by training for the development of special activities or endowment.

307This recognition of natural function appears in the organization of the Church. By divine fiat, the Priesthood is conferred on the men. This means that organization must prevail in the family, the ultimate unit of the Church. The husband, the Priesthood bearer, presides over the family; the Priesthood conferred upon him is intended for the blessing of the whole family. Every member shares in the gift bestowed, but under a proper organization. No man who understands the gospel believes that he is greater than his wife, or more beloved of the Lord, because he holds the Priesthood, but rather that he is under the responsibility of speaking and acting for the family in official matters. It is a protection to the woman who, because of her motherhood is under a large physical and spiritual obligation. Motherhood is an eternal part of Priesthood. It is a wise provision that the man, who is the freer to move about both at home and abroad, should be called to the family presidency and be under the responsibility of holding the Priesthood. This does not limit equality among men and women. Citizens in a free land are not unequal because some hold office and others do not.

308Meanwhile, within the Church are organizations for the benefit of women. These are presided over by women. These have the same general objective as the Priesthood organizations -- the fitting of the individual more fully for gospel living. The Prophet Joseph Smith said when he formed the Relief Society, "I will organize the sisters under the Priesthood and after the pattern of the Priesthood." President Grant has declared, "Without the wonderful work of the women I realize that the Church would have been a failure. . . . It is our sisters who carry the burden of the work. They are leaders in all things that make for spiritual uplift." (Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards, pp. 150, 151)

308The program of the National Women's Relief Society, which is really international, illustrates the comprehensiveness of woman's place in the Church. "The Ladies' Relief Society is not only to relieve the poor, but to save souls," was the Prophet's message to the sisters. (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 5:25) To save souls opens the whole field of human activity and development: Relief of poverty, relief of illness; relief of doubt relief of ignorance -- relief of all that hinders the joy and progress of woman. What a magnificent commission! The activities of the Society correspond to this charge. For example, in the program for the weekly meetings provision is made for the study of theology, homemaking, social science, and practical work. The men in their Priesthood organizations have no wider program. The Young Women's Mutual Improvement Associations have a similar, widely-conceived program. No limitations, except those inherent in the gospel plan, restrict the labors of these organizations for women.

309"What is the place of woman in the Church?" To walk by the side of the man, not before him nor behind him.
