John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

5

Why Should Family Prayers Be Held?

Man's needs are many. He has little, if any, power of himself to supply them. Therefore he turns to God for the necessary help. This he can properly do, for the Lord, who has placed man on earth with limited powers, has declared Himself ready to assist His children. He has given them the privilege to address Divinity, with the assurance of being heard. Indeed, He has requested them to approach Him in prayer for guidance in solving life's problems.

315Prayer is really the beginning of wisdom. By prayer, communion between man and God is established and maintained. It brings man and his Maker into close association. Earnest, sincere prayer places man in little with heaven and with the Beings who dwell therein. The knowledge and power thus gained from the unseen world are very real. Brigham Young said:

If we draw near to him, he will draw near to us; if we seek him early we shall find him; if we apply our minds faithfully and diligently day by day, to know and understand the mind and will of God, it is as easy as, yes, I will say easier than, it is to know the minds of each other, for to know and understand ourselves and our own being is to know and understand God and his being. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 65)

315Prayer may be offered concerning all religious activities. The Lord is concerned with every phase of human welfare material or spiritual. In the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

We would say to the brethren, seek to know God in your closets, call upon him in the fields. Follow the directions of the Book of Mormon, and pray over, and for your families, your cattle, your flocks, your herds, your corn, and all things that you possess; ask the blessing of God upon all your labors, and everything that you engage in. (Teaching of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 247)

315Such prayers may be offered at any time, on bended knees in the closet or family circle, or when walking, driving, or working, in public or in private. One should do all that he does in the spirit of prayer.

315The sacred importance of prayer demands, however, that certain periods of prayer be set aside regularly, daily, when all distracting elements are absent. When the set time comes, prayers should be offered. They are more important than the trivial duties that often take us away from the altar of prayer.

316Prayer should be direct and simple as if spoken to our earthly father. Routine forms of prayer should be avoided. The words spoken are less important than the humble faith in which they are uttered. "Prayer is the soul's sincere desire, uttered or unexpressed." It is the spirit of prayer that gives life to our desires. The direct simplicity of the Lords prayer should be kept in mind.

316While we should feel free to open our hearts to the Lord, yet the things sought in prayer should be necessary to our welfare, as explained by President Joseph F. Smith:

My brethren and sisters, let us remember and call upon God and implore his blessings and his favor upon us. Let us do it, nevertheless in wisdom and in righteousness, and when we pray we should call upon him in a consistent and reasonable way. We should not ask the Lord for that which is unnecessary or which would not be beneficial to us. We should ask for that which we need and we should ask in faith, "nothing wavering, for he that wavereth," as the apostle said, "is like the wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed. For let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord." But when we ask of God for blessings let us ask in the faith of the gospel, in that faith that he has promised to give to those who believe in him and obey his commandments (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , p. 273)

316Every prayer is heard, and every sincere prayer is answered. They who pray should be content to await the answer at the time and in the manner comporting with God's wisdom. He knows what is for our good and bestows His blessings accordingly. The testimony of untold millions that their prayers have been heard is a convincing testimony that God hears and answers prayer.

316A prayer is not complete unless gratitude for blessings received is expressed. It is by the power of the Lord that we "live and move and have our being." This should be frankly stated gratefully as we pray to our Father in heaven.

316Private prayer has been enjoined upon us, but we are also commanded to pray as families and in public meetings. A united prayer, one in which many join, comes with greater strength and power before the Lord. "In union there is strength."

317The family is the ultimate unit of the organized Church. It represents the patriarchal order, which is the order of heaven. All members of this unit should be conscious of the family needs, and should regularly and unitedly petition the Lord for His blessings. Unless this is done, family ties are weakened, and the blessings of the Lord may be withheld. A happier understanding prevails among families who pray together. Therefore, every effort should me made to engage the family regularly in prayer.

317Family prayers also become a training school for the younger members of the family. They acquire the habit of prayer, which usually remains with them throughout life. They are taught how to pray as they listen to their elders. They are given practice in vocal prayer, before others, as they are asked to take their turn in prayer. Children who have been brought up under the influence of family prayer, remain stauncher in their faith, live more conscientious lives, and look back gratefully upon the family prayers of their childhoods. Parents who do not have family prayers make sad mistakes.

317It is not wise for one member of the family to be voice in prayer constantly. It is better for all members of the family to take their turns in praying. The short prayer of the lisping child is transmuted by heavenly forces into a petition of power, dealing with all the needs of the family. It is selfish for any one member of the family to deprive others of the privilege of participating in family prayer.

317Regularity is necessary to make family prayers effective. There should be at least one daily family prayer; two are better. When labor and other conditions permit, there should be a morning and an evening prayer. In many families, terms of employment are such that all the family cannot gather at a morning hour. In practically every home, however, all members of the family are present at the evening meal. That may then be the best time for prayer. All kneel around the table or elsewhere and supplicate the Lord for help and guidance before the meal begins.
