John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

6

Which Comes First -- Church Or Home?

The Church is composed of homes. Church and home cannot be separated. Neither one come first. They are one.

318Therefore, a home not properly cared for weakens the Church; one cared for strengthens the Church. The condition of the Church as a whole is but as a reflection of the homes of the people.

318The question, however, is asked sincerely by persons who, voluntarily or under call, would divide their time, wisely, between the official work of the Church, the assemblage of homes, and the work required in the home.

318Fathers, mothers, and children who earnestly strive to make a happy home are really doing Church work -- the most important, because it is the most basic work in the Church.

318Mothers are especially important in building happy homes and an acceptable Church. They are called divinely to rear children toward maturity, in the spirit and practice of the gospel. Great men have always given tributes to their mothers. Mothers are the makers of men.

318Note these words from President Brigham Young: "When I reflect upon duties and responsibilities devolving upon our mothers and sisters, and the influence they wield, I look upon them as the mainspring and soul of our being here."

318This of course does not absolve the father from parental duties. A mother who does not have the cooperation of her husband faces a difficult task in her home. Cooperation of mother and father is indispensable for full home success. The father must do his part, support the mother, and add to her attempts to make of the children Latter-day Saints, and worthy citizens of Church and state.

318In the home lies the beginning of wisdom in making the Church acceptable to the Lord. The Church, organized from the homes and for the people in them, has its special obligations and responsibilities. It must help provide means by which the homes may function most completely. It must be as arms for the fathers and mothers of the many homes.

319Through its various organizations, priesthood and auxiliary, and by its publications, the Church must teach its members the principles of the gospel. It must carry the gospel message to the world. It must open the doors of salvation to the dead. Every member of the Church must learn to understand the principles involved in these activities, and must devote some time to one or more of these activities.

319However this work should not be done at the sacrifice of the home; it should rather stimulate home activities. At times fathers and especially mothers give themselves so assiduously to the task of business or of home, that they eliminate all outside activities. They become slaves to a daily routine, when they should be its masters. This is not wise. The mother, as every member of her household, needs change from the daily routine of required tasks. Some time should be found by everyone for relaxation or recreation. The Church activities offer the best outlet for required change. Some mothers, and others, sensing the need of change forget the opportunities the Church offers, and try to find most of their release from routine duties in recreation away from both home and Church. This is equally undesirable. It is unwise.

319Latter-day Saints should remember that the Church is so organized that all normal desires may find expression in its program. By entering heartily into this program, love for the Church is not only maintained, but also increased. Moreover, only homes that are active in the affairs of the Church are really happy. The Church is ours -- as homes and individuals. We should ever seek to build the Church by our individual efforts.

319Most members of the Church are at one time or another called to serve as teacher or officer in some Church organization. This is of necessity so in a Church without a paid ministry, in which the required work is done voluntarily by the members. Naturally the most willing or most capable are likely to be called most frequently to such service.

319Sometimes, especially in smaller wards or stakes, the same person may be called to fill several offices at the same time. This is not in full harmony with the spirit of the Church, which provides that one of the functions of the Church is to help develop the innate powers of all of its members. There are usually a sufficient number of members to fill offices if they are but trusted. The weak become strong under `the labors to which they may be called. Presiding officers everywhere should distribute the work to be done among the members. It is often remarkable how well a backward person does work when given the opportunity.

320It is when a person, especially a mother, is called to several offices, that the question at the head of this writing appears. No one refuses, or should refuse, a Church call. Every member of the Church, however heavy the duties of home or business may be, could no doubt be active in one Church activity. Should another call come, the person so called has the right to lay before the presiding officer the conditions of his life. Then, the one who has the right to call will determine whether the person called may be honorably released from service.

320By such a procedure there will be no interference with home duties; no person be over-worked in the sacred cause of home and Church; all who are able will have the blessed opportunity to serve in building the kingdom of God on earth.

320Every member of the Church should divide his time wisely between Church and home. He should be careful not to neglect either. Both are parts of the Lord's great plan of salvation for his children.
