John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

7

What Is the Meaning of Patriarchal Blessings?

In the history of the Prophet Joseph Smith the following occurs:

An evangelist is a patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established on the earth, there should he a patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessing unto his sons, etc. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 151)

321Every father, having children born to him under the covenant, is to them as a patriarch, and he has the right to bless his posterity in the authority of the Priesthood which he holds. The patriarchs of old commonly blessed their children, as, for example, Isaac (Genesis, chapter 27), Jacob (Genesis, chapter 49), Lehi (Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi, chapters 2, 3, 4), and John Taylor (Times and Seasons, Vol. 6:921, 922).

321There are many members of the Church whose fathers or nearest male relatives are not in the Church, or unfitted or unwilling to bless their children. For them special provision must be made. Moreover, the Church is a family, composed of many families. The ordained patriarchs speak also for the larger Church family. They act therefore both in behalf of the fathers of families and of the patriarchal head of the Church.

321So important are these official patriarchal blessings that they should always be reduced to writing and preserved. Every blessing is entered upon the record of the patriarch, and ultimately deposited with the Church historian. The person blessed receives a copy of the blessing for his use and comfort.

321Patriarchs are specially called and ordained to the work. Their authority is derived from the president of the Church, in whom the ultimate power of giving such blessings on earth is vested. Their jurisdiction is limited. With the exception of the patriarch to the Church, each is appointed to serve in a limited geographical area, usually a stake of Zion.

322All Church members may claim the patriarchal blessings flowing from their membership in the assemblage of families within the Church, which can be pronounced only by men who represent the group as a whole. Therefore, patriarchs, ordained to the office, are made available in all the stakes of Zion so that all faithful members may receive the blessings to which they are entitled.

322In giving a blessing the patriarch may declare our lineage -- that is, that we are of Israel, therefore of the family of Abraham and of a specific tribe of Jacob. In the great majority of cases, Latter-day Saints are of the tribe of Ephraim, the tribe to which has been committed the leadership of Latter-day work. Whether this lineage is of blood or adoption does not matter. (Pearl of Great Price, Abraham, 2:10) This is very important, for it is through the lineage of Abraham alone that the mighty blessings of the Lord for His children on earth are to be consummated. (Gen. 12:2, 3; Pearl of Great Price, Abraham, 2:11)

322Then, the patriarch, looking into the future, enumerates the blessings and promises, some special, others general, to which the person of the proper lineage, who receives the blessings, is entitled; and through his authority seals them upon him, so that they may be his forever through faithfulness. The obligations resting upon those who receive such promises are often stated. These blessings are parts of the larger promise made by the Lord to Abraham and his seed. They vary somewhat from person to person, for each has his specific assignment or calling in the gospel plan; but in essence they deal with the gifts, responsibilities, powers, and ultimate destiny of those who have received and obeyed the gospel, and thereby have become members of the great family represented by the Church.

322Usually, blessings are added as the spirit may indicate, to meet our special requirements in life for our comfort success, and strength. Our special needs may be pointed out; special gifts may be promised us; we may be blessed to overcome our weaknesses, to resist temptation, or to develop our powers, so that we may the more surely achieve the promised blessings. Since all men differ, their blessings may differ; but a patriarchal blessing always confers promises upon us, becomes a warning against failure in life, and a means of guidance in attaining the blessings of the Lord. It may be made of daily help in all the affairs of life.

323These blessings are possibilities predicated upon faithful devotion to the cause of truth. They must be earned. Otherwise they are but empty words. Indeed, they rise to their highest value when used as ideals, specific possibilities, toward which we may strive throughout life. To look upon a patriarch as a fortune-teller is an offense to the Priesthood; the patriarch only indicates the gifts the Lord would give us, if we labor for them. He helps us by pointing out the divine goal which we may enjoy if we pay the price.

323Such a blessing, given in the spirit of a father's love, and sealed upon us in the authority of the Priesthood, becomes a power in our lives; a comfort to our days. It is a message which if read and honored aright, will become an anchor in stormy days, our encouragement in cloudy days. It states our certain destination here and hereafter, if we live by the law; and as life goes on, it strengthens our faith and leads us into truth. (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , p. 226)

323It should always be kept in mind that the realization of the promises made may come in this or the future life. Men have stumbled at times because promised blessings have not occurred in this life. They have failed to remember that, in the gospel, life with all its activities continues forever and that the labors of earth may be continued in heaven. Besides the Giver of the blessings, the Lord, reserves the right to have them become active in our lives as suits His divine purpose. We and our blessings are in the hands of the Lord. But, there is the general testimony that when the gospel law has been obeyed, the promised blessings have been realized.

323Those who seek patriarchal blessings should ask for them with faith in the reality of the power of the Priesthood. They should seek them with an earnest, prayerful desire to become, through the blessings, more completely happy in their lives, and more perfectly serviceable in the work of the Lord. And they should, of course, be qualified to receive their blessings by conformity in their lives to the requirements of the gospel. The unclean or disobedient person should cleanse himself, and learn obedience before going to the patriarch. Only under such conditions can a person expect to learn of the will of the Lord.

324The patriarchal blessing should be read and reread. It should be made useful in life. This should be done with faith in spiritual blessings.

324It is a gift of the Lord. The purpose of asking for the blessing must be remembered. It must be read with intelligent consideration of its meaning. Attention should be fixed upon the one great meaning of the blessing rather than upon particular statements. There must be no quibbling about the time or place when the promises should be fulfilled or about the man who gave it. As the blessing was given through the inspiration of the Lord, so its meaning will be made clear by the same power; and its fulfillment will be in His hands. Above all, it must ever be remembered that every blessing is conditioned upon our faithfulness. Let us examine our lives from time to time to learn whether we are so living as to be worthy of the blessings promised. It is certain that our patriarchal blessing, if we give it proper respect, may be a source of divine help in life's journey.

324It may be added that the sacred patriarchal blessings are personal in their nature. They should not be talked about or shown about; they should be read frequently and pondered upon for our personal good. It is for that reason that each person receives a copy of his blessing.

324Necessarily, since patriarchs are but men, they are subject to human frailties. Their manner of speech and thinking is reflected in their blessings. Different men express the same idea in different words. The Lord does not dictate blessings to them word for word. Likewise, portions of the blessing may be emphasized by the nature or desire of the patriarch. Nevertheless, if the patriarch lives worthily, he is sustained by the power and authority of his calling, and will pronounce blessings intended for us. And we, if we live worthily, will comprehend the blessings and find deep comfort in them.

324A patriarchal blessing is also a constant reminder of the patriarchal form of organization and government, emphasizing the importance of the family, which prevailed in the early days of the world. The father, holding the holy Priesthood, was then the legislator, judge, and governor of his family, each father presiding over his own family; and the oldest, over the group of families of common descent. Thus, every family as it increased became a tribe, kingdom, or nation, under the presidency of the living father of them all. It is the ideal form of government, wherever the Priesthood prevails, and it appears to be the form of organization in the world to come.

325In summary: a patriarchal blessing (1) is for those who are of the chosen people, the family of obedient children, through whom the Lord is working out His earthly purposes; (2) it promises the members of the family certain blessings which are in store for them, on earth and in heaven which are sealed upon them on conditions of obedience to the law of the Lord; (3) it confers power upon us, if we will use it, to win the fulfillment of these promises, as we journey through life; and (4) special blessings are made available to us to meet our daily needs.

325All Latter-day Saints should seek their blessings under the hands of the patriarch; and should use them in their lives.
