John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

8

Why Are Buildings Dedicated?

The practice of dedicating buildings is as old as the Church, and older. Solomon's temple was dedicated amidst elaborate ceremonies. Soon after the Church in this dispensation was organized, a temple was built in Kirtland, Ohio. On March 27, 1836, it was dedicated. All the other temples of the Church have been dedicated in a public and solemn manner. Meetinghouses of the Latter-day Saints, when fully paid for, are also always dedicated. Many of the most glorious manifestations of the Church have occurred in connection with the dedications of temples and meetinghouses.

326This practice is not confined to temples and meetinghouses. The practice of the Church is to dedicate any building intended for a good purpose. For example, in 1852, a few years after entering Salt Lake Valley, the pioneers built a social hall to provide a place for the recreation of the people. This building was formally dedicated just before its opening. In 1862 when the Salt Lake Theatre had been completed, President Daniel H. Wells, counselor to President Brigham Young, dedicated the building.

326It has been a common practice also among Latter-day Saints to dedicate the homes in which they live. When a home has been secured and paid for, a dedication is frequently held. This practice carries with it the same ideals hopes, and aspirations embodied in a dedication of more public places.

326The Latter-day Saints do not claim to be the originators of the practice of dedicating buildings, but are very sincere and earnest followers of it. Throughout the world, the practice of dedicating public places is very common. Churches hospitals, libraries, and cathedrals are dedicated amidst much pomp and splendor.

326The central event in dedicating ceremonies among the latter-day Saints is the prayer of dedication. Those of past dedications are as inspiring today as when they were given. The prayer given when Solomon's temple was dedicated has comforted hosts of people. Joseph Smith's prayer when the Kirtland Temple was dedicated is published as D&C 109 in the Doctrine and Covenants. The prayers offered at the dedication of the various temples show the prophetic power which guides this Church. The noble prayer at the dedication of the Salt Lake Theatre might profitably be read by all who offer dramatic recreation. They are models which might well be followed by all who are called upon to dedicate buildings.

327The dedicatory prayers, as reported, fall into several parts, instructive, enlightening, and inspiring.

327First, there is in such prayers an expression of gratitude to the Lord for the possession of the building, an acknowledgment that without his help man cannot succeed in any endeavor. Then follows, usually, a promise that the house will be used to help advance the gospel cause in this day. That is, that in all activities within the building the Spirit of the Lord shall rule and direct. Only things will be done in the house which are in harmony with the principles and laws laid down by the Lord for the guidance of his children.

327Blessings are also asked upon all who have helped in the construction of the building, and those who participate in the dedicatory service. Special blessings are asked for all who may use the building so that help from heaven may be received by them in all their labors and in every moment of need.

327The prayer also asks that the building may be protected from all harm of an external nature, and from the designs of wicked men, that it may be kept whole and intact for the purposes for which it was erected.

327A prayer of dedication surrenders the building to the Lord for the establishment of his great cause. That is, the building and the people in it commit themselves to the great Latter-day purposes of the Lord.

327As the Spirit may dictate, any prayer and supplication may be a part of the dedicatory prayer. It is really a simple approach to the Lord in thanksgiving, praise, promise, and prayer.

327Some people ask why homes are dedicated. The prayers themselves furnish the answer. The very things that appear most regularly in dedicatory prayers are those that we need in our homes, in our daily lives. We thank the Lord for our homes. We ask that they, with those who dwell in them, may be under the overshadowing hand of the Lord. We ask the Lord to assist us in our daily labor. We promise him to devote our homes and our labors therein to the advancement of the cause of the Lord -- the salvation of human kind. Then we may expect help from above; then we may expect to have peace and happiness in our homes.

328Our of the homes issues the spirit of the people. As the homes are conducted, sot he Church in a large measure will be. We have good reason, therefore, to dedicate our homes and all our possessions to the might purpose of the restoration of the gospel. Dedicated homes are the best abiding places of peace and happiness.

328Wilford Woodruff speaking on this subject said:

"The Lord has blessed ... the earth for our use; and we ought to dedicate our families, our fields, our crops, our herds to God."
