John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

2

When Did Joseph Smith Have the First Vision?

In the history of Joseph Smith written by himself is an account of his first vision. He tells that it was received in the spring of 1820, when he was between fourteen and fifteen years of age. A religious revival in his neighborhood led him to wonder which of the contending sects was right before God. (See also Oliver Cowdery Letters No. 3) In his perplexity he retired to a quiet grove and appealed to God in prayer. I,, answer he had a vision of God, the Father and God, the Son. These heavenly personages informed him that all the churches had strayed from the full truth, and that the true Church was soon to be re-established. (History of the Church 1, 2-6)

334Because the earliest available written or printed account of this vision is dated 1838 and 1839, some enemies of the Church have cast doubt upon the authenticity of the date claimed for the vision. They have suggested that the vision was invented by the Prophet in 1838, when he set about to write the formal history of the Church. This not only implies that Joseph Smith lied, but also that the facts of history to be acceptable must be written and circulated at the time of their occurrence. This is a preposterous claim, made only by enemies of the Church to mislead those who are unacquainted with Mormon history.

334Whether the story of the first vision existed in written form in the early days of the Church is not known. Many manuscripts of that time have been lost. In some cases, secretaries deliberately carried Church records away from Church possession. But, even were they all available, minutes of meetings as they are usually kept might seldom mention the first vision, for familiar and repeated things are often not recorded because they are taken for granted. Certainly, the people in Joseph Smith's neighborhood would pay little attention to the claim of a fourteen-year-old boy that he had had a visitation from God.

334It must be remembered that the Book of Mormon printed in 1830, became at once the storm center of the claims of Joseph Smith. All other issues were forgotten when friend or foe held the printed Nephite record in his hands. The coming forth of this volume, with the establishment of the Church soon following, presented claims of superlative importance. These events declared that heavenly visitations may occur now as in the past, that translations of unknown languages may be made by the "gift and power of God," that the authoritative priesthood of God had been conferred on men by resurrected beings, and that the true Church of Christ was re-established. The book with its accompanying claims overshadowed then as now other equally weighty matters, such as the first vision. The Book of Mormon was a tangible thing which could be argued about. The vision of a boy, whether true or false, could not be attacked in the same way. Nevertheless, it is evident that the first vision was known to the people and on their lips, before the Prophet began the writing of his history. Moreover, it was always understood in the church that the vision was received in 1820, before the revelations concerning the Book of Mormon which are dated beyond question from 1823 to 1827. Indeed, unfriendly non-Mormon writers have contributed to the evidence for this view.

335The first vision is not mentioned in many non-Mormon books dealing with the time of Joseph Smith. The writers plunge at once into the Book of Mormon controversy. A few have mildly suggested or have had the temerity to distort history by ignoring the facts and to insist that the story of the first vision was invented by the Prophet many years later than 1820. (C. B. Arbaugh, Revelation Among the Mormons, pp. 34, 35, 238; W. A. Linn, History of the Mormons, p. 30; Fawn M. Brodie, No Man Knows My History, pp. 21-25) All other non-Mormon or anti-Mormon writers accept the first vision and the time of its occurrence, as one of the early claims of the Prophet.

335In later books, after the days of the Prophet, the visions of Joseph Smith, the first vision, the visitations of Moroni, and later visions, are all mumbled together, so that no distinction can be made among them. In fact, testimony of any consequence must come from the lips of those who lived in the early days of Mormonism, when the Prophet was alive.

335Pomeroy Tucker, the proprietor and editor of the Wayne Sentinel, on the press of which the Book of Mormon was first printed, knew most of the persons and events connected with the early days of the Church. He was deeply prejudiced against the claims of Joseph Smith, and looked upon them as hoaxes.

336Nevertheless, he had reason to know the succession of events, even if he did not believe their authenticity. Upon the basis of contemporaneous knowledge, he held that the first claim of Joseph Smith to have had a vision came before the manifestations relative to the Book of Mormon occurred. He writes:

About this time (he places the date about 1823) Smith had a remarkable vision. He pretended that while engaged in secret prayer, alone in the wilderness, an "angel of the Lord appeared to him with the glad tidings that "all his sins had been forgiven him," and proclaiming further that "all the religious denominations were believing in else doctrines and consequently that none of them were accepted of God as his Church and Kingdom," and also that he had received a "promise that the true doctrine and the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be revealed to him." Following this soon came another angel ... "that the American Indians were a remnant of the Israelites, ... that ... their writings were safely deposited ... and that ... he would be the chosen prophet to translate them."

336Despite the errors in detail this statement repeats in essence, the first vision as told by the Prophet himself, and sets the time of its occurrence before the coming forth of the Book of Mormon.

336J. B. Turner, a non-Mormon, was one of the earliest writers on Mormonism. His book was published in 1842, written, no doubt, before he could have had access to Joseph's own printed story, also published in 1842. He mentions the first vision. His version, though containing errors of date, corroborates the Prophet's story. He writes:

In the year 1823, when our prophet was about seventeen years of age, his mind became, for the first time, deeply excited on the subject of religion by Mr. Lane, a devoted and talented elder of the Methodist Church, under whose reaching there was a "great awakening," and numbers, among whom was our prophet and several members of his family, were "profoundly added to the Kingdom of the Lord."

336After the revival ceased, the usual strife for proselytes between the several sects commenced this resulted, so far as the Smiths are concerned, in bringing the mother, one sister, and two brothers into the Presbyterian church; but leaving Joseph as he states, in disgust with all the sects and almost in despair of ever coming to the knowledge of the truth amid so many contradictory and conflicting claims. He resorted to prayer for a "full manifestation of divine approbation" and "for the assurance that he was accepted of him." This occurred sometime in the winter of 1823.

337On the memorable evening of the 21st of September following ... a form stood before him ... (who) proceeded to inform Smith that ... the Lord had chosen him to bring forth and translate the Book of Mormon.

337This early author thus confirms the claims of Joseph Smith that the first vision antedated the promise of the Book of Mormon.

337The quotations made by these two writers are not from the Prophet's story. Apparently they had not read it. If they had other sources of information, it would add to the evidence that the first vision was known among the people in the early years of the Church. However, both writers agree that the first vision antedated the revelations received by the Prophet concerning the Nephite record.

337B. Pixley, after visiting the Saints in Missouri, writes under date of October 12, 1832, that

... their creed appears to have undergone hut little change The Mormons still prefer to talk with angels, visit the third heaven, and converse with Christ face to face.

337The Missouri Intelligencer, under August 10, 1833, speaking of a meeting held in Independence the previous month, says:

Of all their pretended revelations from heaven ... their personal intercourse with God and his angels ... converse with God and his angels ... may be better imagined than described.

337Others of the same period speak of the claim that Joseph Smith conversed with God, which, no doubt, had reference to the first vision.

337A correspondent of the Episcopal Recorder describes the visit of Martin Harris in 1827 who told of a supernatural experience of Joseph Smith, followed later by another divine communication directing him to find the plates. The story is wildly distorted, but the elements of the first vision are clearly evident: Joseph was alone in the woods; a dazzling illumination occurred; an evil power first overcame him; he was overcome by the succeeding vision of God, and a later vision concerning the plates of the Book of Mormon. (The correspondent was J. A. Clark, D.D., and his story appeared as a series of letters in the Recorder in 1840, reproduced in the Weekly Visitor, 1841, pp 61-64, and in his book Gleanings by the Way, New York, 1842, 222-8)

338J. H. Kennedy who much later professed to write an unbiased book on the Mormons, accepts without question Joseph Smith's own story as to time and date. (J. H. Kennedy, Early Days of Mormonism, pp. 23, 24) So, as has been said, do most of the writers who discuss the first vision. (For example, T. B. H. Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 15; I. W. Riley, The Founder of Mormonism, p. 66; Ellen Dickenson, New Light on Mormonism, p. 33; Doris H. Bays, Doctrines and Dogmas of Mormonism, p. 19; E. Meyer, Ursprung and Gerschichte der Mormonen, pp. 16, 17) In fact proof of the occurrence of the vision in Joseph Smith's early' years, if needed, could be established wholly from non-Mormon sources.

338 Mormon writers and speakers who lived in the days of Joseph Smith believed without exception that the first vision occurred in the early life of the boy, before the Book of Mormon visitations. His mother accepted her son's own story in full and added more about his early spiritual experiences. (Lucy M. Smith, Joseph Smith the Prophet, pp. 73-77, [1902 ed.] pp. 69-74, [1945 ed.]) Elder Edward Stevenson wrote:

In... 1834 in the midst of many large congregations, the Prophet testified with great power concerning the visit of the Father and the Son. (Edward Stevenson, Reminiscences of Joseph, the Prophet, p. 4)

338Joseph Smith himself relates how in 1835, he told one Erastus Holmes of his "first vision which was when I was about fourteen years old." (History of the Church, II, 312) His brother William in his old age described the circumstances of his first vision as told by his prophet brother. (Deseret News, January 20, 1894)

338Orson Pratt, who lived for some time in the Prophet's home issued a pamphlet in 1839, in which the first vision is described, and it is there placed in 1820. (Orson Pratt, Remarkable Visions, pp. 4, 5) Later in life, Orson Pratt said, "I have often heard him (the Prophet) relate it." (Journal of Discourses 7:220-221; 11:65-66; 12:302; 14:150-141; 15:180-182. See also N. B. Lundwall, Masterful Discourses and Writings of Orson Pratt, pp. 235-236) Brigham Young who often spoke about the Prophet and his early experiences, said on one occasion:

The Lord called Joseph Smith, called upon him at fourteen years of age, gave him visions, and led him along, guided and directed him in his obscurity, until he brought forth the plates and translated them. (Journal of Discourses, 8:354; see also 12:6)

339Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, George A. Smith, and numerous others who lived in the days of the Prophet, have spoken of the first vision as a fact accomplished in 1820, and before the Prophet saw the Book of Mormon plates, according to Joseph Smith's own story. (Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses 6:29; John Taylor, The Gospel Kingdom, p. 121; Wilford Woodruff, Leaves from My Journal, first edition, p. 86; George A. Smith, Journal of Discourses 12:334; 13:78; 11:1-2)

339These men were among the early converts to Mormonism. They were hardheaded men, who wanted to be certain about things. Brigham Young took two long years to study Joseph Smith and his message before he was baptized into the Church in 1831. If these men had heard for the first time in 1838 of the Prophet's first vision, Joseph Smith would have had to do some explaining. They were not the men to follow a deceiver.

339All acceptable evidence within and beyond the Church confirms the Prophet's story that his first vision occurred when he was between fourteen and fifteen years of age in the year 1820 and before the Book of Mormon revelations occurred.
