John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

4

Did Joseph Smith Plan the Westward Migration of the Church?

In 1847 the Pioneer company entered the Great Salt Lake Valley. They were the forerunners of the tens of thousands who in orderly procession toiled across plain and desert in search of a haven of peace. Their story of suffering, sacrifice and eventual success will live while the generations of men endure. It is fitting that 1947 is dedicated to the memory of these intrepid men and women, the founders of the intermountain empire of North America.

345The westward movement of the Latter-day Saints was not desired by them. Instead it was thrust upon them. They came west because they were obliged to do so. They would have preferred to enjoy their comfortable homes in beautiful Nauvoo and elsewhere. They were driven out and forced to seek another place of settlement. It was with heavy hearts that they trudged through the winter in Iowa and built temporary homes in Nebraska. Had it not been for the courage born of faith in their destiny, they would have scattered over the country, and the opening of the west would have been delayed by many years.

345The trail of the Church from New York, Ohio, and Missouri had been littered with persecutions from enemies, who stooped to every evil and inhuman device to prevent the progress of the Church. At length the persecuted people found a peaceful haven as they thought, in Illinois. But among neighboring villages, outdistanced by the city of Nauvoo, hate was being fanned into a destructive flame.

345That these conditions would ultimately compel another removal of the people became clear to the mind of the Prophet Joseph, the sustained leader of the Church. He began to look around for a place to which his people could move and remain relatively unmolested from unfriendly neighbors. The far west, then being opened on the Pacific Coast was almost naturally the place to which the Prophet's mind would be directed. None had as yet suggested settlement in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains or on the surrounding interior deserts. That seemed to be a place where the Saints could live undisturbed at least for a while. The spirit of revelation confirmed this view.

346The Prophet then set about to prepare the people for this coming event. Under date of August 6, 1842, he wrote in his journal:

"Passed over the river to Montrose, Iowa. ... I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." (History of the Church, V:85)

346Anson Call, who was present on that occasion and wrote his recollection of it, says that the Prophet, after uttering this prophecy, began a vivid description of the western country, much as it really is. The Prophet also said that Anson Call, Shadrach Roundy, and others who were present would assist in this building of cities among the Rocky Mountains. He then charged all present to be faithful, so that the priesthood would prevail over all enemies. (Ibid., V:85, 86; Tullidge, Edward, History of Northern Utah and Southern Idaho, Biographical Supplement, pp. 271-273; Whitney, Orson F., History of Utah, Vol. IV, p 143)

346More than a year and a half later, on Tuesday, February 20, 1844, the proposed westward movement began to take shape. The Prophet writes:

"I instructed the Twelve Apostles to send out a delegation and investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt out a good location, where we can remove to after the temple is completed, and where we can build a city in a day, and have a government of our own, get up into the mountains, where the devil cannot dig us out, and live in a healthful climate, where we can live as old as we have a mind to." (History of the Church, VI:222)

346Prompt action was taken to obey these instructions, as shown by the following entry:

"At a meeting of the Twelve, at the mayor's office, Nauvoo, February 21, 1844, seven o'clock p.m., Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, George A. Smith, Willard Richards and four others being present, called by previous notice, by instruction of President Joseph Smith on the 20th instant, for the purpose of selecting a company to explore Oregon and California, and select a site for a new city for the Saints.

347"Jonathan Dunham, Phineas H. Young, David D. Yearsley, and David Fullmer, volunteered to go; and Alphonso Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt, and Daniel Spencer were requested to go.

347"Voted the above persons to be notified to meet with the council on Friday evening next, at the assembly room.

Willard Richards, Clerk." (Ibid., VI:223)

347Two days later on the 23rd of February, the Prophet met with the Twelve concerning the expedition.

347"I told them I wanted an exploration of all that mountain country ... Send twenty-five men: let them preach the gospel wherever they go. Let that man go that can raise $500, a good horse and mule, a double-barrel gun, one-barrel rifle, and the other smooth bore, a saddle and bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie-knife, and a good sabre. Appoint a leader and let them beat up for volunteers. I want every man that goes to be a king and a priest. When he gets on the mountains he may want to talk with his God; when with the savage nations have power to govern, etc. If we don't get volunteers, wait till after the election.'" (Ibid., VI:-224. [The national election would be held the following November.])

347There was no lack of volunteers. Within a week over twenty men had volunteered. (Ibid., VI:223-227) The proposed expedition was widely known. In a letter written to James Arlington Bennett, March 4, 1844, Willard Richards under the Prophet's instruction says, "We are now fitting out a noble company to explore Oregon and California." (Ibid., VI:232) On March 11, the Prophet spoke to the Council about the desirability of securing "a resting place in the mountains, or some uninhabited region, where we can enjoy the liberty of conscience guaranteed to us by the Constitution of our country." (Ibid., VI:261) Anticipating this westward movement, the Prophet also wrote and sent to Congress, "An Ordinance for the Protection of the Citizens of the United States Emigrating to the Territories, and for the Extension of the Principles of Universal Liberty." (Ibid., VI:275) This document, which Congress ignored, was clearly designed to protect the migration of the whole people after a suitable location had been found.

348During this time, while the expedition was being formed, the persecutions of the people reached an unprecedented height. At last, the life of the Prophet was seriously endangered. For his own safety, he left Nauvoo, and as would appear from the records, intended to go westward himself to explore the country. He was recalled to Nauvoo before the journey had begun, and, on June 27, he and his brother Hyrum were foully assassinated.

348There can be no question about Joseph Smith's intention to move the Latter-day Saints to some favorable spot among the Rocky Mountains. (See also B. H. Roberts, Succession in the Presidency of the Church, Second Edition, pp 113-117)

348After the martyrdom, the Twelve, with Brigham Young at the head, took over the leadership of the Church. The death of Joseph Smith had not stilled persecution. An exodus from Nauvoo was inevitable. Several places of refuge were presented, as Texas and Vancouver Island, but in accordance with Joseph's prophecy, the then unknown west among the Rocky Mountains was chosen, and the memorable westward migration began.

348Brigham Young in all that he did, repeatedly admitted the leadership of Joseph Smith, even in the journey to the Great Salt Lake Valley. For example, this on March 16 1856:

"The Prophet Joseph has been referred to, and his prophecy that this people would leave Nauvoo and be planted in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. We see it fulfilled it was declared to the people long before we left Nauvoo. (Journal of Discourses, III:257, 258. See also IV: 203; VIII: 356)

348That the famous trek from Nauvoo to Salt Lake Valley was a fulfillment of prophecy, does not detract from the glorious achievement of Brigham Young and his fellow pioneers. That he repeatedly admitted it, publicly and privately, and gave the Prophet proper credit, rather enhances the greatness of the foremost pioneer. President Young's loyalty to the Prophet was always unsullied. To him, the Prophet was the great restorer of the Lord's eternal truth. His own magnificent work in carrying out the prophecy, subduing the desert, and finding peace for his people, made him one of the world's really great men.
