John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

5

Which Prophet Is the Greatest?

A prophet as here designated is a man endowed with priesthood authority who is called by the Lord to leadership in the unfolding of the plan of salvation. The prophets have been, in their day and age, the leaders of the Lord's work.

350Such men of the past have been Abraham, Moses, Samuel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lehi, and others. Such men of the present dispensation have been Joseph Smith and his successors in office.

350Each age has its own peculiar problems. Each dispensation carries forward into new situations the Lord's plan for human welfare. Additional revelation from the Lord is needed to meet the problems of a progressive unfolding plan. Such new truths emanating from divinity, come only through the prophet of the day.

350Joseph Smith was commissioned to restore the doctrine, organization, and authority of the Church to a generation which had lost these fundamentals of the Church of Christ. Joseph Smith's successors have been engaged in carrying forward the restoration in proclaiming its truth to all the world, and in building securely the Church of Christ, through which the Lord will soon accomplish his purposes relative to the last days.

350All these men were teachers and defenders of the gospel. In addition, each had his special work to do. Each has left behind a message for succeeding generations.

350Above all, so prophetic history reveals, each prophet was called to serve the needs of his own generation. Therein lay his power to advance the unchanging cause of the Lord. In accomplishing this, in admonishing the people to gospel obedience, three major helps and procedures were at his command.

350First. The prophet of any age draws upon the records of the past. The keeping of records has ever been enjoined by the Lord upon his people. Each prophet, from the days of the early patriarchs, down the years, has left behind a precious body of teaching and practice, of continuous value. Some have recorded in their messages direct revelations from the Lord. These records are the foundation of all safe gospel teaching. Many have been collected in the volume known as the Holy Bible. Others are found in the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. These four books together form the most precious library on earth.

351The prophet, of any time, must of necessity draw upon these treasures of the past, in clarifying his own views and in teaching the people.

351Second. The great governing principles of truth are unchanging. But, the conditions brought about by human activity are forever changing. From sailboat to steamboat to airship; from horse power to steam power; from grease-soaked wicklight to electric lighting; from the rushing human agent to the telegraph, telephone, and radio -- and a multitude of others -- we span changes that in the past seemed impossible. And undoubtedly the future holds developments that today are equally inconceivable.

351Such changes affect human thinking. New social and economic problems arise. Even the spiritual outlook is invaded. Then, it becomes the duty of the prophet to teach how the eternal laws of the gospel may be applied amidst constant change, for the benefit and blessing of humanity. The prophet does not discard new ways for old ones, if truth is preserved. He is not a reactionary, but ever a progressive, holding, however, the new and the old to gospel law. He gives life to that which is new as it blossoms upon the ruins of the old, by the constant application to it of principles of truth.

351This adherence to and use of the principles of the gospel in an age of changing conditions has characterized the lives of the prophets. It has often been their main responsibility.

351Third. The prophet is but a man. He draws heavily upon the past. He seeks inspiration from the Lord for his daily work. There comes at times the need for new knowledge from heaven. Then, if it be the proper time, the Lord speaks. New revelation is given. Pressing problems are solved by a knowledge beyond that of man.

351The prophet is never wholly dependent upon the past. He may always draw upon the fount of truth and wisdom. All the prophets have done this.

351* * * *

352Which then of all these prophets is the greatest? Since all have done equally well the work assigned to them, they are equally great. By the same token, the last ordained elder and the veteran apostle are equal before the Lord, if they do their assigned work equally well. That is the test of heaven.

352But, which prophet is the most important to us? That is the more incisive question.

352The most important prophet in any age is the living prophet. The prophets who have gone before have left to us their precious teachings which will be used for the instruction and comfort of mankind. But, it is the living prophet who helps us by his teachings, example, and direction to meet and to solve the problems of today, our day. To follow the living prophet, the interpreter of the past, is the essence of wisdom. The very strength of the Church lies in the doctrine of continuous revelation through a living prophet.

352In that sense, the living prophet is the greatest prophet.
