John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

6

What Is the "Inspired Translation" of the Bible?

Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and those associated with him, had been brought up on the teachings of the Holy Bible. It was assumed that the English Bible had been translated correctly and completely from the original manuscripts.

353The teachings of the Book of Mormon with other new revelations from the Lord, convinced the Prophet that there were errors, unauthorized additions, and incomplete statements in the sacred volume of the Old and New Testaments.

353Such errors seemed to the Prophet, a devoted lover of the truth, out of keeping with the sacred nature of the Bible. Therefore, very soon after the organization of the Church, after placing the matter before the Lord, he began the "inspired translation" of the holy scriptures. In June 1830 less than three months after the Church was organized, he had had revealed to him the "visions of Moses." In December, 1830, Sidney Rigdon, who had just joined the Church, was called to act in this work as scribe to the Prophet.

353The two brethren labored on the task with all possible regularity until July 21, 1833, when with divine permission the "translation and review" of the Old and New Testaments was sealed until a suitable time of publication, which unfortunately, in the troubled life of the Prophet never came.

353After the death of the Prophet, Brigham Young sent Willard Richards to Emma Smith, to secure the translation which was partly in manuscript, and partly in marginal notes in the family Bible. She refused to surrender the material then, but at last in 1866 she gave the material to the committee of publications of the Reorganized Church by whom the material was later published.

353However, at the request of the Prophet, Dr. John M. Bernhisel had made a copy, both of the manuscript, and of the marginal page changes. This copy is now in the library of the Historian's Office in Salt Lake City.

353It is not really correct to say that the Prophet translated the Bible. Rather, he corrected errors in the Bible, and under revelation added long statements. Nor is it really certain that the work was finally finished. Had he gone over the Bible again he probably would have made additional corrections. He seems to have given special attention to certain portions of the Bible.

354But, as it stands, he performed a vast work. Drs. Sidney B. Sperry and Merrill Y. Van Wagoner state that 12,650 words were added in Genesis, and that 693 verses were changed in the other books of the Old Testament. In the New Testament, these authors say that 1,453 verses were changed. In the four gospels alone, 1,036 verses were altered. Certainly the Prophet used great effort to restore the original meaning of the Bible.

354Out of this mass of material only a few examples can be shown here.

354The above mentioned work on the Book of Genesis appears as the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. It adds much information to the somewhat meager account in the Bible.

354Numerous slight but important changes were made.

354 Ex. 32:14 says: "And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto the people." The inspired version reads: And the Lord said unto Moses, If they will repent of the evil which they have done, I will spare them and turn away my fierce wrath. . . .

354 Ex. 7:3 says: "And I will harden Pharaoh's heart and multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt."' The inspired version reads, "And Pharaoh will harden his heart, as I said unto thee; and thou shalt multiply my signs and wonders, in the I and of Egypt."

354 1 Sam. 16:14 says: "But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him." The inspired version reads, "But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit which was not of the Lord troubled him."

354There is no need to comment upon the rational improvement in the above verses.

354 John 4:2 says: "Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples." The inspired version reads: "Though he, himself baptized not so many as his disciples." So ends a long controversy.

355Melchizedek, for whom the higher, Holy Priesthood is named, is a mystical figure in the Bible. He is spoken of as a king of righteousness, King of Salem, priest of the most high God. The Apostle Paul speaks of Christ as a priest after the order of Melchizedek. Little more. The inspired version however makes him a more human being. It says:

"And now Melchisedek [Melchizedek] was a priest of this order; therefore he obtained peace in Salem, and was called the Prince of peace.

355"And his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world;

355"And hath said, and sworn with an oath, that the heavens and the earth should come together; and the sons of God should be tried so as by fire.

355"And this Melchisedek, having thus established righteousness, was called the king of heaven by his people, or, in other words, the King of peace.

355"And he lifted up his voice, and he blessed Abram, being the high priest, and the keeper of the storehouse of God;

355"Him whom God had appointed to receive tithes for the poor.

355"Wherefore, Abram paid unto him tithes of all that he had, of all the riches which he possessed, which God had given him more than that which he had need.

355"And it came to pass, that God blessed Abram, and gave unto him riches, and honor, and lands for an everlasting possession; according to the covenant which he had made, and according to the blessing wherewith Melchisedek had blessed him." (Holy Scriptures Inspired Version, Gen. 14:33-40)

355The incomprehensible statement that Melchisedek was "Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually. is made plain and reasonable in the inspired version. "For this Melchisedec was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life. And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually."

356Such comparisons might be multiplied. All would show the great service the Prophet Joseph Smith rendered in correcting Biblical errors, and to make the statements of the Holy Scriptures more understandable to the human mind. The "inspired translation" is one of the mighty evidences of prophetic power of Joseph Smith.
