John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations ( 1943)

XI

Delusions

1

Why Is Reincarnation A False Doctrine?

Reincarnation, often known as metapsychosis, is an ancient doctrine. It dates from the earliest corruption of truth, from the very dawn of human history, when mankind first departed from the simple principles of the gospel. In some form it has existed at all times in all lands. It is an excellent example of the distortion of beautiful, fundamental truths.

365Reincarnation, as commonly taught, means that the spirit or "soul" of a human being, after the death of the person, and after intervals of varying duration, returns to earth in another body. This may occur frequently, indeed may be a continuous, unending process.

365Usually it is taught that the spirit inhabits from time to time bodies of the same species. That is, the spirit of a man will reappear on earth as a man; a woman as a woman; a human being as a human being. This may not, however, always be the case. Many believers in reincarnation hold that a "soul" which is a man today, may be a woman tomorrow, or vice versa. It is also often taught that the spirit of a man may in the next earthly incarnation, inhabit the body of a lower animal, say a dog or a cat. There is not full agreement among reincarnationists on many of these matters.

365Under this doctrine our next-door neighbor may be the reincarnation of a man or a woman who lived centuries ago; our bootblack may be the reincarnation of one of the great philosophers of the past; our school teacher may have been an untutored savage a thousand years ago; our present dog, Sanko, may be nothing else than our dog, Fido, long since dead, in a more recent incarnation. And what is worse, the animating essence, the "soul," of Sanko, may be the former "soul" of a Newton, or a Galileo, or a Plato! Or, the wife who cooks our meals for us, may have been in an earlier reincarnation, the Queen of Sheba. Or, still more to our confusion, a man's wife might have been his husband when he was a woman in an earlier reincarnation.

365Three doctrines lie at the foundation of belief in reincarnation.

366First, the pre-existence of the "soul" of man; second, the indestructibility of the "soul" of man after death; and, third, the possibility of constant development of the pre-existent, eternal "soul." These are all necessary doctrines to the thinking mind. They are supported by divine revelation. But, in the explanations and applications of these truths, the proponents of reincarnation have failed dismally, and have shown how the semblance of truth, becoming untruth, may lead men into vast fields of deception.

366The basic doctrine of pre-existence is always presented in an incomplete form. Clearly, if the "soul" of man has occupied from time to time successive and distinct bodies, birth cannot be the beginning of his "soul." There must be existence before each successive embodiment.

366But what about the first incarnation?

366One group sidestep the question by saying that before the first appearance on earth, God created the "soul." That merely means that after all, the spirit is not really eternal. Since it began on earth, it may end with the earth.

366Another group of believers in reincarnation, sensing the inadequacy of this explanation, seek refuge in the doctrine that the "souls" of men began their existence as lower animals, and then they add that "in the lower kingdoms consciousness evolves in the mass, . . . as these group souls slowly develop, they continually divide and subdivide." (Cooper, Reincarnation, p. 48.) Finally, by some mysterious process these animals, subdivisions of the mass, acquire a soul" and become human beings. All of which is merely saying that there is an "ocean of consciousness," out of which God dips individuals.

366Contrast these feeble, lame, and incomprehensible explanations with the true doctrine of pre-existence, as taught in the gospel of Jesus Christ. The spirit of man is co-eternal with God. In the eternities before he came on earth he has been a personality, possessing the power to think and learn to accept or reject the means by which he could ascend or descend, progress or retrograde. He has been himself from the endless beginning through all the waiting eternities.

366Reincarnation rests upon an unsound foundation; hence is dangerous, and should be avoided.

366The conditions of reincarnation by which the immortal "soul" may progress are equally unacceptable. "Reincarnation is a plan whereby imperishable conscious beings are supplied with physical bodies appropriate to their stage of growth and through which they can come in contact with the lessons of physical life." (Ibid., p. 17.) This supplying of bodies is repeated endlessly. By this doctrine, the body of man is of little consequence. We take it on, cast it off, and put on another one, much as we do with our old suits of clothing. The "soul" of man is then really confined to this earth, as in a prison. Why this should be so, baffles the mind. His sojourn between incarnations can be of no value to him, since he must return to earth in a mortal body to gain further experience. He is of the earth, earthy. He cannot in reality go beyond the earth or physical experiences. Therefore, an infinity of experiences are beyond his reach. The universe is not his. Such an eternal "soul" demands a vaster area of understanding and action than the earthly life affords. There is no freedom in reincarnation.

367Reincarnation fails utterly to comprehend the meaning of the human body.

367The gospel of Jesus Christ declares that man an eternal spirit, acquainted with the spiritual world, came upon the earth when he was fitted and permitted to become acquainted with the material world. To this end he was given a body of material elements. This body belongs to him eternally, to be used by him, in a purified form, in his endless progressive journey among spiritual and material realities. He does not need another. It is a sacred possession, the home of his eternal spirit. With it, composed of celestialized material elements, he may forever explore the universe, in all its aspects, even to the limits of eternity. Without such a body, the immortal spirit would be handicapped in its victorious progress, in the midst of universal elements, toward the likeness of God. Reincarnation has gone far afield to explain that which the Lord has made clear to the human mind.

367The doctrine of reincarnation really destroys personality as connected with earth life. The perpetual passage of spirits from body to body on earth, implies that the Lord is using the earth as a playground for a few spirits. As one writer remarks, the soul of the ancient patriarch Seth was probably the spirit of the great prophet Moses. Thus, individuality on the earth is lost. Temporal identification is hopelessly confused. There is no end to the disorder, for the process of reincarnation is unending. That violates the innate desire, even need, of man, for an individual, personal identity on earth as in heaven.

368By reincarnation the power of God seems also to be limited. He uses the same, relatively few, spirits over and over again, endlessly, to accomplish whatever may be his purpose. He seems to be short of material and vague in his purpose. This is out of harmony with the gospel, which teaches that there is a host of spirits waiting to take upon themselves mortal bodies, and that the next stage of existence will come when this has been accomplished.

368This doctrine of confusion presents no final objective in life. It seems to suggest only living over and over again on earth, much the same experiences, sometimes as a man, sometimes as something else. To what ultimate state does it lead us? Even in human affairs, soldiers who may fight many a battle in various places, come at last to an end -- victory or defeat. Reincarnation sets up no understandable objective of existence, except that we are advancing; but how and to what end? It reduces the spirit of man to the position of a treadmill worker in the affairs of the universe. Some say that the end is nirvana, first held to be extinction of existence; now a fusion into a mass of security. That does not help.

368This is in clearest opposition to the doctrine of progression, which lies fundamentally in the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. The objective of life is to move toward the likeness of God. Man rises continually. Once on earth, he experiences earth life, with its joys and sorrows: then bids it farewell, to enter into another life where he continues with added power, in the advancing program of existence. He outgrows the past throughout eternal existence. Reincarnation moves in a circle; the gospel in an ascending spiral. Existence without a definite objective, but with constant repetitions, is valueless.

368Finally, reincarnation is incompatible with the resurrection of the body, through the redeeming service of Jesus Christ. The continuous changing of bodies makes the resurrection and any redeeming act, unnecessary. It places the Christ in the class of fakirs. A Christian cannot believe in reincarnation. That should be, in itself, a sufficient answer to the question at the head of this writing.

369References: Rt. Reverend Irving S. Cooper, Reincarnation, The Hope of the World; E. D. Walker, Reincarnation, A Study of Forgotten Truth.
