Bible Chronology by Ivan Panin is a highly technical chronology of biblical dates and numeric biblical patterns. Mr. Panin’s efforts of over 40,000 separate pages of written reference and research work form the basis of it. In Part III, it will be noted that he even created his own vocabulary and concordance.

No work of this magnitude should be left to die with the author but should live on. I possess the old turned-brown paperback book, which has no copyright on it, and was personally gifted to me by the late Dr. Ernest L. Martin (1932-2002) years ago. It would be his wish that it was reproduced.

As for my own involvement, I thank God for the computer and its assistance for making extremely difficult work practical. In reproducing Panin’s work by Hoyer, no changes were made in the text other than where minor errors occurred (because of being re-formatted for various purposes, errors concerning page references are still present). Where necessary, an editor’s note [Ed. <notation> ] gives guidance at their place. The English wording and spelling were left intact. A lined grid format was added for easier location and reading. Though this production was edited and ‘proofed’ over five times, minor errors may still exist. The 245 Biblical dates, however, were each hand checked for Biblical accuracy. Regardless of my effots, if errors are found, please point them out so they may be corrected.

In addition to Bible Chronology, Mr. Panin produced a New Testament version based on his concordance and numeric method. Many other writings of his may also be found on the Internet.

Works of this nature, being so large and technical, are rarely accurate in all details. While Panin’s work has many followers, it also has its critics and detractors and the reader must keep each in mind for both will have their points. Overall, however, even the average reader should be convinced that there are biblical patterns both numerically and structurally.

As a final note, Mr. Panin stated that 1922 was year 5924 (from Adam) according to his Bible Chronology. The present year of this printing is 1998. There are 76 years of difference between 1922 and 1998 so 76 added to year 5924 places us at year 6000. Adjusted according to the Hebrew calendar, September 20th, at sundown in 1998, will be 2,000 years from the birthday of Jesus. (Biblical dates and dating, as we should all know, has been going on for a long time and while the above may not be certain, we can speculate that we are very near the 6000 year period as of 1998.) [A new date, perhaps more accurate, is offered by Dr. James Tabor. Here’s his statement: “…at sundown, April 3/4, as Thursday fades into Friday by Jewish reckoning, marks the actual day and date, 1978 years ago, that Jesus died.”]

Scanned and edited by:

Richard G. Stodola

June, 1998
