PART I — BIBLICAL CHRONOLOGY CANONS

I. Point of View

II. Present State of Bible Chronology

III. Bible Canons

IV. Canon 1. The Bible alone is the Final Authority for its own Data

V. Canon 1I. The Old Testament text adopted as the basis of discussion is that

of the Hebrew Masoretes, of the present Hebrew copies, of which the Protestant Versions are translations.

VI. Canon III. The present Hebrew Text to be firmly held to, and abandoned

only where a copyist's error is proved from the Bible itself; the correction, moreover, to be made only from the Bible itself.

VII Canon IV. A clear Statement in one part of the Bible to be held to against . others not so clear in other parts. The light from the clear to be thrown on

the obscure, rather than the obscure to darken the light. A mere difficulty is not to annul a certainty.

VII Canon V. The Terms of the original Bible Languages are to be strictly I. Adhered to in Translation: Keeping specially to the Distinction between

Cardinal and Ordinal Numbers, and heeding the different Methods of using Chronological Terms.

IX. Canon VI. The Dictionary Meaning of the Terms used is to be strictly

Adhered to, and Departed from only when the ordinary Meaning is made Impossible by other Established Facts. Canon VII. The Reconciliation of what are apparently Discrepancies in the Bible Data must be along the lines laid down in Canons.

X. Canon VII. The Reconciliation of what are apparently Discrepancies in

the Bible Data must be along the Lines laid down in Canons I-VI; and any attempted Harmonisation on other lines stands Self-Condemned.

XI. Canon Vlll. In the Solution of Bible Difficulties that which covers an

entire Class of Cases Stands as against those dealing with their individual Cases separately. The Simple solution stands against the Complex.

XII Canon IX. In Matters Biblical the Notions of “Unlikely, Improbable, Hard . to Believe, Incredible, Inconceivable,” and their like, are not to be

Entertained so as to make the Bible Statements Void. Only what is demonstrably Irrational, or declared in the Bible itself to be Impossible, is to be allowed to Call in question Bible Statements.

2

Part II — THE BIBLE DATA

The Bible Data

Years deducible from the Data of the Bible

Table I

Period 1. Adam to the Flood

Period 2. Flood to Covenant

Period 3. Covenant to Exodus

Period 4. Exodus to Temple

Period 5. Temple to Captivity

Period 6. Captivity to Restoration

Period 7. Restoration to the Christ

Period 8. Nativity to Pentecost

Table II

Kings of Israel and Judah

Part III — THE NUMERIC PHENOMENA

The Numeric Phenomena

Table III

Table IV

Table V

Table VI

3
