Bible Chronology Canons

I. POINT OF VIEW.

§ 1. The following pages are written in the conviction that the Bible has God for its

author, a conviction amply justified by the facts brought forward in Part III of this work.

§ 2. As the book of God the only error the Bible may contain is that of copyist, printer,

or translator. These once eliminated, every statement of the Bible must agree with every other. The harmony, however, is not always on the surface, is at times even deeply hid, but ever at last brought to light if reverently, diligently, and patiently sought. The Bible makes upon the reader certain inexorable demands. To those who comply it readily yields its secrets, treasures ere long, according to the capacity of each. To those who do not comply it abides sealed in proportion to their lack of compliance.

Only to the wise (but wise according to its standard: the childlike in temper, the poor in

spirit, the lowly at heart) does it unfold itself: at first indeed as the book of wisdom, ere long also as the book of life, and last in all its majesty as the Book of God before which he may now indeed tremble, as at every other word of the living God, which is indeed like a hammer and like a fire: a hammer against all that is hard and proud; a fire against all that is only wood, hay, and stubble, however exalted in the sight of men.

II. PRESENT STATE OF BIBLE CHRONOLOGY.

§ 3. Through this book are scattered numerous chronological statements: but not all are

readily reconcilable on the surface. Not a few, moreover, present real problems, solved only after long investigation. consideration, and prayer. On these problems, and even its plain statements, the ablest minds of Christendom have for centuries devoutly and faithfully toiled, yet with results far from satisfactory. To name if only among the moderns: Usher, Scaliger, Petavius, Newton, Prideaux, Ideler, Hales, Clinton, Browne, Jarvis, and the writers on Chronology in the various Bible Encyclopedias and dictionaries. No two among the dozens of writers entirely agree. On the central dates of the Flood, the Exodus, the 490 years of Daniel, some are even centuries apart.

§ 4. It was the writer’s belief that order can be brought out of this chaos; and this he

believes is accomplished in Part II. That he has succeeded is demonstrated in Part III. When a conglomeration of fragments of diverse shapes and sizes is at last put together so that each fragment fits into its neighbour, and there thus appears an artist’s figure hitherto unsuspected— the figure itself becomes its own evidence. Accordingly in Part III Bible Chronology is found to be not a mere collection of fragments with some lone unifying thread running through it (which hitherto has been the most that could be expected by even the best friends of the Bible), but a gigantic Figure, wrought out to the minutest detail with the consummate art of all hitherto unheard of Genius.

III. BIBLE CANONS.

§ 5. The confusion noted above, prevailing widely not only in Bible Chronology but in

all matters biblical, is largely due to the failure to give heed to certain canons which from its very

4

nature as God’s book the Bible imposes on all who have to do therewith as other than mere merchandise. Confusion, discord about its purpose and meaning, is the penalty it exacts from those who from whatever cause go contrary to the laws peculiarly its own. Accordingly, in this work the following principles have been strictly held to:

IV. CANON I.

The Bible alone is the Final Authority for its own Data.

§ 6. This canon is necessitated by the acceptance of the Bible as God’s Book. Its own

verdict as to the temper with which it is to be approached is: “Thus saith the Lord . . . to this man will I look, to him that is poor and of contrite spirit, and that trembleth at My word” (Isa. 66:l-2). As God’s Book, as it brooks no suspicion, so neither does it court endorsements, testimonials, or letters of commendation from historians, monuments, tablets, coins, and the various other indispensable materials of Profane Chronology. This canon accordingly fixes the exact relation between the Bible and other sources of information in matters chronological.

§ 7. The other sources may indeed be used to clear up obscurities, or to strengthen

interpretations that need strengthening; they may even be used as witnesses before those unfortunate enough to require a witness unto God’s book (and even this as mere condescension, in nowise is aught due to such): as helps, in short, they can only be welcomed; but they must in nowise be allowed to assume authority as against the Bible. If other authorities agree therewith, so much the better for them; if they disagree, it may well give occasion to examine the biblical data whether they really do state what they apparently state, whether they have been understood as they should be understood; the disagreement may even be a reason for holding the biblical data in abeyance for a while till perchance the disagreement be at last harmonised or eliminated; but further than this the disagreement on the part of other sources must not be allowed to go.

§ 8. Adherence to this canon thus settles at the start the true relation between the Bible

and (to take as an example the case most favourable to disagreement with the Bible) the Ptolemy Canon, to which the Bible has been made to bend even by its professed friends. This work is declared as of the highest authority by the best judges, and this truly enough if it be added: but only within certain limits. For a certain period of Bible history this work is the only profane chronological authority, No contradiction has yet been established between it and the Bible, but neither has any harmony. Accordingly nearly all the conservative, Bible chronologers accept Ptolemy as the standard, and unbendingly bend the Bible thereto: with result not only of distortion of the Bible, but also dismal confusion of history as well as chronology.

Now Canon I assigns Ptolemy his proper place: it does not diminish his worth, not even

reduce his rank. Where prince before, he may still remain prince, but before the Bible he is only a prince in presence of his—Sovereign.

And what is true of Ptolemy’s Canon is equally true of every other source of knowledge

in fields covered also by the Bible. This is especially true of much that in these days likes to think of itself as Science. In its own legitimate field it is indeed supreme, though even there it is already presumption, which are long becomes downright arrogance, to assert that because things have been thus during the few millennia within the experience of man, they always have been and always will continue thus. But whenever Science professes to contradict the Bible in its field, it proves itself by this very fact to be either No-Science, or at best only dyspeptic science.

5

V. CANON II

The Old Testament text adopted as the basis of discussion is that of the Hebrew

Masoretes, of the present Hebrew copies, of which the Protestant Versions are translations.

§ 9. For a Bible Chronology there are four rivals in the field as authorities: the Hebrew

Masoretic text, its Greek translation by the Seventy, the Samaritan Five Books of Moses, and Josephus. Each presents a different chronology, with a difference in some data of a thousand years between them. Josephus drops out at once from the competition, as one who had before him no more than the same three rivals that we have. Josephus is a mere interpreter of other authorities, not an original authority himself for Bible dates. The state of his text in matters of dates is moreover such as to prevent the construction of a consistent system of chronology thereon as yet.

§ 10. Of the preservation and transmission of the Samaritan text next to nothing is

known. There are no materials for deciding on its claims as rival of the Hebrew and the Greek. It agrees wholly with neither. Enough suspicion, moreover, has already been thrown upon it by Gesenius as to absolve the student for the present from taking seriously its chronological claims as against the Hebrew and the Seventy.

§ 11. The Seventy is a translation only, with now and then an addition to the Hebrew. Its

transmission, therefore, was not watched over as zealously, or even as carefully, as that of the original. The Hebrew was always held by its custodians the Jews as their final authority. It was its divisions, chapters, verses, words, and letters that were so carefully counted and recorded. It was its manner of being copied and handled that was so carefully protected by the various stringent rules about pen, ink, and parchment and scribe, length of page, line, and spacings. And the Hebrew, moreover, is in possession of the field. The burden of proof is on its rivals to show cause why it should be ousted and they installed. This proof after a battle of decades between the acutest intellects of Christendom has not been produced.

VI. CANON III.

The present Hebrew Text to be firmly held to, and abandoned only where a

copyist’s error is proved from the Bible itself; the correction, moreover, to be made only from the Bible itself.

§ 12. Thus l Kings 6:1 is in the Hebrew literally: “And it was in the year eighty and year

four hundreds from Israel’s children’s departure from Egypt land, in the year the fourth, in month Ziph (that is the month the second) of Solomon’s reign over Israel—and he built the house unto the Lord.”

The simple English is: 480 years from the Exodus, in the second month of Year Four of

his reign Solomon began build the Temple.

Three peculiar but usual idioms of the Hebrew are to be noted here: (1) the numbers are

given not in the letters of the alphabet (corresponding somewhat to the modern Arabic figures), but in their own names, words in full eighty and four hundreds, not 480, nor even 80 and 400. (2) The word year is repeated: not 480 years, but 80 years and 400 years. (3) The word year, though plural with numbers up to ten, is singular with numbers above ten. Hence it is not 80 years and 400 years, but 80 year and 400 year, necessitating a transposition of the number in the English, which perhaps varies somewhat the sense of the phrase in the original. 6

§ 13. With these facts before us we are confronted with the assertion of all the advocates

of a longer period between the Exodus and the Temple that 480 is an error, and they make it therefore 580.

As the year of the Temple is a cardinal date for Bible chronology, and its proper placing

is a good illustration of both the need and soundness of this canon, it is best discussed at some length.

§ 14. Four plausible reasons are brought forth in favour of the notion that there is an

“error” here.

(1) Hebrew letters being used for numerals (like our Arabic figures), one letter is readily mistaken for another where there is some resemblance between them, so that the letter for 10 might be mistaken for the letter for 6; or 8 for 5, or 4 for 200, etc.

(2) Josephus makes this period nearly 580 years.

(3) The book of Judges requires at least 580 years for this period.

(4) Paul’s statement in Acts 13: 17-21 requires a longer period than 480 years.

As to (1). Neither in the Hebrew Old Testament nor the Greek New Testament are

letters ever used for numerals. The words for the numbers are always given. Four, not 4. Hundred, not 100. If chamishi, five, can be mistaken into arbaah, four, it can be mistaken into any other number, and 680, 780, or 980 are as likely as 580.

§ 15. As to (2). However trustworthy Josephus be as to FACTS he personally testifies to,

in relation to the status of the Hebrew text of the Old Testament the mention of his name is irrelevant. He nowhere discusses the Hebrew text. The status, moreover, of his own Greek text is such that the contradictions therein in matters chronological are best accounted for by the need of much revision of his text which has apparently suffered not a little from transcribers, editors, or harmonizers.

Moreover, the numbers of Josephus for this period are 612 in one place and 592 in

another. The change of the biblical 480 into 580 is thus of no help here toward agreement with Josephus at any rate.

§ 16. As to (3). The data of Judges, interpreted in favour of the longer chronology, and

only thus, require for this period not 520, but some 630 years.

As to (4). The data of Paul in Acts 13:17-21, interpreted likewise in favour of the longer

period, but only thus, call not for 580, but for some nine hundred years.

All the advocates of the longer chronology agree in rejecting, against all the manuscripts,

the number 480 in 1 Kings 6:1, but no two agree as to the exact length of the individual items of this period: each writer having for these a scheme of his own to harmonize it with the preconceptions already brought thereto. They agree, however, that the number is “probably” 580, but produce no textual authority for it; no manuscripts, no versions. The only version here that speaks, the Seventy, is indeed against the 480, but its number is not more, but less—440.

The violence thus done to the Hebrew text in substituting from mere conjecture 580 for

480 is not only arbitrary and contrary to all the duties one owes to ancient documents, to say nothing of the persons who wrote them (the golden rule having been promulgated in favour of the dead as well as of the living), it fails even of its purpose: since 580 serves here no better than 480. The “discrepancy” between Judges and Acts on the one side and Kings on the other is left. The so-called error might as well have been any number other than 480,

§ 17. The apparent discrepancy noted above is a difficulty: be duly recognized

explained and harmonized; but it does not justify on the grounds given above the abandonment

7

of the Hebrew text. In matters scientific, above all in matters biblical, the procedure of the school boy, who rubs out the figures when they do not add together correctly and substitutes others, is in nowise to be imitated, least of all in an age that boasts of a better equipment for the discovery, or even pursuit of truth than any other. This departure from the text has not settled Bible chronology; it has only thrown it into confusion, as is testified to by the failure of any two of the Longer chronologists to agree as to the details of this period.

It is as a safeguard against the numerous occasions for confusion, of which the case of the

480 years is only a notable example, that Canon III is to be adhered to.

§ 18. As this case of the 480 years is a good example not only of the need of this canon

but also of its efficacy, the demonstration is herewith given from the book of Judges itself that at least one statement of his own demands a shorter period than is apparently demanded by its data as a whole.

For its sins the people of God are in Judg. 10: 6-11: 28, delivered into the hand of

Ammon for eighteen years. They repent, and Jephthah is raised up to deliver them. He sends to Ammon to inquire why he is fighting his people. The answer is, “Because when he came up from Egypt Israel took away my land from Arnon even unto Jabbok and unto Jordan. Now, therefore, restore those again in peace” (Judg. 11:13). Jephthah answers that the land had not been taken from Ammon, but from the Amorites. Ammon therefore has no claim upon them; and then adds, While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities by the side of Arnon, three hundred years, wherefore did ye not recover them within that time? (Judg. 11:26).

§ 19. From the possession, therefore, of Heshbon to the end of the Amrnon oppression is

thus according to Jephthah 300 years.

When these began is readily made out thus:

(1) Aaron the priest, in Numb. 33:38, went up into Mount Hor at the Lord’s command

and “died there in years forty from the departure of the children of Israel from Egypt land, in the fifth month, on [day] one of the month.” (2) After mourning for Aaron at Mount Hor (Numb. 21:4) thirty days (Numb. 20:29) the children of Israel journey from Mount Hor by way to the Red Sea to compass Edom land. Shortly after (Numb. 21:24-25) “Israel smote him [Sihon the Amorite king] with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from Arnon unto Jabbok . . . And Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon and all its towns.”

These 300 years then began in year 40 from the Exodus, and ended with year 18 of the

Ammon oppression.

§ 20. The data for this period from Judges are twelve in number, as follows:

1 3:8 Israel is delivered for their sins to Cushan Rishathaim years 8 2 3:11 They repent and are delivered through Othniel

years 40

3 3:14 Sin again. Eglon oppression follows

years 18

4 3:30 Deliverance through Ehud

years 80

5 4:3 Oppression by Jabin

years 20

6 5:31 Deliverance through Barak

years 40

7 6:1 Midian oppression

years 7

8 8:28 Deliverance through Gideon

years 40

9 9:22 Abimelech reigns

years 3

10 10:2 Tola judge

years 23

8

11 10:3 Jair judge

years 22

12 10:8 Ammon oppression

years 18

The sum of these twelve data is 319 years. To these are to be added: (1) the six years

from the end of the forty in the wilderness to the division of the land; (2) the time from the division of the land to the first oppression, which, as shown in Part II at year 2610 is 27 years. This makes the time from Heshbon to the end of the Ammon oppression 352 years. Jephthah says only 300. The twelve data given above cannot therefore mean to cover 52 years more. The difficulty moreover is not removed by calling 300 a round number. Round numbers, as shown below, are ruled out by Canon VI, and are to be admitted only where demonstrated as such. Here, however, it is not only undemonstrated, it is out of question. 352 is nearer 400 than 300; and Jephthah would have been a poor pleader of his cause to name 300 when 400 would have been not only nearer the truth, but would have served his purpose better. If a round number were at all to be used here, no reason can be given why 300 or even 400 should be used rather than the obvious 350.

Judges itself thus furnishes a check of its own upon its chronology, and thus warns us not

to receive all its data as material for a consecutive chronology, since up to the end of the 300 years it is already, if consecutive, 52 years out of the way according to a datum of its own.

So far, therefore, as Judges is concerned the 480 years from the Exodus to the Temple

need not yet be disturbed. And as the chronology of Acts 13:19 is apparently linked with it, whatever clears up the one clears up also the other. The calling in question, therefore, of the number 480 on the authority of Judges and Acts is not yet warranted by what has so far been brought forward.

§ 21. Again: In 2 Kings 24:8, Jehoiachin “was a son of eighteen years at his reigning,

and he reigned in Jerusalem three months.” In 2 Chron. 36:9 he is a son of eight years at his reigning, and he reigned three mouths and ten days. All the manuscripts and versions retain the eight here. It is a singular testimony to the fidelity of the Hebrew custodians of the text that this apparent discrepancy is left without a trace of attempt at correction.

The commentators, however, are all here at one. If ever, they say, there was a textual

error it is surely here. The king was either 18 or 8, he could not have been both. No room here for harmonizings, allegorizings, deeper meanings. An error here surely is, and moreover it is in Chronicles. For in the other book the Babylon king arried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the mother of the king, and the wives of the king. At 18 he might have a wife, and even wives, but not at 8, at least not more than the one to whom he might have been betrothed even at that early age. And even for this latter assumption there is no occasion in view of the rival 18 in the other book. A textual error is here therefore uniformly accepted by all. Read 18 for 8. Lovers of the Bible charge indeed the error only to the original scribe. But enemies of the Bible are content with nothing short of an error by the author himself.

§ 22. Now here it is where Canon III demands heed. A difficulty here certainly is, but

one in nowise compelling enough to justify violence to the author. Such drastically might perhaps be tolerated in an ordinary book, but not in the book of God. The ways of God are not as the ways of man, neither is His Book as the book of a man. It is still possible that the father found it advisable to appoint his son fellow-ruler even at the age of eight, The circumstances of his reign do not preclude it, would even justify it. As such a co-reign is not infrequent in Israel, and is found at least once in the southern kingdom, no one has a right to eliminate here a co-reign of father and son as an impossibility. “Not credible, . . . improbable? “unlikely? “strange,” are all

9

irrelevant here. Folk living thousands of years as well as miles from certain events are not the most fitted to say off hand what at such vast distance of time, place, and circumstance is possible or impossible, likely or unlikely.

§ 23. But even a glance at the Hebrew should have halted commentators here, for the

error, if any, covers the word year as well as the numeral 8. It is plural here, as is usual with numbers up to ten, whereas with 18 it would be singular. This so-called error is thus not merely casual, it is studied, meditated error, all the more so since in Chronicles the ten days not mentioned in Kings are carefully added to the three months of that reign. This Latter circumstance alone should have protected here the sacred writer from the habitual criticism dealt out to him so rashly by the two writers of the Hastings Bible dictionary.

With this co-reign thus possible Canon III forbids the disregard thereof. Of the two evils,

the tampering with the text on grounds short of demonstration, and the admission of an unproven, and even unmotived but possible co-reign, the latter is not only by far the smaller, but the choice thereof extends so the dead-at least that fairness which is extended to the living by these for whom the Golden Rule is still aught more than mere rhetoric.

§ 24. Other is indeed the case of 2 Chron. 16:1, “In year thirty and six of Asa’s reign

Baasha king of Israel went up against “Judah and built Ramah.” Here Baasha is alive and vigorous in 36 Asa But in 1 Kings 15:33 the account is year three of Asa . . . Baasha . . . reigned over all Israel in Tirzah-twenty and four year years.” In I Kings 16: 8 it is, In year twenty and six of Asa ... Elah son of Baasha reigned in Tirzah—two years. The twenty-four current years of Baasha are thus accounted for. 1 Baasha being 3 Asa, 24 Baasha is 26 Asa; and Elah son of Baasha duly begins his reign in that year. He reign, moreover, after the death of his father; for in 1 Kings 16:6 Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah, and Elah his son reigned in his stead. In 26 Asa then Baasha is dead according to Kings, but according to Chronicles he was still warring against Judah and building a fortress ten years later. The text of Kings is thus consistent throughout, it is Chronicles that perplexes. All attempts to harmonize Kings and Chronicles here are at best only plausible, if indeed the remedy offered is not at times as bad as the disease. Thus Archbishop Usher, followed here by Bishop Patrick, Adam Clarke, and others, holds that by “year thirty and six of Asa’s reign,” (or kingdom as Malcuth may also mean) is meant year 36 of the kingdom of Judah, which began with Rehoboam in 3054 from Adam. This would be 16 Asa, or 3089 Adam, where Baasha’s attempt on Ramah may indeed fit in. This explanation is, of course, not absolutely impossible. But here again the choice is between two evils: a possible copyist’s error in the text, or a novel, unique interpretation of a common phrase habitually used only in the one technical sense. An interpretation which, moreover, offers no compensation for the violence it does to both Dictionary and common sense.

Accordingly, here the writer, with all his veneration for Usher and Patrick, and respect

for Adam Clarke, is ready to admit a primitive copyist’s error (all the more so as the number 36 is demonstrated in Part II1 to be impossible). But as the Bible itself furnishes no means for correction here, the passage according to Canon III is left for the present as it is, until in the goodness of God the means for correction are at hand.

VII. CANON IV.

A clear Statement in one part of the Bible is to be held to against others not so clear in other parts. The light from the clear to be thrown on the obscure, rather than the obscure to darken the light. A mere difficulty is not to annul a certainty.

10

§ 25. The case of 1 Kings with the 480 years from Exodus to Temple, which as already

seen fails under Canon III, fails also under this Canon IV. The statement in Kings is clear. The data of Judges and Acts in apparent conflict therewith are acknowledged by all to need elucidation. Accordingly Kings in this case is to be used for clearing up Judges and Acts rather than letting their obscurity darken the light of Kings.

§ 26. Likewise in Gal. 3:16-18 “the promises were spoken to Abraham . . . But this I

say: A covenant confirmed afore by God the Law which came four hundred and thirty years after, disannulleth not unto the voiding of the promise. For if the inheritance is of law, it is no longer of promise. But to Abraham God hath granted it by promise.” This statement through Paul is clear and positive. From the Covenant with Abraham (whenever it was) to the Law (given at Sinai) is 430 years. But by the side of this is Ex. 12: 40-41: “And the sojourning of Israel’s sons who sojourned in Egypt had was thirty years and four hundred years. And it was at the end of thirty years and four hundred years (and it was the self-same day) that all the hosts of the Lord went out from Egypt land.”

As this was only some three months from the Law at Sinai (“In the third month after

Israel’s sons were gone forth from Egypt land, the same day they came into the Sinai wilderness”—Ex. 19:1), Gal 3:16 is here apparently contradicted: seemingly this passage asserts that from the going down of the sons of Jacob with their father to sojourn in Egypt to the Law it was 430 years. But the Covenant with Abraham was at the latest the year before Isaac was born, when Abraham was ninety-nine. Isaac was 60 when Jacob was born, and Jacob was 130 when he came to Egypt. But year, 60, 130, and 430 years, give 621 years from the (Covenant to the Law, if the data of Exodus are correctly understood here.

§ 27. Galatians is clear, Exodus not so clear. “Sojourned,” “Israel’s sons” (apparently

including the father also), “Egypt land” to which the regions of Abraham’s and Isaac’s abode may have been subject some time in their day)-every one of these terms needs much elucidation before they can be allowed to annul the clear statement in Galatians. Canon IV. thus makes Galatians the standard here by which Exodus is to be interpreted, rather than Exodus for Galatians; the clear is standard for the obscure, not the obscure for the clear: Exodus meanwhile being held in abeyance for further light thereon from elsewhere.

§ 28. Subject to the same Canon is the manner of establishing the year of Abraham’s

birth, which affects all succeeding Bible dates. In Acts 7:2-4 the statement through Stephen is clear that when Abraham left Haran his father Terah was—dead. “The God of the Glory appeared to our father Abraham . . . and said to him, Come out of thy land . . . Then came he out of the Chaldeans’ land and dwelt in Haran; and thence after his father’s death [God] removed him into this land wherein ye now dwell.” In Gen. 11:32 “all the days of Terah were five years and two hundred years.” In Gen. 12:4 Abraham is a “son of five years’ and seventy years when he departed from Haran.” According then to Stephen, expressly said to have been then “filled with Holy Spirit,” Terah was 205 years less 75 when Abraham was born, or 130; and this statement is clear and simple. But in Gen. 11:26 “Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram,. Nahor, and Haran,” apparently begetting triplets then of whom Abraham is the first-born. In the clear light of Acts 7:2-4 this statement at once demands elucidation. If Abraham was born when his father was 70, he was at Terah’s death 135, not 75. Canon IV. here accordingly requires that the clear statement through Stephen be held to against Gen. 11: 26, where there is room for the meaning that Terah became a father at 70; and his children were Abram, Nahor, and Haran: of whom the first is not necessarily the oldest, but named first for an obvious reason, though not given here. With this and like possibilities Gen. 11:26 can with propriety be held in

11

abeyance for further light, with Stephen, however, meanwhile as the standard. This all the more since the case of Abram, Nahor and Haran is paralleled by that of Shem, Ham and Japher, where is demonstrated that Shem, though named first, was not only not the oldest of triplets, but was two years younger than Japher.

VIII. CANON V.

The Terms of the original Bible Languages are to be strictly Adhered to in Translation. Keeping specially to the Distinction between Cardinal and Ordinal Numbers, and heeding the different Methods of using Chronological Terms.

§ 29. Thus in Gen. 7:6 “Noah was a son of six hundred years, and the flood of waters

was on the earth.” This and all like cases is rendered in the English version 600 years old. On its face the precise meaning of the chronological term “a son of years” may indeed need clearing up. It may or may not mean that Noah had already lived full 600 years. But the English here is at least not a mistranslation. When however they render Gen. 7:11, “In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life.” making Noah live up to that time only 599 years, they mistranslate. For the Hebrew has it: “In year six hundred years.” This peculiar expression “In year six hundred years,” whatever else it may mean, does not mean the six hundredth year. It was meant in fact to guard against this very error. For the whole verse is: “in year six hundred of Noah’s life, in the second month, on day seventeen of the month, on this day all fountains of a great deep were broken up, and windows of the heavens were opened.” Whatever the reason, a distinction between the month on the one hand, and the day and the year on the other, is kept up: Year six hundred, day seventeen, but second month, not month two.

Likewise in Gen. 8:13: “And it was in year one and six hundred of Noah, in the first

[month], on [day] one of the month.” Year 601, day one, but first month.

§ 30. The same distinction is oft kept up elsewhere. In 1 Kings 6:1, as seen in § 12, it is

carefully made between the cardinal and ordinal numbers. The English translations have it: “And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year,” thus making the full period from Exodus to Temple 479 years, shortening the chronology here by one year, and in the case of the Flood by another year in the same manner. The Hebrew gives Solomon’s regnal year as an ordinal, “the fourth”; but the period as a cardinal number: “eighty years and four hundred years”—the very distinction being designed to warn against mistake.

The habitual disregard of these distinctions by Bible chronologers in the numerous data

of Kings and Chronicles has made of the whole simple chronology of this period a veritable jungle at their hands, through which the way to daylight can be cut only by means of anarchies, interregna, or joint reigns not found in the Bible.

§ 31. How softly one has to tread in the presence of the utmost accuracy of Scripture in

the original is best seen from an example or two. Of the ten pre-flood patriarchs Adam is the first and Noah the last. These two have accordingly their years given thus: “And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred years and thirty years.” “And all the days that Noah lived were nine hundred years and fifty years” (Gen. 5:3-31; 9:29). The hundreds are in these two cases given first. But for the eight patriarchs between the first and last it is: “And all the days of Seth were twelve years and nine hundred years,” with the hundreds not first but last in every case.

12

§ 32. In Ex. 6:16, 18, 20, the years of the lives of Levi, Kohath and Amram are given

respectively as “seven and thirty and hundred years, . . . . three and thirty and hundred years,” and “seven and thirty and hundred years.” Years is given only once; and the order is: units, tens, hundreds. But the lives of Sarah, Abraham and Ishmael are given thus: “And Sarah’s life was hundred years and twenty years and seven years-years of Sarah’s life.” “And these [are the] days of Abraham’s life which he lived: hundred years and seventy years and five years.” “And these [the] years of Ishmael’s life: hundred years, thirty years and seven years” (Gen. 23:1; 25:7, 17). Here year is repeated thrice, with each denomination; and the denominations, moreover, are reversed from the order of Levi. Kohath and Amram. Here the order is: hundreds, tens, units. Of Isaac it is: “And Isaac’s days were hundred years and eighty years’ (Gen. 35: 28), which in the absence of units still holds to the manner and order of his father, mother and brother. But with Jacob it is: “And Jacob’s days were, the years of his life, seven years and forty and hundred year; (Gen. 47: 28). Here the order is the same with Levi, Kohath, and Amram; units first, hundreds last. The repetition of year is kept, but only once instead of twice; so that the case of Jacob is midway between Abraham, Sarah and Ishmael, with their year thrice, and Levi, Kohath and Amram with their one.

The reason for these changes in the notation of the length of life, and others like them, are

unknown to the writer. But dull reader indeed would he be of God’s book, if he were take all this as mattering naught, unimportant. meaningless . . .

IX. CANON VI.

The Dictionary Meaning of the Terms used is to be strictly Adhered to, and

Departed from only when the ordinary Meaning is made Impossible by other Established Facts.

§ 33. The disregard of this Canon by all Bible Chronologers in at least two crucial data

has completely deranged not only the Bible chronology, but also all chronology after 2083 from Adam: since Profane Chronology is based on the synchronisms of some years of Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon with those of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah of Judah. These two dates best illustrate the utmost need of this Canon:

§ 34. In Gal. 3:17 Paul says: “A covenant confirmed afore by God, the Law which came

four hundred and thirty years after, doth not disannul?” This statement makes two demands upon the correct locating of its dates upon the chart: (l) The 430 years must begin with a COVENANT, with nothing short thereof; not with something like it, or even near it. It must be a covenant. (2) The period from this Covenant to the Law must be four hundred and thirty years, and not merely “about” that number, nor any other number. It must be just what Paul says: 430. Moreover, Ex. 12:41 says expressly, “It was at [the] end of thirty years and four hundred years,—and it was on that very day, that all hosts of the Lord went out from Egypt land.” The 430 years, from the time they began at the Covenant, apparently ended to a day at the Exodus. Not only 430 years, but 430 years exactly.

§ 35. In spite, however, of these two explicit requirements, these 430 years are dated by

chronologers with one accord, so far as is known to the writer, from what is designated as Abraham’s Call, when he was seventy-five, in 2083 from Adam. This event is told in Gen. 12:1-4, 7, 9, thus:

“And the Lord said to Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and

from thy father’s house unto the land that I will show thee, and I will make thee a great nation,

13

and will bless thee and make thy name great, and be thou a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and him that curseth thee I will curse, and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And Abram went as the Lord had spoken unto him, and Lot went with him. And Abram was a son of five years and seventy years when he departed from Haran . . . . And the Lord appeared to Abram and said, Unto thy seed will l give this land; and there he builded an altar unto the Lord who appeared unto him. And he removed thence to the mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent having Bethel on the west and Ai on the east; and there he built an altar to the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord. And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the South.”

§ 36. Here is indeed the Lord’s call unto Abram, the date also is there: Abram is

seventy-five; and he obtains additional promises in answer to his obedience. But there is here no COVENANT. A gracious call from the Lord, the promise of reward for obedience, Abram’s obedience, and the consequent enlargement of the first promise, are indeed all here, and duly dated, but the vital requisite of the Covenant is not here. The 430 from the Covenant cannot therefore begin when Abram was 75 in 2083, when no covenant with him is recorded.

Thus every Chronology based on 2083 as the Covenant year at once—collapses.

§ 37. No covenant with Abram is mentioned till Gen. 15:18, but this is some time after

the Call.

In Gen. 12:1-8 Abram at 75 leaves Haran, goes to Canaan hundreds of miles off, leaves it

only because of famine, and goes to Egypt, another long distance. Sarah is long enough in Pharaoh’s house to be the cause of his being plagued by the Lord with great plagues, himself and his house (Gen. 12:10-20). Abram leaves Egypt with “sheep and oxen and he-asses and men servants and maid servants and she-asses and camels.” Thus encumbered, in days when fifteen miles a day was good progress, he gets back to Bethel. There is difficulty about pasture for the herds, and Lot parts from him for Sodom. There is war between Sodom and its allies, and Chederlaomer and his: five kings against four; and Lot is taken with the king of Sodom. Abram pursues, and delivers his nephew. It is after all this that “the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision,” which ended in a covenant. “On that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying: Unto thy seed have I given this land, from Egypt’s river to the great river, the river Euphrates” (Gen. 15:18).

§ 38. This might well be the Covenant required, since shortly after the Call the promise

had been merely, To thy seed will I give this land. Now it is, I have given. Hitherto the promise had been conditional, depending on his obedience, faithfulness. Now it is made sure (have given, henceforth stablished, irrevocable), because a Covenant has now been made between the contracting parties, and duly ratified with sacrifices on Abram’s part, and the flaming torch passing between the pieces on the Lord’s part. “When the sun went down and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace and a flaming torch that passed between the pieces.”

It was in connection moreover with this covenant that “Abram believed God, and it was

reckoned to him for righteousness.” It is with this faith in the promised Seed in whom all the nations were to be blessed, with this faith in the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the world, it is with this evangelical faith that Abram became, according to Rom. 4:11, father of the faithful of all the succeeding ages. A covenant, a most important covenant, is thus indeed made here with Abram; but this covenant, which thus meets all the other requirements, fails in the one essential for Chronology: it is not—dated. The time occupied by the events of Gen. 12:10-15 2 cannot be determined. The only event dated is the war between the five kings and the four; and

14

even this only that it began in year thirteen of Chedarlaomer (Gen. 14:1-5). But when this king began to reign is not stated.

§ 39. The next event recorded after this covenant is in Gen. 16:1-3, where Sarai gives

Hagar to Abram for a wife; this is “after Abram had dwelt ten years in Canaan land” (verse 3). What is known of this covenant, therefore, is that it took place at least a year after Abram left Haran at 75 (if not several years), but not later than Abram’s year 85, since he begat Ishmael at 86. But this leaves the Covenant from which the 430 years are to be dated undetermined, with a possible variation of several years for its limits.

This failure to meet the one essential requirement for establishing its date is fatal to the

claim of this covenant being the one needed. And the entire Bible Chronology, once the beginning of the 430 years being left obscure, with the Profane Chronology linked thereto, is after 2083 from Adam, left in suspense, a bridge with one end short of the shore.

As, therefore, the dating of the 430 years from the Call of Abram at 75 is a violation of

Canon VI, so also is the same dating from this Covenant. The one is no covenant, the other has no date.

§ 40. Far other is the case with Gen. 17:1-27. In the very first verse of this account of

the Covenant as if a bell is rung, lest the date be missed by the careless. “And Abram (he is still Abram, not yet the covenanted with Abraham) was a son of ninety years and nine years; and the Lord appeared to Abram and said to him: I am God Almighty, walk before Me, and be perfect; and I will make My covenant (no longer a covenant) between Me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. And Abram fell on his face, and God talked with him, saying: As for Me, behold My Covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be father of a multitude of nations. Neither shall thy name be called Abram any more, but thy name shall be called Abraham, for I have made thee father of a multitude of nations . . . And I will stablish My Covenant between Me and thee and thy seed after thee throughout their generations for an ETERNAL COVENANT to be God unto time and thy seed after thee . . . As for thee, thou shalt keep My Covenant: thou and thy seed after thee throughout their generations. THIS IS MY COVENANT: WHICH YE SHALL KEEP BETWEEN ME AND YOU AND THY SEED AFTER THEE. EVERY MALE AMONG YOU SHALL BE CIRCUMCISED. And ye shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of a covenant between Me and you . . . And the uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he hath broken My covenant . . . And Abraham was a son of ninety and nine years when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin; and Ishmael was a son of thirteen years when he was circumcised.”

§ 41. Of the several chimes with which this covenant is rung in three are chronological.

In verse 1 Abram is 99; in verse 20 Abraham, now circumcised, is 99; and in verse 25 Ishmael is thirteen, he having been born when Abraham was 86 (Gen. 16:16). In verse 2 the covenant is only promised. In verse 3 Abraham responds with humiliation and Worship. This the Lord honours with the assurance that the covenant hitherto only promised now is with him. (verse 4), and now gives him the new, covenant name Abraham (verse 5). But this as yet only his personal covenant. To be enlarged to his seed also, the covenant must be ratified by Abraham himself and his seed after him by a definite act of obedience, circumcision. And as no uncircumcised were within the covenant, being cut off, this covenant with Abraham was not in effect till himself and his put their signature, seal thereto upon their flesh. The covenant thus ratified by both parties now becomes valid, and the promised heir of the Covenant is then and there named, and is duly born next year. “THIS IS MY COVENANT which ye shalt keep” (verse 10). This is the covenant duly signed, duly ratified, and duly dated, by both parties: by God in giving Abrabam the new

15

name, and in opening Sarah’s womb; and by Abraham in his obedience for himself and his house by circumcision. This is thus the only covenant from which Paul could date the 430 years to the Law: the one made with Abraham when he was 99, in 2107 (7 x 7 x 43, three and four being also seven) from Adam.

§ 42. A like violation of Canon V in the received dates of the Babylon captivity period

results in the same confusion for all the dates thereafter. Chronologers are nearly unanimous in dating the Seventy Years’ captivity of Judah from 4 Jehoiakim, in 3428, a year which meets neither of the two specifications conditioning this period:

(1) In Dan. 9:1-2 it is: “In year one of Darius, son of Ahasuerus, . . . in year one of his

reign I Daniel understood by books the number of the years whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet for accomplishing desolations of Jerusalem—seventy years.” Here, as in the case of the Covenant, two specifications must be complied with: (1) Jerusalem must be desolate for (2) seventy years; any state of Jerusalem short of desolation thus failing to meet the need.

§ 43. Daniel only refers to Jeremiah, and these are the passages he refers to: (2) Jer. 25:9-12. “Behold, I will send and take all the families of the North, and unto

Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon My servant, and will bring them against this land and against its inhabitants, and against all these nations round about, and I will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment and a hissing and perpetual desolations. . . . This whole land shall be desolation and astonishment, and these nations shall serve the Babylon king seventy years; and it shall be when seventy years are accomplished that I will punish the Babylon king.” This was uttered in 4 Jehoiakim, the very year in which the Captivity is supposed to begin.

(3) Jer. 29:10-14. “Thus saith the Lord: When seventy years are accomplished for

Babylon I will visit you and perform My good word toward you in causing you to return to this place . . . Ye shall call upon Me, and ye shall go and pray unto Me, and I will hearken unto you. . . . I will be found of you, saith the Lord, and I will turn your captivity.” Uttered in 1 Zedekiah, eight years after 4 Jehoiakim, in which year the Captivity is already supposed to have begun.

§ 44. But the seventy years are found also elsewhere as follows: (4) Zech. 1:16. “In the eighth month in year two of Darius the word of the Lord came to

Zechariah the prophet, son of Berechiah, son of Iddo, saying . . . Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Return unto Me, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will return to you. . . . On day twenty-four of month eleven—the same is month Shebat—in year two of Darius the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah. . . . Then the angel of the Lord answered and said, 0 Lord of hosts, how long wilt Thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah against which Thou hast had indignation these seventy years? And the Lord answered: . . . I am jealous for Jerusalem and Zion with a great jealousy. . . . I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies; Mine house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.?”

(5) Zech. 7:1-5. “It was in year four of Darius the king; the word of the Lord came to

Zechariah on day four of the ninth month. . . . When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh [months], and this (too) seventy years, did ye at all fast unto Me ?”

(6) In 2 Chron. 36: 11-23, Zedekiah “reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, and he did what

was evil in sight of the Lord his God. . . . Moreover all the chiefs of the priests and the people trespassed very greatly after all the abominations of the nations, and they polluted the house of the Lord . . . they mocked God’s messengers and despised His word and scoffed at His prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against His people till there was no remedy. Therefore He 16

brought the king of the Chaldeans, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or virgin, old man or hoary headed, He gave all into his hand. And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king and of his princes, all these he brought to Babylon. And they burned God’s house, and brake down Jerusalem’s wall, and burnt all its palaces with fire, and destroyed all its goodly vessels. And them that escaped the sword he carried away to Babylon; they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the king of Persia; to fulfill the word of the Lord by Jeremiah’s mouth, until the land had enjoyed its sabbaths; as long as it lay desolate it kept sabbath to fulfill seventy years, and in year one of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by [the] mouth of Jeremiah be accomplished, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made proclamation . . . . the Lord the God of heaven . . . . hath charged me to build Him a house in Jerusalem which is in Judah. Whoever is among you of all His people, the Lord his God be with him, and let him go up.”

(7) After relating the events from Zedekiah’s year 11 both 2 Kings 25:21 and its parallel

account in Jer. 52:27 add, So Judah was carried away captive out of the land.

(8) Isa. 44:24-4; 5:4. “Thus saith the Lord . . . . that saith of Jerusalem, She shall be

inhabited; and of the cities of Judah, They shall be built, and I will raise up its waste places; that saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up the rivers; that saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, She shall be built, and of the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. Thus saith the Lord to His anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden to subdue nations before him. . . . I will break in pieces the doors of brass, cut asunder the bars of iron . . . that thou know that it is I, the Lord, who call thee by thy name. . . . I have called thee by thy name, 1 have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known Me. . . . I will gird thee though thou hast not known Me.”

§ 45. Passages (1), (2), (4) and (6) agree on a period of desolation of Judah. Passage (8)

implies it, since it foretells a desolation of what in Isaiah’s time, about a century before, was still in its glory. Passages (1) to (6) all persist in the assertion that this period of desolation was to be seventy years.

Passages (2) and (3) assert that these seventy years of desolation, if not identical with,

cover nearly the same period as, the bestowal of power on Babylon over Judah. When one ends, the other also ends, or is near its end.

Passage (3) promises restoration to Judah on repentance and prayer for deliverance. Passage (8) names a century in advance the deliverer and restorer, Cyrus. In Passage (4) the Lord calls unto repentance and prayer for the promised restoration. In Passage (1) Daniel accordingly thus confesses and intercedes for Judah and Jerusalem,

in the rest of the chapter.

Passages (6) and (7) begin this captivity of seventy years with the taking of Jerusalem

and the king, and the destruction of the Temple in 11 Zedekiah.

Passage (4) marks 2 Darius as the last year of these 70.

Passage (6) marks 1 Cyrus as the year of the Restoration, and therefore as the year next to

2 Darius.

Finally: What Genesis 17, with all its minutiae, does for the identification of THE

COVENANT Passage, (6), the last chapter of 2 Chronicles, does for the identification of the beginning of the Captivity. Hardly a line thereof but has a bell ringing therein, LO, THIS is the Captivity from which the Seventy years are to be counted; do not, oh do not mistake aught else for this! And dull indeed must be that betheorised ear that remains deaf to the pleading of that chapter.

17

§ 46. From these eight scriptures the following scheme is readily constructed: About a century before his time Cyrus is named through Isaiah as the one who should

restore Jerusalem and the Temple and the land of Judah from a condition of ruin, which at the time of the prophecy was wholly out of sight.

In 4 Jehoiakim, which is l Nebuchadnezzar, Jeremiah predicts a seventy years’ captivity

and desolation upon Jerusalem and Judah. At about the end of these seventy years Babylon, the desolator, would itself in turn be visited with wrath. and Judah restored if penitent and prayerful.

Jeremiah’s prophecy duly begins to be fulfilled eighteen years later in 11 Zedekiah and

19 Nebuchadnezzar. Judah is led captive and Jerusalem laid desolate.

Daniel discovers in Jeremiah (in 1 Darius the Mede, year 69 of the Captivity), its exact

length, and gives himself to repentance by confession, and prayer and intercession for the restoration of his people. The next year, in 2 Darius the Mede, the last of the Seventy, the angel of the Lord also inquires, Is not this the time for the end of Judah’s affliction? The same year, the seventy years of Babylon’s exaltation end, and it falls under Belshazzar to Darius the Mede, is related in detail in Daniel V.

With the fall of Babylon Judah’s Captivity ends, and the next year, in 1 Cyrus he

becomes the deliverer and restorer Jerusalem and Judah.

§ 47. With the year after 11 Zedekiah, or 3447 from Adam, (thus meeting the

specifications required for the first year of the Seventy Captivity) are now to be compared the other captivities (if any) of Judah as candidates for the required Seventy years.

Four other captivities of Judah are recorded before 11 Zedekiah: (1) Of Manasseh, only in 2 Chron. 33:10-11. “And the Lord spake to Manasseh and the

people, but they gave no heed. Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh. in chains and bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon,”

(2) Of Jehoahaz, the first to reign of the three sons of Josiah who were kings. This

captivity is related in both 2 Kings 23:31-34 and 2 Chron. 36:1-4. “Jehoahaz . . . reigned three months. . . . And Pharaoh Necho put him in bonds at Riblah in Hamath land that he might not reign in Jerusalem, and put the land to tribute. And Pharaoh Necho made Eliskim, son of Josiah, king in the room of Josiah his father, . . . but took Jehoahaz away and he came to Egypt and died there.”

“Joahaz . . . reigned three months in Jerusalem. And the king of Egypt deposed him at

Jerusalem, and fined the land a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold. And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho took Joahaz his brother and carried him to Egypt.”

(3) Of Jehoiakim. Not recorded at all in 2 Kings; in 2 Chron. 36:5-7, apparently so: but

really recorded only in Dan. l:1-3:

“Jehoiakim . . . reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. . . . Against him came up

Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar also carried off the vessels of the house of the Lord to Babylon, and put them in his temple.”

The parallel account in 2 Kings 23:36; 24:6 is : “Jehoiakim . . . reigned eleven years in

Jerusalem. . . . In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three years. And the Lord sent against him bands of the Chaldeans and bands of the Syrians and bands of the Moabites and bands of Ammon’s children, and sent them against Judah to destroy it . . . for the sins of Manasseh . . . So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers, and Jekoiachin reigned in his stead.”

18

§ 48. Captivities (1) and (2) at once drop out of competition: since Jeremiah foretold the

king of Babylon as the captor. Manasseh is indeed taken to Babylon, but it was then the capital of the king of Assyria. Moreover, the captor was to be not any king of Babylon, but one specially named, Nebuchadnezzar. Jehoahaz is captive of the king of Egypt (see § 43, above, under 2, Jer. 25: 9-12). Moreover, the prophecy for the seventy years was given in 4 Jehoiakim. No Captivity therefore before that year can be the one needed.

And it is this year 4 Jehoiakim that for reasons which do not appear is the accepted year

one of the Captivity, the (3) above.

From Kings we would not know that Jehoiakim was at all a captive. From Chronicles we

learn that it was intended to take him to Babylon. But both Kings and Chronicles agree that he reigned his eleven years in Jerusalem. And as Nebuchadnezzar bound him several years before his death, and Jehoiakim died in Jerusalem, he apparently was not taken to Babylon at all, owing perhaps to a change of mind in Nebuchadnezzar. That he died in Jerusalem is clear from Jer. 22:18-19: “Thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah: They shall not lament for him [saying], Ah my brother, or Ah my sister. They shall not lament for him [saying] Ah lord, or Ah his glory. He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.”

“In year three of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of

Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand with part of the vessels of the house of God .... And the king spake unto Ashpenaz, master of his eunuchs, that he should bring: [certain] of Israel’s children and of the seed royal and of the nobles, youths in whom was no blemish.”

It is from this account of Daniel alone that we learn that there was a deportation in

Jehoiakim’s reign. And this deportation of certain youths for a specific purpose is mentioned only incidentally in order to account for Daniel’s presence in Babylon. But for this incidental necessity, this captivity would not be known. Jeremiah and Kings are silent here, and Chronicles does not report here a captivity. Of the only persons actually reported as taken by Nebuchadnezzar, the report implies that the deportation of the king himself, though at first intended, was not carried out, presumably because of Jehoiakim’s successful plea for himself that he had only been faithful to his hitherto Egyptian master. A plea of special force perhaps with a master who visited so savagely Zedekiah’s rebellion upon him by first slaying his children in their father’s sight, and then putting out his eyes: leaving the agonised father to carry this his last sight as the memory for the rest of his sightless days.

§ 49. This event thus fails of the two required specifications: there is no captivity of the

KING, nor of Judah. The few of the royal seed with Daniel were apparently at first taken merely as hostages for Jehoiakim’s fidelity to his new master. Neither is there the essential of DESOLATION of both Jerusalem and the land. The king is left in Jerusalem to live out his days there as king. Of the people, hardly any are deported. The only real deportation here was that of a part (and only a part) of the vessels of the house of God. None of these are qualifications for a captivity of king, princes and people, with the holy city and the entire land lying desolate for seventy successive years.

To reckon the 70 years from 4 (3 according to Daniel) Jehoiakim is thus out of question.

And thus the whole of Profane Chronology which is linked with 1 Cyrus succeeding the

last of the 70 years—collapses. I Cyrus is some years further away than 70 from 4 Jehoiakim or 1 Nebuchadnezzar.

§ 50. There yet remains another candidate for the Captivity to be considered.

19

(4) Of Jehoiachin: Recorded in 2 Chron. 36:9-10; 2 Kings 24:8-17; Jer. 24:1-10; and

Ezek. 1:2; 33:21; 40:1.

(a) 2 Chron. 36:9-10. “Jehoiachin . . . reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem,

and he did what was evil in [the] eyes of the Lord. And at the year’s turn king Nebuchadnezzar sent and brought him to Babylon with goodly vessels of the house of the Lord, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.” From this account alone we would only know that Jehoia- chin was the only captive of this captivity, with some vessels from the Temple.

(b) Ezek. 1:2; 33:21; 40:1. “As I was among the Captivity by the river Chebar . . . I saw

visions of God. On [day] five of the month, which was the fifth year of the king Jehoiachin’s captivity.”

“And it was in year twelve, in the tenth [month], on the fifth of the month of our

Captivity, that a fugitive from Jerusalem came to me saying, The City is smitten.”

“In year twenty and five of our Captivity, in the beginning of the year, on [day] ten of the

month, in year fourteen after the City was smitten, the self same day the hand of the Lord was upon me.

Here we learn that this Captivity was more extended than it appears from Chronicles.

Ezekiel implies that he was led away captive with Jehoiachin: he calls it once, The Captivity of Jehoiachin the king; and twice, Our Captivity, his and those taken with him. Not of the nation, of Judah, for the City, Jerusalem with its Temple, was not “smitten” till eleven years after. Moreover, if the date of his own captivity is used by Ezekiel as an era from which he thus thrice directly, and other times indirectly, dates his prophecies,—he uses the destruction of Jerusalem eleven years later also for an era.

(c) 2 Kings 24:8-17. “Jehoiachin was a son of eighteen years at his reigning, and he

reigned in Jerusalem three months . . . . At that time servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and the city was besieged. And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came upon the city, and his servants were besieging it. And Jehoiachin king of Judah went out to [the] Babylon king, and his mother and his servants and his princes and his officers. And [the]. Babylon king took him in year eight of his reign. And he brought thence all the treasures of the house of the Lord and treasures the king’s house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the Lord, as the Lord had said. And he took all Jerusalem captive, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, captivity of ten thousand and all the craftsmen and the smiths; none remained save the poor of the land. And he took Jehoinchin captive to Babylon, and the king’s mother and the king’s wives and his officers, and the mighty men of the land he made to go captive from Jerusalem to Babylon. And all the men of might, seven thousand, and the craftsmen and the smiths a thousand all strong and apt for war Babylon’s king brought them captive to Babylon. And Babylon’s king made Mattaniah his uncle king in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.”

§ 51. This account greatly expands those of Ezekiel and Chronicles and makes it a

captivity indeed. But (1) A king is still left reigning. (2) the City is not yet desolate, (3) The land itself is only incidentally mentioned here: the chief men and the poorest of the land. But of even these the “chief men” were presumably those living at court in Jerusalem.

Nevertheless this account makes this Captivity a rival, but the only rival candidate for the

year from which the Seventy years are to be dated.

(d) Jer. 24: 1-10, “the Lord showed me: and lo, two baskets of figs set before the temple

of the Lord, after that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made a captive of Jeconiah, son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah; and Judah’s princes and the craftsmen and the smiths from Jerusalem, and brought them to Babylon. The one basket had very good figs like the first ripe 20

figs; and the other basket had very bad figs which could not be eaten for badness . . . And the word of the Lord came unto me saying: Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: Like these good figs so will I regard the captives of Judah for good whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chalddeans. For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and will bring them again into this land . . . . And as the bad figs which cannot be eaten for badness, surely thus saith the Lord: So will I give up Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes and the residue of Jerusalem that remain in the land, and them that dwell in Egypt land. I will even give them to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse in all places whither I shall drive them. And I will send the sword, the famine and the pestilence among them till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and their fathers.”

Jeremiah is thus shown the exact relation between Jehoiakim’s captivity and

Zedekiah’s. The one was not to be unto DESOLATION, but for good, as mere chastening. The other was to be unto desolation, and for evil as a punishment. It was indeed to be, as in 2 Chronicles, “with out remedy.”

Thus Jehoiakim’s Captivity (already seven years after the received Captivity date),

though the only rival candidate for the beginning of the Seventy years, falls also short of one of the required specifications, the—Desolation.

Canon VI thus fixes the Seventy years Captivity as beginning with the year following 11

Zedekiah, or in 3447 from Adam, and ending with 2 Darius the Mede, the year before 1 Cyrus, or with year 3516.

Thus just as the first Covenant with Abraham was only a covenant and not the covenant,

and is accordingly left undated, so this first real captivity was a captivity and not the captivity, and is accordingly left without a desolation.

§ 52. To a similar disregard of this Canon VI is due another misplacement of two other

important dates: the beginning and end of Daniel’s seventy weeks of years.

In Dan. 9:1, 16-19, “in year 1 of Darius son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes . . . in

year one of his reign, Daniel prayed: O Lord, according to Thy righteousness let Thine anger and Thy fury, I pray Thee, be turned away from Thy city Jerusalem, Thy holy mount . . . Cause Thy face to shine upon Thy sanctuary that is desolate . . . . Behold our desolations, and the city which is called by Thy name . . . 0 Lord hear, 0 Lord forgive, 0 Lord hearken and do; defer not, for Thine own sake, 0 my God, because Thy city and Thy people are called by Thy name. And while I was speaking and praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the Lord my God, for the holy mount of my God, yea while I was speaking in prayer . . . the man Gabriel, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me.

§ 53. Daniel prays here not for the return of the captives to their land, for the restoration

of the kingdom to Israel, but solely for the restoration of the city, and for the city only because of the sanctuary it was to contain. He was praying in 1 Darius. According to Zech. 1:12 (see above 43) 2 Darius was the last year of the seventy of Captivity and Desolation.1

1The commentators and chronologers, however, are unanimous in considering the Darius of Zechariah as Hystaspes, who reigned after Cyrus. Hystaspes is well known to Profane history, of Darius the Mede it knows nothing. The clearing up of the history of this particular period is beset with difficulties. The two most important authorities for this period are here apparently in hopeless discord. But that this Darius is a predecessor of Cyrus and not a successor is clear from the statement of the angel that the Seventy Years’ Desolation are still on. All agree that at 1 Cyrus they were at an end. The chronologers and commentators, having already begun the confusion at 4 Jehoiakim as the beginning of the Captivity, could not but keep adding thereto

21

as they went on. There still. however, remains this Biblical difficulty: The Bible allows apparently for Darius the Mede only two years, but Zechariah speaks in a later chapter of the fourth year of Darius, presumably the same king; but not necessarily, in view of the difficulty it creates. In any ease, it is clear that the 2 Darius of Zechariah preceded 1 Cyrus. even if 4 Darius should prove to have succeeded it. And a mere difficulty avails nothing against a certainty.

A year before its end Daniel thus prays, 0 Lord, DEFER NOT! He had already seen

Babylon fallen to this same Darius; he had learned “from the book,” from Jeremiah, that the time was seventy years; he knew also when these seventy years began. Immediately after his prayer he is told by Gabriel that though the Captivity and Desolations are drawing to an end, he is at present to look for nothing more than a temporal restoration to God’s favour, that for the restoration of Israel to the kingdom under His own Anointed King centuries must yet intervene. “Seventy weeks [of years] are cut off for thy people and for the holy city . . . . Know therefore and discern that from the going forth of the word to restore and to build Jerusalem unto an anointed one, a prince, shall be seven sevens and sixty-two sevens; it shall be built again with street and moat in troublous times. And after the sixty and two weeks shall [the] Anointed one be cut off, and the people of the coming prince shall destroy the city and the sanctuary.” (Dan. 9: 24-26).

§ 54. Daniel prays for the restoration of the city (for its sanctuary’s sake), 0 Lord, defer

not ! He cries Delay not because Babylon had already fallen, and was now in the hands of Darius the Mede. But according to the prophecies the fall of Babylon was to signal the end of the Captivity. So he prays, 0 Lord, defer not. The answer to this prayer was the proclamation shortly after by Cyrus for the restoration of the Temple; but with it Daniel is also told of a period 483 years with two specifications: (1) They are to begin with a decree to “restore and build Jerusalem”: (2) they are to extend to “one Anointed, a Prince”.

Daniel prays for the restoration of the Holy City. Cyrus is appointed some 150 years

before his birth to say to Jerusalem, Be thou built; and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid! Daniel’s prayer is heard at once, and Gabriel is forthwith despatched to let him know that he is greatly believed; that though Gabriel was delayed on his way three weeks, the delay was due not to aught in Daniel, but to resistance from the prince for Persia. His prayer for the Holy City he is thus assured is heard; and he is told that a decree is going forth to build the City. Cyrus does issue a proclamation to build the Temple, but in this proclamation no express mention is made of the CITY but he issues no other proclamation. This can mean only one thing: that in issuing the decree concerning the Temple, he was of necessity implying also the building of the City. For (1) the Temple could not be built without a settlement behind the builders for themselves and families; and the worshippers to come were sure to arrive by thousands. (2) In the mind of God and of all who have His mind, the City was built to contain His Temple, and not the Temple to adorn the City. Daniel accordingly kept praying for the city because of its sanctuary. The decree to build the Temple was thus from the very nature of the case a decree to build the City. The case must stand thus, or Daniel’s prayer, in spite of Gabriel’s assurance, was not answered; and Isaiah’s prophecy to Cyrus was fulfilled only in part.

§ 55. This omission, however, by Cyrus to specially name the city has stumbled nearly

all the chronologers, and they have for centuries been looking about for other decrees from which to date the 483 years. And as the decrees of Darius and of 7 and 20 Artaxerxes bring the 483 years beyond the birth of the Anointed of Daniel, these chronologers are compelled to say that the 483 years extend to (l) the baptism of the Lord, some thirty years after He was born; or (2) to the Cross, some three years later still; or even (3) to the destruction of Jerusalem, seventy-22

three years after the birth of the Messiah foretold to Daniel. But of the three decrees deemed by chronologers available for the purpose, the decree of Darius in Ezra 6:1-12 does not mention the restoration of the CITY any more than the decree of Cyrus: since it is merely a restatement and confirmation thereof. Moreover, it is not even dated.

§ 56. The decree of 7 Artaxerxes given in Ezra 7:1-27 specifies three things: (1) Ezra and

they like minded with him may return to Jerusalem. (2) Heavy offerings for the worship of the Lord in the Temple are to be taken to Jerusalem from the king. (3) Ezra is to institute civil government over “all the people beyond the River, such as know the laws of thy God.” Ezra himself sums up this decree thus: “Blessed be the Lord, the God of our fathers. Who hath put such a thing in the king’s heart, to beautify the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem, and hath extended mercy unto me before the king.” This decree thus deals only with the Temple and Government, but like the two preceding decrees says nothing about the restoration of the City. Moreover, Ezra’s description of the king’s desire to beautify the Temple implies that it was then already standing, but not yet in the glory befitting it. The utmost then that can be granted this event is that it might be admitted as a candidate for the end of the seventy years, as a rival to 1 Cyrus, but this not a single chronologer has so far proposed. And were even this claim to be considered, it could not be made good, because from the Bible it is impossible to say in what year from Adam Artaxerxes began to reign.

§ 57. The decree of 20 Artaxerxes thus remains the only rival of 1 Cyrus from which to

begin the 483 years to the Messiah Prince. But Neh. (2:1-9) had not asked for a decree, nor did Artaxerxes here make one. Nehemiah merely asked for letters to the governors of the parts through which he was to pass that they impede not his journey, and such letters the king gave him. Nehemiah in accordance with his request is thus granted, as a personal favorite of the king, his heart’s desire to make Jerusalem a city with gates. A restored city it had already been for years, but the local enemies gave the Jews trouble, and Nehemiah was eager to restore Jerusalem not so much to a wailed city, as to a city freed from these petty but serious annoyances. Nehemiah, as a private favour from the king obtained his heart’s desire: but no decree, proclamation, or any other governmental act of record is mentioned here, as is specifically the case with three preceding events.

§ 58. But even if 20 Artaxerxes were otherwise an admissible rival to 1 Cyrus, it

would lose its claim from the mere fact that 1 Artaxerxes being unassignable to any definite year by means of biblical data, the beginning of the 483 years remain uncertain.

1 Cyrus alone thus meeting the Bible specifications, it is the year from which the 483 to

Messiah Prince must be dated. The Captivity (according to the same Canon VI which thus fixes its date) ending the year before 1 Cyrus, there is thus the only CONTINUOUS chronology to the Messiah according to the Bible data.

§ 59. The first specification by Gabriel “from the going forth of the commandment to

build the City” is thus complied with by 1 Cyrus. The second specification is “to an anointed, a prince.” This is by most taken to mean His baptism, when, they say, the Lord Jesus actually became the Messiah, the Christ. By others the entire 490 years (Gabriel says 483) of Daniel are brought down to the Cross, or even to the destruction of Jerusalem forty years later. In no case, however, are the 483 or 490 years here made out exactly. It is either “nearly,” or “about,” or the Jews were not particular as to their computing of the new moon, or the modern lunar tables do not always apply to Palestine moons two thousand years ago.

23

(a) The carrying down of the 483 or the 490 years “unto Messiah Prince” to the

destruction of Jerusalem is on a par with calling Abraham’s Call a Covenant, and with many like feats of even orthodox, yea evangelical modern Bible exegesis. No kingdom was set up at the destruction of the Holy City, but a Commonwealth was destroyed instead. The King, instead of then planting his feet on Mount Olivet, and sending then his law from Mount Zion, and about to rule the nations with a rod of iron, was then seated, at the-right hand of the Father. If the Messiah then came at all, he came not unto salvation but unto destruction. And even this he did not accomplish in person, but sent “his armies to destroy their city.” Only superficial exegesis can see in the destruction of Jerusalem the required arrival of Messiah Prince at the end of the 483 years.

(b) Neither is it at the Cross that the Lord became the Messiah, and certainly not then the

Prince. Already some years before, the Lord accepted without rebuke the title Messiah at the hands of the disciples. In John 2:1-10 is related the Lord’s first sign in turning water into wine. “This beginning of His signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested His glory; and His disciples believed on Him” (verse 11). The Glory can here be only of the Son of God, and the believing on Him can be only their acknowledging Him as such. In Chapter 1 before this “beginning of His signs,” John Baptist announces the Lord publicly, Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the’ world (verses 29, 36). In verse 34 he says, I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of God. In verse 41 Andrew tells Peter: “We have found the Messiah . . . . He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked upon him and said: Simon, son of John. thou shalt be called Cephas,” or Stone, presumably either because Peter had already acknowledged Him as Messiah, or the Lord then read this confession in his heart, which later before the Transfiguration was so distinctly and publicly made by Peter. Philip, in verses 45 confesses the Lord as the one “of whom Moses in the Law and the prophets did write Jesus of Nazareth.” Nathanael confesses him in verse 49, Rabbei, thou art the Son of God, the king of Israel. The Lord here does not only approve the confession, He rewards it with the promise, Ye shall see angels ascending and descending upon the Son of Man. All this was some three years before the Cross. Nathanael actually confesses Him as the Messiah-Prince. To him He is the Son of God (Messiah) and King of Israel (Prince). Shortly after, the Lord. in John 4:26, tells the woman of Samaria that He Himself is the Christ she is talking about: “I that speak unto thee am He.”

If only the Messiahship, therefore, is meant by an Anointed, a Prince, the 483 years

cannot extend as far as the Cross, but only to at least three years before, say, to the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Lord at His baptism, with the attestation from the Father, This is My Son the beloved in whom I am well pleased.

§ 60. But the phrase “an Anointed, Prince” contains not only the specification of

anointing, Messiah in Hebrew, Christ in Greek, he must also be a Prince. Behold a king shall reign in righteousness, was the prophecy through Isaiah. Out of thee shall come forth a Governor, who shall rule My people Israel, was the prophecy for Messiah’s birth-place. He was to be not only an Anointed one, only a prophet, or only a priest. He was to be Messiah-Prince, a King. This specification is accepted by most chronologers as met when a few days before the Cross the Lord Jesus entered Jerusalem and was greeted by a multitude as king, with the strong protest, however, from the rulers. This makes Gabriel’s words to mean only, From the going forth of the commandment to an anointed KING, instead of, To an anointed, a prince. This forthwith splits up the fulfillment of the prophecy in two sections three years apart: The Lord becomes the Anointed at His baptism; He becomes the Prince within a few days of the Cross. This leaves the 483 years to oscillate between say 4029 and 4032 from Adam—a condition most unsatisfactory, specially so with a prophecy from God, and this too recorded in His own Book. 24

Every king beginning a dynasty had to be anointed. To make the 483 years end at this

event as a sort of kingship of our Lord is not only to overlook the Messiahship of the Christ, it does also violence to the Hebrew. The position of the two words, Messiah, Prince, makes not for one office, an anointed prince (Prince Messiah would then be the order), but for an anointed one (whether prophet, or priest, or both) who is at the same time a Prince: a Messianic king, a Royal Messiah.

§ 61. Now the Lord Jesus (blessed be God) is indeed Prophet and Priest and King; and as

all these offices require anointing, He was indeed the Anointed One, the Messiah (Hebrew), the Christ (Greek). But the assumption of each of these offices is separated from the others by an interval of time.

(1) In the days of His flesh, in the body prepared for Him of God, in likeness of sinful

flesh, He was manifested to all only as the prophet foretold by Moses. He was also indeed King to all ready to own Him then as such. He was indeed the Saviour even of the world, to all those ready to own Him then as such. But the sin of the Jews (to whom alone He was sent in that body) consisted primarily in rejecting Him not as their king—they were willing enough to make Him their King if only on their terms,—but as the Prophet. Says Peter to the Jews in Acts 3: 22-26: “Moses indeed said, A prophet shall the Lord God raise up unto you from among your brethren like unto me; to Him shall ye hearken in all things whatever He shall speak unto you. And it shall be that every soul that shall not hearken to that Prophet shall be utterly destroyed from among the people. . . . Unto you first God having raised up His servant, sent Him to bless you in turning every one of you away from his iniquities.” Having rejected Him as the teacher sent from God to teach them concerning Himself they debarred themselves from what was to be obtained from Him and through Him as priest and king: the law in His presence ever being, Except ye believe that I am He, ye shall die in your sins. As prophet He was sent to the Jews alone, and in a body in likeness of sinful flesh, and was visible to all and accessible to all.

(2) He became Priest, High Priest, when after being slain as the Lamb of God, and His

blood is shed for the sins of the whole world, He enters the Holy of Holies, and there presents the blood shed. As priest He no longer has the body in likeness of sinful flesh. As priest He has the raised body, the resurrection body. He dwells no longer on earth, though He may visit it; He now dwells in heaven, at the right-hand of the Majesty on high; no longer, however, visible to all, but seen only of those to whom He is pleased to manifest Himself in His glory.

As prophet His abode was on earth in a body visible to all. As prophet and priest He is

away from earth, His abode is in the heavens and He is not visible to all. The prophet is seen by saint and sinner alike, by every eye in fact, the priest is no longer seen by sinners. If seen at all it is only by the saint, and this too only on special occasions, and by the few.

(3) But as king He is again to be seen by all, by every eye, just as He could be seen as

prophet. Only no longer in the body of the days of His prophethood, but in the body of priesthood. As prophet the Jews as a nation would not have Him. As the priest the world would not have Him. As the King both the Jews and the World shall have Him: the Jews willingly; but the World, whether willing or not,— “He shall rule the nations with a rod of iron.” When the Son of Man shall come in His glory all the nations shall be gathered before Him. Then shall the King say unto them (Matt. 25: 31). And when in Rev. 19:11-16 He whose name is there the Word of God comes forth to judge in righteousness, He hath also on His thigh the name King of kings.

So that the three offices of the Lord Jesus present a cycle of three stages in time:

Prophet, seen by all

Priest, seen by few.

25

King, seen by all.

Each aspect of Messiah-Prince in its season.

§ 62. Hence though ever ready to be owned as King by all His subjects in every age,

even the chosen sons of the kingdom, He assumes no kingship before the due season, and never offers Himself as king to Israel. Accordingly, in all the four Gospels, and throughout the three years’ ministry, He is only four times recorded to have been greeted as king. And even of these four only two are sincere. At the Cross He was hailed king, but in mockery. When the multitude would make Him king, He departed from them. In John 12:12-13 a politically unauthorized multitude precedes Him with the cry, Blessed the one who cometh in the Lord’s name, the King of Israel. And the rulers, Israel’s officialdom, promptly ask Him to rebuke the multitude. If He did not comply with their request, it was for reasons other than that of “presenting Himself as king to the nation.” He told His disciples only shortly before that He was going up to Jerusalem not for the crown, but for the Cross. The Only crown He knew to be before Him was the one of thorns. Nathanael had hailed Him as king of Israel, but he was a disciple, fresh in the glow of the discovery of the Messiah, and this too in the privacy of the interview. The Lord tolerated the enthusiasm of the multitude as He had tolerated Nathanael’s. But while even Nathanael was most gently rebuked with the “Because I said unto thee I saw thee underneath the fig tree, believest thou? the multitude was not restrained: partly as a rebuke to the rulers (“if these held their peace, the very stones would cry out”); and partly that the prophecy be fulfilled, “Behold, thy King cometh unto thee meek and riding upon an ass” (Matt. 21:4-5). The official accusation against the Lord that He had made Himself king is expressly declared by the inspired evangelists to have been—false. And Pilate himself, His judge herein, expressly declares, I find no fault in the man.

During His ministry and before the Cross the Lord was indeed already king, a king. and

told Pilate so; only, Now My Kingdom is not hence, not of this world. He was already King by right, but not yet in fact. For this there were “times and season,” He told the apostles in Acts 1:7, and these “the Father hath set within His own authority.” Too soon therefore it is to look on the Ministry or the Cross as the end of the 483 years to Messiah-Prince, if the open kingship is the one contemplated here. At the Ministry there is a Messiah, and one specification is met. There is no Prince, and the other specification is wanting.

§ 63. But if the Kingdom contemplated in prophecy is not as accepted of men on earth,

but as bestowed of God in heaven, then the Ministry and the Cross are too late for it, just as for the other case they are too early. For there is in the book of God a definite point of time when in accordance with the mind of God the Lord Jesus is declared to be king. In Luke 1:26-33 the angel Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God, was “sent from God” to say to Mary that the Lord Jesus “shall be great, and shall be called Son of the Most High (the Messiah) and the Lord God shall give Him the throne of His father David, and He shall REIGN over the house of Jacob unto the ages, and of His KINGDOM shall be no end.” Son of God—Messiah; Shall reign—Prince. Gabriel, the same Gabriel who 483 years before told Daniel of a Messiah-Prince, now tells Mary that the one born of her shall be called Messiah, and shall be the Prince Gabriel delivers his message to Daniel the year before the 483 years begin. He delivers his message to Mary the year before they end.

§ 64. Accordingly the New Testament begins with the genealogy which entitles Him to

be the promised Prince, the one who has a right to the throne of His father David; and this beginning of the New Testament is duly followed by the narrative of the Magi. By a miracle specially for them they are divinely led to inquire for the One who to them is already King from 26

His—birth. They ask, Where is the One born King of the Jews ? (Matt. 2:2). In God’s mind the Lord Jesus was already Messiah-Prince at His birth. And the only event meeting the two specifications of a Messiah and a Prince suitable for the end of the 483 years to that personage is the birth of the Lord Jesus, not the beginning of His ministry, which is thirty years later; nor the Cross, three years later still

§ 65. At the time of His birth Messiah-Prince was expected: was expected by Simeon,

expected by other faithful watchers who were looking for the consolation of Israel. He was not only expected, but sought out by the ‘Magi from the East. All these knew the time when to expect Him, look for Him. But there was only one source from which the exact time could be learned: Gabriel’s statement as to the 483 years. To all these watchers and searchers the 483 years expired at the birth of the Bethlehem Babe. Daniel had learned the end of the seventy years from a study of “the books,” and acted accordingly. Simeon, Anna, the other watchers, and the Magi learned the end of the 483 years also by study of “the books,” and acted accordingly. Daniel read his in Jeremiah, Simeon and his read theirs in Daniel.

§ 66. If the 483 years ended some thirty years later, the watcher at the time of the Child

had no warrant for recognizing it as the Messiah-Prince. The statement has been seriously made that they knew the Messianic Babe because they knew that some thirty years later the 483 years were to expire. But apart from the fact that it is nowhere indicated that a king must be thirty at his manifestation, such “reasoning” would only equal the folly of propounding it.

But if either the Baptism or the Cross had met both of the required specifications, they

have the fatal defect of not being—dated. The Lord was indeed thirty at the Ministry, and this lasted three years. But unless the Christ was born at the end of the 483 years, we know not from the Bible when the Lord was born; and thus we are ignorant as to when he was thirty or thirty-three. John Baptist’s ministry is dated: 15 Tiberius. But (1) There is no certainty as to whether his sole reign is meant, or joint reign with Augustus. (2) The Bible does not enable us to say when Tiberius began to reign, whether jointly or alone. (3) Even if 15 Tiberius could be placed from the Bible data, this would only give the Ministry and the Cross approximately, it would not fix their exact date. All that is certain is that John was some six months older than the Lord, and that the Ministry began during 15 Tiberius or shortly after it. Unless, therefore, the end of the 483 years is at the birth of the Lord, we have no dates from the Bible for the birth of the Lord, nor for the Baptism, nor for the Cross—for not a single event for which the prophecies of Daniel were given to be foreknown by God’s people.

§ 67. Thus just as the giving heed to Canon VI corrects the error of twenty-four years by

the Received Chronology in the date of the Covenant, so it likewise restores the true dates of the seventy years of the Captivity (which is the only bridge from the Pre-Captivity to the Post-Captivity period) and Daniel’s 483 years which succeed it: concerning which period the chronologers have widely departed from this Canon. Moreover, by leaving the Bible here for the Canon of Ptolemy, the accepted chronology has become a tangled skein where every twist or turn toward unravelling it entangles all the more.

§ 68. In accordance also with this Canon VI the face of the Bible Chronologer is set

against the widely prevailing notion that certain numbers frequently recurring in the Bible may be taken at convenience as “round numbers.”

Three numbers are frequently met with in Scripture: seven, twelve, and forty. While

twelve is generally taken literally, seven at times and forty often are taken by not a few writers on the Bible as indefinite numbers.

27

§ 69. Now there may be cases where a number ending with zeros may not be exact, may

be “round”; but it must be proved to be such either from the context, or from other data which compel the rejection of the literal sense. For mere assumption, supposition, opinion, the Bible leaves here no room whatever. Thus when David is said in 2 Sam, 5:4 to have reigned forty years, we are debarred by the next verse from unqualifiedly understanding it to be forty years exactly: “In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.” He may have thus reigned over forty years, the exact time over 33 years being given here as six months. In 1 Chron. 29: 27, however, “the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years.” In the absence of the testimony from Kings some Chronologers would feel free here to understand the true number to be two-three years on either side of forty: say from thirty-seven to forty-three. The number 40 being frequently used in Scripture, it is forsooth a round number, or even an indefinite number. But the very next verse in Chronicles adds, Seven years reigned he in Hebron and thirty-three he reigned in Jerusalem. This division thus shows that the number 40 was meant to be definite and not round.

And yet even thus David only may have reigned over 40 years, but not necessarily. If he

reigned in Jerusalem 32 years and a half, all the statements concerning his reign of 40 years are still true. It is certain that in Hebron he reigned seven years and a half. It is certain that for a consecutive Chronology his reign is given in all the three books, 2 Sam. 5: 4, 1 Kings (2: 11), and 1 Chron. 29: 27, as 40. The thirty-three years assigned to him in Jerusalem are therefore best taken not as full but current.

§ 70. In the New Testament there is no room for “round numbers.” There numbers are

carefully guarded from misunderstanding by the qualification “about” when needful. Thus in Luke 3:23 “Jesus Himself, when He began was as if (about) thirty years [old],” thus distinctly warning that He was not exactly thirty.

“He had an only daughter about twelve” (Luke 8:42). In Acts 13:19 the Lord “gave their

land for an inheritance for about 450 years,” thus giving distinct warning that with the omission of the qualifying word the number would not be “round.” Not even the 1,000 years of Rev. 20:2 can be allowed to be “round,” as long as after being introduced without the article (he bound him for a thousand years) in verse 2, the article is immediately after inserted thrice in verses 3, 5, and 7 (“until the thousand years be finished,” etc.): meaning the definite fixed years exact.

In the Hebrew Old Testament, however, the writer is at present unaware that numbers are

thus qualified at all. If numbers are there at all used as round they are easily shown to be such by the circumstances themselves stated in connection with them. Round numbers are therefore first to be proved as such, and not merely assumed as such. where their circumstances do not demand it.

§ 71. Thus the seven years of famine in Joseph’s day are expressly divided into two and

five (Gen. 45:6). Jacob’s 130 years, as he stands before Pharaoh (Gen. 47:9), are protected as exact by “And Jacob lived in Egypt land seventeen years: and [the] days of Jacob’s years of his life were seven years and forty and a hundred years” (Gen. 47:28), 130 and 17 being 147. In the same way the 800 years of Adam after Seth’s birth are protected against being taken as round by the statement that he was 130 at Seth’s birth and 930 when he died (Gen. 5:3-5). Jared’s 800, Enoch’s 300, Lamech’s 777, Noah’s 500 and 600, Enosh’s 90, Kenafi’s 70, Shem’s 100, 500 and 600, and others like them, are carefully protected in the same chapter and in the eleventh. How the forty years of David are guarded by the division into seven and thirty-three, has already been shown above. The forty years of Israel in the wilderness are protected by the events named as 28

occurring in the first, second, and fortieth years, as well as by Caleb’s statement that he was forty in the second year of the Wilderness, and is eighty-five forty-five years later at the division of the Land (Josh. 14: 7-10). To assume, therefore, that where no such protection is in sight, numbers can be treated as “round” at the mere dictum of, say, the writers in Hastings’ Bible Dictionary is sheer arbitrariness. From frequent unchallenged indulgence in this vice the Critics have come to look thereon as an indispensable part of their equipment. Accordingly Daniel’s 70 weeks are to them a round number without ado: 77, though found only twice in the Bible, and 777 found only once, ditto.

It is as a guard against such presumptuous liberties with God’s Book that Canon VI is

specially effective.

§ 72. Canons I—VI thus prescribe the methods by which from the Bible data a

consecutive Chronology can be readily constructed from Adam to the birth of the Christ. And with this once accomplished, the long-standing problem is solved, and the main task of Bible Chronology is, indeed accomplished.

The filling in, however, of the space’s between these two dates presents now and then

serious difficulties, bring to the apparent discrepancies between some of the Bible data: the periods from the Exodus to the Temple and from the Temple to the Captivity being herein peculiarly perplexing. So much so indeed that the adjustment of many of these dates has hitherto taxed to the utmost the ingenuity of all who have far honestly and competently dealt with them, but as yet without success. The solutions hitherto offered either depart from Bible data altogether, or they give them turns and interpretations which are impossible, and even fanciful. Still, even these might be tolerated, if only aught near unanimity were here at all within reach. But, except where the writers are only copies or mere echoes of one another, no two chronologers have yet to agree to agree as to a definite scheme of years for either of these two periods. Accordingly here is invoked Canon VII.

X. CANON VII.

The Reconciliation of what are apparently Discrepancies in the Bible Data must be along

the Lines laid down in Canons I—VI: and any attempted Harmonization on other lines stands Self-Condemned.

§ 73. Thus Canon III requires that no textual error be charged upon the Bible unless

demonstrated as such, and this moreover only by data from the Bible itself. Not merely suspected, nor even plausibly argued, but demonstrated. Canon IV requires that a clear Bible statement stand as against one not so clear: the light not to be obscured by the dark.

It has been shown above in § § 11—16, 24, that the 480 years from Exodus to Temple are

to be held to as demanded not only by one of these Canons, but by both. But it has also been seen in § 16 that the data of Judges, if taken as giving a consecutive Chronology, can be made to require for this period some 630 years (a length advocated by no one to the writer’s knowledge). Likewise that the data in Acts, apparently based on Judges, can be made to require at least some 900 years. But with the length of 480 years taken as settled, not all the data of Judges can be taken as making up together a consecutive Chronology.

§ 74. Two ways of meeting this difficulty have been proposed by those who hold to the

480 years: (1) Some of the Judges were contemporary. This is indeed true of two of the judges: Samson and Eli were each contemporary in part with other judges. This is established from the data of the Bible itself: from Judges and 1 Samuel, as is shown in Part II To this extent then this

29

explanation satisfies Canon III. If, however, there were other contemporary judgeships (and these are needed in nearly all the schemes so far propounded, the Bible furnishes no data as to who were the contemporaries, and when; and all is left uncertain if not confusion, as is indeed to be expected when the Bible Canons are not complied with.

(2) A late school of writers, devout enough, and able enough withal, seriously propose

the notion that though the period between Exodus and Temple does indeed cover some years, yet the great God, in accordance with 1 Kings 6: 1, reckons only 480 years,—because for some ninety odd years of that period Israel, God’s people, had been sinning, and in punishment was left for oppression by its enemies. And these periods of oppression are taken no account of in the divine chronology, however real they be in human chronology. Not one of the three writers, however, who advance this “solution” gives the source of his information, which however is not in the Bible. This solution thus violating Canon VI at once absolves the writer from discussing it any further. Nevertheless it may be added that this “solution” creates more and greater difficulties than it removes. It contradicts other Bible facts: The forty years in the Wilderness were also years of sin; the seventy in Babylon were also years of punishment. The entire period of the rent-off kingdom of Israel was the result of the Lord’s displeasure with His people. If the Oppressions in judges are “not divinely reckoned:” neither should these periods be. Moreover, there are three years in the history of the people God, where this method of divine Chronology should he specially used; if anywhere. At the time of the Maccabees Israel was oppressed, as never before in its history and never after, by Antiochus Epiphanes for three years, with swine’s flesh offered on the altar for the pollution of the Sanctuary. These three years are part of the 483 years from the Restoration to the Christ. If these three years are not “divinely reckoned,” then this period’s real length is not 483 years. but 486. But this correction every one of the three has failed to make in his Chronology.

The Lord God has set the sun and moon in the heavens for signs and seasons. He hath

determined for the nations not only the bounds of their habitation, but also their times and seasons. Yet this “solution” makes the Creator of the time-pieces of the Universe (whose variation to even a second sets all the Observatories a-searching), play hide and seek with a whole century of time.

§ 76. With this method of Exegesis Noah may have lived more than 950 solar years,

because the Lord God may not have been pleased to reckon that episode of the Vineyard. David may have reigned some years over the forty assigned him in the Bible; because God may have excluded therefrom those Absalom and Uriah days. And he of the, in 41 David, Absalom rebellion, may after all be right: only that the Higher Critic was for once here not quite so alert with his approaching omniscience as those three Orthodoxians.

These are the only two solutions so far offered, during the last few centuries in which

Bible Chronology has at all been handled by earnest souls well equipped for their task. And neither of these two is found to serve the purpose. The true solution, however. is readily found, but only by the method Canon VIII.

Xl. CANON Vlll.

In the Solution of Bible Difficulties that which Covers an entire Class of Cases

stands as against those dealing with their individual Cases separately. The Simple Solution stands against the Complex.

§ 77. It having been shown that the data of Judges cannot be taken as successive (§ §

18—20), some must be eliminated as contemporaneous. There being, however, no ready clue in 30

sight as to which are thus to be ignored in constructing a consecutive Chronology for this period, the matter can be solved only by actual experimentation. It is then found that if the years of those oppressions (§ 20) which are succeeded in each case—and only these—by periods designated as “the land had rest” so many years, be included in these periods of rest, the chronology thus obtained meets all the requirements of the case. That is to say the Cushan Oppression of eight years is part of the forty Rest under Othniel. The Eglon Oppression of eighteen years is part of the eighty years Rest under Ehud. The Jabin Oppression of twenty years is part of the forty years Rest named at their end. And the seven years Midian Oppression are part of the forty Rest mentioned next. The omission of these fifty-three years thus justifies Jephthah’s statement (§ 19) about those three hundred years; whereas if these fifty-three years be included, at least 352 years are required for the time covered by Jephthah’s statement.

As no periods of Rest are mentioned after Abimelech’s reign, though there were

Oppressions by Ammon eighteen years and by the Philistines forty, these fifty-eight years are part of the consecutive Chronology for this period, and are accordingly not omitted like the other Oppressions.

§ 78. The sole purpose of the data for the length of these Oppressions is thus not to serve

as links in the Chronology, but to designate their length. And Jephthah’s 300 years are mentioned apparently for the express purpose of showing which of the Oppressions are to be omitted and which to be retained: a lighthouse amidst trackless billows, as if with a sign. Here is the channel, keep to this and avoid stranding. And the Chronology of this period has been hitherto admittedly hopelessly stranded.

That this is the true solution is readily seen in Part II under the years of that period. Seen,

as a key is seen to be the right one when it first fits into the lock, and then opens it. But in Part III the Numerics for this period demonstrate that what is merely seen to be true cannot but be true.

§ 79. This result, however, at once rules out the interpretation hitherto given by all that

“the land had rest forty [or eighty] years” means that the rest lasted 40 or 80 years: after the Oppression, by one set of chronologers; during the Oppression, by another set. The latter profess to find support in the fact that a period is sometimes spoken of as a whole when only a part is meant. Thus the period of the wandering of the sons of Israel in the Wilderness is frequently spoken of as one of 40) years: when in fact they were not condemned to be wanderers till the second year of the forty. And as that generation died in the fortieth year, they were wanderers less than thirty-nine. The wilderness period being in truth 40 years, the wandering also is spoken of as a period of 40. Other like examples occur. And indeed as a last resort this would have to be accepted here, but it is needless; since “the land had rest: 40 years”— the mere colon or dash would at once suggest the meaning as possible, and here necessary: “The land had rest [from oppression, ending a period of] 40 year.” Forty years from the beginning of the history in the first case; 40 (or 80) from the last landmark, whatever it be. The “40 years” thus have nothing to do with the Rest. It is a mere chronological note which in modern writings would be relegated to a foot note, or to the margin, or at most be thrown into a parenthesis. But such ellipsis, as is frequent in Scripture (see the data at the beginning of the reigns in Kings and Chronicles), is not infrequent also in other ancient writings, and now and then modern writers who care for brevity of expression.

§ 80. By means of this same Canon VIII is settled the great difficulty of adjusting to one

another the Chronology of the kings of Judah and Israel.

31

For the time from Solomon to the Captivity the dates are abundant, being determined

moreover by three distinct lines: (1) The length of the reigns of the kings of Judah given in 1 and 2 Kings. (2) The length of the reigns of the Kings of Israel for much of the same period given also in 1 and 2 Kings. (3) The same data in 1 and 2 Chronicles. Kings and Chronicles, which are clearly independent sources (as is seen from the wide difference of method in dealing with the same events) entirely agree in their chronology, except in the case of the one (if indeed it is such) primitive copyist’s error in Chronicles discussed below in Part II at Year 3109. But in checking the reigns of the kings of Judah with those of Israel it is soon seen that the surface meaning of the numbers cannot always be accepted as true; and the method must be sought out by which they are found scientifically to harmonise. Here too as in the case of the Chronology of the Judges actual experimentation is the only resource for extrication.

§ 81. In a series of dates of recurring events, presumed to be given for the purpose of

accurate chronology, such as the length of reigns, the years given are either (1) full: or (2) current; or (3) partly full and partly current. With full years there is at once a scientific, consecutive Chronology. Add the years, and it is there. With the years reckoned as current (where a rein of, say, a year and a month is taken as of two years), there can still be a scientific Chronology if only due warning is given that the years are not full. Though even thus there is no certainty against confusion. But where the years are partly full and partly current, unless each case is specifically described as full or current, there is an end to a SCIENTIFIC Chronology.

§ 82. Thus at the division of Solomon’s kingdom into those of Judah and Israel

Rehoboam began his reign over Judah, and Jeroboam his reign over Israel, in the same year Year 1 of Rehoboam is thus also Year 1 of Jeroboam, and from here on the dates of the two sets of kings frequently interlock.

Rehoboam reigns seventeen years; his son Abijah reigns three years. He is succeeded by

his son Asa, whose years 2 and 3 are specially dated in 1 Kings 15: 25, 28, 33, thus: “And Nadab, Jeroboam’s son, reigned over Israel in Asa’s year two” “And Baasha slew him in Asa’s year three . . . and reigned in his stead.” “In Asa’s year three . . . Baasha, Ahijah’s son, reigned over all Israel.” Rehoboam’s 17, Abijah’s 3, and Asa’s 3. bring us thus to Year 23 of both Rehoboam and Jeroboam, according to the data far the kings of Judah. But according to the data for the kings of Israel, “the days which Jeroboam reigned were twenty and two years, and he slept with his fathers; and Nadab his son reigned in his stead” (1 Kings 14: 20). Nadab reigned two years, and was replaced by Baasha in 3 Asa, which was just seen to be 23 Jeroboam. But Jeroboam’s 22, Nadab;s 2, and Baasha’s 1, give not 23, but 25, two years more than for the same time covered by the data for Judah. Jeroboam and his son Nadab reigned therefore only 23 full years, and a rational explanation must be found for this 25. The explanation is simple enough. From the above quotations it is clear that Jeroboam reigned 72 full years, but Nadab reigned only one full year from 2 Asa to 3 Asa, though he reigned in two years. He is thus truly said to have reigned 2 (current) years.

Thus within the first quarter of a century from their common starting point the

chronologies of Judah and Israel diverge already two years; and the very first case thus approached for close inspection meets us with a sign of Halt!

§ 83. The same result is obtained from a look at the next 25 years. In 1 Kings 15:33

Baasha reigns 24 years, his Year 1 being Asa’s 3. But “in year twenty and six of Asa... Elah, Baasha’s son, reigned over Israel two years in Tirzah . . . . And Zimri came, and smote him and slew him in year twenty and seven of Asa” (1 Kings 16: 8,10 From 3 Asa to 27 years. But Baasha’s 24 and Elah’s 2 give not 24, but 26 years. Thus at the end of another quarter of a 32

century there is another divergence of two years between the Chronologies of Judah and Israel, the parallel columns being now thus four years out of line. And as these two sets of Israel’s reigns are only examples of others, the lower down one goes, the greater the divergence grows, with apparently hopeless confusion at the end.

Into this confusion, however, order is at once brought if Baasha’s 24 and Elah’s 2 years

are also. like Nadab’s two years, taken not as full, but as current. Just as Nadab reigned only one full year but in two years.

The data for the kings of Israel thus do not prove available as a standard to which the

data for Judah conform enough for a harmonised Chronology.

§ 84. Other is the case with the data for the kings of Judah in both Kings and Chronicles.

For a continuous, consistent, scientific chronology they appear in no such unhealthy status. They do not indeed solve all the difficulties which are not few in this period, in spite of the abundance of data. But they lead into no tangle, no maze, no jungle, into which false systems of chronology soon conduct the student. In any case they leave fewer difficulties than on any other system known to the writer. It is demonstrated, moreover, at the proper place that, with the data for the kings of Judah once taken as the standard with which all others must comply, they alone establish the sought for harmony with the others.

§ 85. Accordingly, in this treatise, for the period from Solomon to Zedekiah, the lengths

of the reigns of the kings of Judah are uniformly taken as of full years; and they are used as the standard wherewith to check the dates of the kings of Israel,—a method which, apart from the exigencies of the case itself, is already prescribed by Canon III: the clear being used for throwing light on the obscure: rather than letting the obscure darken the clear. And as the one simple expedient in Judges is found to cover all the perplexing data for its period, so this simple expedient for Kings is found to cover all the perplexities of its period. In Part 11 it is seen that this solution solves. In Part III Numerics demonstrate it.

By this the only method available for a scientific Chronology of this period four hundred

and twenty-nine years are deduced for the time from 4 Solomon to 11 Zedekiah (from the Foundation of the Temple to its Destruction), which number 429 is neighbour to the 430 from the Covenant to the Law.

XII. CANON IX.

In Matters Biblical the Notions of “Unlikely, Improbable, Hard to Believe,

Incredible, Inconceivable,” and their like, are not to be Entertained so as to make the Bible Statements Void. Only what is demonstrably Irrational, or declared in the Bible itself to be Impossible, is to be allowed to Call in Question Bible Statements.

§ 86. With the Bible once accepted as God’s book dictum stands that, With God all

things are possible; and nothing is impossible save what the Bible here excepts. The question here is not what man thinks he can believe, but what God says he MUST believe. What God will or will not least of all what He is likely to do or not likely, is not for the worm of a man to opine about. He can know what God has said He does or does not, will or will not do. There thus in things biblical no room for puny man to guess and to suppose, and surmise, or to opine, but solely in all humility to seek, and this moreover with due patience, to learn and understand what the great God has said in His Book.

33

According to this Canon, no statement however strange. however unlikely, however

contrary even to experience, is to be dismissed without painstaking scrutiny, and above all not before all its possibilities have been exhausted.

§ 87. Thus in 2 Kings 15:32 Jotham, son of Uzziah, reigns over Judah at twenty-five in

Year 2 of Pekah of Israel, and he reigns sixteen years. In 2 Kings 16:1 his son Ahaz begins to reign over Judah in 17 of Pekah. As 2 Pekah is 1 Jotham, 17 Pekah is 16 Jotham. And as in that year Ahaz. succeeded him, Jotham, according to these two passages, reigned 16 years.

In 2 Chron. 27:1, 8, it is twice said that Jotham was 25 at his reign, and reigned 16 years.

Four times it is thus stated that this reign was 16 years.

But in 2 Kings 15:30, before Jotham comes into view at all, it is stated: Hosea, Elah’s

son, conspired against Pekah, Remaliah’s son, and slew him, and reigned in his stead in year twenty of Jotham, Uzziah’s son.

As 16 Jotham was 17 Pekah, 20 Jotham was 21 Pekah. Pekah according to 2 Kings 15:

27, did reign 20 years. Hosea is thus 20 Jotham and 21 Pekah. This statement thus harmonizes chronologically with the other four statements about Jotham’s reign of 16 years.

But if Jotham reigned 16 years, and was succeeded then by Ahaz the mention of 20

Jotham is a difficulty, and Dr. Lightfoot speaks of it as Jotham reigning four years after he is buried.

This difficulty, with others like it, of which it is a good example, has stumbled not only

those who like to find “contradictions” in the Bible, but even those who grieve at their possibility. To those who do not love the Book (and these are known by their fruits) Jotham’s 20 years are “impossible,” and to them is here demonstrably an “error.” to those who do love the Book these 20 years of Jotham, with others like them, have only given occasion to offer remedies refer only

to the disease.

But first: The Bible does say that (1) Jotham reigned 16 years; and (2) he died. It does

not say that he reigned 16 years, and at their end he died. In any other book such an inference is indeed allowable, though even here allowable only. But not in God’s book, when only two verses BEFORE 20 Jotham is named. Jotham may have lived some time after his sixteen years of reign (as did Napoleon, Charles V of Spain, and others). And this very mention of his year 20 may be intended to give notice of the fact that though his son Ahaz began to reign in what would be Year 17 of his father, Jotham was still alive in 4 Ahaz. There is nothing impossible in this, or even improbable.

The data in Kings and Chronicles are given primarily not much to tell how long each king

lived, but how long he reigned: so as to provide a consecutive chronology for this period. Thus we know that David was 30 when he began to reign, and he reigned 40 years. He was thus presumably 70 when he died. The Bible does not expressly state the length of David’s life. Of Solomon only the year of his accession is known, and that he reigned 40. When he was born, and how long he lived cannot be made out from the Bible.

But there is another possibility: Jotham’s father was Uzziah, who was smitten with

leprosy for presumption (Higher Critics, beware!) in acting as priest. Jotham thus ruled for his father some years, and the 20 years of Jotham may be reckoned from the time he thus became regent either with or for his father. And were this the true explanation, it would actually fix the year of Uzziah’s transgression.

§ 89. This is the only case among the kings of Judah where the data given oblige us to

accept an otherwise unrecorded joint reign of two kings, father and son: the case of David and Solomon being peculiar to the then situation, and lasting at the most a few weeks, at any rate less 34

than a year. But with the kings of Israel the data more than once demand the acceptance of joint reigns. Though in no single case named as such, these alone harmonize the otherwise perplexing, yea insoluble difficulties presented by these data, Canon IX, however, covering as it does every such case, thus bring order here, just as the preceding Canons have brought unity and order into the data covered by them.

§ 90. A careful analysis of the data for Judah shows that one king was eleven when his

son and successor was born: a fact truly hard to believe, and one indeed not to be accepted lightly . . . But this is hard to believe only for us. Oriental conditions of puberty and marriage differ widely from ours.

PART II.

The Bible Data.

§ 91. The data for a consecutive Chronology furnished by the Bible are of three classes: (1) Those readily deducible from a plain statement of the text. Thus Genesis V furnishes

clear data for the Chronology from the creation of Adam to 500 Noah, by giving the ages of each patriarch at the birth of his son. A further statement in Gen.7:6 that the Flood was in 600 Noah thus brings the Chronology down to 1656 from Adam. The same is the case with the chronology from Arphaxad’s birth “two years after the Flood,” in 1658, to the death of Terah at the age of 205, in 2083 Adam, which is furnished in Genesis XI, by the ages of each patriarch at his son’s birth.

(2) Those deducible only from more than one statement of the text: their combination

being required in spite of the apparent plainness of each text separately.

§ 92. Thus in Gen. 5:32 Noah is 500, and begets Shem, Ham, and Japhet. Standing alone

this could be understood in only one way: the natural, plain sense being that at 500 Noah became father of triplets, of whom Shem was the oldest, and Japhet was the youngest. But in Gen. 11:10 Shem is 100 when he begets Arphaxad two years after the Hood. The Flood was in 600 Noah. Two years after is 602 Noah. But if 100 Shem is 602 Noah, Shem was born not in 500 Noah, but in 502. And the statement in Gen. 5:32 that Noah was 500 and he begat Shem, Ham, and Japhet, must at once be modified in these three particulars: Shem was not one of triplets; he was not the oldest of the three, he was not born in 500 Noah, or in 1556 Adam. The statement, therefore in Gen. 5:32 can only mean that at 500 Noah was a father, and his sons were Shem, Ham, and Japhet; but who was born in 1556, whether Japhet and Ham as twins, or Japhet alone, or Ham alone, is left undetermined here. The only thing certain from Gen. 11:10 is that Shem was not born then, but for reasons not given it was deemed best to name him first.

§ 93. Other Scriptures, however, make it plain, as shown below under Year 1556, that

Japhet was the first born. This is also indicated in the genealogies of Noah’s sons given in Gen.10:1-32, and 1 Chron. 1:4-27. Both these genealogies are indeed headed: Shem, Ham, and Japhet, presumably because “Blessed the God of Shem,” as the one through whose line the Redeemer was to come. But when the genealogies are given in detail, the order is not Shem, Ham, and Japhet, but Japhet, Ham, Shem, according to priority of birth.

The case of Terah’s three sons, given as Abraham, Nahor, and Haran, is parallel: Haran

being the eldest, and Abraham the youngest of the three, as shown above for Abraham in Part I, § 28; and for Haran below under Year 1948.

35

(3) Those readily deducible from other dates, but requiring the utmost care in their

adjustment, in spite of the apparent simplicity of the statements concerning them separately.

§ 94. Thus in Ex. 12:40 “the sojourning of Israel’s sons, who sojourned in Egypt, was

four hundred and thirty years.” Apparently this means that the sojourning began 430 years before the Exodus, which was within three months from the giving of the Law at Sinai. This then apparently began when Jacob at 130, Joseph being then 39, came with his sons to dwell in Egypt in Year Adam 2298. This might possibly be pushed back 22 years to 2276, when Joseph at 17 was brought a slave to Egypt. According to this statement then the 430 years of sojourning could not begin earlier than 2276. But, as shown in Part I, 26-27, the statement in Exodus 12:40 can only be accepted in the light thrown thereon from Gal. 3:17, which alone furnishes the true commentary on the term sojourning, as including Abraham and Isaac as “sons” of (spiritual) Israel; and the beginning of this “sojourn” is thus thrown back at least 169 years to 2107 from Adam.

In this particular case the light from Galatians upon Exodus is indeed clear. In other

cases the matter is not so readily cleared up; and unless the utmost care is taken, inextricable confusion is the result.

§ 95. The number of individual years deducible from the Bible is 245, from Adam to the

Cross, year 4032 Adam. After the Ascension in the same year, no dates are deducible from the Bible for the events mentioned therein.

These 245 years are indeed not the only ones that can be deduced from the Bible data—

their number could indeed be manifolded. Thus if Adam lived 930 years, a complete Table of Bible dates could be made out, say, thus:

Year 1 from Creation, Adam 1 year old.

Year 2 from Creation, Adam 2 years old.

Year 3 from Creation, Adam 3 years old.

And so on throughout his 930 years. Then in Seth’s case the years could be continued

after Adam’s death thus:

Year 931 from Creation: Seth 801.

Year 932 from Creation: Seth 802.

Year 933 from Creation: Seth 803.

And so on throughout his 912 years. And as up to 2369 there is an unbroken chain of

twenty-three generations from father to son, unto Joseph’s death, there could thus be made out at once a list of 2369 individual consecutive years which could be truly deducible from the Bible data. But the individual events actually dated in the Bible during these 2369 years are only sixty-five. In the 930 years of Adam’s life only two events are dated: the birth of his son Seth in his year 230, and his own death in 930. While, therefore, the Bible has thus at the very beginning as many as 2369 individual years deducible from its data, it offers no reason for entering, for purposes of Bible Chronology other than a small fraction thereof, the individual years it specifically names, or enables us to date.

§ 96. Similarly: The first of the seven years of Plenty under Joseph in Egypt was Year

36

making up Bible Chronology. And this applies to all the cases where a whole series of years is deducible from the dating of even one event: its the length of a life, or a reign, or a period, etc.

The only exceptions to this are the years of the births of individuals deducible from their

other data, even though the birth itself is not dated. Thus the ages of most of the kings of Judah are given with the account of their reign. As the length of the reign is never omitted, the birth yeas is thus readily obtained. And through these individual years of their births are not specifically mentioned, they are uniformly entered among the 245 years. The same applies to other individuals. Thus when Caleb speaks of himself as 85 at the Division of the Land, the year of his birth is readily obtained; but though nowhere specifically spoken of, it is duly entered in the List. This principle applies throughout for every series of years connected with a person. The years beginning and ending such a series are always taken into the List, whether specially mentioned or not.

§ 97. On the other hand some dates, though they are apparently fixed in the Bible, can

find no place in the List, because their fixture depends on other events which are not dated. Thus in Gen. 16:3 “Sarai, Abram’s wife, took Hagar . . . . after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife.” This event is thus clearly dated: ten years after Abraham came to Canaan. Now Abraham started for Canaan at 75, on his father’s death, in 2083; and Hagar’s son Ishmael was born when his father Abraham was 86, eleven years later, in 2094. The ten years thus lie between 2083 and 2094, and could have begun only in 2083 or 2084, since they could run beyond the birth of Ishmael in 2094, and could not begin before 2083, when Abraham was as yet in Haran. But in which of the two years they began, whether in 2083 or in 2084, the Bible does not enable us to say. If Abraham came to Canaan the year his father died, in 2083, then the ten years ended in 2093. But if the burial of his father, the mourning for him, the settling of his affairs before the departure for a distant land, and the long journey itself to Canaan, took at least part of the next year, then Abraham came into Canaan in 2084, and the ten years run to 2094. If this is the year, it is already entered in the List of years as already deduced twofold: (1) from the statement that Abraham was 86 when Ishmael was born. (2) that Ishmael was 13 when circumcised with his father who was then 99. But if 2093 is the year, it would have to be added to the List, since no other event is dated for that year. As there is, however, no clear statement when the ten years began, 2093 rejected from the List, though Hagar’s becoming Abraham’s wife is clearly fixed to either 2093 or 2094.

§ 98. Joshua’s death is thus likewise apparently dated in the Bible. He dies, like Joseph,

at 110. But the date of Joseph’s birth being obtained from the Bible data, his death is fixed at 2369. But Joshua’s birth year is not obtainable, and the year of his death is left in suspense. He probably died in 2607, and thus was born in 2497, just one year before Caleb, his fellow spy, who was 85 at the division of the Land under Joshua. But there are no Bible data for fixing the year of Joshua’s birth; and both the years of his birth and death are accordingly absent from the list of Bible years.

§ 99. Similarly: As Japhet was born in 1556, in 500 Noah, and Shem was born two years

later in 1558, Ham was most likely born in 1557; in any case his birth is limited to years 1556, 1557, 1558. But the Bible gives no certainty as to which of these three he was born in, and 1557 is accordingly not given in the List.

The same is the case with the years of the births of the, sons of Jacob who were born

before Joseph. As Jacob married Leah and Rachel after his first seven years of service, and Joseph was born at the end of the second seven, all the ten sons from Reuben to Zebulun were

37

born only in the seven years 2253-2259; but the Bible data do not fix the date of a single birth of these ten to any definite year, and these years are accordingly not entered in the List.

Other examples the reader will readily find for himself.

In the following List, therefore, only those years are entered which are indisputably

deduced from data furnished by the Bible: only those which are made certain thereby. The statements on which their fixture is based accompany therefore each year.

§ 100: For a consecutive Chronology the years given in the List must be reckoned as

COMPLETE. Thus at the birth of Seth Adam is stated to be 130. That he was not then merely in his hundred and thirtieth year, but had completed them, is settled by the expression, And Adam lived 130 years, and begat Seth. This fixes Adam’s age here as of 130 full years, and Seth’s Year 1 is accordingly 131 Adam. But in most cases the expression is: He was a son of so many years. Thus in Gen. 21:5 “Abraham was a son of a hundred years when Isaac his son was born to him.” Here he was not necessarily full hundred years old: he may have lived up to then only 99 years, and be now only in his hundredth. Isaac’s Year 1 thus may be 100 Abraham, and the time from father to son would thus be not 100 years, but 99. This is exactly what Beecher does in his Tables: he makes 1 Isaac to be 100 Abraham, and 1 Jacob to be 60 Isaac, thus shortening his own chronology by two years in these two instances alone from sheer oversight. It so happens that other Scripture makes it plain that Abraham was full hundred at Isaac’s birth, but the expression a son of 100 years does not itself necessitate it. For the purpose of Bible Chronology, however, all such cases must be taken as full years: so that were even Isaac born in his fathers hundredth year that year would chronologically have to be reckoned to Abraham, and 1 Isaac would be the equivalent only of 101 Abraham. Without this method (which applies to all data forming a series), there can be no certain consecutive and hardly any scientific chronology.

§ 101. The translation of the Scriptures which accompanies the years in the List is

directly from the original, for the reasons given in Part I. Chapters VIII. and IX. Words of the translation not in the original are in brackets, (chiefly the article), or in bold type. At the end of the Scripture quotations given for each year the calculation is given by which the number is arrived at, except in the case of the second two consecutive years. Thus it is omitted for 1657, since 1656 precedes it in the List.

YEARS DEDUCIBLE

FROM THE DATA OF THE BIBLE.

Seth born. Adam 130.

Year 130

And Adam lived thirty and a hundred years and he begat . . . . Seth. Gen. 5:3 Enosh born. Seth 105.

Year 235

And Seth lived five years and a hundred years, and he begat Enosh. Gen. 5:6

Seth was born in 130; and 105 are 235.

Kenan born. Enosh 90.

Year 325

And Enosh Lived ninety years, and he begat Kenan.

Gen. 5:9

Enosh was born in 235; and 90 are 325.

Mahalaleel born. Kenan 70.

Year 395

And Kenan lived seventy years, and he begat Mahalaleel. Gen. 5:12

Kenan was born in 325; and 70 are 395.

Jared born. MahalaIeel 65.

Year 460

And Mahalaleel lived five years and sixty years, and he begat Jared. Gen 5:15

38

Mahalaleel was born in 395; and 65 are 460.

Enoch born. Jared 162.

Year 622

And Jared lived two and sixty years and a hundred years, and he begat Enoch. Gen 5:18

Jared was born in 460; and 162 are 622.

Methuselah born. Enoch 65.

Year 687

And Enoch lived five and sixty years, and he begat Methuselah. Gen. 5:21

Enoch was born in 622; and 65 are 687.

Lamech born. Methuselah 187.

Year 874

Methuselah lived seven and eighty years and a hundred years, and he begat Gen. 5: 25 Lamech.

Methuselah was born 687; and 187 are 874.

Adam dies, age 930.

Year 930

And all [the] days which Adam lived were nine hundred years and thirty years. Gen. 5:5 Enoch Translated, aged 365.

Year 987

And all [the] days of Enoch were five and sixty years and three hundred years. Gen. 5:23 And Enoch walked with God and he was not; for God took him.

Enoch was born in 622; and 365 are 987.

Seth dies, age 912.

Year 1042

And all the days of Seth were twelve years and nine hundred years. Gen. 5:8

Seth was born in 130; and 912 are 1042.

Noah born. Lamech 182.

Year 1056

And Lamech lived two and eighty years and a hundred years and begat Noah. Gen 5:28

Lemech was born in 874; and 182 are 1056.

Enosh dies, aged 905.

Year 1140

And all [the] days of Enosh were five years and nine hundred years. Gen. 5:11

Enosh was born in 235; and 905 are 1140.

Kenan dies, age 910.

Year 1235

And all [the] days of Kenan were ten years and nine hundred years. Gen. 5:14

Kenan was born in 325; and 910 are 1235.

Mahalaleel dies, age 895.

Year 1290

And all [the] days of Mahalaleel were five nnd ninety years and eight hundred Gen. 5:17 years.

Mahalaleel was born in 395; and 895 are 1290.

Jared dies, age 962.

Year 1422

And all [the] days of Jared were two and sixty years and nine hundred years. Gen 5:20

Jared was born in 460; and 962 are 1422.

Flood decreed.

Year 1536

And the angel of the Lord said: My Spirit shall not strive with man for ever, for Gen 6:3 that he also is flesh: and his days shall be a hundred and twenty years.

The Flood took place in Year 1656 (which see): this less 120 is 1536. This passage is

understood thus only by some: by others it is not taken as a prophecy, in which case the year 1536 drops out as a Bible date. The Bible itself throws no light on the true interpretation here. Numerics, however, as is demonstrated in Part III, show that this year is dated in the Bible, and this passage is therefore a prophecy of warning for 120 years of a Flood.

Japhet born. Noah 500

Year 1556

39

And Noah was a son of five hundred years, and he begat Shem, Ham, and Japhet. Gen 5:32

Noah was born in 1056; and 500 are 1566

See above § 92-93. That Shem was not born till 1558 is seen under that year. In Gen.

9:24 “Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his son had done to him.” Ham is here meant, and referred to as the little, the idiom for younger, when as here others are also spoken of. Japhet and Shem are named in the preceding verse. In Gen. 10:21 Japhet is mentioned thus: “And unto Shem. . . . brother of Japhet the great”—idiom for elder. Japhet being thus the elder brother of Shem, and Ham being the younger, it is Japhet that was born in 1556; though the possibility is not excluded, as far as this text is concerned, that Japhet and Ham were twins. But though the birth of Ham is not dated, Numerics favour 1557 as the year of Ham’s birth: the dates of the three brothers thus being 1556, 1557, 1558.

Moreover, in other cases of twins as those of Esau and Jacob, Pharez and Zerah, it is

stated that twins they are. Here it is not so stated. The probability therefore that Ham was a twin is thus greatly reduced. But as Ham’s birth is not spoken of in the Bible, except when mentioned with his brothers, and is not deducible from other texts, the year 1557 has no place among the Bible years.

See below for the case of Abram, Nahor and Haran, parallel to that of Shem, Ham, and

Japhet, under Year 1948.

Shem born.

Year 1558

Shem was a son of a hundred years, and he begat Arphaxad two years after the Gen. 11:10 Flood.

The Flood was in 1656, which see. Shem is thus 100 two years later, in 1658; less 100 are 1558.

Lamech dies, age 777.

Year 1651

And all [the] days of Lamech were seven and seventy years and seven hundred years.

Lamech was born in 874; and 777 are 1651.

Methuselah dies, age 969. The Flood Year 1656

And all [the] days of Methuselah were nine and sixty years and nine hundred Gen. years.

5:27;7:6

And Noah was a son of six hundred years, and the Flood of waters was upon the earth

Methuselah was born in 687 ;and 969 are 1656. Noah was born in 1056; and 600 are also 1656.

Noah’s 601. Flood ends.

Year 1657

And it was in year one and six hundred, in the first [month], in (day) one of the Gen. 8.13 month—the waters dried from over the earth.

Arphaxad born. Shem 100.

Year 1658

Shem . . . begat Arphaxad two years after the Flood

Gen. 11:10

The Flood was in 1656; and 2 are 1658.

Shelah born. Arphaxad 35.

Year 1693

And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and he begat Shelab Gen.11:12

Arphaxad was born in 1658; and 35 are 1693.

Eber born. Shelah 30.

Year 1723

And Shelab lived thirty years, and he begat Eber.

Gen. 11:14

Shelah was born in 1693; and 30 are 1723.

Peleg born. Eber 34.

Year 1757

40

And Eber lived four and thirty years, and he begat Peleg.

Gen. 11:16

Eber was born in 1723; and 34 are 1757.

Reu born. Peleg 30.

Year 1787

And Peleg lived thirty years, and he begat Reu.

Gen. 11:18

Peleg was born in 1757; and 30 are 1787.

Serug born. Reu 32.

Year 1819

And Reu lived two and thirty years, and he begat Serug.

Gen. 11:20

Reu was born in 1787; and 32 are 1819.

Nahor born. Serug 30.

Year 1849

And Serug lived thirty years, and he begat Nahor.

Gen. 11:22

Serug was born in 1819; and 30 are 1849.

Terah born. Nahor 29.

Year 1878

And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and he begat Terah Gen. 11:24

Nahor was born in 1849; and 29 are 1878.

Haran born. Terah 70.

Year 1948

And Terah lived seventy years, and he begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. Gen. 11:26

Terah was born in 1878; and 70 are 1948.

That it was not Abraham that was born when Teran was 70 was shown in Part I, § 28.

Compare also § 93 and Year 1556. All that is meant in Gen. 11:26 is that Terah was 70 when he became a father, and his sons were Abram, Nahor and Haran: of whom Abram is named first not because the oldest, but because the Redeemer was to be through his line: the case of Abraham being parallel with that of Shem. Scripture, however, does not make it certain that it was Haran rather than Nahor that was born in 70 Terah; nor that the two older brothers were not twins, unless light be thrown hereon by Numerics. These questions do not affect the Chronology, the only question being as to what person shall be named as born in 1948: Haran or Nahor, and this is not a strictly Bible Chronology question.

That Haran, however, was the older rather than Nahor is suggested already by the order

of Shem, Ham, and Japhet: where the oldest is put last, the three being given in the reverse order of their age.

Peleg dies, age 239.

Year 1996

And Peleg lived after he begat Reu nine years and two hundred years. Gen.

Reu was born in 1787; and 209 are 1996

11:19

Nahor dies, age 148.

Year 1997

And Nahor lived after he begat Terah nineteen years and a hundred years Gen.

Terah was born in 1878; and 119 are 1997.

11:25

Noah dies, age 950.

Year 2006

All the days of Noah were nine hundred years and fifty years. Gen. 9:29

Noah was born in 1056; and 950 are 2006.

Abraham born.

Year 2008

See under 1948 that it was not Abraham that was born at 70 Terah: and see Part I, § 28, that Abraham was born at 130 Terah.

Terah was born in 1878; and 130 are 2008.

Sarah born.

Year 2017

And Abraham fell on his face and laughed; and said in his heart. Shall one be born to a son of a hundred years, and shall Sarah, daughter of ninety years, bear? Gen.

41

17:17 Abraham was born in 2008. At his 99 Sarah is 90. She was thus born nine years after Abraham, 2008 and 9 are 2017.

All chronologers make Sarah ten years younger than her husband, which makes her birth

in 2018, one year later; but this misapprehends Gen. 17:17. When Abraham thus laughs at the Lord's promise of a son from Sarah, who is then 90, Abraham himself is not 100, but 99 according to verse 1: And Abram was a son of ninety years and nine years; and the Lord appeared unto Abram and said to him, etc. Sarah is thus 90 when he is 99. When Abram speaks of 100 when he is 99, he is thinking of the time next year when the child shall be actually born. Shall one be born to [me when I am] a son of a hundred years, and shall Sarah [now] a daughter of ninety years bear? Sarah is thus nine years Abraham's junior, not 10. Numerics, moreover, demonstrate conclusively that Sarah’s birth year is 2017, not 2018. And as Sarah died 127 years later, the year of her death is also affected thereby, and moves down one year also.

Reu dies, age 239.

Year 2026

And Reu lived after he begat Serug seven years and two hundred years. Gen.

Serug was born in 1819; and 207 are 2026.

11:21

Serug dies, age 230.

Year 2049

And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years. Gen.

Nahor was born in 1849; and 200 are 2049.

11:23

Terah dies, age 205.

Year 2083

And Terah's days were five years and two hundred years. Gen.

Terah was born in 1878; and 205 are 2083.

11:32

Ishmael born. Abraham 86.

Year 2094

And Abraham was a son of eighty years and six years when Hagar bare Ishmael Gen. to Abram

16:16

Abraham was born in 2008; and 86 are 2094.

Arphaxad dies, age 438.

Year 2096

And Arphaxad lived after be begat Shclah three years and four hundred years. Gen.

Shelah was born in 1693; and 403 are 2096.

11:13

Abraham 99. The Covenant.

Year 2107

And Abram was a son of ninety years and nine years.

Gen. 17: 1

See Part I, § § 34-40, for the other Scriptures for this year, and the proof that this is the year of the Covenant.

Abraham was born in 2008; and 99 are 2107.

Isaac born. Abram 100.

Year 2108

And Abraham was a son of a hundred years when his son Isaac was born to him. Gen. 21:5

Abraham was born in 2008; and 100 is 2108.

Shelah dies, age 433.

Year 2126

And Shelab lived after he begat Eber three years and four hundred years. Gen.

11:15

Eber was born in 1723; and 403 are 2126.

Sarah dies, age 127.

Year 2144

And Sarah's life was a hundred years and twenty years and seven years. Gen. 23:1

Sarah was born in 2017; and 127 is 2144.

Isaac 40. Marries Rebecca.

Year 2148

And Isaac was a son of forty years when he took Rebecca . . . for his wife. Gen.

42

Isaac was born in 2108; and 40 are 2148.

25:20

Shem dies, age 600.

Year 2158

And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years. Gen.

Arphaxad was born in 1658; and 500 are 2158.

11:11

Jacob and Esau born. Isaac 60.

Year 2168

And Isaac was a son of sixty years when she (Rebecca) bare them (Esau and Gen. Jacob).

25:26

Isaac was born in 2108; and 60 are 2168

Abraham dies, age 175.

Year 2183

And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived: a hundred Gen. 25:7 years, seventy years and five years.

Abraham was born in 2008; and 175 are 2183.

Eber dies, age 464.

Year 2187

And Eber lived after he begat Peleg thirty years and four hundred years. Gen.

Peleg was born in 1757; and 430 are 2187.

11:17

Esau 40. Marries Judith.

Year 2208

And Esau was a son of forty years, and he took Judith for a wife. Gen.

Esau was born in 2168; and 40 are 2208.

26:34

Ishmael dies, age 137.

Year 2231

And these are the years of Ishmael's life: a hundred years and thirty years and Gen. seven years.

25:17

Ishmael was born in 2094; and 137 are 2231.

Jacob begins to Serve Laban at 77.

Year 2245

Jacob was born in 2168 and 77 are 2245.

In Gen. 41:46 “Joseph was a son of thirty years when he stood before Pharaoh.”

foretelling the seven years of plenty and the seven years of famine to follow. The years of plenty begin at once in the next verse: “And the land brought forth in seven plenteous years by handfuls.” “And the seven years of plenty came to an end . . . And the seven years of famine began to come” (Gen. 41:53-54). Joseph is thus now 37. Jacob arrives in Egypt and is presented to Pharaoh in the year when Joseph sends word to him to come: “these two years hath the famine been in the land, and five years are yet.” “There are yet five years of famine” (Gen. 45:6,11). Joseph is thus now 39. But in Gen. 47:8-9 “Pharaoh said to Jacob, How many are the days of your life’s years? And Jacob said to Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are thirty and a hundred years.” Jacob is thus 130 when Joseph is 39; he was thus 91 when Joseph was born. In Gen. 31:41 Jacob says to Laban: These twenty years have I been in thy house. I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy flock.

In Gen. 30:25 “it came to pass when Rachel had borne Joseph that Jacob said to Laban:

Send me away that I may go unto mine own place and my country.” The rest of the chapter tells of the arrangement between Jacob and Laban that Jacob now works for his flocks as he had served the preceding fourteen for his wives. Joseph was thus born at the end of Jacob's 14 years with Laban. If 91 at the birth of Joseph, at the end of 14 years' service. Jacob is 77 when he begins to serve.

Jacob 84. Marries Leah and Rachel.

Year 2252

And Jacob served for Rachel 7 years.

Gen.

Jacob's service began 2245; and 7 are 2252.

29:20

43

Joseph born. Jacob 91.

Year 2259

See under 2245 that Joseph was born when Jacob was 91.

Jacob was born in 2168; and 91 are 2259

Jacob 97, Leaves Laban.

Year 2265

These twenty years have I been in thine house—Jacob to Laban. Gen.

31:41

Jacob came to Laban 2245; and 20 are 2265.

Joseph 17. Sold by his brethren.

Year 2276

Joseph, a son of seventeen years, was shepherding with his brethren, . . . . and Gen. 37:2, they sold Joseph.

28

Joseph was born in 2259; and 17 are 2276.

Joseph 28. In prison.

Year 2287

And it came to pass at the end of two years’ days that Pharaoh dreamed. Gen. 41:1

Joseph was born in 2259: and 28 are 2287.

This dream was the cause of Joseph's standing before Pharaoh, when he was 30, as seen under 2289. He was in prison therefore at 28.

Isaac dies, age 180.

Year 2288

And the days of Isaac were a hundred years and eighty years. Gen.

Isaac was born in 2108; and 180 are 2288.

35:28

Joseph 30, Stands before Pharaoh.

Year 2289

And Joseph was a son of thirty years when he stood before Pharaoh. Gen.

Joseph was born in 2259; anti 30 are 2289.

41:46

7 Years of Plenty end.

Year 2296

And the seven years of plenty ended

Gen.

Joseph foretold them in 2289; and 7 are 2296

41:53

Year 1 of Famine.

Year 2297

And the seven years of famine began to come.

Gen.

41:54

Year 2 of Famine.

Year 2298

These two years hath the famine been. See also under 2245. Gen. 45:6

Jacob dies, age 147.

Year 2315

And the days of the years of Jacob's life were seven years and forty and a Gen. hundred years.

47:28

Jacob was born in 2168: and 147 are 2315.

Joseph dies, age 110.

Year 2369

And Joseph died, a son of a hundred and ten years.

Gen.

Joseph was born in 2259: and 110 are 2369.

50:26

Aaron born.

Year 2454

And Moses was a son of eighty years, and Aaron a son of three and eighty years Ex. 7:7 when they spake to Pharaoh.

This was shortly before the Exodus in 2537 (which see): less 83 is 2454. Moses born.

Year 2457

See Year 2454. Moses was born three years after Aaron, who was born 2454; and 3 are 2457.

Moses 40.

Year 2497

And Moses . . . when a forty years' time was fulfilled unto him, it came into his Act. 7:23 heart to visit his brethren.

44

Moses was born in 2457; and 40 are 2497.

Caleb born.

Year 2498

Caleb was 40 in 2538: less forty are 2498.

Caleb and Joshua were of the twelve sent to spy out the land. The evil report brought

back by the other ten caused the Congregation to murmur: for which they were condemned to be wanderers 40 years in the wilderness. “Your children shall be wanderers forty years” (Numb. 14:33). But this sentence was passed upon them after “it came to pass in the second year, in day twenty of the month” of Numb. 10:11; and “the Lord spake unto Moses in the Sinai wilderness in the second year from their leaving Egypt land” (Numb. 9:1). The Exodus was in 2537, which see. This is, therefore, in 2538 when Caleb is sent to spy out the land. In Josh. 14:7 Caleb says, A son of forty years I was when Moses, the servant of the Lord, sent me from Kadesh Barnea to spy out the land. He was thus sent out at the age of forty in 2538.

The Exodus. The Law.

Year 2537

And Moses was a son of eighty years, and Aaron a son of three and eighty years, Ex. 7:7 when they spake to Pharaoh.

Moses was born in 2457; and 80 are :2537

Aaron was born in 2454; and 83 are 2537.

Moses and Aaron stood before Pharaoh not earlier than the year of the Exodus, since they

died in Year 40 from the Exodus: the one 120 years old, and the other 123, as is seen under Year 2576. The Exodus is: “And it came to pass at the end of thirty years and four hundred years, and it came to pass the self-same day that the hosts of the Lord all went out from Egypt land” (Ex. 12:41). As the Law was given only a few weeks after this Exodus (“in the third month after Israel's sons were gone forth out of Egypt land, on this day they came into the Sinai wilderness,” Ex. 19: 1), these four hundred and thirty years are the same as in Gal. 3:16-17 from the Law back to the Covenant with Abraham. “Now to Abraham were the promises spoken . . . . A covenant confirmed beforehand by God the Law which came four hundred and thirty years after doth not disannul?” These 430 years date, therefore, from the Covenant in 2107; and the Law was thus given in 2537.

Exodus Year 2. Caleb 40.

Year 2538

And the Lord spake to Moses in the Sinai Wilderness in the second year from Numb. 9:1 their leaving Egypt land.

Exodus Year 40. Moses dies, age 120; and Aaron dies, age 123. Year 2576

And it came to pass in year forty, in month eleven, in day one of the month, Deut. 1:3 Moses spake unto Israel's sons.

And Aaron the priest went up Mount Hor, . . . . and died there in year forty of the Numb. departure of Israel's sons from Egypt, in the fifth month, on day one of the month. 33:38-39 And Aaron was a son of three and twenty and a hundred years when he died.

And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel, and said unto them: A son Deut. 31:2 of a hundred and twenty years am I this day.

And Moses was a son of a hundred and twenty years when he died. Deut. 34:7

Moses was born in 2457, which is his year 1; and his year 120 is 2576.

Aaron was born in 2454, which is his year 1; and his year 123 is 2576.

Moses died within two months of New Year 2577 (which see), and in year 40 from the Exodus. He thus lived almost 120 full years, unless “this day I am a son

45

of 120 years” be pressed to mean his birthday. In any case, he lived 119 full years and at least ten months.

Year 1 in Canaan.

Year 2577

And the people came out of the Jordan on day ten of the first month [of the New Josh. 4:19 Year after the death of Moses].

Caleb 85. Division of the Land.

Year 2583

And now, behold, I am to-day a son of five and eighty years. Caleb to Joshua, in Josh. asking for a special assignment of his inheritance.

14:10

Caleb was born in 2498; and 85 are 2583.

Elders die.

Year 2610

And Aaron the priest went up at the Lord’s commandment to Mount Hor, and Numb. died there in year forty from the departure of Israel's children from Egypt land. 33:38

And they journeyed from Mount Hor . . . . And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon Numb. king of the Amorites, saying: Let me pass through thy land; . . . but Sihon . . . 21:4, fought against Israel . . . And Israel took all these cities; and Israel dwelt in all the 21-25 cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon and all its towns.

And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua and all the days of the Judg. 2: elders that outlived Joshua . . . And Joshua, son of Nun, the Lord's servant. died . . . 7-8, 10 and also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers.

While Israel dwelt in Hesbon and its towns three hundred years, wherefore did ye Judg. not recover them? Jephthah to the Ammon King.

11:26

Hitherto the dates have been obtained from passages of Scripture which furnish a

continuous chronology downward from Adam to Year 2583, the Division of the Land under Joshua. Scripture does not give the number of years from this Division to the death of the Elders, or the first Oppression, which is the next dated event in Scripture. The date obtainable from the Bible data downward next to 2583 is the end of the 300 years spoken of by Jephthah— which began in Year 40 from the Exodus.

There is thus a gap between the Division of the Land and the death of the Elders to be

filled in, ere a continuous chronology can be had for the period of the Judges, and this can be done only by working backward from the end of Jephthah’s 300 years. This gap is found to be 27 years, thus:

About to end the Ammon oppression of 18 years. Jephthah says to Ammon, Israel dwelt

in Heshbon and its towns 300 years. (That this is not to be taken as a round number is shown in Part I § § 68-71). Aaron died in Mount Hor in year 40 from the Exodus. Israel took Heshbon and its town after leaving Mount Hor; therefore, not before that year; and not later: since Moses took it, and he died in the same year as Aaron (see 2576). 300 years and 2576 is 2876, when the Ammon oppression of 18 years ends. It was preceded by 22 years of Jair, 23 of Tola, 3 of Abimelech, 40 “Rest” (see Part I, § 79) associated with Gideon, 40 with Deborah, 80 with Ehud, and 40 with Othniel (see Part 1, § § 77-78), making 266 years. From Year 40 of the Exodus, or 2576, to the Division of the Land in 2583 is 7 years more: 273 years in all (7x13x3). 2583, the year of the Division of the Land, and 273 give 2856 (7x13x24). The 300 years end in 2883, with a difference of 27 years between the two dates. These 27 years cover the time from the Division of the land and the first Oppression (Compare Part I, § § 18-20).

One other long date, covering this period, is given in the Bible: the 480 years from the
