My parents moved from Aberdeen to Colchester when my Father took up a position in London with the Bank of Scotland. My Father commuted every day on the train.

They were far from home, had just become new parents and were setting up a new home when the missionaries first knocked on their door to introduce them to the home evening programme.

Elder Doug Himstreet from Utah and Elder Mulheron knocked at the door and taught my parents over several months. My parents were members of the Church of Scotland and had a good knowledge of the Bible. When the missionaries taught a new principle, my Father would ask them to show where it said that in the Bible. Elder Himstreet was very patient and always said he would find out and come back to them, which he always did. My Father was impressed with his dedication and they became friends.

After several months of teaching and reading the Book of Mormon my Mother was ready to join the Church and Elder Himstreet challenged my Father to prayer about the Book of Mormon. When he accepted that challenge, he received a spiritual witness that it was the word of God. My parents were baptised in 1972 and attended Colchester Ward which was part of the then East Anglia Stake.

A treasured memory for them both was when they heard Elder LeGrand Richards, who was the visiting General Authority, speak at their first stake conference. My Father said he spoke about eternal marriage and about telling your wife you love her every day. My Mother said she was so impressed with the power with which he spoke.

They have been faithful members, raising six children, including five sons who served missions, and they are now seeing their grandchildren serve. And yes, my Father still tells my Mum that he loves her every day!

My parents joined the Church when I was a baby, so my five little brothers and I were fortunate to grow up with the Church teachings and the Spirit in our home. My parents were very faithful and set us a wonderful example of service and gratitude to the Lord for their conversion. My parents moved to Perth, which is part of the Dundee Scotland Stake, in the Summer of 1974. Sister Anne Crook from the Perth Branch said that their arrival was an answer to a prayer and my Father was called to be Branch President within a couple of weeks.

Today I’m surrounded by faithful priesthood holders and their families. We have also been fortunate to have contributed thirteen full-time missionaries: my brothers, sons, and nephews – with three of them currently serving in the field.

It is an amazing number of missionaries from our family, and it all stemmed from our parents’ missionaries and their dedicated service.

The missionaries from our family include:

Husband: Dale Black, England Coventry Mission

Brother 1: David McGlashan, New Zealand Auckland Mission

Brother 2: Neil McGlashan, England London South

Brother 3: James McGlashan, England London Mission

Brother 4: Michael McGlashan, France Bordeaux Mission

Brother 5: Ewan McGlashan, England London South Mission

Son 1: Adam Black, Spain Malaga Mission

Son 2: Callan Black, France Lyon Mission

Nephew 1: Levi McGlashan, Alpine German-Speaking Mission

Nephew 2: Austin McGlashan, Brazil Vitoria Mission

Nephew 3: Gavin McGlashan, Mozambique Maputo Mission (currently serving)

Nephew 4: Duncan McGlashan, Alpine German-Speaking Mission (currently serving)

Nephew 5: Matthew McGlashan, England Leeds Mission (currently serving)

As a direct consequence of Elder Doug Himstreet’s missionary service, two parents, six children, six sons and daughters-in-law, 23 grandchildren and one great granddaughter have been blessed by having the gospel in their lives. We are still in touch with Elder Doug Himstreet and his wife, Celestia. They attended my eldest son’s wedding and came to the temple with us to see them sealed.
