Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Introduction

Overcoming your loss will be a journey. To make that journey successfully you will need three things. First, you will need a map to show you the direction and to point out goals to guide your course. Second, you will need to know the steps that will move you along to your destination. Third, you will need fuel to give you power for your journey.

This journey in overcoming your loss is part of the larger pilgrimage that is life itself. It is largely a trip you must make alone. But sometimes a traveling companion can help pass the lonely hours and give you encouragement. I hope I can be that companion for you in this book.

I would not presume to know your feelings, and it is not my intent to impose my opinions and judgments on your situation. Your loss is unique because you are unique. But you will go through certain stages along the journey in overcoming your loss, stages that are typical of every person who overcomes a loss. These stages can help you recognize where you are in the overcoming process and give you encouragement as you see the progress you are making. I have described in this book three such stages in the process of overcoming your loss.

The first stage comes with the first numbing pains of your loss. The second stage is the long, gray grind as you reconstruct your life to include the loss which is now a part of you. The third stage is overcoming. In this stage you deal with loss not as a permanent setback, but as a part of the process of your eternal growth toward godhood.

As you pass through these stages, you will make better progress if you have goals to reach. Experienced outdoor survivors know that a person can travel through wilderness best by taking a general compass heading, then picking out a visible goal and working toward it. By traveling from goal to goal you finally reach your destination. This book is structured around this goal-reaching concept.

I have identified some short-term survival goals at the beginning of each stage of our progress. These goals, called "Milestone Markers," are worded in personal terms, statements you might make about yourself. I listed them at the beginning because I feel they will act as road maps for you as you make your progress through that stage in the process of overcoming your loss. These goals may look intimidating and overwhelming at first. You may say to yourself, "I am not that way. I don't have that strength or that outlook." That response is perfectly natural, and probably true. If you were in Los Angeles looking at a road map to New York City, you could say, "I am not in New York City. I'm not even in Denver or Chicago or somewhere else along the way." This would be true, but given enough time and sufficient steps or revolutions of wheels in the right direction, you would eventually get to your destination. So, as you look at the "Milestone Markers" sections at the beginning of each stage of your progress, look at them as goals to arrive at later, not as attributes you already possess.

Sitting and staring at a map will not bring us to our destination. We must take the steps to get ourselves there. So at the end of each section I have listed specific things to do, titled "Traveling Tips." These are mind, heart, and body movements that can transport us one step at a time along the journey of overcoming our loss. If we repeat them, they will become part of us.

There is one more element that is vital for our journey. That is the fuel to move us along our way. Cars, planes, trains, and ships move on the power of gasoline, oil, diesel, coal, and sometimes nuclear energy. People are propelled on the fuel of ideas, which can generate motivating emotions. These emotions ignite a spiritual fire within us to keep us moving.

Loss drains our energy and our emotions. It often takes from us those things which seem to make life worth living. It turns life's bright colors into gray, life's music into monotones, and it makes us wonder what is the use of even trying. To overcome loss we need to refuel our tanks, recharge our batteries, and reignite our fires. We need new ideas, new inspirations, new perspectives and ways of looking at life. The motivational fuel in this book is between the goal sections, "Milestone Markers," and the activities sections, "Traveling Tips." Between these two I have described the best ideas I know to overcome loss. I have found and continue to find them very helpful.

One last comment: I know that giving counsel to others is a risky business. There is always the danger of sounding condescending or overly simple. I hope nothing in this book sounds like a pat on the head or a minimizing of your loss. If it does, I apologize. Like you, I am constantly struggling with life's losses, large and small, and trying to turn them into the ultimate success the Lord intended our lives to be.
