Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Overcoming Loss—a Personal Story

I looked down again at the little yellow card in my hand. It was dog-eared from being taken out of my planning book every day. On the bottom of the card I read my handwritten note, "Turn every lemon into lemonade." I laughed a long, hollow, empty laugh that turned to sobs at the end. How ridiculous it seemed to battle the dragon of death with the puny sword of human optimism.

Time to ponder, even time to weep, is a luxury when you have a terminally ill wife and fifteen children. The tear reservoirs are soon emptied, and the dry sobs soon lose their ability to tap off the pressure on your mind and heart. Then it is time to get up and put one foot in front of the other. I picked up my briefcase and left the office.

I climbed into my faithful but aging pickup truck. I eased it out of park, which didn't really hold anymore, into drive and gently pushed the accelerator. The truck had once been a husky, three-quarter-ton with a heavy, cast-iron block and four hundred cubic inches of plunging horsepower. Its mechanical muscles were starting to sag from the many miles it had traveled. It, too, was losing life. Everything about me seemed a harbinger of death.

Diane met me at the door. She smiled with tired eyes and thin lips. We embraced, and both of us tried not to notice the growing bulge at her middle coming between us. Sometimes, we could almost imagine it was another pregnancy, like the ones we had worked through together. But those swellings had been filled with life. This one, we knew, was filled with death.

We savored every moment we could be together during the following weeks. The cancer swelled within her. I contacted every resource we thought might help. Every therapy and technique I was told about or read about I traced down and called. I found that in the traditional medical circles as well as the nontraditional, and even the folk remedies and unproved therapies, there is much more heat than light. Everybody knows something about cancer, but nobody knows enough. Each side blames the other for malpractice in treating the disease, but no one really knows what to do.

She had ovarian cancer. This is rare in a woman still bearing children, as she was. When they operated and removed the tumor, they felt they had gotten it all. We agreed to radiation treatments of the affected area to make sure the cancer was killed. The treatments were hard on her constitution and digestive system, but they seemed to do the job. For several months she seemed cancer free. But then a routine checkup X-ray showed a tiny, dark spot on her liver. A particle of the tumor, probably just a few cells, had broken free before the operation and floated into her liver. It was inoperable. She had received all the radiation her body could handle, and we chose not to put her through the harsh effects of chemotherapy. There were no other options in traditional medical therapy.

We tried diet, homeopathic, and other remedies. They may have helped some and slowed the cancer down, but nothing killed it. Diane grew weaker, thinner in all but her bloated liver. The blessings I gave her every morning kept down the pain but did not stop the growth of the malignancy. We chose to care for her at home with the help of home health services and a gentle, devoted nurse named Carol Lastowski.

Our third son, Joe, came home from his studies and work in Philadelphia. Robert, our second son, came from Arizona. Our fourth son, David, was counseled to stay on his mission in California, which he did. Our oldest son, Dan, and his wife were unable to come in from Japan. We gathered about Diane, talked with her, and listened to her last intelligible words. Then she grew too weak to utter more than simple requests for water.

One morning three weeks later, as I slept on the floor beside her bed, I had an unusual dream of travel and flight around and away from earth. I awoke and did not have to stir from my pillow to know that she was gone. I knew it even before I realized that her labored breathing had stopped. Examining her, I found no pulse. The disfiguring swelling of her abdomen had already begun to recede. The cancer in its perverse nature had consumed its victim, and now would die itself. I called my neighbor Dr. Keith Hooker; he came and pronounced her dead. Then I called a mortician.

As I waited for him, I called the children. We met around the body of their mother. I told them to feel free to cry, now or whenever they needed to in the future, that I had cried and would cry again. But no one cried then. I said, "Your mother is not far away, even now. She is looking upon this scene and upon us and comforting us. We will see her and know her and be with her again. But for a time she has another work that she needs to do. We must carry on here. We will be together again in the future."

The older children held the little ones in their arms. We talked about whatever they wanted to talk about. Mostly we discussed what it means to be alive, what happens when we pass from this life to the next life through the portal that closes here and opens there—the door we call death. I told them, "Death has been pictured in an ugly mask by the superstitious and through horror stories and movies. But really, as you can see, it is a gentle, quiet thing. Your mother's face was twisted in pain, but now it is relaxed. Her spirit, which was trapped in a diseased and helpless body, is now free—more free than ours."

And so we talked and waited until the mortician came and took her away. Then we talked again. I have talked with the children many times since then, together and individually. Four-year-old Lucy, who watched in dry-eyed interest the work of the morticians, later came to me in a quiet moment. "Daddy," she said, "I cried when they took Mama away. I cried inside."

"So did I, Lucy. So did I," I said.

At the end of that day, as we gathered for scripture reading and prayer, I complimented the children on having survived the hardest day of our lives. Looking back, I think that is still true. There would be the day of the funeral and burial. There would be the long, gray days of that hot summer. There would be our first Christmas without our mother. These were all hard, but I still believe the first day was the hardest.

It has been a tradition for as long as our children can remember that each night after scriptures and prayers they answer two questions. The first is, "What was your happiest thing today?" The second, for the children over eight years of age, is, "What did you do to build the Lord's kingdom today?" It might have seemed out of place, but I asked those questions again that night. The children all gave identical answers. "My happiest thing is that I know I will be with Mom again. What I did for the kingdom was I made it through the day."

"That's good," I said. "That is enough."

The experts in these matters say that I as a husband and we as a family had suffered one of the worst psychological and emotional traumas in the book. I don't know how such a loss compares with the loss of a child, a close parent or sibling, a divorce, or with physical impairments—blindness, deafness, paralysis. I don't know how you would go about comparing them. So much depends on the individual circumstance. But I know that this is a big one. I set aside a year in which to get my head back together. I read later that the average is two years in America: that's how long it takes before the accident and suicide rates of surviving spouses return to normal. I'm not suicide prone, but I wouldn't have trusted myself with any complicated or dangerous equipment for a while. I stumbled around a lot, and my mind was mostly elsewhere for a long time. I understood for the first time how one could prefer to be in the next life rather than this one. If it had not been for the children and for whatever work I am supposed to accomplish in this life, I would have preferred to move on.

Many dark dawns I stood at Diane's grave and thought deeply. Sometimes I sank to my knees and wept hot tears on the cold headstone. But then I would have to stand up and plod homeward to the children and my work. Often I quoted aloud the words of Robert Frost from "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening." I had memorized them years before but never understood them until now:

The woods are lovely, dark and deep. But I have promises to keep, And miles to go before I sleep, And miles to go before I sleep.

The cemetery is on my morning jogging route, so I stop at Diane's grave most mornings. I often used to think, with a grim smile, "With the rotten, healthy lifestyle I keep, I could go on down here for another half century." The thought did not particularly appeal to me.

Gradually, over the weeks and months, my desire to die dissipated. I picked up the threads of my life and began to reweave them into a new tapestry. A beautiful new strand in the pattern appeared when Sharon Lee Johnson consented to be my wife. I know that the blessing of remarriage does not come to every person who loses a spouse to death or divorce. If you don't get the chance to remarry, probably your recovery from loss will be harder than mine was, but I believe it is still possible. Recovery does not mean reconstruction of what you had or what you were before. That is impossible. But it does mean making the most of the new condition in which you find yourself.

This is the situation in our family now. None of us are the same people we were. We still think of Diane often and pray for her every night and morning, but we don't weep when we do. We have survived and even gained a little ground in our quest for salvation and exaltation, I believe.

Whether your loss is a loved one, a marriage, a physical ability, an opportunity, a job, a hope or dream—the process of overcoming it will be somewhat similar. In the pages that follow, I have described that process from my experience and the experiences of others, and shared some thoughts in the hope that they may help you as they have helped me.
