Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Part 1

The First Numbing Pains

Milestone Markers

The most important goals we will achieve in this life are the character traits that will move us along toward our ultimate destination, which is to be like our Heavenly Father and to dwell with him. Loss can move us closer to, or farther from, this destination.

Following are some emotional, mental, and physical attributes toward which you are heading as you begin your journey working through the first numbing pains of loss. Down the road of your journey, you will at some point be able to say these statements and believe them:

I can outlast this painful period, and I know that sooner or later it will pass.

Every moment, every hour, every day that I endure this pain is a victory for me, for time is on my side.

I have suffered a loss, but I am not bitter about it.

I am a strong person; I can stand up under this loss.

I have internal psychological and emotional resources that will get me through this hard time.

I am loved by my family, my friends, and most importantly and certainly by my Heavenly Father and by my Savior, Jesus Christ.

I am beginning to adjust to my new situation and find it at least bearable.

I am beginning to form productive habits in my life to accommodate the loss without having it destroy my life. These habits may include new activities, new schedules, new contacts and associates.

I am beginning to picture and focus in my mind a lifestyle that will include my loss but will not be dominated and directed by it.

I am taking confidence and courage as I look back at the hard things in my life I have endured thus far.

I am beginning to map out on paper, or at least in my mind, positive directions my life will take now that I have endured the first part of my loss.

I have developed greater trust and deeper love for my Father in heaven as I have seen how he has helped me get through this difficult time in my life.

Through prayer and contemplation, I have developed a deeper appreciation for my own inner strengths and reserves. This has helped me become a more calm and confident person.

Nothing I will face now or in the future will crush me, because my Savior will sustain me.
