Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 1

It's Okay to Cry

My friend took my hand in both of his. His gaunt face was etched with the deep lines of eighty-plus years of living. His blue eyes were clouded and watery, as the eyes of old people become. His face was deeply lined from the strain he had borne up under the last few years caring for his wife as she slowly died of leukemia. Now she was breathing her last, and I had come as her bishop to give her a final blessing.

Her devoted husband followed me outside her hospital room to take my hand and thank me for coming. "It was so kind of you to come and . . . " His voice cracked as the sobs welled up in his throat. He dropped his eyes, a little embarrassed. "I'm sorry. I didn't mean to lose control, but she is a wonderful wife. And sixty-three years together is a long time."

I nodded, gave his weathered hands a final squeeze, and walked down the hospital corridor. I didn't say to him what I was thinking. It didn't seem appropriate at the moment. I wanted to say, "Don't apologize. I am just sorry you don't feel free to pour out your feelings in any way that may help. If a man can't weep over the loss of his beloved, lifetime companion, why were we born with tear ducts anyway?"

The Doctrine and Covenants counsels us to "weep for the loss of them that die." (D&C 42:45.) This is good spiritual and psychological practice. Crying can help to tap off the emotional pressure that builds up in a time of loss.

Our society puts rather strict limits on what is considered a proper display of feelings. A few years ago Edmund Muskie, the U.S. Senator from Maine, was a viable presidential candidate. At one fateful news conference, in a moment of failure and frustration, he let fall a tear or two. He was politically dead from that moment. In the minds of the press and public, he was the crying candidate. The same thing happened a few years later to a female member of the U.S. House of Representatives. She was, if anything, even more sharply criticized than Muskie, because it was said she had betrayed not only herself but her sex, giving the impression that women were not tough enough to handle the highest political offices.

Most of us grow up in fear of taunts and teasing if we let our emotions show. "Crybaby," "wimp," "sob sister," and other epithets are hurled at us when we are small, and they leave a lasting impression about how we should behave. So we squeeze off the tear ducts, bottle the emotion, and try to take it on the chin without showing outwardly how much it hurts.

Given our society, that's probably a practical approach—in public. But in private and within ourselves, it is well to remember that crying is often a sign of sensitivity and compassion, not weakness. The shortest verse in the Bible reminds us that the Lord himself is not above showing emotion. John 11:35 records simply, "Jesus wept."

The Lord's prophets also show their pain with tears. In a stake conference in the Provo Utah Edgemont Stake in the spring of 1987, Elder Paul H. Dunn told of being in Hawaii on a church assignment with President Harold B. Lee. Late one night he heard a soft knock on his door. When he opened it, President Lee collapsed into his arms sobbing, "Help me, please help me." President Lee had just learned of the death of his daughter. Elder Dunn learned a great lesson at that moment. If a great and strong man like Harold B. Lee, the Lord's prophet, can weep over his loss, the invitation is open to us all.

President Lee later wrote that his tears gushed forth anew when he descended from the airplane in Salt Lake City and saw the little motherless family before him. He gathered his grandchildren about him and cried again, but they did not cry. He said to them, "Here your grandpa is crying and you are not."

They replied, "Grandpa, we have cried and cried until we are all out of tears."

Eventually the tears do dry, but, like little mountain springs, they may refresh themselves after a while and run again for a time. All the familiar things of your world that once were your friends may seem like adversaries for a time. If your loss was financial, it's pretty obvious that you won't find the same zest in looking at your books when the bottom lines are red as you did when they were black. If your loss is a physical ability, the tennis shoes or dancing shoes you once enjoyed slipping on may be a source of pain when you see them from a wheelchair or a bed. If you have lost love and companionship through a divorce, those treasured wedding pictures and mementoes that once made you misty-eyed may do so again, but not in the same way. If a loved one has died, every drawer and closet will probably hold a painful surprise, causing a catch in your throat and more tears.

There are more and less effective ways to use crying in overcoming grief. The same thing could be said for any mental or emotional technique. Used alone and to excess, most tools become ineffective, even counterproductive. It's hard to hammer with a saw or saw with a hammer. Too much "stiff upper lip" can wear us down and wear us out in the face of adversity. Sometimes we need to bend a little or we will break. Too much leaning on our support systems can deprive us of the opportunity to build our own strength, but the support of others is practically indispensable as we are working our way back from a loss.

Likewise, too much crying can produce a psychological syndrome similar to the self-fulfilling prophecy. We cry because we are hurt or grief stricken. If we continue to cry, and only cry, as a response to our sadness, the crying itself can become a source of sadness. We say to ourselves, "I must have suffered great—perhaps irreparable—damage, because see how much I am crying." The cycle of crying because we are sad and being sad because we are crying can repeat itself unendingly unless we interrupt it with some of the other techniques of healing and recovery, which will be discussed later in this book.

Crying alone will not bring about the healing we need when we hurt from a loss, but used in conjunction with other mental and emotional rehabilitation, it can be very helpful. It can release the bottled-up pressure and pain that come with the first shocks of our loss. It can remind us that we are human and vulnerable, sometimes even helpless, before the powers of other elements in our existence. This realization can open the door to humility and trust in God, who has all power, all wisdom, perfect love for us as his children, and a Father's desire to give us only what is ultimately for our best good.

Used for these purposes, crying can help us endure and overcome our loss. We will find after a time that we do not need to cry anymore; our tears have served their purpose. Eventually, we will find that the grief itself will pass. We will discover the wisdom and truth in the words of Psalm 30:5, "Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning."
