Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 2

What Happened?

What happened?

"It was the best thing that could have happened to our family. The experience pulled us together, helped to unite us in a bond of common purpose, and showed us what the truly important things in life are—our loved ones and our families. It helped to bring our children back, and it helped me to focus my life on what is really most important to me."

"For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matthew 16:26.)

What happened?

"I learned to love in ways I had never known before. My heart has expanded in love, not only to those who are easy to love and who love me in return, but to those who do not reciprocate my love. I have learned to love even my enemies."

"But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you . . . and persecute you." (Matthew 5:44.)

What happened?

"That experience helped us take our eyes off the things of this world and concentrate on the things of eternity. It created a bond between us and heaven which is like a rope pulling us upward."

"Let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds." (D&C 43:34.)

What happened?

"It gave me an appreciation of life that I never had before. I wake up in the morning, take a deep breath, give thanks to God for this beautiful day, and resolve to make the best of every minute of it."

"This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it." (Psalm 118:24.)

What happened to each of these people? Apparently, it was something important and good. Their lives were changed for the better, and they are in the process of reaping eternal benefits from their experiences. Yet none of them would have chosen to go through these experiences.

"It pulled our family together and showed us what was really important in life," Martin said. Martin lived just up the hill from us. "Up the hill" often has meaning beyond the geographical in our location; it often means up the economic ladder as well. Martin had climbed both the hill and the economic ladder quite successfully. He was a professional man in southern California with a thriving practice and a comfortable financial portfolio, but he was also a conscientious father. He cared about his family and was concerned about the environment they were growing up in, so he moved them back to Utah to be among the Saints. He knew, as we do, that there is sin in the valleys of the mountains, just as there is everywhere else in the world. But he felt that living where there was a higher concentration of Mormons would be helpful.

To maintain the lifestyle to which he and his family had been accustomed, he still needed that income from his California clientele, so he commuted back and forth to work—flying to California for the week and returning home on weekends. This was a difficult arrangement, and he longed to be financially independent so he could stay at home with his family in Utah. Finally, the opportunity came for him to put his life savings into an extremely high-yield investment. Things were working out so well for him, it seemed too good to be true. It was. He lost everything. He was forced to return with his family to California and essentially start over. They had to sell their beautiful homes, their fine cars, and their expensive country club memberships.

After a while, they did save enough to go to Disneyland. Walking between the pirate ride and the Matterhorn with his happy children gathered close around him, Martin said, "I would never have chosen to go through that, but it's the best thing that ever happened to our family. It's not where you live; it's how you live and how much you love each other that matter. This experience has brought us together."

Mirna was a loving wife and mother of five children. Her husband left her and the children and married his secretary. She was understandably bewildered and bitter. They had been a model Latter-day Saint family. Now she felt they were more like something out of a TV soap opera or a bad novel. She alternately criticized herself for having done something wrong to ruin their marriage, although she didn't know what, and condemned the "rat of a husband" who would do such a rotten thing to his wife and children. Finally, she said, "This is getting me nowhere. I've got to change."

It wasn't easy. She fasted and prayed for the Lord to soften her heart and give her understanding. She still doesn't know why their marriage broke up, but she has learned something even more valuable. She has learned to turn this tragedy from a festering spiritual wound cankering her soul into a Gethsemane experience on the road to salvation. "Over the years the Lord has helped me learn to love my husband's new wife as a daughter of God and a sister of mine, and to regain love for my former husband—not as my husband, but as the father of our children—and to respect him in that position."

Thelma was so busy as the mother of a large family and the ward Relief Society president that she forgot to check behind the car that dreadful day when she backed out of the driveway. The terrible thump under the wheels and the sight of her own child dying in the driveway still haunts her thoughts and dreams occasionally. But the guilt and the stabbing pains to a mother's heart are finally gone. She no longer makes those accusations against herself and against the angels who should have been sent to protect her little one. His gentle voice is silent no more. It is speaking to her from the other side of the veil, constantly encouraging her and her family to live righteously so they can be together again.

"Paul's death is not bitter to me anymore. Instead, it is a gentle tug to all of us. The things of this world are not nearly so important to me—only the things of eternity and being together forever with our family."

Howard was getting along in years, but he still led and loved the active life. When that crushing pain settled on his chest one night, he knew it was all over. A triple bypass and weeks of recuperation saved his life, but left him, in his own estimation, an invalid. For a long time he wondered why God didn't just let him die and get it over with instead of confining him to the living death of a wheelchair, walker, and finally careful and measured steps to protect his weakened heart. He has found out since that there is still much work for him to do, and many joys to be experienced. Things don't have to be done at a sprinter's pace.

"That heart attack mellowed me out. It showed me blessings in this life that I'd been going by too fast to notice—things like the love of my family and friends, and like taking a breath and seeing the sun come up in the morning. Life means more to me than it did before my heart attack."

All of these people, and tens of thousands like them every day, face terrible losses in their lives. None of us will escape such experiences as these. Yet these people turned their tragedies into triumphs. Their accomplishments were difficult; they took time and tremendous effort. The process was not easy, nor was it automatic. But it worked for them, and it can work for us when we face similar trials.

When we truly overcome our losses, we don't just endure. We don't just hobble along as wounded warriors in life's battles. We are not talking here about positive mental attitude in the face of difficulties, or of painting the clouds with sunshine. These are important skills and steps along the way, but we are talking about actually transforming the clouds from thundering, menacing, drenching overcasts to floating, white banners in a blue sky—guiding us back to God, even as they led the ancient children of Israel. It is possible to make such transformations and such redefinitions in our troubled minds and our scarred souls following a loss.

The first thing we have to do, I believe, is to define what happened to us. This may seem like a basic and overly simple question, but it is the beginning of the process in coming back from a loss. If we don't know exactly what it is we have lost, how can we recover from our loss or compensate for it? It is surprising that this basic question is usually not asked. When we suffer a setback, perhaps we want to turn our attention away from the loss as quickly as possible. It is a source of pain and grief to us, and we may not want to analyze and probe our loss.

But I suspect there is a more basic reason we rarely ask what happened. The fact is, we rarely probe for the realities of anything in our lives. We live in a world of carefully crafted facades and images. We often have reality presented to us shrouded in slogans, symbols, and stereotypes. We elect our public officials on catchy phrases and party platforms. We buy our food based more on packaging and taste than nutritional content. We purchase homes and pay for them most of our lives without knowing much about construction. Advertisers make handsome profits when they can re-create our reality to include a need for their products. We often choose our lifestyles, our political parties, even our religions, on the basis of propaganda and information that is several steps removed from reality.

Being seduced out of hard-earned money by accepting other people's versions of reality can be unfortunate, but it isn't the most serious misinterpretation we make. For example, we might kill ourselves with lung cancer while trying to impersonate the image of a virile man with a tattoo on his arm and a cigarette in his fingers. The reality is that nicotine cuts down circulation and limits all the masculine and virile functions.

This propensity for accepting illusion as reality is part of our human equipment, and generally we get along all right in the world because everybody else is thinking in about the same terms. But occasionally, during deep crisis in our lives, we will be well ahead if we pull ourselves up short, force ourselves to look into the situation, and find out what really happened.

I can hear you getting irritated with me already. I don't blame you. You're saying, "This is stupid. I know what happened. My father died," or "I was crippled in an accident," or "Business reversals wiped out an entire lifetime of hard work." Whatever the loss, it is easy to assume we know what happened. That is the first pitfall to watch out for. We have to define what really happened to us if we are to begin to know how to deal with it. As we do this defining, we would be well advised to examine the basis of our definitions. We would be wise to separate the observable facts from the interpretations we attach to them. We will make these interpretations despite ourselves—that is the nature of human beings. But we need to examine closely the basis on which we make those interpretations. We can define our loss as anything from emotional annihilation to a stimulating challenge spurring us on to greater accomplishment.

One night the New Jersey sky turned orange as flames exploded and burned the laboratories of Thomas A. Edison. Up in smoke went half a lifetime of ideas and experiments. It was a tragic loss. Or was it? It's a little presumptuous of us to make that statement without asking Edison. So let's look at what he saw. Standing silhouetted against the roaring flames, he sent someone for his wife, saying, "Tell her to come quickly or she'll miss one of the most spectacular fires she will ever see." Later he said, "This will give us a chance to make a whole new start." Was Edison's interpretation of these events the "real" one, or was he merely making something up to help himself and others feel better? Who has the authority to say which is the "real" interpretation of that event? Surely Edison himself should be granted that prerogative, since it is his life. And thus it is with us. Ultimately it is not the sympathizers, the mourners, or the encouragers, well-meaning though they may be, who can tell us what really happened. We must decide for ourselves. And the reality of the situation will, in large measure, rest on our ideas.

The Savior said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) This is applicable to our interpretation of the loss we have experienced. What did we have? What is our current status, and, most important, what will the future hold? It is hard to imagine a different, better future when we have sustained a loss. The future portends to be a dark and dismal corridor down which we will drag one flagging footstep after another. But this is a false perception of reality. The future may be better or it may be worse, but it will not be the same as the present. The decision is largely in our hands—or, more precisely, in our minds—whether the future will be better than our present saddened situation.

Using your mind as an interpreter of reality and taking into consideration time and change, what do you perceive is the actual nature of your loss? If it is a business loss, it may at first appear to be a waste of years of your life, of carefully accumulated capital—perhaps a heavy burden of debt as you try to cover your losses. This is one interpretation. Can you reinterpret reality in your mind to see your loss as also a change in direction? Might you now, as a result, learn and continue in this work or some other with more insight and understanding? Such feelings and plans are difficult to develop during the pain of loss, but they do open up a shaft of light at the end of the present tunnel. Since the sun is going to come up every day regardless, we might as well greet it, looking forward to future gains rather than looking back and grieving over our losses.

That is reality if our mind chooses to make it so.
