Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 3

What's Left after Loss?

Cy Perkins had lost a lot. Maybe no more than many other people approaching age eighty, but that is a lot. He had lost his wife, his youth, much of his mobility, his chances for fame and prosperity—and he had just lost a spirited argument. Well, sort of lost. His parting shot was, "Well, you may be right now. But when I get home, I'll be right!" With only his cat to dispute him there, Cy knew his opinion would prevail.

Despite Cy's apparent losses, he wasn't down. He was his usual twinkle-eyed, philosophical self as he continued picking the peaches on the East Sharon Stake Welfare Farm. Our ladders were close together, and I suspected there might be more than peaches to be harvested here. There might be wisdom as well. So I said, "Cy, how do you do it? How do you keep from getting down when you lose something precious to you?"

"Don't think about what I've lost," he said. "I think about what I've got left."

When Lehi's family was trudging through the Arabian desert, their steel bows lost their spring. The pessimistic older brothers, Laman and Lemuel, focused on that loss and turned it into a loss of hope in survival. They were ready to sit down and starve to death on the spot. Nephi focused on what they had left, including their ingenuity, their brains and strength, and their faith in God. Soon he had fashioned a new bow of wood and went back to hunting for food. Likewise, the focus of our attention in a time of loss can be for us the difference between emotionally succumbing or surviving.

It isn't easy to focus on the positive. The sore-thumb syndrome is a real factor when we face a loss. You smack your finger with a hammer, and all of a sudden your whole attention is focused on that blackened fingernail. The whole universe seems to point to your pain. The same is true when we suffer a loss. We usually center an inordinate amount of attention on the loss, ignoring what we have left. Here is one of the most practical exercises I know for breaking this syndrome. It is simple but very effective.

Take a paper and pencil and write down all the good things you have in your life. Write down your health, such as it may be; your friends; your mental faculties; knowledge, information, and wisdom you have gained through experience and study. Usually, the more detailed your list, the more helpful it is to you. So, for example, instead of just listing friends as an asset, list them individually by name. You may even want to list some of their characteristics, their smile, or a mannerism that brightens your life. Instead of just listing health, think about your ears that catch the music of the world, your eyes that see. Even if they don't see as well as they once did, be grateful for what they do see. You may want to list specific memories that you call back to add to the richness of your life's present period. Make the list as long as time and recollection will allow. You will find that writing one good thing triggers thoughts of a whole bouquet of blessings blossoming out from that one.

Just making the list and contemplating it can ease the pain of your loss and put it into perspective. Certainly you would want to list as one of your greatest retained possessions a knowledge of the gospel, because this knowledge can show us that no loss is permanent. Every good thing will be restored to us in the proper time.

But you can make this experience even more powerful and helpful to you. Take that pencil and scribble out each one of those blessings. As you do so, in your mind's eye, see this being taken from your life, leaving an empty void. Now look at your life and consider your state. Picture yourself with none of the assets and blessings on your list. Imagine what your life would be like if this were truly the case. Live in that bleak world for a few moments. While you are here in this unhappy state you have created, use a little empathy as well. Realize that everything you have scratched out on your paper is being suffered by some people in this world. There are those who are without friends, others without freedom, many without health, some whose minds have been destroyed by disease or accident. There is no deprivation you have imagined that is not being suffered in actuality by some people in this world.

While you are in a sympathetic and sensitive state, picture Joseph Smith in a jail ironically named Liberty. In Liberty Jail the Prophet Joseph cried out in agony and desperation to the Lord, "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?" (D&C 121:1-2.) Joseph had legitimate cause to cry out for relief. Instead of seeing the kingdom roll forth to fill the earth as he had anticipated, based on the revelations the Lord had given him, Joseph saw it being crushed by oppression from without and apostasy from within. Joseph and the Saints had apparently lost their inheritance in the land of Zion. They had lost their homes and their possessions, and some had lost their lives. Joseph had lost friends, his family had been ripped from him, and he was on the verge of losing hope.

The Lord answered his anguished pleas with gentleness and wisdom. He counseled Joseph to do the same thing we are suggesting here—to try to avoid thinking of his loss and concentrate on what he had left and how he might build upon it. The Lord said, "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes. Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands. Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job." (D&C 121:7-10.)

The Lord then told Joseph what he will tell any of us in our loss, if we listen: "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 122:7.) There is purpose in opposition, and no loss is so tragic and total that we cannot reclaim some good from it. Then the Lord gives us this great theological and psychological truth: "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.) In ways that are incomprehensible to us, but nevertheless true, the Lord Jesus has suffered the accumulated load of all our losses. He has felt the pain and crippling of lost limbs, the frustration and helplessness of blindness, the isolation of deafness, the discouragement of hard work unrewarded, the bitterness of betrayal, the anguish of loved ones lost. He has consumed the bitterest of all life's fruits—the loss of virtue, opportunity, strength, and self-respect that comes when we sin. If all the lists like yours of all the people who ever lived, or ever will, were brought before him and all the blessings scribbled out so that humanity was almost a total loss and the weeping and wailing reached the heights of heaven and the depths of hell, it would not equal the sum of suffering that the Christ has endured for our sake.

Take a moment with your scribbled-out list in front of you to contemplate how much Jesus loves us—enough to have endured such loss and such suffering. Then realize that because of his love, and because we have not the strength or the calling he had, we have not been called upon to suffer the agony that he did. We are only called upon to suffer such deprivation as we can handle and as will be for our good. Therefore, we can begin to add back to our lists those things that have not been taken from us. Do that now. Take another sheet of paper and add back the things previously crossed out. As you list each one, stop and savor it. See your life become more rich and full with every blessing added back. My experience is that when you have completed your list, you will have a new appreciation for what you have left, and new strength and optimism to handle what you have lost.
