Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 4

Manage Your Moods

"It could have been so much worse. We were really blessed." I have heard that expression all my life from my mother. She said it many years ago when friends helped her back home from an accident that totalled the car and banged up and bruised her, but left everybody still alive. She said it when the kitchen caught fire but didn't burn down the house. She said it when heart attacks hit her as a young mother and might have left her an invalid, but didn't. She said it later when the advancing years brought cataracts to her eyes and pains and discomforts to her body. It is her theme song: "We are so blessed; it could have been so much worse."

Some people just naturally choose to see the positive side of a misfortune. There is an old country anecdote about a grandma who always chose this response to difficulties. She was always saying, "It could have been worse. It could have been worse." Her grandchildren decided to see how far Grandma would really go with this doctrine, so they concocted a story and ran to her one day screaming, "Grandma, Grandma, something terrible has happened! Cousin Jozy got carried off by the devil!"

Grandma said, of course, "Well, it could have been worse. It could have been worse."

The children said, "Grandma, that's ridiculous. Cousin Jozy was carried off by the devil. How could it have been worse?"

Grandma said, "The devil could have made Jozy carry him."

I didn't know the grandma in that story, but I know my own mother well. She chose early in her life to take that stance in the face of misfortune. She got it from her own mother, who lost a twelve-year-old daughter to heart disease, watched a son in his thirties die of diabetes, and lived thirty-two years as a widow. My grandmother also, no matter what the trials, felt she was blessed, because "it could have been so much worse." My grandmother knew, and my mother knows, that those are not just idle words they toss off to try to look courageous in the face of adversity. They state a simple fact: things can always be worse than they are. By focusing on how bad things are not, these noble women are able to manage the moods that come to them in adversity. Words have a powerful effect to help us set our moods and the state of our heart and mind.

Music also has great power. Many years ago in Massachusetts, Elder Boyd K. Packer advised a group of us that when we are discouraged or downcast or tempted to do evil, we can think of our mind as a stage. Little actors come out on that stage to give our minds certain messages. If these are not the thoughts and feelings we want to hold, there is an easy way to sweep the stage and bring on better actors. "Just hum your favorite hymn," Elder Packer said, "and it will drive those bad actors off the stage of your mind and bring on the good actors."

I took his advice and chose my favorite hymn, and over the years I fancy I have become one of the great hummers of the Church. I thought at first that the process was too simple, almost a child's game. You may feel the same way. But after decades of experience, I can tell you that it's a very powerful tool in managing your moods. Several years before I got this helpful counsel from Elder Packer, I was the only American elder on the group of tiny islands in the little kingdom of Tonga in the South Pacific. Because of government restrictions at that time, we were only allowed three foreign proselyting missionaries in Tonga. Each of us had a local companion and lived among those wonderful people. But I was a long way from home for a long time. Sometimes I got homesick and lonely. I didn't know much about psychology or counseling, but I knew that sitting on the bow of those tiny ships plying the waters between the islands and singing my songs of home to the fish and the friendly waves surely made me feel better.

Music can match your mood and also help you change it. One of the most powerful ways to make this happen is by inviting music into your heart that matches your mood at first. If you are sad, feel free to sing, hum, whistle, or play on a phonograph or tape recorder sad songs that match your mood. Then, as the music begins to capture you, gradually change it to a brighter and brighter motif until it helps to pull you out of the doldrums. Any kind of good music will do—folk music, popular music, classical music—whatever music touches your heart and lifts it.

Several years ago a funeral was held for one of the beloved ladies in the Church, Jessie Evans Smith. She was the wife of President Joseph Fielding Smith. Her beautiful voice had inspired generations of Mormons and non-Mormons alike as she sang in the Tabernacle Choir and as a soloist. Her bubbling good humor was legendary, and the folk tales surrounding her made her probably the nearest thing we have to a female counterpart of J. Golden Kimball. If ever a beloved woman would be missed by the Saints, it was Jessie Evans Smith. The Los Angeles Times noted this in reporting her funeral. They also made note of the fact that there was not a sign of black in the entire Tabernacle. The Tabernacle Choir was dressed in beautiful colors; the room was festooned with flowers; the speakers were dressed in subdued and respectful tones, but not in somber shades. Sister Smith probably wanted it that way, and the President complied with her wishes. She had lived her life in happy colors and wanted to be remembered that way.

Color can do a lot for us in managing our moods. Reds, oranges, and other hot colors can arouse us. If we are feeling angry or stressed, they will add to that feeling. If we are deep in depression, they may help to bring us out. Many hospital rooms and doctors' gowns are pastel blue or green because this helps to calm patients who are under the stress of sickness or surgery. In times of pain or stress following a loss, you may want to choose carefully the colors that surround you and arrange them as much as possible to your benefit. It is a good way to help manage your moods.

We all know that a blue sky tends to brighten our outlook, and a gray, overcast one subdues it. The blue and gray skies contain more than just a difference of color. The clear sky allows the sunlight to penetrate to the world and into our lives. It is no coincidence that sunlight is so often used as a metaphor for happiness, brightness, and joy. Researchers are still looking into this, but already the indications are strong that sunlight itself can affect our moods. Many people get more subdued, even depressed, in the wintertime simply because the days are shorter, the nights are longer, and they have less sunlight around them. We may not realize how powerful sunlight is—probably because it is all around us.

Part of what I do for a living is to make video productions. I remember one scene we were shooting inside a room against a window. The window was on the north side, and there was no direct sunlight coming in. We masked the window with black plastic and turned on our inside lights to the fullest, but they were still no match for the outside light seeping in. Even bright artificial lighting has only a tiny fraction of the power of sunlight. It also does not contain all the wavelengths found in natural lighting. That is why plants grown under artificial lighting require special grow lights, which produce a wider spectrum of light. Lights similar to these can be obtained for home lighting, and they may help. You may also find that getting out in the sun when it is available helps to brighten your mood when you are down.

No factor of mood management is more powerful than the other people we associate with. Gary Dayton passes himself off as a barber at the Brigham Young University student center and at the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah. But he really is a counselor and a good-humor man. He gives good haircuts, no doubt about that, and a good haircut can brighten your life. But more than that, he has an infectious smile, a ready ear, a storyteller's skill, and a bottomless supply of anecdotes that have put a smile on his customers' faces for several decades now. I'm convinced that over the years many downcast souls have come in for a trim when they didn't want a haircut as badly as they wanted a word of encouragement. From my observation, our world is full of such dispensers of sunshine. Don't be afraid to call on them when you need help. They are people whom the Lord has blessed with a special talent for lifting others. They have developed that talent over the years, and will generally enjoy sharing it with us to our benefit. Usually, all they and the Lord will ask in return is that we ourselves help others later when we are stronger. As we absorb the sunshine from these saintly people, we find ourselves growing brighter. We tend to look for and bring out the brightness in others. We discover again that optimism and pessimism both tend to feed on themselves. They are like a breeder nuclear reactor. This power plant can, theoretically at least, create light and heat out of radioactive materials. When it finishes, it has created more fuel than it has consumed.

When we suffer a loss in our lives, one subtle side effect is a loss of confidence in our ability to control our own lives. We may say, with Job, "For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me." (Job 3:25.) We may feel we are at the mercy of powers beyond our control. In a sense this is true, since few of us would voluntarily bring loss and pain upon ourselves. But we will be farther along in the healing process when we realize just how much of our destiny we still hold in our own hands. We cannot control all the things that happen to us, but we can in large measure control our response to them. By managing as much as we can such things as the words we say, the thoughts we think, the songs we sing and listen to, the colors about us, the amount of sunlight we absorb, the people we associate with, and other variables in our lives, we can in a great measure manage our moods. We can spend less time in the shadows of depression and more time in the sunshine of hope, and we will heal more quickly.
