Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 5

Controlled Dreaming

"I was never very big, but I always loved sports. I remember when I was ten I came home from a softball game grinning all over. My dad said, 'Did you win?' I said, 'No, we lost twenty-one to one.' My dad was a gruff man. He said, 'What are you smiling about, then?' I said, 'I was the one.'"

Sheila still wasn't very big in stature as she sat across the table from me. But she was tough enough to have endured a hard childhood, an abusive marriage, and a bitter divorce. As she told me about these and other experiences, I could see why she had survived. Her dark eyes sparkled and her face lit up when she relived in her memory the good times in her past. She savored them not only as happy reminiscences, but as raw material on which to build her dreams of the present and future.

History and the scriptures speak powerfully and repeatedly of the role that dreams have played in people's lives. The line of demarcation between dreams, visions, inspirations, daydreaming, meditation, and conscious imaging can be as hazy and blurred as the line between sleeping and wakefulness. Sometimes we snap out of a dead slumber into alert wakefulness. Other times we drift out of dreams slowly into a conscious awareness of our actual surroundings. Thus it is with the dreamlike states of the brain. If you are tucked under your covers, it is dark, your eyes are closed, you are unconscious to the world around you, but you are experiencing vivid scenes in your head, you can pretty well define that as a dream. If you are going through your daily routine and your mind wanders for a few seconds to another subject, that may be only reverie, memory, or idle thoughts. But between these two points is a continuum of mental activities that partake of aspects of the dreamlike state. They have several things in common. For one thing, the conscious awareness of the brain is relatively at rest. The brain actually emits a different shape of electromagnetic waves during these states. A second similarity of all these dreamlike states is their powerful effect on our conscious mind and on our emotions. Dreams and meditations can trigger emotions, and vice versa.

We jokingly talk about nightmares being triggered by something we ate. That happens, of course, but more often our dreams are triggered by something we thought or felt before we went to sleep. I have often wakened, as I'm sure you have, from a bizarre dream and wondered what dark corner of my mind that sprang from. I cannot usually think of a visual picture to match the dream: in my daytime life, I rarely get chased by two-headed monsters or find myself downtown in my pajamas. But if I take a moment, I can usually match the emotion. If the dream was soothing and pleasant, I can think of similar feelings I had the night before, the day before, or within the past few days. If the dream was bitter or angry, I can often think of some real or imagined slight I suffered in the conscious world. If the dream was frightening, it usually traces back to feelings of insecurity I may have faced in my job or church calling or relationships with others. I find that feelings and emotions are like the scents in the nose of a bloodhound. You can't see them or describe them exactly, but they are fairly easy to trace and to recognize when you feel them again.

Recognizing this tie of dreams and dreamlike mental states to feelings is important as we learn to overcome our losses. It is even more important that we develop the power to control these dreams and the effects they have on our feelings, at least in a measure. Emotions and feelings are where we really live. Our outward environment may be palatial or poverty-stricken, our physical appearance handsome or homely, our state of health robust or precarious, our circle of friends large or small—but none of these is anywhere nearly as important to our happiness as are our feelings and emotions. When we control them, we control our joy and our destiny.

One effective tool for adjusting our mental and emotional conditions is a technique called controlled dreaming. The aim of controlled dreaming is to gain access to the powerful communication channels into the unconscious mind, which open during states of relaxation, reverie, and sleep. During these times the watchdog of the conscious mind is lulled temporarily off guard. This is important, because normally this useful but sometimes meddlesome mutt tries to intervene between us and our unconscious mind. He barks, yaps, snaps, and tries to drive away any messages that don't seem to be in accordance with his view of reality. So when we tell ourselves, "I can be happy despite my difficulties; I can turn this obstacle into a stepping stone and come back stronger than I was before," the conscious-mind watchdog leaps barking between us and our goal. He yaps and snarls and whines messages such as these: "This is a terrible loss; you will never recover. No one in history ever suffered as much as you are suffering now. You deserve to be down and discouraged after what the world (or the Lord) has done to you. It's a Pollyanna fairy tale to try to make this loss anything less than it is. The real situation is this." He then describes things in the worst way, and our strengths as weak as we can picture them, and calls that an objective view of the world.

One of Satan's most powerful tools is fear. He digs a mighty chasm between us and the healed person we would hope to become. Then he throws us over the edge and dangles us by the thin strands of hope as he taunts us with the terrible "what-ifs": What if things get even worse than they are now? What if this loss is just the beginning of a landslide of catastrophes upon me? What if my strength fails? What if I grow too old to handle it? What if I cave in? What if I slip into a depression and never come out? He has a million of these, each one finely tuned to our own particular weaknesses and each one designed to pluck out a thread from our lifeline of hope.

Does this mean that our conscious mind is the devil's advocate, our opponent in the struggle—that we have actually turned upon ourselves? It doesn't seem reasonable that we would deliberately try to defeat our own cause, but the answer to the question is yes. We ourselves are the yapping, snapping, junkyard dog standing between us and the better world we would aspire to. For reasons that are not clear to psychologists, theologians, or even to ourselves, we often deliberately choose darkness rather than light, pain rather than joy. We often reopen and let fester our own emotional wounds rather than helping them to heal, or at least letting them alone so they can begin to heal by themselves. No one knows all the reasons why we do this, but we do.

The quickest recovery would be, of course, to muzzle our personal "hound of the Baskervilles," shove him into his doghouse, and nail the door shut. That's fine when it works, but often we have fed, groomed, and trained this brute until he is now more powerful than we are. In a fight with him we always lose. We tell ourselves, "Hey, I can feel better tomorrow," or "I can overcome this loss," or "I can win this time." We think we are doing fine, but then we lose or fail and drop back into depression. Late that night we hear an echo from the doghouse of our mind saying, "I thought I could, but I knew I couldn't." The double-crossing watchdog of the conscious mind chuckles softly as he digs a hole and buries another of our aspirations.

So what can we do? If we can't be stronger than the watchdog is, we must be smarter. We must wait until he's asleep, then slip past him and tiptoe on toward the brighter world of our healed selves. Unfortunately, he doesn't sleep as often as we wish he would. When he does, we're too groggy to do anything about it. Controlled dreaming is a technique designed to lull the conscious mind to sleep, or at least into fairly passive resistance. Then we can get our message through to the unconscious mind, which can change our outlook and thereby change our world.

The technique is simple, but very powerful. Find yourself a quiet spot, sit down in a comfortable chair with your feet flat on the floor, or even lie down. (Don't try to do this when you are exhausted or you will go into an uncontrolled dream and wake up late for an appointment.) While you are conscious, close your eyes and concentrate on relaxing every muscle in your body. There are techniques for doing this. One of the easiest is simply to focus on groups of muscles, starting in your chest and then working down to your abdomen, hips, upper legs, lower legs, feet, toes—then into your shoulders and up into your head and face, then into your upper arm muscles, lower arm muscles, and finally your fingers. As you focus on each one of these muscle groups, deliberately tighten them for three seconds; then relax. You will feel them let go.

After you have gone through your entire body, feel if there are any unrelaxed muscles. If so, merely repeat the technique on them. You are now relaxed. Your brain is functioning somewhat on the sleep-wave cycle. In this mode, your brain will take suggestions and carry them more effectively to your unconscious mind. It will respond to words, music, smells, and visual images, but one of the most effective communication devices is mental pictures. Start the film of your life as you would like it to be, with wide-screen panoramic vision, quadraphonic sound, and all the special effects you want. Make it as real as you can. See yourself in the situations that now trouble you. See yourself overcoming them and putting them past you. See yourself in the situation that you would like to be in.

Uh oh, a bad scene. You tried to leap over a hurdle, caught your toe, and fell flat on your face on the track. So much for that movie, right? Wrong. It's your movie. You own the copyrights, the film footage, the editing equipment, the projection equipment, the theater, the seat, and even the popcorn. You can do whatever you want to in your movie, so stop the film, rewind, and splice in a new scene. In this scene you clear that hurdle magnificently and go on to the next one. If you trip again, stop the movie, snip out the scene, and edit it again until finally the negative part of you will give up. You will clear that hurdle in your movie and move on. At first you may tire out in ten minutes or so. Later you will be able to go for a half hour or more. Like any mental or physical skill, the more you do it the better at it you will get. But even the first time through, you will probably have helpful results—even if you open your eyes, stand up, and return immediately to the sad world you left. For those few moments, you have lived in the world of your dreams. Your watchdog will probably wake up barking and bellowing, but it is too late. You have slipped a message of hope past him, and the unconscious mind—the control center of your real world—has received it and recognized it.

Do this again and again. As you do so, your messages will get stronger and your movie more positive. In the process your conscious-mind watchdog will begin to turn from a snarling adversary into a tongue-lapping, tail-wagging ally. That is an important point. We were a little hard on the conscious mind just now. Actually, the conscious mind is not our natural enemy, but neither is he our natural friend. He is a powerful force for good or ill; we decide which. And in those first hard days and weeks after a loss, we need all the friends we can get.
