Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Traveling Tips

Following is a list of mental and physical activities to help you along the journey thus far. They will be useful anytime you are down, but they are designed specifically for combatting the first shock waves that accompany your loss:

Pamper yourself a little. Physically, mentally, and emotionally you probably won't have as much to give because your strength in these areas is being siphoned off to work through the shock to your system. It isn't self-pity or self-indulgence to lighten up your loads in other areas a bit. You are saving your resources to apply to recuperating from your loss and to being more effective in the future. Usually friends, family, and fellow workers will understand this and be considerate.

Eat the right things, even though you may not have much of an appetite. A balanced, nourishing diet is important here. You may even consider a food supplement for a time to make sure your body is receiving the nutrition to work through this difficult process.

Cry if you need to. We sometimes develop the opinion that crying is for sissies, and big people don't do it. But big people do cry, in various ways and for various reasons. If crying seems to help release the pressure bottled up within you, then find a quiet place and cry.

Go ahead and think about your loss. We sometimes feel we have to get our minds off our loss. Eventually we do, of course, but our minds are naturally curious and inquisitive. If we try to lock them out of this part of our lives, they will constantly sniff and poke around it. Like forbidden fruit, the subject will tempt and tantalize our minds, and the more we tell ourselves, "I shouldn't think about this," the more we will tend to think about it. The easiest way to guarantee that our minds will hover on a subject is to command them that they shouldn't. But if the mind is given full rein to ponder and consider and reenact even the most painful parts of our loss, after a while our curiosity is fulfilled, the subject loses its intrigue, and the mind naturally goes on to other things. This moving on is a sign of healing.

Use the powerful imaging abilities of your "right brain," but use them gently. During the past few years researchers have gained a new appreciation for the mind's abilities to picture and create vivid scenes. These images tend to pull our thoughts and our actions in certain directions. Right now, you are hurting and in a kind of shock. It may be too much to ask of your system to rally its forces and carry on as though nothing had happened. Your thoughts are slower, and sometimes foggy. Your judgments may be clouded. Your energy level is down. You probably don't want to take on any ambitious projects at this time. But even in this subdued state, your mind will always be active. If left to itself it may lead you into depressing scenes and frightening possibilities. It may picture you unable to cope with coming challenges—this loss triggering additional losses, helplessness, and hopelessness. But with a little gentle leading, you can coach your mind into picturing happier scenarios for you. Gently daydream about the situations in which you would like to see yourself. Don't be depressed if many or most of these situations seem to be replays of the time before your loss. That's natural. As time passes, your mind will find ways of adapting your present situation nearer to the happy scenes before your loss. It's one of the incredible powers of your imagination. But even as that is happening, these fantasies can bring warmth to your soul and can even help your physical system to work better. So go ahead and dream of things as you would like them to be.

Let others help you. One of the reimbursements paid you for your loss is often a greater appreciation for how much milk of human kindness is flowing through society. There is, of course, much hardheartedness in the world. But when you need help, as you now do, it will likely surprise you how many people pop up and want to be counted as your friends.

Keep breathing. Stay alive. You may not want to. A desire for death is a very natural feeling after a great loss. Simply surviving from day to day is a victory in your present state, and you should consider it so. Every breath you take, every moment that passes is a tiny score for your side. Every passing moment leaves behind a thin layer of the balm of Gilead to soothe your troubled soul and to help heal the open wound brought on by your loss. As you survive, little by little you will overcome.

Keep moving. Move at a gentle and reduced pace, but move nevertheless.

Do more of the things you want to do. Don't be disappointed if they don't hold the same zest they had at other times. That is natural in your present state. But take what joy and interest and involvement you can from them.

Read and ponder the scriptures and the words of the prophets. Nothing gives us perspective on our losses as the scriptures do. Here we find the purpose and the plan of our lives. We see that no loss is permanent. We understand some of the reasons why loss is a vital part of the plan. Other writers may console us. They may give us new insights and ideas. These are valuable, but the scriptures are the sure word of the Lord. The word of God is the iron rod to which we can hold as we work our way through the fog of our present crisis and continue our journey back to the presence of God.

Meditate and pray. One member of the Eternal Godhead has the specific responsibility to care for you in times such as these. This is the Holy Ghost. He is, among other things, a comforter. His influence can touch your heart and your mind. He can soothe your pains and stanch the emotional hemorrhaging that is draining your strength. He is also assigned to bring to you knowledge, "even hidden treasures" of knowledge. This knowledge can include glimpses of better times coming for you, ideas on how to endure your present hard situation, and visions of eternity that can help you put your loss into perspective. A time of loss is an excellent opportunity to draw on the powers of this omnipotent God who stands ready to help you. One of the best ways to tap these powers is through prayer and meditation. These times can be spiritual oases dotting the desert of your present existence. You will do well to drink from them and use their strength to help you move into the greener valleys beyond this arid place you are now struggling through.
