Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Part 2

The Long, Gray Grind

Milestone Markers

As we discussed at the beginning of the first stage, overcoming your loss is a journey. As you move into the next stage of your journey, you may feel there are attitudes and attributes in the first stage that you still need to work on. Don't let them concern you. You can review that section whenever you need to, but for now, move into this next section to give yourself a better overall view of the journey you are making.

When we sustain a serious loss in our lives, the second phase toward recovery often involves what I have called here "the long, gray grind." The initial shock and grief of the loss have worn off. The outpourings of condolence and support have slowed to a small stream or a trickle, or have stopped altogether. This is fine. It is uncomfortable and unhealthy to be the focus of others' concerns for too long. The jarring changes in our life patterns have largely been made. Now it is time to learn to live with the loss.

This segment of the healing process usually comes on more gradually and lasts longer than the first painful phase. It is a condition we need to initiate at least partly by ourselves. The initial loss was thrust upon us, and we had little or no control over when or how it would happen. This second period will likewise gradually come as a matter of course, but we can adjust the timing by our mental and emotional set. This phase is vital to the healing process. It is important that we experience it and that we work directly through it. To try to avoid this part of the grief process would only slow our recovery, because sooner or later we must face the realities of our situation. Then we must adjust to our new lifestyle and develop the strength to live in the world that is now given to us. The mental and emotional attributes we want to achieve on this part of our journey have to do with adjusting to the long-term effects of our loss. Sooner or later, we want to be able to make these statements and believe them in our inner heart and soul:

I have looked unflinchingly into the face of my present situation; there is no pain or sorrow there that I have tried to hide from.

On the other hand, I have not exaggerated my loss to make it more than it really is.

I am committed to go on living to the fullest extent possible despite my loss.

I am learning to use the wisdom I gained from my loss to empathize with and help others through their pain.

Every day I am gaining a little more strength to overcome my loss.

I gain strength and confidence to face the future as I look back at what I have endured already.

I am using the insights gained from my loss to better understand the eternal purposes of God for his children, and particularly for me. I can begin to see the light at the end of my tunnel of grief, or at least to believe that such light is possible.

I am beginning to smile again and to look forward and enjoy some aspects of my life, even when they remind me of my loss.

Though I will always remember my loss, it will become a gentle memory to me—not a stabbing pain or an aching depression.
