Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 6

Time on Your Hands or by Your Side

"Call me Charlie," he says, and almost everybody complies with his wishes. When you are seventeen and your thoughts, your ideas, your conversations haven't fully matured, Charlie is an appropriate and youthful name. The only problem is that Charlie is not seventeen anymore, except in parts of his mind and his emotions. His unsympathetic birth certificate says he is nearing the age of retirement, but parts of Charlie are stuck back there on that fateful day when he was seventeen and his brother was killed in a car accident. Charlie never learned how to deal with the grief and guilt of it all. The accident wasn't his fault. People have tried to tell him that over the years, and he nods in agreement. But deep down inside him somewhere, something snapped that day and has never been reconnected. He's a fairly normal human being. He's not paranoid or schizophrenic, but he is a little eccentric because, apparently, he has never learned to deal with the grief of the loss of his brother. Part of him wants to live in the time before that loss and refuses to budge much beyond it.

In the days of Charlie's loss, not much was known about grief therapy. There is still a great deal to learn, but one truth is apparent: we must work through our feelings of grief and loss. If we don't, the mere passage of time will not necessarily help us. In Charlie's case, he has immunized himself against the soothing effects of the balm of time. In fact, in those areas of his life most affected by the loss of his brother, time appears to have stopped. He talks a great deal about his brother and about the things they did together. There is nothing wrong with remembering, of course, but when Charlie talks you get the feeling it happened the day before yesterday. And sadder than this, you get the feeling that nothing worth remembering has happened since then. Few, if any, joyful experiences or growing, maturing events seem to have occurred in Charlie's life since that great loss. It is apparent that time cannot help us overcome our losses if we do not allow it to pass.

I got the same feeling from the famous cartoonist Al Capp. During his heyday in the forties and fifties, his cartoon "L'il Abner" was probably the most popular comic strip in America. His characters of Mammy Yokum, Daisy Mae, Marryin' Sam, Senator Fogbound, and others were practically members of millions of American families. A few weeks ago our high school kids got dressed up and went to a Sadie Hawkins Day dance at their school. It was an occasion where the girls asked the boys for a date. They had the idea of the affair, but had no idea who Sadie Hawkins was. So I told them about the famous unmarriageable daughter in Dogpatch, U.S.A., L'il Abner's hometown. Every year her father would stage the Sadie Hawkins Day race in which the panicky, eligible bachelors would run for their unmarried lives, pursued hotly by Sadie and any other of the unmarriageable maidens who wanted to participate. Sadie's father cheered her on with these encouraging words, "Go out and catch a husband, or I may have you on my hands for the rest of my natural life." It was great fun in its day, but obviously would not be considered very funny anymore. The idea of single women frantically pursuing bachelors as their only source of happiness, temporal salvation, and self-worth is not an idea that brings smiles to the lips of many women and women's organizations today.

The point is that times changed and Al Capp lost popularity. Frankly, he didn't take it too well. In his later years he became negative and sarcastic and really wasn't very funny. It seemed he did not progress to the next stage of his life, which time and the changes of society presented to him. So he magnified his loss and turned it from a loss of public popularity with his present way of doing things to a personal affront, a betrayal from his formerly loyal public. That brought an end to his delightful cartooning.

Time, at least in our present human condition, is designed to pass inexorably. It refuses to stop, no matter what our pleadings. It does not respond to the command of the mightiest potentate. It moves. There will come a time, apparently, when this condition will not exist. The Apostle John saw in vision a day when "there should be time no longer." (Revelation 10:6.) But for now, time continues to tick, and there is nothing we can do to stop it. I believe this principle illustrates again the benevolence and condescension of God toward us as children. In that day when time will stop, sorrow, pain, death, and loss will already have been conquered. Eternal bliss will be our status. At that point, our merciful Father will apparently stop time and allow us to dwell in those celestial conditions forever.

Until that blessed day, who of us would want to stop time? If we did so, we would all be literally damned—stopped in our progress, unable to improve, repent, and heal from our losses. So for now, time continues to flow as a relentless river. How can we catch the flow and sail smoothly with it instead of defeating ourselves by paddling against the current? Among other things, we need to keep time by our side and not on our hands.

When we suffer a loss, we enter into a fascinating love/hate relationship with time. Time is our ally and our adversary, our friend and our foe. As the realization of our loss first closes in upon us, time stops. It allows us to sit and suffer in limbo. Hours and days may pass for others, but not for us. It is always the same time—the time of tragedy. Appointments are unimportant. Even the demands of hunger, thirst, and sleep are filled only cursorily and automatically, and sometimes ignored altogether. We go through the motions of being in sync with the rest of the world, but inside the clock has stopped ticking and the calendar has stopped turning its pages.

Time is on our hands; it is a dead weight on our heart and mind. Sometimes we make the mistake of solidifying this relationship because of pain, heartache, and disappointment. We try to stop time. We try to petrify and embalm it at some period before this great loss and hurt came upon us.

Some parents who have lost a child lock the door to the little one's room and never change an article inside. Some older people who have experienced the natural but sometimes painful loss of youth never quite get over it. They choose to dress and behave as they did decades earlier. They have their faces and their tummies lifted. They frantically try to deny the passage of time. They see it as only a loss of their youth.

Some people who have lost material resources try to freeze time in the period when they still had abundance, by continuing to live a lifestyle beyond their means. In so doing they often waste precious resources that could help them fight back from their financial loss.

It is a natural thing to want to turn back the clock and stop its hands at the moment before we suffered our loss. But it is, of course, a frustrating exercise in uselessness. Time refuses to stop, and we are fortunate that it does. It is fitting and proper to memorialize, remember, and commemorate the loss of those we love. It is appropriate and invigorating to think young thoughts and remain active as one grows older. It is often motivating when one loses material things to remember good times and strive appropriately to overcome adversity and return to comfort and even prosperity. But these are different from frantic attempts to freeze time in its tracks. When we try to stop time, we do not memorialize the dead as we continue on living. We cut ourselves off from any future joys and live only in the rewarmed memories of yesterday. When we frantically try to capture and hold onto youth forever, we may make ourselves look eccentric or ridiculous, and we miss the warm and golden moments that come with maturity and even with old age.

When we deny the loss of status, position, or material means, we shut out the growth and new experiences that may come with struggle. I have known men who could not accept being released from church callings. They continued to live as though they were in their previous position of authority, which caused problems for themselves and for those who succeeded them. I knew a family once in the South Seas who had struggled mightily to keep their branch of the Church together. They were the entire Church organization on their island. Eventually, government restrictions were lifted, others joined the Church, and the branch began to flourish. New leaders were called, and members of this family were released with a vote of thanks. It would have been a fine experience for them to accept their new role and enjoy the growth of others about them, but they instead chose to freeze history in the period when they were most important. They left the Church and lived in the past in their own organization where they were still the leaders.

If we try to stop time, it will turn on us as an adversary. It may boldly attack us with new losses and new tragedies. But more likely it will oppose us in slow, quiet, and subversive ways. It will detach us from reality and force us to live in the past, in the days when we had our loved one or loved things. As memory fades, we will substitute fantasies and make our past lives more and more beautiful. By comparison, our present days will seem more and more dismal and gray. If we have lost a spouse, he or she will get to be so wonderful in our own mind that no living person could ever share our life, being so far short of the person we had been married to before. The story is told of a preacher who stood before his congregation to make a point about forgiveness, and he said, "All of you who are perfect, please stand." To his surprise a man in the back row stood up. The preacher said, "Brother, are you telling us that you are perfect?" The man said, "No, I'm standing here as proxy for my wife's first husband." I suspect that first husband got more perfect every day in his wife's memory.

Time will play these tricks on us if we try to bottle it up and screw the lid down. It will seep out the cracks. It will ooze through our defenses. It will distort our present and dim our future. On the other hand, if we can bring ourselves to look beneath time's doleful, brooding, unfriendly face in our moment of loss, we will see a friend sitting deep inside. This is not an easy or a natural thing to do. We must lift ourselves by force of will and make ourselves take time's hand and walk with him along the rocky trail of our lives. The first steps will definitely be uphill. The path will be rough; the stones will cut our feet. The sun will be too hot, and the wind will be too cold. The unknown country beyond the next bend will frighten us, and we will doubt that we have the strength to make the grade. At times we will have only enough strength to take one step, breathe hard, gather our energies, and take another small, shuffling step.

As we move forward, we find that time not only becomes kind, but it also becomes one of the best friends we have. Its claws sunk into our hearts turn to gentle fingers that massage away the pain. Its steely grip holding us fast in our moment of loss turns to an inviting hand leading us away from our tragic moments and into an unexplored future. Its brooding brow staring on us softens and shows a twinkle of promise in the eyes. Even if events continue to rain down tragedy and loss upon us, time will stand by our side if we will let it. The story is told of an oriental potentate who had everything his heart could desire until his heart's desire was taken from him: his beloved daughter died. He was inconsolable and offered a rich reward to any who could free him from the icy grip of grief. The wise man who eventually claimed the prize gave the great potentate a ring and told him to wear it always and read the inscription often. The simple words were, "This, too, shall pass."

Time makes us that promise always, even if the future should turn out to be more loss and greater grief. The whispered promise from our friend Time is that "this, too, shall pass." Brigham Young sang to his Saints in their hard times during the first years in the Salt Lake Valley, "Hard times, hard times, come again no more. Many days you have lingered around our cabin door. But now we've brighter days in store."

There will be brighter days in store. If the brighter days are postponed even until the next world, so be it. The promise is still sure that we are not locked forever in the grip of the present tragic moment of loss.
