Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 7

Making the Body Move the Mind

Traditionally, in history and literature, great battles begin at dawn. But Anne Karren prefers to get the jump on the enemy. She marshals her forces even before the first gray streaks light the eastern sky. She will not win the war on this or any other day, but her single-handed holding action may keep the enemy at bay. That is goal enough for her fighting spirit. The enemy is arthritis, and it grips her joints every night while she is asleep and has to be fought off every morning. Drugs and painkillers can help somewhat in the battle against this cruel crippler, but Anne prefers to engage him in hand-to-hand combat. And she usually wins that day's skirmish.

The alarm clock sounds the bell for another round in the battle. She fights her way through the fog of sleep and the great temptation that we all have just to lie there and let life take its course. Her first movements are met with stabs of pain. She pushes through them, gets up, dresses, and goes somewhat stiffly out the door to the street. Here she is met by a couple of other supportive sisters, and the little group walks from one streetlight to the next. They exercise not only their bodies but their minds as they discuss current events, philosophies, personal development, and gospel principles. By the end of the walk, Anne has at least got the edge on her adversary for the day. If she keeps busy in mind and body until bedtime, she usually keeps the upper hand. There is never a dearth of things to do in her busy life as wife, mother, and ward Relief Society president.

You might expect such a warrior woman to be steely eyed, heavy jawed, and built like an Amazon. Not so. Anne's eyes twinkle with life and humor. Her petite face still has the graceful lines of girlhood, and her trim figure belies the fact that she is a grandmother. Gently, personally, on a darkened battlefield of the street, and within the quiet confines of her own heart and mind, Anne Karren is the quintessential happy warrior. She has lost what most of us consider a satisfying sensory experience—lounging in a lazy body. But in exchange she has developed a rare ability to use her body to control her mind and emotions.

One of the fundamental purposes for which we came to this world was to gain a body. We often say that, but we don't often say why. Why would we want to clothe our free and immortal spirits in flesh and bone subject to temptation, disease, and, in a short time, death and decay? Eventually, of course, our bodies will rise again, glorified, resurrected, and eternal—that will solve all the problems we are discussing in this book. But we are dealing with the here and now. In our present circumstances we have bodies that can be a burden, but they can also be a marvelous blessing.

I believe that we needed and wanted a body—despite its inherent limitations in its present state—because the body gives us access to our spirits in a way that nothing else can. The body is strung together with what we call voluntary muscles. They may not be as voluntary as we would like. They sometimes won't move as quickly, effectively, or smoothly as we would like them to. They sometimes sag and bag, but as a general rule they do respond to the electrical impulses we send out from our brain. These movements are ultimately the best access we have to reach the spirit inside us. That, I believe, is the most important reason for having a body.

It is obvious that the most talented, hard-working, dedicated, well-organized, task-oriented, management-by-objectives person who ever lived will not accomplish very much in this life. At best we live a few short years, build a few buildings, create a few works of art, or plow some fields. We may be lucky and end up as head of a great corporation, or even be born a king. But we won't accomplish a great deal toward changing the shape or destiny of the world. We delude ourselves if we think we will. Percy Bysshe Shelley's poem "Ozymandias" is the most eloquent, succinct summation I know of this truth. Shelley writes of a traveler who describes an inscription near what had once been a magnificent statue: "My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings: Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!" But all around the statue, "The lone and level sands stretch far away."

I once visited a display of the greatest artifacts from a man about whom "Ozymandias" could have been written, Ramses the Great, Pharaoh of Egypt. Among other reasons, Ramses' reputation was great because he went around scraping off the names of previous Pharaohs and inscribing his own on their works. Still, in his day he was king of kings. In our day he is a traveling museum show of little brass trinkets and hunks of carved granite.

The point is that none of us can accumulate enough accomplishments to change mankind or to buy our way into heaven. Why work, then? Because it is the only way to reach inside our body where the spirit dwells and change the nature of our character. What the body does affects the mind, the spirit, and the character. This is vital information to know when our minds and spirits are in the rut of loss and depression. If we don't move them, they will stay there.

There used to be a sign on the long Alcan Highway stretching through the open spaces of Canada on to Alaska. The term highway was an overly generous one for this rutted dirt trail that was barely passable. Over the years, vehicles had worn down two deep tracks going each way. Once you were in those, it was hard to get out before you got to Alaska, so a humorous but wise sign at the head of the trail said, "Choose your ruts carefully; you're going to be in them for a long time."

Better advice for our travel down the road of life could not be given. After a loss we sometimes find ourselves dropped into ruts of grief and bereavement. If we don't move ourselves out of them, we can be in them for a long time—sometimes for the rest of our lives. This is where the body and the voluntary muscles come in handy. We need to take command of our bodies in these junctures because they will not be still. They will be moving in one direction or another. If we do not move them upward, they will dissipate downward. A body without motive power and moral direction will not remain stagnant or drift aimlessly. It will begin to sink under the pull of spiritual gravity that surrounds us all the time. Or it may be sucked down the vortex of sin or descend into depression.

Anthony Robbins, a well-known business and personal consultant, asks depressed people who come to him, "What do you do to get yourself into depression?" This is a surprising and sometimes offensive remark to these troubled souls. But Robbins is not placing blame. He is trying to follow a track so they can retrace their steps. He is right. Depression may be triggered by a loss, by a chemical imbalance in the brain, or by mental or emotional stimuli. There are any number of sources and reasons for depression. No one is minimizing the seriousness of those reasons, but depression is not like losing an arm or having your heart stop. Depression is brought on and maintained by certain physical actions—such things as looking down instead of looking up, lying in bed instead of getting up, using our energies to serve ourselves instead of other people. Again, this is not faultfinding or blaming the depressed person. He or she is often laboring under heavy burdens. This is just to say that those actions perpetuate and intensify depression, and the opposite physical actions tend to dispel the depression. So if we want to overcome the pain and grief that loss brings to us, one avenue is by the way we manipulate the voluntary muscles in our bodies. Here are some simple but effective things we can do.

Focus your attention on the facial muscles approximately an inch and a half to two inches on either side of your nose. Tighten these muscles gently. You will find a universal law of physiology. The body is supported by the tension of opposing muscle groups. The rule on which they operate is that when the muscles pulling in one direction apply pressure, the muscles in the other direction relax. (Parenthetically, this is one way to get rid of lordosis, sway back, and lower back pains—keep a stiff abdomen.) You will now feel this opposite pulling syndrome in the muscles of your cheeks. There will be resistance at first, but as you continue to send electrical signals to the upward-pulling muscle group, they will respond and the downward-pulling muscle group will relax. You will have created one of mankind's little miracles. You have now made the only universal sign that anthropologists have found in all their studies. Other hand and body signals and facial gestures vary from culture to culture. But the gesture you have just created is recognized throughout the earth as a sign of positive feelings, friendliness, love, and kindness. It is called a smile.

A smile projects good feelings outward to anyone who sees it. The research is quite definitive in this. What is less appreciated is the message that a smile projects inward. Among other things, manipulating the face in this configuration helps open up the blood vessels to the brain. A frown or a grimace constricts those same blood vessels. As the blood vessels open with a smile, more blood circulates into the brain and raises the brain's temperature. The brain responds by releasing chemicals that are natural pain relievers, stress reducers, and mellowing catalysts. They are mild forms of the deadly drugs that addicts get hooked on, but they are naturally produced and gently administered to answer our needs without developing unnatural cravings. A smile helps produce a natural and gentle high.

Another simple action we can take is to raise our eyes. Our biggest challenge in overcoming loss, I believe, is to lengthen our perspective, figuratively and literally. It is no accident that a downcast look is associated with discouragement. That is the natural move for the body to make. It is our way of protecting ourselves when we feel we are vulnerable. When we look down, we are in a sense drawing our wagons into a circle, consolidating our resources, hiding out and holding on as we wait for the next attack to come. Every muscle contracts when it is in pain. Our eyes and our outlook do the same thing. We may need this protective device for a short time, but very soon we need to break out of this self-enclosed psychological shell in which we are hiding. One of the best ways to do that is to force the eyes up and out and lift the head. There is deep psychological as well as religious significance in Psalm 121:1, "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help." It is hard to focus your eyes on the farthest horizon, to climb to high points and look out, and still maintain the same closed-in perspective.

The reason perspective is so important is that it is ultimately the only answer to loss. When I lost my first wife, I had (and still have) a deep and abiding faith in the eternal nature of human beings. I knew of a certainty that I would see her again after this life. But my problem was to get through the years, the months, and the days that separated us. Focusing my eyes on the long view, the eternal perspective, helped me to keep from making an eternity out of the given grieving moment.

The spine and shoulders are likewise avenues of escape from the ruts of depression. Again, it is not by accident that folklore, literature, and scripture have focused on the back and the shoulders to symbolize the loads that we carry through life. The leg muscles are actually our strongest, and any professional athlete knows that they are the most important part of his performance (and, unfortunately, often the first to go as he ages). Mickey Mantle, the great home-run hitter, still had the arms and shoulders to punch a baseball out of the park. Joe Namath still had that howitzer of an arm that could fire a football sixty yards downfield. But both of them were finished when their knees gave out. We never say, "He carries a heavy load on his thighs." It is the "back-breaking labor" and "shouldering the burden" that immediately give us the image of life's heavy loads upon us. The reason we emphasize spine and shoulders is that when they are bent we are burdened. But when we stand tall with our shoulders thrown back and our spines held relatively straight, we are more in command of our environment. We can control this outlook through the application of our voluntary muscles.

The larynx is likewise controlled by voluntary muscles, as are the rib cage and the abdomen. When we contract our abdominal muscles, we force air through the folds of the voice box, which vibrate to make a basic sound. This sound is echoed through our nasal and facial cavities. It even reverberates through the bones of our head and face. The sound is molded by the tongue, the teeth, and the soft palate as it flows out of the mouth. The combination of these unique characteristics creates your individual voice and mine. It is a simple matter with most of us to constrict or relax these vocal folds. The result is a raising or lowering of the voice. With a bit of training we can adjust the resonance and the placement of the sound, which can change a growling, guttural voice or a whining twang into sweet and melodious music. These simple, voluntary changes in the way we speak can have dramatic effects on those about us and upon ourselves.

In Proverbs 15:1 we read, "A soft answer turneth away wrath." In our house of fifteen children, this counsel has been invaluable. Try this simple experiment: next time you answer the phone, have your voice go down at the end of the word hello. See what kind of effect this has on the person at the other end of the line. Chances are, he or she will be looking to hang up the receiver as soon as possible. Now put an upward turn on your greeting. This is an invitation to continue the conversation, a welcome into the world on your end of the phone line.

There are other, more complicated, voluntary actions we can take, and should take, with other parts of our body. Our legs and feet can carry us to settings that do not constantly remind us of our loss. Our hands can be busily engaged in the service of others. Our eyes can focus on roses and not thorns. Our ears can open to the laughter of children, the song of birds. Our noses can smell the flowers along life's path. These are subjects for another discussion, but even the simple things we have talked about here are very powerful. I guarantee that if you do them you will feel better, and you will overcome the adverse effects of your loss more quickly.
