Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 8

Restructuring Reality around Your Handicaps

A few years ago a policeman in a Midwestern city pulled over to inspect what appeared to be a late-night larceny. A car was parked at the curb in the darkness, and a man was underneath, busily engaged with wrenches. The officer stopped his car and demanded in the name of the law that the suspicious midnight mechanic come out from under the car and explain his actions.

Iliff Jeffrey obligingly did so. It wasn't the first time he had surprised the sighted world with his initiative and independence. He was reared among southern Utah farmers whose creed of life included pulling your own weight as much as possible and looking for opportunities instead of excuses. His parents wisely chose not to make an exception in their philosophy for three-year-old Iliff, even though he had been blinded in an accident. He grew up believing he could, should, and would develop his talents and do his part to make the world better, and he did. He shared the chores of the farm, later wrestled on his high school and college varsity teams, and learned to play the guitar for recreation. He used this and his other talents to woo a beautiful young woman for his wife. He reared a fine family and was later named the most successful graduate of his high school class.

When he met up with the policeman that night, the future Dr. Jeffrey was a struggling young medical student trying to save a few dollars by doing his own mechanical work on his car. He had learned to do this sort of thing, as every farmer does, by helping to keep the farm machinery repaired on the family homestead. He explained to the officer that he often worked late at night since he was busy with classes and studying during the day. He had no need of a flashlight under the car because he had trained his fingers to see for him. The officer shook his head in amazement, as friends and acquaintances of Dr. Jeffrey have shaken their heads all his life. He hopped in his patrol car and drove away. The midnight mechanic went nonchalantly back to work.

Iliff Jeffrey was gentle in his explanation to the policeman. He is a gentle man, and his healing hands have blessed the lives of thousands over the course of a long career. He might have had a chuckle or two at the officer's expense. He might have said something like this, "I'm not using a light because I'm not handicapped, like you folks are. Your hands are so clumsy and your ears and other senses are so dull that you can't work in the dark like I can." That sounds a little cocky, so I'm sure Dr. Jeffrey would never use that approach. But in the world that he has made for himself, it is true.

In sharing the experiences of admirable handicapped people and this philosophy of restructuring your world to overcome handicaps, I certainly don't mean to imply that this is easy or natural. I would not minimize the difficulties that come with physical handicaps or the strength of character it takes to overcome them. I do not pretend to have personal insight into this difficult and discouraging form of loss in our lives. But from my observation, this is the path that those remarkable people have trod who have overcome their physical handicaps. They have found ways to restructure their world so that they could go on living and contributing to the good of others. In the process, they have made their own lives sweeter and have inspired the rest of us to do better with the physical abilities we have. But it is certainly not easy to do what they have done.

A prominent government official in England centuries ago gave us the true measure of a person's worth and the value of his work in the eternal perspective of things. John Milton had a promising career ahead of him until he went blind. He agonized over the loss of his opportunities. At length he picked up his pen and turned his talents to the subject that obsessed him. He left a poem of wisdom, "On His Blindness," that has lived longer and moved mankind more than any state paper he might have written. In the poem, Milton wrote:

"God doth not need Either man's work or his own gifts. Who best Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state Is kingly: thousands at his bidding speed, And post o'er land and ocean without rest; They also serve who only stand and wait."

Handicapped people, speaking among themselves, sometimes refer to others as TAB's, temporarily able-bodied. This is true. All of us will eventually be handicapped, if not by accident or illness, then by old age. Physical limitations are a given in this world. If we peer and listen through instruments beyond our normal human capabilities, we see how severely handicapped even the healthiest of us are. At our prime we cannot hear sound higher than 20,000 cycles per second or lower than about 16 cycles per second. Yet there are audio frequencies extending far beyond our limited listening spectrum. Some other animals do much better than we do in hearing. We cannot see beyond the reds on one end of the color spectrum and the purples on the other. Yet beyond these limitations the ultraviolets stretch out in shorter and shorter wavelengths. The infrareds going the other direction lengthen into heat waves and radio waves. The universe is full of a multitude of sensations that we never know because we are largely deaf and blind. We do not have the sharp eye the eagle has, the speed and quickness of the leopard, the grace of the gazelle, the navigational skills of the migratory birds, the sonar of the bat, the strength of the elephant, or the graceful, undulating swim of the fish. We can jump a little, run rather slowly, and see and hear a few things in this universe.

When we stand in admiration before a beautiful painting, or listen in rapture to great music, or cheer in the stadium for some athletic event, we structure the universe to define our modest human accomplishments as spectacular. We use words such as genius, maestro, and champion to describe the best of our human efforts. They are superior by human standards, but again, it is human minds that set those standards. Cannot our human minds restructure reality if we are not as mobile as others or have lost the use of some of our sensory perception organs?

Years ago, I stood at the bedside of a beautiful young woman in Idaho. Her thin body had wasted away so that she barely wrinkled the sheet under which she lay. The life had gone out of her limbs, but it seemed to have distilled into her eyes, which sparkled. Using her bright mind, she talked of music she had heard and books she had read. She was up to the minute on the latest happenings in the world. She had not withdrawn into herself. We talked and laughed together. I had gone there to cheer her up, but it was obvious at the end of our talk who had cheered up whom.

For seven years my friend Elwin Pulsipher lay paralyzed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease). He had been a career army officer, had later earned a doctor's degree in education, and had been an administrator at Brigham Young University. He had been a branch president eleven times, was father to a fine family, a Boy Scout leader, and an active man who loved life. But disease had destroyed virtually all his voluntary muscles and left him dependent on a machine for his every breath. A tube through his throat carried the slurry that was his only nourishment.

Elwin Pulsipher could have seen himself as helpless. Instead he restructured his world with himself as father, patriarch, and leader of his family. He pictured himself as a source of inspiration and strength to others. His tools for helping others were a tiny wisp of a smile and his right eyebrow. No one was ever better at making maximum use of minimum bodily faculties than he. With the smile he could brighten the lives of those who came to visit him. He had his right eyebrow outfitted to actuate a computer. With special writing software he could laboriously compose messages one letter at a time. Write he did. It took him at least twelve hours to write a letter, but he wrote letter after letter to friends, to missionaries in the field, to other handicapped people, encouraging them on. Often he sent me copies of his letters. They always closed with this message, "Have a good day." I felt absolutely obligated to have a good day after an invitation from him. He could have been a captive in his own body. Instead he restructured his world around the abilities he still had.

Stephen Hawking has the same disease as my friend Elwin had and is nearly as paralyzed. Hawking does have the use of three fingers on his right hand and can communicate through a word processor hooked to a voice synthesizer. He can also use his eyes. But his unshackled mind roams among the stars and galaxies, black holes, white holes, and time reversals. He is a world-renowned astrophysicist and author of a best-selling book on the history of time. He is also a man with an unquenchable zest for life. "When one's expectations are reduced to zero, one appreciates everything one does have," he says. He is a mathematics professor at Cambridge University in England, a husband, and father of three. With his powerful mind he has restructured not only his own world, but much of the universe for all of us.

Rosalie Pratt was a concert harpist with a promising career opening before her until a rare disease crippled her fingers. "I was bitter and angry at first," she said. But then she restructured her reality. She saw herself not as a concert performer but as a teacher who could bring special talents and understanding to handicapped students. She has become a world authority in her field. Her gifts in music, her sensitive spirit, and her insight and innovation have brought beauty into lives that were barren. She has helped deaf students to "feel" and "see" music. She developed a special keyboard device that helps them analyze sounds. Through this they can not only learn to appreciate music more, but they can improve their speech rhythm and pitch to make it sound more natural. Rosalie Pratt is not a crippled concert performer. She is a talented, inspiring, and beloved teacher.

A few years ago a talented gymnast from Oregon misjudged his trampoline jump and landed on his neck. He never used his arms or legs again. Viewed from the outside, his had been an exciting life. As he described it, he had filled his days with wine, women, and revelry. Now the days of satisfying his sensual appetites were over. He was forced inward to his mind and spirit. He surprised everyone, including himself, with the strength and resources he found there. He discovered and developed his mental, emotional, and spiritual abilities. New worlds opened up to him as he sharpened his abilities to perceive them. He restructured his reality to include his new talents and minimize the ones he had lost. Most important, he discovered the Lord and his relationship with Him. The young man often told his story, describing the new life he had developed after his accident. He said of his present condition, "I wouldn't want what happened to me to happen to anyone—unless that's what it takes."

These people and others have shown us how they restructured their reality to minimize their losses and take fullest advantage of the assets they still possessed. The way they and others have successfully restructured their world is a marvel and an inspiration. It shows the tremendous power our minds can have in deciding how we define our losses and what we do about them.

The healing hands of Jesus touched many and made them whole during his short sojourn on the earth. Eventually, his power will heal us all from our handicaps of body, mind, and spirit. Miraculous healings still take place, of course. But perhaps the greatest ongoing miracle is the courage, ingenuity, resourcefulness, and faith shown by those who challenge and overcome physical handicaps. Their victories can be patterns for all of us as we meet the crises that will inevitably come to us in our walk through this world.
