Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 9

Beautiful Memories Last Forever

Mary Lincoln spent her last days in a darkened room in Springfield, Illinois, where she could live in her memories. She drifted with the days, endlessly caressing her wedding ring with its inscription, "Love Is Eternal." At eventide she would blow out the single candle lighting her room and turn down her side of the bed. She would slip into bed quietly, being careful not to disturb "the President's place" beside her. Some of the neighbors said she was crazy. More accurately, she was probably preserving and nurturing the memories of better times, as all of us do when we suffer a loss.

In undergoing a loss, particularly the loss of a loved one, we may get concerned that the precious experiences we have known before our loss will fade from our memories and be lost also. Sometimes we think of this not just as a personal loss of lovely memories, but as a kind of infidelity to our loved one. We fear that our forgetting may indicate a lack of caring on our part. This concern to preserve the past can cause eccentric and even bizarre behavior. People have been known to let their fondness for memorabilia of the lost one turn into veneration. This is not a healthy mental mode for us. Pictures and souvenirs, of course, are treasured remembrances of the past, but the past is ours to cherish, not to live in.

As for the question of whether we will forget much of our life before our loss, the answer is yes, we will. Our conscious minds are so constructed that we can hold very little in them. Most research indicates that the average person can store about seven digits in his head in short-term memory. We can improve our performance in this area by training and mnemonic devices, but at best our conscious memory can hold only a tiny fraction of what we experience from day to day. Most of us wish we could remember more. Mark Twain described it this way, "The human memory is amazing. It begins working the moment we are born and doesn't stop until we stand up to speak."

A number of factors affect how much we can store in our conscious memory. Age is a factor, though not nearly as big a factor as was once thought. Present research indicates that the elderly who keep their minds active lose only 10 to 15 percent of their memory capacity, unless they're struck with Alzheimer's disease or some other debilitating mental ailment. Emotions play a big part. It's hard to remember things when we are emotionally aroused.

One interesting mental phenomenon is called "flashbulb memory." If you are old enough to remember the day John F. Kennedy was shot or the day Neil Armstrong stepped onto the moon, you can probably remember the circumstances. Unique flashes in your experience tend to stick a long time, although they sometimes get distorted as the years go by. But the conscious short-term memory seems to be quite limited.

In terms of loss, this can be a blessing. If we had our way, we would probably fill our memories with souvenirs, scenes, and memorabilia of the happy times before our loss. Then we would sit in the middle of them and watch the dust settle—watch them turn from souvenirs into antiques, and finally antiquities. We would progress no further. So the Lord in his mercy has made our minds such that the scenes fade quite quickly. They also fade selectively. You have probably noticed that after a short separation from those you love most, even a separation of hours, it's often hard to picture those who are closest to you. Again, there is a reason for that. Abraham Lincoln's son was always frustrated with the photographs of his father. He said they never caught the essence of the man. But then he agreed that it was impossible to capture Abraham Lincoln in a still photograph. His face and his eyes were too animated, constantly changing from twinkling humor to deep sadness. Any picture sliced only a small segment of his total personality.

So it is with our memories of those we love most. We have known their smiles and their sadness; often known them in youth, sometimes in age, in sleep and awake. Our loved one is so varied that when we really know him or her, it's hard for the memory to pick out which image we want when we think back. So we ought not criticize ourselves if the image of those we have loved and lost seems to slip rather quickly from us. That's only an indication of how tightly intertwined our lives are with theirs. Treasured times and beloved companions will fade fairly quickly from our conscious memory. But that is only a temporary phenomenon to allow us to get on with the business of living, which we must be about.

However, there is much more to the story of memory than this. A few years ago in Toronto, Canada, a neurosurgeon by the name of Dr. Wilder Penfield was operating on a patient's brain using local anesthetic. The patient was still conscious even though a section of his skull had been removed, and Dr. Penfield was probing in the gray matter, using a mild electrical current. (This isn't as ghastly as it sounds. The brain has no pain-sensing nerves. The pain of a headache comes from the tissue surrounding the brain.) Dr. Penfield touched an area of the cortex with his probe, which sent a mild electrical signal to the nerves in that area. Suddenly, the patient said, "I see scenes from my childhood." These were not dim recollections. They were startling, full-color scenes complete with sound. In fact, the man began to hum a little song his mother used to sing for him that he hadn't remembered in years. The smells were there, and even the emotions. The entire scene was replayed vividly, literally before the man's eyes. Dr. Penfield probed other areas and aroused other scenes from the man's past.

Dr. Penfield's accidental discoveries opened a whole new area of brain research that is still going on. The more we find out about the mind and the brain, the more we realize we don't know. And we probably never will know the depths of the human mind and soul. One researcher put it this way: if the brain were simple enough for us to understand it, we would be too simple to understand it. Other researchers have duplicated and expanded on Penfield's original probings, but have yet to find really practical applications.

Poking an electrical probe into your skull when a telephone number slips your mind is not a good idea. But in terms of our discussion of loss, Dr. Penfield's discoveries open up marvelous vistas. Such research indicates that absolutely nothing is lost in our journey through this life. Every sight, sound, feeling, touch, thought, and word are still recorded in the billions of neurons in our brains. We are a walking record of everything we have experienced in this life. We may not have access to these limitless records at present, but that is simply because our retrieval system is currently very limited. I believe it is designed so to force us to live in the present where we can control our destinies instead of merely reliving the past over and over again.

But sometime, in the Lord's own appointed hour, I believe all these marvelous memories will be opened to us. I cannot believe they are so carefully and miraculously stored for no reason. Exactly how that is to be done, under what circumstances, and even for what purpose we are not yet told. But we may rest assured that it will come to pass. We needn't concern ourselves, nor condemn ourselves, if our beautiful memories slip quietly into the misty background for a time. They are safely stored, and we will recall them when the time is right.
