Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 10

Exercise More Than Your Options

A few years ago a newspaper reporter was dying of causes incident to his age and poor physical condition. Understandably, his terminal condition weighed heavily on him mentally and emotionally. He decided to take his own life, and chose an original approach to doing it. He got a set of sweats and running shoes, and one evening set out to run himself to death. He hadn't exercised seriously in years. After a few miles, he fell to the ground exhausted. He dragged himself home to die—but he did not quite die that time, although for a few days he felt like it. He repeated his attempt. Again he felt near death, but survived. He tried again and again. Then a strange thing began to happen. He found he was dying less with every attempt. He even began to get a certain masochistic pleasure from his punishment. He looked forward to it and then to life itself. He not only failed to kill himself with exercise, but he renewed his body and spirit and rejoined the ranks of the healthy and happy in the world.

On any morning I can watch a parade of walkers, joggers, and runners in front of our house. We live on a street with a designated bike path and nice scenery that seems to attract this mobile populace. I have walked or driven that street as early as 4:30 in the morning, and I have yet to be the first person out. Morning and evening, winter and summer, they are there at all hours of the day and most hours of the night. Some of them find an indoor track or shopping mall for the colder weather, but others consider the brisk and even cold weather and change of seasons part of the variety they enjoy in their exercise regimen.

There are no Olympic champions among these walkers and joggers, although a local track club comes up on Wednesday mornings, and they look pretty impressive. Most of them are average people like you and me. And like you and me, they have suffered the various and sundry shocks to body and spirit that come with life. That is one of the reasons they are out there every day. Experts say that a brisk walk, jog, swim, or bicycle ride three times a week is enough to keep most people in acceptable condition. But most of these folks are out every day. There is something more behind their exercise program than sustaining a healthy cardiovascular system. They are using exercise to meet the physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual challenges of each day.

Let me give you a random sample of this passing parade of jogging and walking wounded. Here come Marlin and Barbara Ditmore at a brisk pace. Actually, Marlin is determined to live his whole life at a brisk pace. Approaching his eighth decade with a couple of heart attacks behind him and a bout with pneumonia last winter that left scar tissue on his lungs, Marlin could certainly be excused from the rigors of daily exercise. But he has never looked for excuses in his life and he is not about to start now.

Down the street comes Lyle Koller with a cane. That's great, because a few weeks ago he was pushing a walker. Before then it was a wheelchair, and previous to that he was confined to a hospital and then a home bed when they replaced his hip. Lyle is coming back a step at a time.

Here come Elsbeth Maas and Ruth Naylor. They are animatedly discussing some gospel subject as they cover the miles on their morning constitutional. Part of their discussion probably centers on the afterlife, because there used to be three of those lovely sisters. These two had helped the third one clear her lungs of asthma. Later their friend died slowly of cancer. They encouraged and cheered her on as long as she was able to walk with them.

Down the street comes another good neighbor from a few blocks away. Her husband's business is not doing well. They may lose it and perhaps their home as well. This daily walk relaxes her and helps to clear her mind and give her strength to face their present and future problems.

My friend Dave's wife left a few years ago. Nobody knows why. They seemed happy enough. Dave gets out most mornings to greet his friends and neighbors and work his way back from the lonely nights. Daily exercise is the common bond of these and tens of thousands more who are using this powerful weapon of defense against depression, anxiety, and discouragement.

Physical exercise may be one of the last resources we think of in a time of discouragement, but it can help us to increase our motivation as we try to pick up the pieces and go on after a loss. Research is showing the mind and the body to be more tightly locked together than we ever suspected. They cause each other to get up and get down.

People sometimes ask me how to get going on a physical fitness program. Here is how: slowly. S-l-o-w-l-y. It is almost impossible to start too slowly. Usually we want fast results, so we leap in with more gusto than wisdom. Our unaccustomed muscles naturally complain, and by about the third day we decide the gain isn't worth the pain and we give it up. My suggestion for the first day out is to pull on your gym shoes and tighten them up, then loosen them and take them off. That will do it for the first day. Hit the showers. Leave yourself wanting more. All right, this is exaggerated a little, but not much. Take it slowly, particularly in a down time such as a loss brings on.

A second word of advice is to find activities that you enjoy. Most people like to walk or jog. But some prefer swimming or cycling. For mental relaxation and refreshment you are generally better off choosing gentle, noncompetitive exercises, but choose the ones that come fairly naturally to you and bring you a sense of satisfaction when you do them. My experience is that if you choose these kinds of activities and start slowly, you will find physical exercise very helpful in coming back from the mental and emotional despondency loss can bring on.

Running may not be your preferred form of workout, and that's fine. The heart doesn't know the difference between running, walking rapidly, bicycling, swimming, and other exercises that use the big muscles in a regular and rhythmic fashion. Basically, what you are trying to do is use the large muscles, particularly the muscles in your legs, to force-feed your heart. These muscles contract rhythmically as you exercise. In doing so, they squeeze the big veins inside of them and send blood under pressure back to the heart. Then every time the heart valve opens to take a sip of blood, it meets this pressurized stream the muscles are sending to it. The chamber is forced to stretch a little to accommodate more of the blood than it had planned to. Over thousands of such stretchings, the heart's capacity grows. It is able to pump more blood with every beat. This accomplishes two purposes. First, the heart can do an equal amount of work with fewer beats. This allows it to work less to keep you going.

Second, and perhaps more important in a discussion of pulling up out of depression, the heart pumps more blood with every stroke. This blood is rich in oxygen because exercise also develops the lungs' capacity to hold more air and extract oxygen from it more efficiently. Oxygen is the breakfast, lunch, and dinner of champions. When we are low on oxygen, we feel sluggish. Our muscles have no energy, our brain is blurred, and our mind sees the grim side of every situation. These are all physiological states, but I can't think of a better description of emotional depression than this. There are usually other factors, but a mere shortage of oxygen in our system can depress us single-handedly.

On the other hand, a healthy heart pumping strong streams of oxygen-enriched blood can be a powerful warrior in our battle against the blues. This is not the only reason that aerobic exercise can strengthen us against depression. Sir Isaac Newton's laws of motion apply to human beings as well. He said, "A body in motion tends to remain in motion, unless acted upon by an opposing force." The actual and symbolic process of putting one foot in front of the other one reminds us that we are not dead. We are live bodies in motion; and if nothing else, there is always the chance we may stumble upon an answer to our problems.

Good counsel to people who are flattened by depression is to try to get the monkey off their back by getting the mattress off their back. I'm not saying it's easy, and chemical imbalances and other personal problems may add to the weight of the burden they are carrying. But the counsel is still very good. When you are moving, you are generally a proactive and not a reactive force. You are constantly changing the environment around you—even a little, even from one room to another. You are meeting new situations and new people. Each of these has the potential of containing a shaft of light that may help to lead you from the darkness.

The body itself was made for movement. When it is fulfilling the measure of its creation, even in awkward stumbles or creaky-jointed crawling, it rewards us. When we are active, the brain releases endorphins. These are natural tranquilizers that help to raise our spirits and calm our anxieties. They can even help counteract chemical imbalances that may be causing our depression. Exercise tends to make us feel and look younger, and this can help brighten our spirits. It can give us the feeling that we are in control of our bodies. Then we can extend that control outward from our being to our immediate surroundings and environment. We may surprise ourselves at how far-reaching the effects of even a modest exercise program can be.
