Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 11

Don't Fight on Two Fronts

Adolph Hitler was an evil man but a military and political master strategist, according to historian William L. Shirer. But he made one fatal miscalculation. He tried simultaneously to defeat Russia on the east and the Allies on the west. In so doing, he added the mighty Third Reich war machine to the junk pile of military history. He joined the company of commanders who have tried to fight on two fronts at the same time. It almost never works.

This principle is wise generalship when we face the battle to overcome a loss in our lives. The struggle can draw heavily on our resources. Like a general, we must commit our fighting forces of every sort. Our physical strength, our mental abilities, our emotional power, and our spiritual reserves may be called on as they have never been before.

If our minds are distracted and our mental powers dissipated, we have less strength to fight the battle of the mind that wages whenever we suffer a loss. Worry is a natural temptation at these times. We often worry about what the future now holds for us. Will we be able to pay the bills and meet the demands of each day? What if this is only the beginning of a series of losses? If it is a business loss, what will this do to our financial position and our standing among our peers and in the community? If it is a loss of reputation or of face, due to some mistake we have made, our mind flits from face to face of our acquaintances, worrying about what they will think. If we have lost a loved one, particularly in an accident, we are tempted to think, "Could I have done something differently to avoid this?" All manner of devious paths are open to our minds, and they love to keep us busy following them. But they run away with our mental strength if we let them.

How, then, do we keep a tight rein on our minds? We don't. What we really need to do with our minds is not try to pull them back. Our minds are marvelous, frisky, wide-ranging, inquisitive creatures. Like spirited hunting dogs, they are always out in front of us sniffing the air, poking under bushes, exploring the nooks and crannies of our environment for new information. They don't respond well to negative commands and tight leashes. If we tell them to stop and stay, they come back momentarily, but then they whine and complain and are soon bounding off again in the wrong direction. Rather than reining and muzzling them, we need to make use of their incorrigible curiosity. We should set out a goal in front of our minds, then instruct them to get us to that goal. When we find our minds wandering into forbidden or unfruitful paths, rather than castigating them and calling them home, we need merely to remind them where the goal is. They will pick up the trail from where they are and refocus on the target. They will do even better than this: very often our wandering minds will use the information they've gathered, even in side trips, to help guide them on toward the goal.

So as we map out our campaign strategy to win the battle over loss, the first thing we must do is what every general does. We must point at the battle map and say, "We are here, and we want to get to there." We need to tell our minds what goal we are trying to reach. What does it look like? What is the terrain, the environment, the population? War strategists often talk about getting the big picture. The foot soldier in the trenches may not know any more than his job to take the next hill in the next battle, but somebody in the army had better have a vision of the big picture, or the campaign is lost before it begins. The metaphor is appropriate in our mental battles. We need to get the big picture of our goal. What will it look like when we have overcome our loss? What will the landscape be like? What personnel—whom will we be with? What will we be like? Will we have gained additional attributes and character strengths through the struggle?

All this information, like reconnaissance to a general, must be constantly fed into our minds to flesh out the image of the goal we are striving to achieve. Then this image must be constantly transmitted to the fighting mental forces under our control. Whenever our minds wander off to worries or fears, we should give them the picture of the goal to pull them around and send them off on the right course again. The mind is perhaps our most powerful resource. This is our heavy artillery in the battle to overcome loss. No wonder we often lose battles, when we turn our guns upon ourselves.

The emotions are so closely tied to the mind and they overlap in so many ways that it is impossible to say where one stops and the other begins. For that matter, it is impossible to say where the physical person—or the mental, or the emotional, or the spiritual—stops. They overlap on every edge. They are like strings on a harp, and you cannot pluck one without having the tone resound and reverberate throughout the entire system. A physical ailment focuses our minds upon it. This affects our emotions negatively, and can even impinge on our spiritual well-being. Likewise, emotional lows can bring on pessimistic thoughts and psychosomatic physical illnesses, and scar over our spiritual sensitivity. Spiritual and emotional traumas have stupefied the minds and blighted the health of many people. Richard Nixon developed phlebitis shortly after he was forced to resign. Lyndon Johnson was not the same robust cowboy after his public policies were largely rejected and he was denied the opportunity to run for president a second time. Medical research indicates that the will to live can be a powerful factor in whether people survive serious illnesses.

The practical point of all this observation and speculation is that we can wage war against defeat on the battlefield of our emotions as we can in the other areas of our lives. We are not helpless hostages to external events. But again, we probably do not have the strength to fight on two fronts. We must make a good, substantial peace within ourselves so that we can conserve our emotional strength to fight the external opposition.

Charlie Plumb learned this lesson early in his captivity in North Vietnam. His external opposition was almost overwhelming. Locked in a bamboo dungeon in solitary confinement, baking in the soggy jungle heat, retching on rotten food, covered with sores and boils, existing in putrid squalor, cut off from virtually all sources of outward strength (not even a window to peer out of), he should have died. He almost did. But one day a more experienced prisoner smuggled a note to him that saved his life. The note explained a system through which they could communicate by jiggling a wire back and forth between their two isolated cells. Gradually, Charlie learned to translate the jiggles on the wire into words, and he began to communicate with his friend. Charlie poured out his anger and self-pity at having been plucked by fate from the skies as a high-flying Navy pilot five days before he was scheduled to be rotated back home. In an instant he had lost everything and dropped from being top gun and king of the clouds to a wretched, muddy rat in a rice paddy. He was understandably bitter.

His experienced fellow prisoner told him he was perfectly free to have those feelings, and was probably justified. He said, "Go ahead and feel that way if you want to, Charlie, but there is one thing you should know: it will cost you your life." He then recounted to Charlie the stories of other prisoners who had devoured themselves in self-pity and died.

In that instant, Charlie made the choice to be a survivor. He stopped wasting his emotional ammunition on himself and saved it for the enemy outside—not only his North Vietnamese captors, but the silent enemies of loneliness, fear, isolation, nostalgia, and heartbreak. He settled within himself the question of why he was there. He decided that for some good reason God had put him there, or allowed him to be there. That was all he knew and all he needed to know. Then he got on to the really important question of what to do about it. He said, among other things, "Do you know how many church hymns you can dredge up out of your memory if you have seven years to think about it? In my case the answer is seventy-eight." He remembered and repeated snatches of the Bible he had been taught in church, other literature, training instructions, and information from his school days. Most important for his emotional battle, he kept his self-conversations upbeat. He sought out and found joy in even the tiniest blessings of life. He could literally, as the scriptures say, give thanks for his latest breath. By fighting on only one front, Charlie Plumb won the battle against what would seem to be overwhelming odds, and he survived. The same principles can apply to us in overcoming our own losses, big and small.

Every night we ask each of our children a couple of questions. One of them is, "What was your happiest thing today?" Like most children, indeed almost all of us, they sometimes have a hard time thinking of anything happy. "Nothing good happened today," they have sometimes said.

Then we ask them some other questions: "Did you get out of bed this morning?"

"Yes."

"A lot of people didn't. Did you have breakfast?"

"Yes."

"A lot of people didn't—a lot of people went hungry all day and went to bed hungry tonight. And they will do the same thing every day for the rest of their lives."

It doesn't take long to find a happiest thing. We hope that a lifetime of this daily emotional exercise will help them to pick out automatically the good things in every day's activities. Then they can be at peace within themselves and have more strength to win the battles against outward opposition.

In the physical aspects of our existence, we also tend to divide our forces and try to battle on two fronts at once. In our exterior world the laws of gravity and inertia are ever present and ever powerful. They want to pull us down and stop our progress. If we have been weakened by loss or grief, we have disrupted the balance between the forces we have used to keep us active and the ever-present resistance that would slow us down or stop us. It is harder to get going in the morning; harder to keep a daily work schedule; harder to do aerobic exercises that would help pump new oxygen, life, and energy into our bodies. It is harder to smile, look up, and speak cheerfully.

In a state of depression, it is easy to look at our face and form and feel old, used up, wrinkled and wasted, or flabby and overweight. But when we cave in to these feelings and treat our bodies and our physical surroundings accordingly, we turn them into enemies. On the other hand, the more we discipline our bodies, the more we can control them and thereby control the outward environment around us. To be sure, our physiques are subject to the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. They will inevitably get creaky and cranky and take more skill and inner strength to operate. But that will be a source of depression to us only if we make it so. We can choose to consider it a quiet challenge that can bring us increased mental, emotional, and spiritual power.

George Lucas, the creator of the "Star Wars" series of motion pictures, is one of the most successful directors in the business. He understands the principle that getting the most out of an old body can sometimes be more intriguing than zipping around in a new one. In the first "Star Wars" episode, his heroes whipped through space in their rocket ship, the Millennium Falcon. In a sci-fi flick such as this, you would expect the main characters' transportation to be shiny and studded with high-tech bells and whistles. But Lucas is too clever a writer and director to pass up this golden opportunity to pluck the heartstrings of his viewers. The Millennium Falcon is an antiquated, interstellar hot rod—a tin can that is always technologically behind the sophisticated spaceships of the evil empire. Only the skill and ingenuity of her owner/pilot/mechanic, Han Solo, keep her aloft and out of the clutches of the enemy. He knows where and when to bang around with his space-age monkey wrench every time she coughs or sputters or gets off course.

This aesthetic element of the human mind and spirit overcoming the limitations of the physical world adds tremendously to our interest and empathy with the protagonists in the movie. The same is true in our real lives. There is great satisfaction and growth in working out our destinies through physical imperfections and with bodies that gradually grow older and less efficient.

Some who do not understand have criticized the leaders of the Church as being too old and infirm to function in their heavy responsibilities. These people miss the point entirely. It is precisely because of their age, and sometimes physical impairment, that they develop the powerful mental and spiritual muscles they need to lead the kingdom. Spencer W. Kimball was a man small of stature, dogged with serious ailments all the years of his later life, robbed by cancer of most of his voice, precariously balancing his medications to keep his blood thin enough to course through his aged arteries but thick enough not to rupture again in the capillaries of his brain. Working around and through this unstable physical situation, he added to his spiritual strength. He was a giant in the land, a man whose strength and vision we have scarcely begun to comprehend, much less fulfill.

The physical battle can likewise build us if we fight it on a single front. But if we see our weakening bodies as a sign of weakening will, we may turn our bodies into "fifth columnists." You may recall the story of an ancient general attacking a fortified city. He had planted subversives and insurrectionists inside the city, ready to cripple its defenses when the attack began. An observer commented on his armies, which were marching in four columns against the outward walls. The general said, "Yes, I have four columns, but inside I have a fifth column that may be more effective than any of the others." Hence the term "fifth columnists" for those who sabotage the war effort from the inside.

The spiritual battleground is the most important aspect of our lives. We may survive the loss of physical health, friends and social standing, mental abilities and competence. But if we lose the battle of the spirit, our loss can have eternally tragic consequences. It is in the realms of the spirit that we need to marshal our resources, focus them on the opposition, and, as the Apostle Paul said, "Fight the good fight." (1 Timothy 6:12.) The enemies of the spirit are deeply entrenched in our outside environment. The lust for power, material possessions, sensual gratification, ease and indolence, selfishness and greed, and other vices are constantly blazing away at our spiritual selves. From the heavy artillery of lust and avarice to the small-arms fire of gossip and criticism, they lay out a constant barrage against our spiritual defenses. If we are to survive this continual onslaught from the outside, surely we need to keep ourselves entrenched in solid spiritual fortifications.

A loss in our lives can create a breach in the wall. We may turn bitter and curse God and our own creation for putting us in a situation where tragedy could occur to us. We may even blame God as the cause of our trials. If we do not face our losses with spiritual strength, the enemy will pour through our defenses and overrun our city. And as with any military maneuver, he will be much harder to drive out once he is in than to keep out while he is still at bay.

We fortify our spiritual defenses through reading and pondering the scriptures, through praying and fasting, and through serving others—particularly in building up the Lord's kingdom. These activities strengthen us against the adversary. Scripture study and contemplation help to give us an eternal perspective of our temporary loss. Fasting builds our spiritual muscles and gives us greater control over our bodies. It can even help us control the chemical and hormonal imbalances that can exacerbate our depressions during times of loss. Prayer opens the conduit to heaven and allows the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, to speak peace to our souls. Service to others keeps us moving, gets our minds off ourselves, and helps speed the passage of time. If we are in the proper frame of mind and spirit, time is the most powerful healing balm with which to soothe the wounds of loss and grief.

There will be wounds in these battles. We can, and should, fortify our physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual defenses, but we can never make them impregnable. We can skillfully align our fighting forces; we can minimize the battlefronts on which we must simultaneously fight. All these are solid and responsible military tactics, but there is one more factor that must be present if we are to achieve the victory.

General Ulysses S. Grant is not remembered as a military tactical genius. He was competent, but not breathtaking in strategy. But the U.S. in Grant's name stood for something more than Ulysses Simpson. It stood for "unconditional surrender" when he went into battle. This tenacious bulldog would "fight it out on this line if it takes all summer." If necessary, he would fight a protracted war of attrition until his forces wore down the opposition.

In a sense, every war is a war of attrition. Superb generalship and a few victories in battle count for little if we do not have the strength to persevere until the war is won. In our personal battles, this is called "enduring to the end." Then, after that ultimate victory, we shall eventually enjoy eternal peace.
