Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Traveling Tips

Here are some suggestions to help you move through this part of your journey in overcoming your loss:

Find ways to put additional information into your mind. Use a variety of activities: reading, viewing uplifting motion pictures and videos, listening to records, attending live concerts and plays, browsing in museums, talking with other people, traveling, building things, growing plants, caring for animals. All these are good. The subject matter is not as important as the tone of the activities. Try to put in upbeat, optimistic raw material for your mind to work on. Your mind and heart may react cynically at first and suspect you of trying to lead them away from their dedicated purpose of grief and mourning. That's exactly what you are doing, and after a while the additional information will lodge in your mind and heart and begin to take effect.

Reach out to help others. This is strong medicine when you yourself are in such need of help. Like other strong medicine, it is hard to take, but it is very powerful—perhaps the most powerful medicine of all next to prayer. Look about you at others who may be suffering loss. Are there ways you could help them get through their crises? Plan to do so.

Read and discuss the lives of others with particular attention to the part that loss has played in their progress. Antonio Stradivari, who was disappointed at not being a great violinist, instead began building violins and became the greatest at his craft. Abraham Lincoln lost election after election but in the process developed his values, his style, and his empathy, becoming one of the greatest presidents in U.S. history. Winston Churchill failed in his plans in World War I but used the experience to prepare himself to lead Britain in World War II. Lehi lost his fine business in Jerusalem, Peter his fishing operation. Both gained immortality and eternal life by accepting those losses.

Look at your own history and note where losses and disappointments have changed the direction of your life. What benefits may have accrued to you because of your losses?

As much as possible, avoid far-reaching, life-changing decisions for a while. Your judgment is still heavily affected by your loss. In an effort to fill the void in your life or avoid constant reminders of your loss, you may want to make sweeping changes in your career or your personal life. Listen to the counsel of those whose judgment you trust and who are near enough to you to be deeply sensitive to your needs, but far enough away from the loss that their counsel is not as emotionally affected as yours may be.

On the other hand, feel free to make changes when the time is right. The right time will usually be some months after a serious loss, but not always. It may come sooner or later with different individuals. The right time is when the initial pain and shock have almost worn off. It is when the routine has settled in and given you a chance to evaluate the good and the not-so-good aspects of your present situation. The right time is when you have studied the alternatives of the decision you are considering and taken counsel from trusted associates and authorities. But ultimately, the right time is after you have pondered and prayed, set your life in order as well as you know how, and asked for the Holy Spirit of the Lord to guide your actions. He will. Then feel free to move.

Refurbish and visit often your mental place of relaxation and refuge. This place, you will remember, is the mental utopia you created not long after your loss. It is the place in which all your dreams are fulfilled and things are as perfect as your imagination can conceive them. Visualize this scene. What are the sights, the sounds, the smells, the feelings? It's fine and natural if this scene includes conditions before your loss. That won't hurt. Feel free to put the scene anywhere you want and populate it with whatever people you choose or with just yourself. Picture your scene in great detail. Is it day or night? Is it winter, spring, summer, or fall? Is it indoors or outdoors? Who is there with you? In whatever ways you can, make the scene more vivid and pleasant for yourself. It is perfectly all right to include people and situations that were near you before your loss, because you are not merely reliving the past. You are creating a pleasant place for your mind to dwell during its future hard times—drawing up blueprints for a future condition that will eventually exist. This is far different from neurotically bogging down in the time before your loss and staying there.

Picture yourself drawing power and strength to your body and spirit. Loss can be weakening, even debilitating, if we let it. The long, gray grind can wear you down. You need sources of mental and physical strength. It is important that you care for your body with proper food and rest, exercise and good health habits. Let your mind assist in this power-producing process. As you eat good food, picture it being absorbed into your system and spreading strength and good health throughout your body. As you breathe, think of the energy-producing oxygen in the air. Feel this power tingle right down to your fingertips and toes. Think of each breath drawn as added strength gained.

Finally, be patient. Every tick of the clock and turning of the world is a victory for you as you work through the long, gray grind.
