Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Part 3

Overcoming, Not Just Enduring

Milestone Markers

This is the third stage of your journey in overcoming your loss. In this stage you will go beyond enduring the loss and seek to overcome it. As in the other stages you have come through, this part of the terrain is uphill, but it can be mastered. This is a vital segment of your journey. It is the process by which you turn your loss from a stumbling block to a stepping stone on your way to godhood. You can take strength and encouragement from the progress you have already made.

The road ahead is marked by levels that, when achieved, will in fact extract blessings from your loss—blessings for you and for those fortunate enough to be touched by your influence.

As with the previous milestones, you will probably not yet have arrived at these. But as you continue your journey, you will one day be able to say these things to yourself:

I am more responsible for my own life, having overcome this loss. I do not blame my difficulties on my environment or on other people. I take responsibility for my actions.

I have a firmer faith and trust in God.

I believe God will send me nothing that is not for my ultimate good.

I am more committed to developing my character and effectiveness as a valuable human being.

I am less committed to accumulating worldly possessions as a goal for my life.

I am less committed to obtaining glory, praise, or power as a goal for my life.

I am more sensitive to the sufferings of others and I am involved in helping to alleviate those sufferings because of what I have gone through.

If my loss could have been prevented by my actions, I have developed strategies to help prevent such a loss from happening again.

I can see clearly ways in which this loss has been beneficial to me, and I am grateful for those aspects of my loss.

I do not fear the future even though it may contain losses similar to the one I have suffered in the past. I see loss as another gift from a loving God to help me and my fellow human beings progress and grow.

I am actively involved in the lives of others and seek ways to help them.

I am not a victim of the world's circumstances. I am a stronger and more confident person and less intimidated by the possibility of loss in my life.

I am not a casual observer in the world's suffering; I am a force for good.

I have a greater depth and breadth of understanding of this life and the important things in it. I more often measure my activities and the events of my life in an eternal perspective.

I am a wiser and more efficient person because of my understanding of the place of loss in my life and the lives of others.
