Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 12

Not Just Enduring, but Overcoming

When it comes to loss, we might divide people into three categories: those who suffer loss, those who endure loss, and those who overcome loss. The first category includes every person who ever drew breath. No human being ever took the journey from cradle to grave without some painful steps along the way and some unpleasant wandering in wildernesses.

The second category includes most people. A few sad folks get totally crushed by their losses and never recover, but most people struggle back, battered and scarred. They try to pick up the pieces as best they can and go on living.

But a few interpret their loss as opportunity. I knew a man who had one standard line whenever things went wrong, which they often did in his life. He would say, "Boy, I can't believe what kind of person I'll be when I get through this." And he was right. Like fine-tempered steel, it seemed the more he got hammered on the stronger he became. This marvelous metamorphosis doesn't take place automatically, of course. It takes commitment, fortitude, and powerful internal visualization to bring it about.

Survivors have certain traits in common, according to researchers. They bend instead of break. They have a solid sense of their self-worth. They often act intuitively, and those decisions turn out well for them. They have a strong outward focus in their lives, looking for the needs of others more than concentrating on their own problems. They are able to change directions with relatively little trauma, and they have a generally optimistic outlook.

Overcomers start with these same traits and then build upon them. I talked with one woman who was putting her life together after twenty-one years of physical and psychological abuse in a relationship misnamed "marriage." She finally sought for and obtained a divorce and endured the trauma that always accompanies that terrible experience. It was the struggle of her life to overcome two decades of having her gentle feelings and her personal worth drained by an insensitive man who tried to make her believe she was worthless. The very real grief of the divorce for her and their children added to her burden. But little by little she was making her way back. Her combined losses had forced her into a situation where she either had to give up and live on other people's handouts and pity or dig deep and come up with strength and resources she had never had before. She chose to dig in instead of give up. She gathered her courage and applied for a good job as a court clerk. She moved to another town and started a new life.

This woman said, "I was terribly unhappy in our marriage. I didn't want to leave, but there seemed to be no other way. And now life goes on. I can either be bitter and negative or try to make the best for me, my children, and my former husband out of the situation that I have now." She is presently enduring quite successfully and beginning the process of overcoming, I believe.

To turn a corner from enduring into overcoming requires that we believe in change and growth. It requires that we be builders and not breakers. Substantial builders need a solid foundation of optimism. This does not mean we have to go around giggling all the time. Optimists have their down times like everyone else. The young woman I just told you about said, "When I am in those hard situations, I'm often sad and bitter. But if I can get away from the pain for a while, I can get my head together and see that this isn't the end of the world. I can come back."

Being optimistic does not require changing our basic character so much as remembering what we used to be. Virtually every human being is born an optimist. Every infant believes that if it cries, help will come—if it reaches out, someone will take its hand. Every toddler believes that somewhere beyond the bumped noses and skinned knees lies the golden land of walking. Every kid daydreams heroic stories with himself or herself in the starring role. Even rebellious teenagers behave as they do because they feel they are big enough and smart enough now that the world should take them more seriously. At heart we all believe, or used to believe, that we are important. For most of us there is no sweeter sound on earth than our own name. A sincere compliment from someone we admire can warm us to the core. Inside we know we are good and valuable people. To change this optimism requires that we allow the world to beat it out of us. Outward circumstances provide the refining fire, but it is our decision whether the fire melts us down or purifies and tempers us.

A few years ago a young Cambodian girl escaped with her family into the jungles of Southeast Asia. All the other family members were killed or captured. She faced death many times, but finally made her way to the coast. She worked there for months until an opportunity came to risk her life on a leaky, unseaworthy boat. She took the chance, beat the odds, and made it to America. Alone in a strange land with a foreign culture and an unknown tongue, she continued her fight for survival. She studied relentlessly, eventually graduated from high school and college, and was later named the "Teacher of the Year" in America. Nothing in her outward environment encouraged her to believe that she could accomplish that incredible odyssey, but inside she was listening to the voice of a child who believed that she could make it and that life was worth the struggle.

This is the basic decision that we all have to make. Is this life, in its temporal and its eternal definitions, worth the struggle? If we say yes, we are basically optimists, and eventually we will overcome all the trials that may be heaped on us. If we allow ourselves to give up the basic optimism we were born with, we have turned to pessimism, and we will not have the strength to win life's battles. Eventually, even a straw can flatten us. We may perish just from boredom if we let defeat become our basic mode of thought. But that is a choice we consciously make.

We are born with an upward reach, a homesickness for heaven from whence we came and to which we shall return if we are willing. The upward path to overcoming our loss requires effort, but it is, in the long run, less difficult than the downward journey of caving in and giving up. Because the efforts we make climbing are productive efforts, they are rewarding. They allow us to look back with satisfaction over the terrain we have covered and take renewed strength for the climb ahead. We can see that we are a little stronger and more able to continue for having come this far on the journey. This is one application of Christ's teaching, "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:30.) The road is not a downhill coast but an inspiring and fulfilling uphill climb. We are promised that whenever our steps falter, the Savior and his Holy Spirit will be there to lift us up and strengthen our feeble knees along the path. We have no such promise when we are going the other direction. There is no stagnant, holding, neutral position in our eternal journey. We are always going one direction or the other. We are overcoming or being overcome by the challenges and the losses of life.

It matters not how far we have come on the journey or where we are on the ladder. What is important is which direction our face is pointed. If we are on the top rung looking down, we are in more jeopardy than the person on the bottom rung looking up. It matters not what losses we have overcome before. The deciding factor for our present state is how we are handling the loss that lies presently before us. From scripture and from our own experience, we know that God will not drown us in a sea of circumstances beyond our control. But neither will he insult us by giving us knee-deep water after we have learned to be skillful swimmers. The challenges in this second estate will be gauged and measured and custom-fitted to our capacities to handle them. We'll face nothing that we cannot overcome with the Lord's help.

Our losses will come in three categories. The first type of loss we suffer simply by coming into a world that is imperfect, temporary, and subject to unexplainable problems and even tragedies. The second category consists of losses we bring upon ourselves through carelessness and sin. The third category is losses the Lord deliberately sends to teach us and strengthen us and to develop our character. All these losses are difficult, but none are insurmountable. We can conquer the losses that are merely a part of this imperfect world if we understand that this second estate is only temporary, and that eventually even the unexplained injustices will be corrected. The losses we bring upon ourselves through sin are, thank heaven, subject to the atoning power of the Savior. Although we may have brought suffering and pain upon ourselves and upon others, if we have faith in Christ, throw ourselves upon his mercy, and do all that we can to repent and make recompense for our sins, we can eventually overcome these tragic losses also. The losses the Lord sends upon us to help us along our individual paths to perfection are, in the measurement of a longer perspective, not losses at all, but testing and training exercises for us. In those cases our best response is to try to understand the will of the Lord, match our limited vision to his eternal perspective, and meet the challenge in accordance with his divine will.

Whatever the challenge, the apparent setback, or the heartbreaking loss, we need to meet it, endure it, and overcome it. If we do not, it will be forever an obstacle in the path of our continued progress and eventual godhood. This may seem like a difficult doctrine when we are lying limp and bleeding from a loss in our lives. But in actuality it is the most encouraging philosophy we could have to live by. It tells us that eventually, with God's help, we can overcome every trial and someday arrive at the point where personal loss is only a past memory. At that day we will receive the blessed reward from our God for being faithful in the face of adversity. We can inscribe our own names on the testimony of the Apostle Paul, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." (2 Timothy 4:7-8.)
