Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 13

You've Paid the Price, Now Take the Prize

"'Give,' said the little stream, 'Give, oh give, give, oh give . . . ' singing, singing all the day, 'Give, oh give away.'" The lilting little melody and the simple but profound lyrics floated out of the big playback speakers and across the recording studio at Capitol Records in Hollywood, California. The engineer smiled and the record producer smiled. Dick Davis, Denis Sorenson, and I (The Three D's), who had just recorded the song, all smiled. It was a beautiful little record with "hit" stamped all over it. The timing was perfect; it was the early 1960s. The popular-music public was temporarily tired of "moon, June, croon, spoon" lyrics and was looking for music with a little more message. The acid rockers had not yet erupted on the scene with their antiestablishment musical propaganda, which would soon drown out everything else for a few years. Folk music with a message, and sometimes a moral, was enjoying a brief season or two of popularity. It was a time of hootenannies and sing-alongs, of the Kingston Trio, the Limelighters, the Brothers Four, the New Christy Minstrels, the Smothers Brothers, and a few hundred other pickers and singers and joke tellers.

Not long before, a Catholic nun had made a hit record with a song titled "Dominique." The timing was perfect for "Give, Said the Little Stream." And obviously, the Three D's were the perfect group to sing it. Dick, Denis, and I had grown up through Primary singing this little song. We were all returned missionaries and dedicated to continuing to spread the gospel with our talents. Dick and Denis were married, and I soon would be. We needed the money. If ever a hit record were written in the stars, it was this one. Capitol Records thought so, too. They enthusiastically pressed the record, sent it to the radio stations, and sat poised at their cash registers waiting for the results.

There was just one problem, we found out later. For the first time in the history of that venerable record company, they punched the hole in the record off center. The radio station program directors and DJs across the country dropped it on the turntables; heard about sixteen bars of wobbling, wailing music; and decided the public wasn't ready for this new sound. They dropped it immediately into the trash can. You can believe that story or not, but that's what the record company told us. Whatever the reasons, "Give, Said the Little Stream" went bravely singing, singing all the day into the wilderness of the record marketplace and never returned. It sold a few copies over the years, but it never became the great hit record it might have been. And the Three D's never rode that record to international stardom. It was a golden opportunity lost.

Now we had to decide what to do about it. We could blame the record company, mourn our misfortune, and quit. We chose not to. We did our share of blaming and moaning, but we didn't quit. Instead we went back to the rehearsal hall and the recording studio and off on the college coffeehouse circuit, to develop a satisfying career that lasted for the next sixteen years. We never got the blazing spotlights and the big money that come with stardom, but we got things that, in the long run, may have been better for us professionally and in our service to the Lord's kingdom.

I noticed that those who got success early were locked into a certain image, music style, and even particular songs. One night I listened to Peter, Paul and Mary sing "Puff, the Magic Dragon" for the umpteen thousandth time. They admitted they were very tired of singing the song, but the audience demanded it. Stars were often prisoners of their own popularity. They didn't dare—nor would their audience allow them—to grow, change, and continue to develop and display new talents.

We, on the other hand, were forced to develop new material constantly. We played audiences that varied from elementary school to the elderly—from the Rose Bowl to the rice paddies of Vietnam. At one time we had eight solid hours of varied material from which we drew music and comedy adapted to almost every conceivable audience. It was hard work over the years, but I believe we grew and developed more than we would have done had we spent those sixteen years singing "Give, Said the Little Stream" and other recorded hits. Now, please don't ask me to make a choice. I'm not saying I would not have enjoyed having "Give, Said the Little Stream" and other songs of ours sweep the record charts. I'm just saying that when we lost that opportunity, there was a trade-off. And there always is, in every loss in our lives.

Abraham voluntarily lost the most fertile parts of the promised land. He gave them to his nephew, Lot. As it turned out, Abraham got in trade a lifetime of struggle and disappointment that culminated in his being the "father of the faithful." Lot got the fertile fields, the easy life, and the bright lights of the big cities in Sodom and Gomorrah.

In many transactions we take a loss. Every time we purchase a product we give money, goods, or services in return. If we receive what we consider to be sufficient value in exchange for what we pay, we do not consider that a loss. In a good investment we get back more than we give and are more than satisfied with having sacrificed something in exchange. But if we get little or nothing back for our money, we feel shortchanged and cheated, and rightly so.

Perhaps Americans, above all people, have internalized this spirit of the Yankee trader as a natural way of living life. I have done some work in advertising and know that the average American homemaker, for example, is a pretty hard sell. The men, from my experience, don't appear to be as articulate about what they will and will not buy and pay for, but they are equally effective. They just quietly walk away and don't come back. This mentality is not limited to one section of the country or one social, vocational, or economic stratum among us. The simple, country farmer outfoxing the city slicker is standard fare in our folklore. The fast-talking car salesman, the high-powered lawyer, and the pork-barreling politician all have two things in common: they are looking for a good deal for themselves, and they are all as American as apple pie. There are some drawbacks to these national characteristics, but there are advantages, too. One is that we tend to demand good measure for our money, a fair return for our effort, a fair day's work for a fair day's pay, and goods and services worth the price we give for them. The system doesn't work perfectly, but it has helped to make our standard of living the envy of much of the world.

I suggest we take that same mental set into our consideration of loss in our lives. Frequently, we don't. We tend to write off loss as a good thing gone forever. We uncharacteristically sit and sigh over what we have been called upon to give, without a thought of what we might get in return. I believe we shortchange ourselves when we passively accept loss with no payment in return. We ought to stand up and demand our rightful dues. If we do so, I believe that the world, the universe, our own psychological and emotional makeup, and the Lord himself will respect those rights.

Nothing irritates me more than to have my car or truck break down. To take them to a garage, pay out my good money, and bring them home only as good as they were before somehow seems like wasting money to me. If I possibly can, I have the mechanics do something else while they are there, even though it costs a little more—replace a fan belt, fix a muffler or a rattle that has been bothering me, along with the major problem—anything so that I get something additional for my money.

I suggest we take this sort of hardheaded business approach to loss. We pay a great deal in grief, bereavement, money, ulcers, lost sleep, and sometimes psychosomatic illnesses when we suffer a loss. What can we get in return?

If the loss was a business failure, we lost money, time, effort, and perhaps our credit rating. A friend of mine had a boat-building business. One night the volatile resin caught fire and practically exploded through the rest of the plant. There was no chance to save a stick of materials. He was finished. "He lost everything," people said, but they were wrong. He retained his business sense, his willingness to work, and the sympathetic ear of his creditors, who believed in him even though he had suffered such a crushing setback. He gained a new appreciation and understanding of his own personal resources—a knowledge that he could come back from even this kind of devastation. He gained the wisdom to look ahead better next time and insure his business and possessions. He gained a new appreciation of his wife and children's love for him and their willingness to stand by him when he was down. He learned how to operate his reopened business on a shoestring, and he learned that you are never beaten until you say you are beaten.

Ettie Lee's family lost their good name. Her progenitor John D. Lee was executed as the perpetrator of the infamous Mountain Meadows Massacre in southern Utah. Probably because of their guilt feelings from their own grandfathers' participation in the massacre, some people in the town decided that the whole Lee family should pay. The Lees lost their standing in the community and the association of some of their former friends. Little Ettie was often shunned by her schoolmates. She could have taken this loss lying down, but she was not that kind of woman. Instead she demanded repayment in full from life, and she got it. She got it by demanding that life pay her in the coin of empathy and understanding for the troubles of others and an ability to rise above her own problems. With these hard-earned riches she opened the Ettie Lee Boys Schools. She blessed the lives of many young men who felt outcast, as she had. And she gained more than she had surrendered in the losses of her early life.

I lost temporarily the companionship of a beautiful and loving wife and the mother of our children. But I determined I would not make such a heavy investment just to return to where I had been before. I decided I would get good measure for my money, and I have already. I understand the hurts and the loneliness of others in a way I never did before. I see the tentative and temporary nature of this life in which we live. I am drawn closer to eternal life in the hereafter. I see more than I ever did before the need to be anxiously doing good with every moment. I love my wife more deeply now than I did when she was with me. I treasure and thank the Lord for the privilege of having served her clear up to the last teaspoon of water I slipped between her lips and the last priesthood blessing I gave her before she died. These memories are locked forever in my heart and hers, and are a significant milestone in our eternal and celestial marriage. I feel a strength and a unity from our children that was not there before. I have known the love and compassion of friends and family in my time of need. I have a list of my goals in life, which I carry with me all the time. They are arranged in priorities, and the first one is to get myself and my family into the celestial kingdom. In the case of my wife, this goal is on its way toward sure fulfillment. This treasured reward cost me the loss of her companionship for a time, but it has assured me that our relationship will continue in eternity if I am worthy.

There is no loss without some attendant gain. If we look carefully, we can always find it. Since we have already paid the price, we should avail ourselves of the prize.
