Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 14

Not Pawns but Partners of God

It is easy to feel overwhelmed by the forces of nature, the power of other people, the unseen factors of coincidence, and fate that sometimes seems to dictate our destiny. Why one person suffers a loss, while another in similar circumstances seems to escape unscathed, is a question that has baffled observers of the human scene for as long as they have been observing. Some losses seem traceable to a cause: indulging in riotous living and imbibing detrimental substances, for example, will usually result in a loss of health. Even here, however, there are puzzling exceptions—centenarians who swear by a stiff drink or a strong cigar every day, and health-conscious people who die young or live with physical disabilities.

A friend of mine in Long Beach, California, has a beautiful home, a large boat docked at his backyard, a very comfortable standard of living, and a small manufacturing business. He has it all not because of his business, but because he happened to buy a good-sized piece of vacant land several decades ago just about the time the bulging city of Long Beach bulged in his direction.

Dr. Clinton Oaks, professor of business at Brigham Young University, has made a long-term study of students who came through that program and went on to success in the business world. He told me: "They come from all walks of life, all socio-economic strata. They have varied personalities and character traits. Some are outgoing and aggressive. Others are very mild mannered and introverted. Some have succeeded in small businesses; others with giant corporations. Their personal lives and habits varied greatly, but all these successful students had one thing in common—luck. They happened to be in the right place at the right time.

"Certainly their training was not wasted, and they were prepared to take advantage of the opportunities when those opportunities presented themselves," he observed. But Dr. Oaks is unusually candid and accurate in his assessment: there is a heavy dose of luck in every recipe for success.

Even in the area of human relationships, where we have a fairly high degree of control over our destiny, there seem to be forces at work beyond our conscious understanding. Some marriages and families seem so much happier than others. Outwardly they don't appear to be doing that much differently from each other, but the mixture of past experiences and present personalities mellows in some relationships and sours in others. Why does luck seem to smile on some and frown on others? More importantly, what can we do about it? Nothing, according to some notable philosophies and religions. The fates have set their faces and predetermined our destinies. Our only role in the experience is to enjoy or endure whatever they have decreed for us. This fatalistic outlook has drawn millions of passive supporters over the ages. Its disadvantages are obvious: we have no say over our own destiny. But weighed against these are aspects that appeal to the coward and the quitter in most of us. Under this system we have no choice, but we also have no responsibility. No one can ever point the finger at us and say, "You failed." We can pass the accusation on to the environment, coincidence, or fate.

This denial of responsibility for our own actions pops out in many curious situations. Recent research has shown a strong correlation between our mental and emotional states and our physical health. From the common cold to such dread scourges as cancer, there appears to be a psychosomatic element. We can, in a measure, think ourselves to health or sickness. Most of us have suspected that was the case for a long time. Some people seem to have both healthy minds and robust bodies, while others, as the saying goes, "enjoy poor health." This is not to say that every disease and disability can be cured by thinking happy thoughts. But the evidence is conclusive that the will to live and an unconquerable spirit send messages to our brain. The brain then dispenses exotic chemicals like interferon and interlukin II. Interferon is a pain- and stress-relieving chemical. Interlukin II triggers the body's immune system and bacteria- and virus-fighting capabilities. This would seem to be good news for everybody. You and I have an arsenal of weapons against the loss of good health built within us as standard equipment. We just need to exercise our will, our faith, and our optimism to activate it. Seems simple enough.

Yet when some of these findings were reported in the distinguished New England Journal of Medicine, probably the most respected medical journal in America, there was an outcry of opposition. It centered on the unsympathetic and uncharitable ramifications of this approach to healing. "These people are already dying of cancer or some other disease, and now you want to lay a guilt trip on them in addition to that by telling them their illness is their own fault," came the cry. That line of reasoning sounds humane on the surface, but it can be truly destructive as it eats its way into our spirit. The implications of that statement are best seen by looking at its opposite: that is to say that we have no control over our health, that we are totally at the mercy of medical practitioners, drug dispensers, and coincidence. It leaves the patient powerless.

The truth of the matter is that we are deeply indebted to fine doctors. We are grateful for miracle drugs and medical advances, but we also have a strong personal input into the equation of our own health and sickness. We are "capacitated," as the philosophers term it, in this realm of our lives.

The same philosophy describes every aspect of our lives. We are not autonomous and unaffected by the world around us and the will of God, but we can have input that will affect the outcome. I believe that the Lord does not expect us to be bowed down. He does not want us to be craven cowards, cringing in anticipation of the next blow that may fall on us. I don't believe he is pleased with the kind of defeatism that sometimes passes for humility and obedience, when we lie beaten down by life's losses and say, "It is the will of God that I am lying here, and I will lie here until the will of God picks me up." We are capacitated. We have been given a minute portion of the power of God and charged with the stewardship to use it. We may be so weakened and exhausted by life's losses and tribulations that we can barely move our lips in pleading and prayer, but at least that much we can do with our own power. The Prophet Joseph Smith quoted Christ's parable of the unjust judge who would not respond to the widow's importunings in the night. But she persisted until he was moved to grant her request. Joseph counseled the Saints to follow her example. He said, "Weary the Lord until he blesses you." So long as we have life, we can at least exercise that much power and faith on our own behalf.

But generally we can do much more than just weary the Lord. We can use our own physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual strength to recover from a loss. We can, as the saying goes, work as though everything depended on us and pray as though everything depended on God. Such a combination of our limited power and God's omnipotence and wisdom is the most powerful force in the universe. It will help us to avoid unnecessary losses in our lives and to recover from the necessary losses that will inevitably come to us.
