Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 16

Bend or Break

A few years ago I was rolling across Kansas in an old bus we had refitted to carry the traveling entertainment trio I was part of. The afternoon was warm, calm, and sunny. The freeway was new and smooth, and the country was as flat as the top of a pool table. It was a day for comfortable cruising. Suddenly, I heard a loud, metallic snap, then a screeching, whining sound. The steering wheel in my hand wrenched to the right, and the bus headed straight for the borrow pit. I wrestled it to a stop by the side of the freeway, got out, and looked underneath. A long leaf on the right rear mainspring had snapped and dropped the frame down onto the axle and the wheel. We jacked, blocked and tackled, chained, and prayed the thing together. We limped all the way to Atlanta, Georgia, arriving just in time to do our show.

I later asked the mechanic who fixed it, "What happened?" We had experienced mechanical breakdowns before, but there had always seemed to be a cause. We might have hit a big chuck hole, for instance, or neglected to replace a worn tire, or gradually burned a valve that needed to be replaced. But why would a perfectly healthy spring on a perfectly smooth road on a perfectly lovely day suddenly snap in two? "Metal fatigue," he said. "This spring was built to take only so many flexes. When it has done that, she's done."

My friend Don Budge, a civil engineer, tells me the same thing about roads. Parts of the freeway between Provo and Salt Lake City were beginning to break up after years of wear. I said, "It seems to me they should go on forever."

He said, "No, they are constructed to carry just so much tonnage. When enough vehicles roll over them to total up that tonnage, they will begin to break down and need to be repaired." The same principle holds true for virtually all mechanical things. Disconcerting as it may seem, those shiny, brand-new automobiles for which people pay a small fortune are beginning to fall apart even as they are driven off the showroom floor.

On the other hand, live things grow stronger through opposition and resistance. I don't know what the difference is between so-called "live" and "dead" materials. Molecules, electrons, and neutrinos are inorganic, but they appear to be some of the liveliest things in the universe. So I guess this demarcation between life and death is as good as any other (at least it is useful for our discussion here): dead things get weaker as they work through difficulties; live things get stronger.

When I was a senior in high school, I remember struggling to do three push-ups. Today, far beyond my physical prime of life, I do a daily sixty or so. The strength has come through years of struggling against resistance. If my muscles were not alive, I guess they would be suffering metal fatigue, and my arms would fall off one morning. There have been mornings when they felt as if they would, but so far it hasn't happened. Now, of course, as I grow older those push-ups will be harder to sustain. The body does grow weaker with age. But the growing strength will still take place in the realms of the mind and the spirit, and in character development. Furthermore, even the slowing down and slackening of physical strength is only temporary. The fading senses and feeble limbs will rise eternally reinvigorated in the resurrection. I believe the strength, skills, and abilities we develop here will be useful then. Certainly, willpower and control over the body's natural appetites and inertia are physical skills worth developing.

The living mind likewise grows by pushing through resistance. I once heard a highly educated man speak of a saying that is sometimes bandied about, "Learning is fun." The man commented, "When people say this, I can only think that either they have never really learned or they have never really had fun." This is true. Learning is satisfying, fulfilling, even joyful, but it is heavier than fun. It is pushing through the fog, constantly refurbishing the memory as it goes blank, straining to understand new concepts and new connections. It is a growing and strengthening exercise.

Recent research indicates that the brain itself may literally grow in size as learning takes place. Dr. Marian Diamond and her fellow researchers at the University of California at Berkeley found this phenomenon in rats, at least. As the rats participated in learning activities such as mazes and rewarded selections, their brains grew and got heavier. They did not add additional neurons (brain cells), but the interconnections between the cells grew and strengthened. Again, this is living matter growing and becoming stronger by overcoming resistance. You could drag a computer, even the big CRAY—the most powerful computer presently in the world—through mazes from now through the Millennium, and its memory chips would not grow the way yours and mine do. Living and nonliving things come out of work and struggle differently. The living things come out stronger; the nonliving things come out weaker.

It has been said that a mind stretched to encompass a new concept or idea never again returns to its former size. From all we can tell, the mind is in an eternal growth pattern. There may be a brief interlude during the final years of this physical existence when the recall functions of the brain may be rendered temporarily less functional. Disease or injury may have similar effects, but these physical impairments will pass and the mind will continue its eternal journey of growth and development. Eventually, we shall comprehend all the mysteries of God, all the knowledge and wisdom of all the universes. We shall comprehend facts, principles, logic, and science; besides these, we shall also comprehend all aesthetics, all subtleties and beauties. We shall understand and empathize with all the feelings of every creature. We shall understand the inner workings of energy and matter and the macrocosmos where edges and borders do not exist. We shall fathom the eternal past and the eternal future—the beginningless beginnings and endless endings. These concepts are beyond our present comprehension. Brigham Young said, "When I receive my body again, shall I cease my learnings? No, I shall then learn a thousand times more in a thousand times less time."

This is our destiny as living creatures, as eternal intelligences, and as children of God. If there was a time we could have chosen otherwise, it has long since passed. We are locked into life. We could commit suicide, but that would not stop our life. It would only transfer us to another sphere of existence. Apparently, the process of making progress is more difficult if we have not done the things we came here to do. We can commit spiritual suicide by choosing to follow Satan, but this will merely relegate us to realms of darkness. Our progress there will apparently be damned, but we will go on living. Our minds, our spirits, and even our bodies are eternal, and we cannot will it otherwise.

We can try to take what would appear to be the course of least resistance and imitate the inorganic world by growing weaker with each forced flex of our inner springs, as the old bus did. But in the long run, I think we will find this the harder course because it is not natural to us. As living things, our instinctive response is to grow stronger by overcoming obstacles and wading through resistance. We will do well to follow that natural tendency as we turn our losses into mental, emotional, and spiritual isometric exercises in our program of eternal growth.
