Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 17

Lessons Not to Learn from Loss

Gerald was a teenager when his parents got divorced. There is no easy divorce—at least not for the children. This one was as grisly as usual. Love between the two most important people in Gerald's life gradually turned to apathy, then to suspicion and distrust, and finally to dislike and maybe hatred. It tore him up. The sympathy he received from his peers, teachers, church advisors, and extended family members was well-intentioned, but less than helpful. It wasn't the sympathizers' fault, particularly. The problem developed because of the way Gerald read the messages he was getting from the outside world. To him they said that he was a special case. He had been put upon unfairly by his parents, by the world in general, and by God. He had suffered more than most, and therefore the Lord, the world, and whoever crossed his path owed him something.

Gerald made it his life's work to collect on that debt. If there were household chores and duties to be done, they could be done by others, because Gerald had already suffered enough. If there was homework assigned in school, it couldn't apply to him because his home had been torn apart. The priesthood and church assignments that would normally have fallen on him as an active member would now have to be done by others because God had already asked too much of him.

Before long the trials of life itself—the daily drudgeries and frequent frustrations that are the common lot of all mankind—were an unfair burden, in his opinion. So he tried to escape these through drinking and drugs. Gerald suffered a terrible loss in the breakup of his parents' marriage, no question about that. But by choosing to react to his loss the way he did, he magnified and personalized that tragedy until it took over his whole life. Within a few years, it cost him his life.

"For whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap." (D&C 6:33.)

"If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." (John 8:36.)

"Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things." (Matthew 25:21.)

"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.)

"Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness." (D&C 58:27.)

The scriptures are replete with declarations that we are the final decision makers about our lives and the direction they go. We will be pushed and prodded, acted upon, and influenced by the conditions we go through in this world. But we will never be overwhelmed or coerced by them, unless we choose to be. In all cases, our own decisions will tip the scales toward righteousness or unrighteousness, toward growth or stagnation, toward salvation or damnation. Nobody can make us do anything in this world that is of eternal consequence. We may be imposed upon, intimidated, even incarcerated. We may be forced to perform some labor. But in matters of the heart and mind—those things that dictate our destinies—we are masters of our own fates. When we give away this free agency, for whatever reason, we bring upon ourselves the most tragic kind of loss.

Victor Frankl has become perhaps the classic study of a man who refused to give up this most basic of human rights—the freedom to decide how he would respond to his environment. Everything else was taken from him by his cruel captors. As a Jewish intellectual in Nazi Germany, he was a danger to the barbaric philosophy and programs of the Third Reich. They could hardly preach their doctrine of the Teutonic, blond, blue-eyed master race with examples of sensitive and scholarly people like Dr. Frankl in their society, coming from supposedly inferior races. So they chose the simple-minded exercise of brute power that the wicked always do when they get the chance. They murdered Dr. Frankl's family in the gas chambers and incarcerated him in a concentration camp. They stripped from him and his fellow prisoners all outward dignity, made them work under conditions one would not inflict on a draft animal, and tried to reduce them to the subhuman species the Nazi philosophy claimed they were.

It did not work. Frankl bent beneath the whip and the chains; he had no choice. But he refused to let his captors enter his brilliant mind. They could break his body, but they could not break his spirit. They took his precious handwritten notes and drafts for his book and destroyed them. They made him work in the snow in rags and sleep on a hard, cold bed with a thin blanket. They beat his body, gave him slop for his mouth and degraded curses for his ears, and assailed his nostrils with the stench of human filth. But Dr. Frankl built an impenetrable barrier between his mind, heart, and spirit and the suffering his body was enduring. He mentally and spiritually insulated himself from his degrading environment and sadistic guards. He refused to let this evil seep in to canker and rot his soul. He continued to think of the beautiful days with his family and loved ones, to create powerful mental worlds in which his mind and spirit lived while his body suffered. He continued to exercise his mind with profound and infinite thoughts and logic so that it was not distracted totally by the squalor around it. This was not an easy thing; it was a constant battle. But no tyrant has ever invented a mental barbed wire that can enclose the minds of men and women like Victor Frankl.

Frankl was wiser than most. He also did not allow hatred and revenge to rot his mind. He continued to consider his captors as human beings, even though they did not give him the same consideration. Eventually Victor Frankl won his war. The Third Reich was defeated; he never was. When he was released at the end of the war, his notes had been long since destroyed, but his mind had not. With indomitable power, he pulled his ideas together again and wrote a book that has inspired millions, Man's Search for Meaning.

Most of us will not find ourselves in the extremes of almost total loss that Victor Frankl did. But no matter what our challenges, our heartbreaks, our setbacks, our losses, we cannot use them as an excuse to cave in, give up, and let outside influences direct our destiny. The examples of Dr. Frankl and others stand as beacons in the darkness of this philosophy. We may choose to draw the window shades of our soul against these beacons, but the light will still pierce the cracks and seep into our inner being. We will know that we have sold our birthright of free agency for the pottage of prisoners and slaves.

On the surface such a trade seems out of the question. Who in his right mind would trade freedom for bondage? But a closer inspection will show us that slavery does indeed have some advantages—or at least some elements that are perceived by some people as advantages. Prisoners do not have to worry where their next meal is coming from or what they will do with their days. They don't have to wonder where they will get money for clothing or necessities. Prisoners needn't ponder and plan about how they can fulfill their responsibilities; they have no responsibilities. Whatever planning is necessary will be done by those over them. Prisoners needn't worry about how to control their appetites and passions. There is little opportunity for them to channel their passions into antisocial acts. They needn't strain their brains on ways to improve their performance or develop new ideas or innovations. If prisoners merely keep their heads down and stay out of trouble, that is generally considered good behavior.

If a person's ultimate goal is security, it's hard to beat the walls and bars and predictability of a well-run prison. "Maximum Security" is about as secure as it gets in this life. If we choose to give our lives over to others, there are many people willing to take them—to relieve us of our burden of self-defined destiny and pay us for it in the coin of security and slavery. And, of course, the prison need not be made of steel and concrete. Very solid prisons can be fashioned of alcohol, drugs, and tobacco. Hobbles for the heart and soul can be fashioned from hatred, envy, and pride. In terms of our discussion here, making excuses, blaming others, disavowing responsibility for our own actions because we have suffered a loss, and other habits weave, strand by strand, a strong tether rope that can stake us to the ground securely and stop our progress in its tracks.

Society today seems largely geared to shifting responsibility. The first response of many people on suffering any kind of setback seems to be not "How can I learn and develop from this loss?" but "Whom can I blame it on?" "Whom can I sue?" "How can I transfer the responsibility for this to somebody else and get money from them?"

I am not suggesting that we ignore issues of legitimate liability on the part of people who may be responsible for our loss. I'm talking about the reckless and random litigation of our day, which has been called "the age of the suers." This kind of action, no matter how much money the complainer and his lawyer end up with, is a step into slavery.

America's genius for technological innovation and invention is in jeopardy today. One of the reasons is that people demand that every new product or technique be 100 percent safe. Any loss is immediately blamed on the inventor or the innovator. This chilling climate is not conducive to new ideas and progress. Safety and security become the highest priorities.

We all lived in a safe society at one time. There was no sickness; there were no setbacks. There was no danger, no death, and no loss. But there was also no progress beyond a certain point. So a council was called to decide how to help the people of that realm continue their progression. One of the leaders at that council attempted to sell a program of total security, which is merely a synonym for slavery. He said, "I will take these spirits down to an earth, run them through their exercises, and force them to return. Not one soul shall be lost, and because I shall do it, I shall receive all the glory." On its own terms that was a fair arrangement. If he was to make all the decisions and accept all the responsibility, he probably deserved whatever glory was given in the end. One-third of the millions of people at the council felt so disposed and followed him.

But then arose the Savior of mankind and, on behalf of his brothers and sisters, upheld the Father's plan. He explained that we would take responsibility for our own acts. When we stumbled and sinned, he would pay the price for us by the sacrifice of his own godly life. Those under this program would be free to choose good or evil and would take the responsibility for their choices and the actions that followed them. They would make mistakes, but if they called upon his name, repented of their sins, and did all in their power to make things right, he would make up the difference. In this program the Christ said he would not take the glory but would give the glory unto the Father. And what is this glory? "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man," the Lord said. (Moses 1:39.)

It is not in the hollow shouting of hallelujahs that God is glorified, but in the growth, perfection, immortality, and eternal life of his children. When we shift responsibility for our lives to anyone else because of losses we may suffer (or for any other reason), we block our own progress, and we deny to God the glory that would rightly be his through our growth. The healthy and proper response to loss is to renew our efforts and exertions to endure its pain, overcome its problems, and use the strength we derive to continue our progress toward godhood.
