Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Traveling Tips

Here are some suggested steps to help you move through the third phase of your journey in overcoming your loss:

Bring strength into your mind and spirit by reading biographies of people who have overcome obstacles. There may be a tendency to compare their problems with yours, but try to avoid this. It can be discouraging to feel that they overcame huge problems while you are still struggling to come back from apparently smaller ones. It is not useful to compare people—a bracing challenge for one might be an almost overwhelming task to someone else. The reason for reading these life stories is not to compare but to take strength from other people's struggles and tips from their techniques.

Build your strength by doing something difficult every day. Then be sure to reward yourself for having done it. Some people describe this as doing something hard and something easy every day. I was speaking to a group on this subject once, and a man came up afterwards and enthusiastically said, "I do that. I do something hard and something easy every day. The hard thing I do is to get out of bed; the easy thing I do is to go back to bed." He had the principle down, I guess, but a little more imagination might have enriched his program.

Physical therapists say not to put too much strain on a muscle that is already in tension. A little bit of additional pressure can gradually build up the muscle strength, but too much while the muscle is under stress can do damage. The same principle applies in times of loss. Don't try to move any mountains; just scoop a shovelful or two and then reward yourself for the additional effort. A little bit of progress on cleaning your home or yard, doing part of a project you have been meaning to get to, writing your personal history, or helping a neighbor—these additional efforts in your life can pay marvelous dividends in developing the strength you need to overcome your loss.

Expand the number and the use of optimistic words in your vocabulary and limit the negative ones. Jesus said that we would be judged by every word that comes out of our mouths. Part of that judgment will come in the last days, when those who are affected by our words offer testimony, and the Great Judge of us all makes his decisions. But a big part of that judgment is occurring every day—not by others, but by ourselves. We hear our own words, and our unconscious mind reacts to them by trying to fulfill the prophecies we have promised in our words. If we say we are doing fine, our unconscious mind tries to make that the case. If we say things are looking up, our mind takes this as a cue and finds evidence to prove that point. And, of course, the opposite is also true. If we deal in negatives, our mind will search for ways to make them come to pass. Some people have succeeded in changing their negative thought patterns by putting an elastic band on their wrist. Whenever they slip and say something negative, they say, "Stop it," and snap the band against their wrist. I personally prefer rewards for good behavior over punishment for mistakes, but this is an effective way to call attention to negative words and mental sets that may be draining your strength.

Feel free to let your mind go back to the good times before your loss. There is nothing hidden or forbidden back there, and the sooner your mind finds that out, the less it will be piqued by curiosity and constantly wanting to return to that time.

Practice taking control of your body. Try the relaxation technique mentioned earlier in this book of tensing and then relaxing all the muscle groups in your body. Now, in this relaxed state, say to yourself a word—perhaps the word "relax" itself. Associate this word with your present physical feelings of relaxation and rest. Practice this until merely the suggestion of the word can bring about this relaxed state of your body. Then in the future as you feel the tension and fear that sometimes come with loss, say to yourself, "Relax," and remember this quiet, peaceful, and pleasant state you are in right now.

Mental control can also help on the opposite end of the spectrum, when your body is so groggy and lazy it won't respond. Practice having your mind tell a muscle to move, and then consciously move it. Fasting for a day is a great help in developing these powers of the mind.

Look back at how far you have come, how much you have already endured, and take confidence and solace from it.

Study the plan of salvation and consider it anew from its beginningless beginnings to its endless end in light of your new condition of loss.

Look for true symbolism and metaphor in the world about you. Often plants and animal species lose certain traits and even members of their kind in order to strengthen the strain and help them focus and survive. Sometimes we need to drop certain activities or possessions in order to help us better focus on the truly important things in our lives.

Notice your own physical, mental, and emotional growth. It has always come through struggle and frequently through pain. If we did not put some stress on our systems, they would never grow. That seems to be an immutable law of life.

Make a list of the character attributes in which you are now stronger because of your loss. Make a list of those in which you are not now stronger but could become stronger because of your loss. These could include such traits as understanding, empathy, perseverance, courage. These can all be strengthened because of what you have gone through and overcome.

Set out a one-thousand-year goal plan. We talk of eternity, but most of us have time on our hands after a few hours or a few days on our own resources. Eternity is truly beyond our comprehension, but a thousand years is encompassed in world history. So ask yourself, what things would you be doing now to accomplish goals sometime within the next millennium? Not many people think this way, although it is a very productive exercise. But having gone through a period of loss and reevaluation, you will find this a good time to strengthen your planning and goal-setting ability.

Part of the productivity of thinking in such a long perspective is the "intimations of immortality" it gives us, to borrow the title of William Wordsworth's poem. The longer we can stretch our perspective, the more our present big and little losses and setbacks assume their proper importance. They are important, in that they help to set our direction and mold our character. But they are not the ultimate determinants of our destiny. We can overcome them and use them as stepping stones on our upward, eternal journey toward godhood and complete happiness.
