Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 18

Temporary Loss, Eternal Gain

I was once fighting forest fires in the Hell's Canyon area of Idaho. We were exhausted from fighting one fire and were trying to catch a few winks of sleep on the bus taking us to the next fire. We hoped it would not be as rugged a climb as the last one. The bus stopped, and we all looked out the windows. We were heartened to see that the fire was only a few miles away on the face of the mountain. But then we got off the bus, walked to the edge of the road, and groaned. The fire was close, all right, but between us and it lay a deep canyon that dropped clear to the Salmon River. We would have to descend for miles through underbrush and then climb back up again to get to our destination. Forest fires don't wait. There was no alternative but to grab our tools and our packs and set off. Soon we were in dense growth and could not see much of where we had been or where we were going. But we did know one thing—every step was taking us down. We were losing altitude that we would later have to regain by puffing up the other side of the canyon. We did have one advantage: we had seen the big picture. We knew where we were heading, and that if we persevered we would eventually regain this lost altitude and arrive at our destination.

Life is sometimes like that. We know that the ultimate direction for man is upward, eternally upward—that the goal is godhood. But sometimes, encompassed about by the undergrowth, weeds, and trees of this temporary world situation, we can lose track of where we are going, particularly if we seem to be losing ground with every step, or if we fall off a cliff and lie bruised and bleeding at the bottom.

This life is full of strange and devious paths that can lead us astray. Evil can sometimes appear to be good. Long-term failure can disguise itself as temporary success. Even the principle of growth and development can be twisted into a cruel practical joke by life. Just ask Richard and Maile Rowley. They, like all good parents, longed to see their baby son grow, and grow he did. But then they found out at what a terrible cost. For as his arms and legs and then his trunk began to stretch out, they created the equivalent of bare wires along his nervous system. Normally, there is a myelin shield that protects and insulates the nerves and keeps their messages traveling along the tracks to the voluntary muscles. Their son had had such a shield over his nerves perfectly intact when he was born. His mother's body had created the material for that shield and put it safely in place for her baby. But for some reason unknown to science, David's body did not continue to extend the shield. His growing limbs soon broke through the original covering he started out with as a baby and exposed the open nerves. Richard and Maile waited anxiously for him to begin walking. A little late, he did, but there was something not quite right about his walk. Instead of growing stronger and more coordinated as he grew, he seemed to be experiencing the opposite. The longer and larger his limbs, his neck, and then his trunk grew, the weaker and more useless they became.

For eleven years Richard and Maile sought out the best medical minds of the country for an answer to this cruel double-cross on the principle of growth. Doctors guessed polio, multiple sclerosis, and Lou Gehrig's disease of creeping paralysis. Finally, at the Mayo Clinic they discovered the correct diagnosis—the degenerating myelin shield on his nerves. But there was nothing they could do. For another eleven long years, Richard and Maile prayed and watched their son's unconquerable spirit fight a losing battle against the enemy within. David never quit. On crutches, in braces, in a wheelchair, and finally confined to his bed, he battled on. His mind stood out in stark contrast to his body. It continued to grow stronger as his body grew weaker. He graduated from high school and college and enrolled in post-graduate studies. By then he needed a brace just to hold his head up, and he tapped out his lessons with a pencil held in his teeth.

One day David called his family and his close friends about him. He laughed and joked with each one of them. Then he gave each one a long and loving look. He breathed out one last gentle breath and was dead. Richard was deeply grieved, but Maile was inconsolable. "Why? Why in those years would God not answer our prayers?" she cried. "If there is a God, why can't he, or why won't he, help us?" Every day for three months Richard took his heartbroken wife to David's grave, where she poured out again and again her questions and her grief.

There was apparently no answer. David's earthly progress had been into paralysis. His forward steps had been ever downward, and finally into death. Little by little he had lost his powers, and finally lost life itself—or so it seemed to his sorrowing mother. With a pierced heart that only a mother can feel at the death of her child, Maile wept over her son's tombstone even as Mary wept at the base of the cross bearing her crucified son.

But then one morning in the third month, David's voice came into his mother's mind at the grave. He said, "Mother, don't grieve. I am well. I came to the earth to receive a body, and I received one. I came to increase my knowledge and intelligence. This I have done. Now I have taken the next step in my journey. I am learning and growing in knowledge and wisdom. I am happy. Please let me see you be happy too."

Maile got up from her knees a new woman. She saw a beautiful world around her. She took the hand of her strong and loving husband, and they went home in peace at last. David was not dead. His life was not a tragedy. His creeping paralysis had not been a slow descent into death, but another way of making progress upward into life eternal. He had, in a sense, gone downhill, even as we had descended the mountain in pursuit of the forest fire. But he, like us, had been pursuing a goal. The temporary trees and brush of this life had obscured the goal for a time in Maile's eyes, but now she too saw it clearly. This knowledge of the journey we are making and of our ultimate destination makes loss in this life bearable, and even joyful. Finding joy in loss is not an exercise in masochism. It is a result of gaining the correct perspective on our lives. The longer our view, the more we can put our losses into proper perspective.

There is a steep hill behind our house. On most mornings, I jog up that hill. It is a killer—some mornings an almost insurmountable obstacle. I'm always puffing by the time I get to the top. But I often fly in an airplane over that same hill on my way to a presentation of some kind. From 20,000 feet up, that hill is a piece of cake. It's tucked into the foothills of the mighty Wasatch Range, and I can barely make it out. From the satellite photos of earth I've seen, I can't find my hill at all. It disappears into the topography. Thus it is with the losses in our lives. Standing close to them, we find them almost overwhelming. But placed in the perspective of our eternal journey, they turn from impassable obstacles to stepping stones along our path of progress.

It might be well to review this path called eternal progression. Life eternal is directly linked to a correct knowledge of God and his creations. Jesus told his disciples as part of his great, high priestly prayer in the seventeenth chapter of John, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

Several important attributes of God relate to loss in our lives. The first is to know that God is omnipotent. He could protect and insulate us from any loss. He could miraculously snatch us out of harm's way whenever we were threatened. He could preserve the lives of all our loved ones indefinitely. He could whisper to us the right stocks to buy and business moves to make so we could be blessed materially. He could stop harmful bacteria and viruses in their tracks. They are under his control. He could make us strong and physically attractive. He could dry all our tears, or, easier yet, structure our lives so there was never an occasion to cry. He has the power to do all this because he is omnipotent.

But God is also omniscient. He has all knowledge and wisdom. His wisdom tells him that a pampered existence would not be good for his beloved children. We would never grow, develop, and fulfill our potential. So, in his wisdom, he refrains from overprotectiveness lest he limit growth. More than anything, God wants us to become as he is. This is his work and his glory. He knows we have this potential. He inspired his prophet Lorenzo Snow to write, "As man is, God once was. As God is, man may become."

To become gods is our ultimate goal and destiny. This knowledge should inspire us with a greater awareness of our potential. Surely, to attain such a state of exaltation requires a long and exacting training course. We delude ourselves if we expect to attain the character of godhood through shortcuts or quick courses. The lessons of eternal life must be learned one by one. The godlike traits must not only be developed, but also perfected. These traits include those enumerated by the Christ in his immortal Sermon on the Mount and repeated to the Nephites at Bountiful.

"Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost. . . . And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God." (3 Nephi 12:3-8.)

None of these characteristics, nor the others expounded and exemplified in the Lord's ministry, are cerebral exercises. They are matters of the heart at least as much as the head. They are the challenging curriculum of the academy of life, and they can be learned only by living through the experiences that teach them. Only those who have been touched by poverty of the spirit feel a need to search out the Christ. We can never know the blessings that can come with mourning until we have mourned. Only those who have been tempted by and overcome this world's opportunities for puffing up our pride and coddling our vanity can know the true meaning of meekness. Until we have suffered some sense of spiritual starvation, we are not ready to truly hunger and thirst after righteousness. And until we approach the Lord's table with that depth of hunger, we will never be filled with the Holy Ghost sufficiently to purify our hearts and make us worthy and able to see God. This kind of learning comes only through living.

The Apostle Peter gives a similar curriculum. Like the Beatitudes, and like every effective learning program, the lessons build upon each other. So Peter said, "Add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity." (2 Peter 1:5-7.)

Life's experiences are irreplaceable in learning these lessons and developing and perfecting our characters. They are also indispensable in the second phase of the learning process, which is testing to see whether we have achieved, internalized, and retained the characteristics we were sent here to develop. How can we know whether we have, in fact, acquired the virtue of meekness if we are never tested with the temptation of pride? How shall we know if we have become self-satisfied and ceased to hunger after the spirit of the Lord unless we are constantly faced with the temptation to turn away from him? And as the Book of Mormon often points out, it is not enough to have obtained a state of grace in these virtues. We must retain that state as well. Alma asked this pointed question: "I say unto you, my brethren, if ye have experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:26.)

So our lives continue to be a succession of learning experiences, tests, and bracing challenges and opposition to keep us growing, progressing, and moving up that strait and narrow path toward godhood. The degree of incline of the upward path is calibrated to the strength of the pilgrim on it. It is not made easy for any traveler, but neither is it impossible.

But why must this academy of eternal life be a boarding school? Why not some correspondence course we could study while we continue to live in our heavenly home? Parents know at least one of the reasons why. "Hang up your clothes and make your bed. Eat your vegetables and brush your teeth. Say, 'Heavenly Father, I thank thee for . . . '" we teach our children when they are tiny. "Make the most of your time and opportunities. Serve others. Search the scriptures. Be faithful in your church duties. Seek the Lord's Spirit and confirmation in all that you do," we counsel them when they are older. In most cases they respond to counsel and guidance and grow into responsible adults. But never, until they leave home, do they, or we, know for certain whether they have internalized the lessons of youth. Only then do the truths come crashing down: if I don't hang up my clothes and do the dishes, no one else will. The car does not automatically fill its tank with gas. To have a friend is to be a friend. I have no special claim on the world's affection, as I did in my family just because of who I am. Anything I truly possess I will have to earn by my own efforts. I am free to do evil or good, but I am not free to escape the consequences of my actions. And the great secret of life: "men are, that they might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25), and joy comes from obeying the Lord and enduring to the end.

We can never know as children whether we have in fact learned and internalized these truths until we have the independence of action to be tested. The same principle holds true in our relationship with our heavenly parents. Under their direct supervision, it was easy to be good, or at least not bad. But our growth was limited in this greenhouse environment. We needed the bracing challenges of outdoors to test our strength and continue our development, so we are here. A veil has been temporarily drawn between that pre-earthly life and this one, and another veil between this and the life to come. These veils are semipermeable, and messengers do sometimes travel between the premortal, postmortal, and present existences. But we do not associate with immortal beings with the ease and frequency we once knew and will one day know again.

This separation and isolation from our heavenly home and family can be confusing, frightening, and discouraging. The apostles of Jesus had these feelings as he was about to leave them. They had experienced a glimmer of the eternities when they had walked and talked with the Lord. Now they wondered how they could survive without his constant companionship. He consoled them with these words as he left, "And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever." (John 14:16.)

The other comforter of which the Christ spoke was the third member of the Godhead, the Holy Ghost. His function is to enlighten, strengthen, and comfort us while we are on our earthly journey here, and to guide us back to our heavenly home. The Holy Ghost may not be visible to our earthly eyes, but the effects of his ministry are obvious to all who have their senses attuned to spiritual things. In the case of the apostles, the Holy Spirit turned them from a dispirited and discouraged group of former followers to a courageous quorum of apostles and ambassadors for Jesus Christ. Thereafter, they fearlessly faced and overcame every obstacle, including martyrdom. Nothing in this world could crush their mighty spirits.

And so it can be with us if we follow their example. We can overcome every test and every trial set before us. All our losses can be eventual gains. Losses of the goods and glories of this world will not crush our spirits, for we will see them in their proper perspective. Losses of mobility and mental skills through physical and mental handicaps will not destroy us, for these shall eventually be restored to us. The loss of loved ones will not be inconsolable because we will carry with us the promise of a future reunion followed by an inseparable eternity.

Someday when pain is a thing of the past, we will look back from our heavenly home and understand more perfectly. We will see why losses came to us. Until that time, much of what we know will be whispered to us by the Holy Ghost. When it is in our best interest, he will give us the knowledge we need. When our knowing too much too soon would hinder our eternal progress, that knowledge will be withheld until the proper time. And throughout our journey, the Spirit will whisper comfort to us in our losses and bring us the "peace of God, which passeth all understanding." (Philippians 4:7.)
