Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 19

Love, Loss, and the Human Predicament

For a year the small metal identification plate at the head of the grave read simply "Dayna Harris." There was no headstone. It wasn't a question of expense; Dayna's parents are financially well off. It was a problem of pain. Her parents, and particularly her mother, Joy, had a hard time facing the additional pain that picking out a headstone would bring them.

Joy Harris is aptly named. She loves life and feels it with passion. She loves her husband and her children. When her daughter Dayna died of cancer of the brain, the experience gashed a deep wound in Joy's heart that will be a long time healing. She aches and agonizes over the loss of her daughter more than she would if she were a less loving and less sensitive person. Is her deep loving worth the pain it causes her?

On another street in our town lives a man struggling with the same question. We'll call him Glen. The big cottonwood trees in his front yard tower over the house and protect it from travelers and trespassers. The front windows are small and curtained. There is no welcoming and protecting front porch for visitors—only a doorway cut in the brick facing, with a glass storm door sealing out the elements and the sounds outside and a heavy oak door to protect the privacy within. Few people knock on that intimidating door. Glen has made it known he wants it that way. Inside, he and his wife lead a rather solitary existence. He's not a hermit; he works and gets about town as much as he needs to. But his soul, like his house, is sealed off as much as possible from the rest of humanity.

Many years ago some remarks and actions of others offended Glen. He decided people weren't worth the pain they caused, so he shut most of them out of his life. He will not be stabbed in the heart by the death of a child because he has no children. He won't feel the pain and loss of a friend because he has carefully avoided making emotional commitments to others. His marriage appears to be more an accommodation than a deep love affair. Thus has Glen tried to protect himself from the human predicament.

Philosophers, theologians, and observers from a number of fields have meditated on this predicament. It has been defined from a variety of directions depending on the background of the definer. The most workable definition I have ever read of the human predicament came from Sydney Harris. He said that our problem stems from our human need to love. We must love and be loved or we are something less than human. Yet it is the nature of human life to have those things we love taken from us sooner or later. This is the human predicament.

It has been said that a problem well defined is a problem half solved. Let's look at Harris's definition of the human predicament and see what answers spring from it. Then we'll see if we can add to the definition and thereby find some solutions.

As Harris accurately points out, to be human is to love. We have an inborn tendency to seek out the love and association of each other. Most of what motivates us in life has to do with our relationships with others—everything from desiring the approval of peers to the romantic love that the ballads say makes the world go round; to the deep, altruistic, selfless love in which we try to emulate the fathomless love of Christ. The ancient Greeks had a different word for each of these kinds of love. Eros is romantic love; philos is the brotherly love in which we hold dear those who are near to us and similar to us in family, culture, habits, or tastes. The highest form of love, agape, is the unselfish, godlike love that demands nothing in return, that can love even its enemies, and that seeks only to bless everything with which it comes in contact.

In terms of the human predicament, these definitions are interesting. Most of us are capable of eros. We can respond to attractive people who flatter our egos and self-image, and may stir up our hormones. Even the most self-centered people seem capable of responding to this sort of relationship, at least until they grow tired of each other.

The second form of love, philos, is likewise not far above our human capabilities. It is not too hard to love those who are like us—whose skin color, religious beliefs, social habits, likes, dislikes, tastes, and place of residence are similar to our own. Birds of a feather do tend to flock together because they easily understand and empathize with one another. There is no great strain in those relationships.

But agape is the love that can be smitten on one cheek and immediately turn the other, the love that can "bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Matthew 5:44.) This kind of love is a lifetime quest for the best of people. And, interestingly, those who achieve it, or part of it, are those we describe in the most human of terms. We say that such a person is a great human being, a humanitarian, a tribute to the human race. Apparently, the more love we can develop, the more human we are.

And in terms of the human predicament, the more love we develop, the more vulnerable we are to the pain of loss. The person bound up in his own self-love misses most of the joys of this life, but he is in a sense at least a self-contained package. He often seems oblivious to the opinions or the suffering of anyone but himself. The person functioning on the level of brotherly love is vulnerable to the opinions and response of those he has chosen to love, but since he has shut out or disdained most of humanity, he is not easily hurt by what they may or may not do or think about him.

To the person committed to the deep, Christlike love of agape—the love that Paul and Moroni call charity—the deepest, richest treasures of the human experience are offered. Likewise, the possibilities for pain are everywhere. No living thing, not even the earth itself, can suffer without this person's suffering also, if he or she is aware of it. The epitome of this love was demonstrated by Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane. Here he felt the pain of the sins of every person who ever lived or ever will live. We are not capable of that depth of love yet. That is humanness taken to its ultimate destiny, which is godhood. But we can and should strive to emulate that Christlike love among one another.

What does that do to the human predicament? It raises the ante to infinite proportions in the game of life. To cut ourselves off from love is to save ourselves from much of the pain of this world, but at the cost of all that makes us truly human. To open ourselves up to love is to make ourselves vulnerable to the deepest pains the human heart can experience—to have those things and people we love ripped from us. Eventually, we are certain it will happen. Either we shall be taken from this life, or they shall. Eventually we will give up our earthly possessions, our youthful vigor, our friends and family. Either we shall die young or watch as even our senses are taken from us and we pass away, as Shakespeare said, "sans [without] teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything."

The human predicament has no solution in human terms. Some of the frustration and attendant ills of this world result from that fact. We have tried to solve eternal problems from a human, this-world perspective. In politics Karl Marx called religion an opiate and focused his governmental theories on this world alone in materialism. The result for those who have adopted his theories has been an insatiable hunger for land and power. And why not? If materialism is your god, the more wealth you can preside over, the closer you are to your heaven. In our own country we have focused on what we call the good life. We have defined it as more material possessions, more freedom from responsibility, more pleasures and luxuries, fewer constraints. The result has been a terrible loss of the virtues that have always sustained America. We live in a selfish and hedonistic society that would have shocked those who originally defined the government and culture of America. Evaluating our personal lives by the measuring stick of mortality alone has sent us on an endless quest for comforts, youth, physical beauty, sensual gratification, and the satisfying of earthly appetites. When we find that these things are torn from us, we can become bitter at life.

The only answer to the human predicament lies beyond the human condition. We need to understand that it is not the human sphere but heaven that is our ultimate goal and destination—that whatever price we pay in pain to develop deeper love is well worth the sacrifice. Only through such sacrifice do we develop godlike traits. When we understand and practice these things, we see that the predicament is only temporary. It is a test, a training ground for us. Ultimately, all that we have suffered and sacrificed will be worth the price, and those loved ones and loved things we have lost shall be returned to us.
