Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 20

Competition Creates Losses

My son Benjamin came thundering down the home stretch on his way to winning his sixth-grade cross-country race. "Way to go, Benji! Pour it on! Finish strong!" I shouted from the sidelines. He gave it his best kick for my benefit and burst across the finish line a winner. What did it matter if there were forty-seven winners in front of him?

With a house full of active children, we are always involved in some kind of contest, from the Cub Scout pinewood derby to the state cross-country championship. We win some, and we lose some. I have three standard questions every time one of our children comes from a competition. The questions come in order of importance, and I prefer them answered in order: "Were you a good sport? Did you have a good time? Did you win?" We can always get two out of three—hopefully, the most important first two. Competition in our lives needs to be under control.

I'm convinced that we often suffer loss in our lives unnecessarily because we create competitions where they don't need to exist. Competition generally means that someone will win and someone, usually a lot of someones, will lose. We compete in school, on the job, in social settings, and even in the home. We even try to compete with the forces of nature, the laws of chance, and, I suspect, with the will of the Lord.

Competition has its place in life. It can be stimulating and entertaining to watch people who have prepared themselves mentally or physically for a contest match their skills against one another. Competition may enhance the performance of the competitors and raise the performance standards of the activity in which they are competing. From sandlot baseball games to the Olympics, from an after-dinner game of Chinese checkers to the grand masters' chess tournaments, competition can be a useful diversion.

But contests and competition at any level need to be kept securely within their proper bounds. We should not confuse winning with worth. Some of the saddest stories in sports are of people who have not made that distinction. Inevitably, they found that their speed, strength, and coordination slipped with age, and they were replaced by new champions. If their self-worth was tied with their blue ribbons, they had little left for their life's work. Their confidence faded with the fading cheers of the crowd. We need to remember that running faster, jumping higher, making more touchdowns or baskets, or winning more scholarships, accolades, and honors is not a measure of our success or failure as human beings. Drive, discipline, and setting high standards for ourselves can be very valuable, but the actual winning of plaudits is far too arbitrary and temporary for us to build our foundation upon. These shifting sands are too easily washed away by the winds and waves of chance, coincidence, and public opinion.

This counsel may not apply directly to most of us, since few actually wear the laurel crown of victory. But millions of us these days identify with the competitors. Some people see it as a mark of degeneracy in our culture that twenty-two people play on a football field and fifty thousand sit watching in the stands. The observers' exercise is primarily with the vocal cords to holler and the elbow to stuff hot dogs into the mouth. What kind of comment is it on our culture when some people's greatest claim to self-worth seems to be that a team from a city they happen to live in wins a game?

But there is a more direct way in which the concept of contests affects us all, every day of our lives. That is, we tend to set up competitions and contests where none need to exist. Alfie Kohn, a professor at Tufts University, has written a book titled No Contest. He confronts head-on our widely held assumption that competition is the natural order of things in the world. In the minds of many people, this is throwing mom's apple pie on the flag. Every red-blooded American knows that "it's a jungle out there," "survival of the fittest," "nice guys finish last."

It isn't so, according to Kohn's studies. The basis of success in virtually every field of endeavor—human, animal, and plant—is not competition. It is cooperation. Nobody can survive alone, and the more we adopt a philosophy that someone must lose in order for us to win, the more we lose. We bring undue pressure upon ourselves to perform. We alienate those who could help us. We encourage opposition from those who ought not to oppose us. Kohn scores some telling points. Even in the most dog-eat-dog marketing contests in business, people within the organization have to cooperate or they cannot be competitive. The competing businesses have to cooperate or they will soon find themselves facing hostility from government and from their own public. And, at more basic levels, every person must eventually cooperate if this planet is to be habitable. We delude ourselves when we think life is a competition. It is more than anything a cooperation.

The same is true in our personal lives. When we see everything in a competitive mode, it becomes win/lose. For us to win, something or somebody else must lose. To experience the good life, we must gather about us some predetermined or vaguely assumed quantity of possessions. If we don't, we have lost in this contest of life. We see our human relationships as win/lose. For example, if our children don't do what we want them to, they win and we lose. We begin to throw out challenges indiscriminately to the whole environment. We must win over illness, depression, handicaps. Even the cosmos itself can be a battleground if we take this mental set to its furthest extreme. We begin to see ourselves, in a sense, in competition with God himself. If we can just accumulate enough good works, stars on the forehead, and spiritual rewards for work well done, we can win the celestial contest. The prize is the title to a fine mansion and a lovely estate in the eternal realms. On the other hand, if we fall short we will lose in this cosmic competition.

These competitive, win/lose attitudes can wear us down to the nub, especially as we find that we can't win them all. We will also find, as is the case in all competitions, that the ecstasy of victory doesn't compensate for the agony of defeat. I have won a few games and lost a few on the fields of athletic endeavor. I have won some scholarships and failed to reach some academic goals. I have won some fine jobs, and I have lost some opportunities. Losing is always more pain than winning is pleasure.

There may be times when the win/lose situation is set up for us and there isn't much we can do about it. But as much as possible we should minimize those conditions and aim for win/win situations. In terms of our material blessings, rather than setting some standard of income or net worth, like a high jumper sets his bar at a certain height, why don't we see what we can gain from our present financial situation? Setting internal goals is fine, but trying to keep up with the Joneses or even the so-called American lifestyle adds pressure and the potential for loss. We needn't bring this loss upon ourselves. There will always be somebody richer than we are, and most people in America can look around the world and see poorer people. Further, as we all know in our more rational moments, there are great lessons to be learned from struggle and economic hardship. Why call those loss? Why not call them another form of winning?

The same is true of our health and well-being. If we define perfect physical conditioning as winning, and everything short of that as losing, we will inevitably lose. The bacteria, the viruses, the accidents and physical misfortunes of the world will win. Instead, we should suck the sting of loss out of our physical handicaps. Jack Nelson, a friend of mine, was a fine athlete in high school. Just before graduation he was stricken with a disease that left his legs paralyzed. Most people would have seen this as a loss of mobility. It was, but Jack saw it as a win for wisdom. He continued to develop his fine mind and his charismatic personality. He was voted one of the preferred men on campus at college. He got his bachelor's degree and advanced degrees. He is a fine writer and teacher, a great father, a bishop, and an inspiration to all of us who know him. Not only does Jack win, but he also makes winners out of all his friends. We win just by being around him.

I believe that the cosmic win/lose battle for exaltation does not exist either, except in our minds. Fortunately for us, God is not a scorekeeper waiting to see whether we tallied enough points to win the game of life. The concept of loss does exist in the eternal economy—it is possible to lose blessings, lose membership, lose promised rewards. But loss is not the basis on which the Lord's system operates. The Lord does not participate in competition. He is cooperating with us, not competing against us. When we win he wins, and when we lose he loses. It is his work and glory to bring to pass our immortality and eternal life.

Satan would have us believe that he is a competitor in the contest, but he is not. He is at best an outside heckler. If we should lose all and end up in his dominions, it would not be a win for him. His abode is a howling anarchy of miserable souls in which there is no glory, no power, no dominion. Increasing the population of hell does not add to Satan's glory.

Ultimately, life is a win/win, not a win/lose proposition. The fewer competitions and the more cooperations we establish in our lives here, the happier we will be, and the fewer losses we will suffer. We will make more progress on our own eternal journey and better assist those about us on their way. We will see, as the Apostle Paul described, that the journey of eternal life is a different kind of race. Paul wrote that in earthly races "one receiveth the prize," but that in the eternal race all can win. So let us work on winning and forget loss as an alternative.
