Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 21

Self-Inflicted Loss

His watery eyes flicked constantly back and forth. His red eyelids blinked often, not so much to clear his sight as to clear his mind. At least that was the impression he gave me. He talked quite rapidly, but there were frequent pauses as he gathered his thoughts. His fingers rubbed the broom in his hand as he spoke. His face was deeply lined and his shoulders hunched. He coughed frequently. "I once owned a thriving electrical contracting business," he said. "I had a beautiful wife, a lovely family, a fine home, and the respect of my colleagues, my fellow church members, and the people in our community. I was healthy and could work long hours without getting tired. One reason I was so successful as an electrical contractor was my virtually photographic memory. I could glance at the schematic for a complicated electrical job, go to work, and never have to look back at it again. I could quote long passages of poetry and prose without effort. I had everything; maybe I had too much.

"I thought some of the thrills of life were passing me by, so I started to look for them in alcohol and drugs. One thing led to another until one morning I woke up literally facedown in the gutter on the waterfronts of Oakland, California. The truth slowly seeped into my brain that morning that I was a bum. I had lost everything. My business was bankrupt—my house, property, and reputation all gone. My wife had divorced me for very good reasons and taken the children with her. My health was shot, and my brain was foggy. I had nothing. I lifted up my head, laid it on the side of that gutter, and said, 'I can't get any lower than this.'"

The causes for loss in this world are too many and too varied for us to ever discover them all. Diseases that strike one person and not another, the domino effect that the failure of one business can have on others, the inevitable loss of faculties that comes with age, the coincidence that can bring two cars to a point of impact, the built-in hazards of a technological society, random bolts of lightning, and the aimless twists and turns of tornadoes are all part of the win-and-lose lottery we buy into when we are born into this world. They are often hard to endure at the time and hard to understand even in retrospect. We just get through them.

But there is one form of loss that brings with it not only grief, sadness, and bereavement but often guilt, remorse, and self-condemnation. This is the self-inflicted loss we bring on through our own sins and stupidity. I am not speaking of poor judgment, but of wrong things we do even though we know better.

This is a sensitive area studded with possibilities for misinterpretation. In terms of others' losses and misfortunes, it is usually none of our business whether they were self-caused. Bishops are set apart as common judges in Israel. It is part of their heavy responsibility to analyze and assess the causes for personal misfortunes and offer counsel and comfort to those who have suffered them. The rest of us usually do not know the facts or have the spirit of discernment to understand them. Ironically, sometimes the more we know of a situation, the less we understand. Our judgment may be clouded by our personal relationships with those who have suffered. If the afflicted person is a relative or close friend, we may feel like, and in fact may be, a part of the problem. This can impair our judgment.

Over the years I have talked to a number of parents whose children are in trouble. Often they feel that the fault is with the school or the peer group or the church or the police. Their own child is a helpless victim of circumstance. Understandably, their deep love for their child clouds their analysis of the problem and hides from them the self-inflicted aspects of the loss. Unfortunately, they sometimes spend precious energies and attention seeking retribution when they might better expend their efforts on sympathy, understanding, and assistance for their child in his loss. Sometimes we know too much and stand too close to the problem to evaluate it accurately.

Our evaluation is usually no more accurate from a distance. In this case we have the advantage of objectivity and greater perspective on the problem, but usually we don't have the facts. For example, a few years ago the media sketchily reported the tragic murder of a young woman in a convenience store. Some people hastily jumped to the conclusion that this woman was somewhat to blame for the loss of her life. Everybody knows that those places can be hangouts for hoodlums and crazies at night, they assumed. She should have been safely at home with her husband and family. Only later did the press elaborate that her two daughters and a friend were out in the car while she was renting a videotape for their entertainment. Her husband was away for the night leading his troop of Boy Scouts on an overnight outing. The gunman was crazy on drugs, anxious to kill the first human being he saw in the store. It happened to be the young mother.

We never know all the facts about other people's losses. Even if we have a detailed description of what happened outwardly, we don't know the inner battles of the mind and heart. We don't know the past histories and the environmental pressures acting on other people. Sometimes as a judge or a member of a jury, we are required to assess the actions of others. In those cases we learn all we can, pray for guidance, and hope we are accurate in our assessment. In most other instances, we need to avoid judging at all.

We sometimes understand our own situations no better than we do those of others. As a bishop I once counseled a bereaved father who was heaping guilt upon his own head for the sins of his son. He was magnifying the real loss resulting from his child's unvirtuous life by including his own imminent damnation for neglect. But I knew he was not guilty of those sins. He had done the best that a father could. I suggested he read section 68 in the Doctrine and Covenants, which specifically describes the parameters of parenthood regarding our responsibilities to our children. If we do not train up a child in light and truth, the sins are upon the heads of the parents. But I take that to mean also that if we do train up our children in light and truth, as this man had done, and they deliberately decide to go astray, the sin is not upon the heads of the parents. This man was suffering terrible loss, but it was not self-inflicted.

I have seen the young and the not-so-young flagellate themselves for losing a game or a job or a contest. "If only I had said this or done that or performed in this way, things would have been different," they say. The truth usually is that they gave it their best shot. They just came up against a team, an opponent, or a challenge that was a bit more than they could handle. There is no cause for self-recrimination in that situation. In fact, they should be complimented for biting off all they could chew and then a little bit more. The next time they may do better.

A few years ago, the aspiring Brigham Young University Cougar football program met up with Ohio State University in a post-season bowl game. Ohio State was as good as they usually are, but had dropped a couple of games in the course of the season. They were anxious to prove they were the best team in the nation. They were more than a team; they were a buzz saw, chewing up the hapless Cougars something like 47-17, as I recall. The fans mourned over this tragedy. Coach LaVell Edwards did not. He said, "We like to play good teams like this. They help us to get better, and we can get a lot better."

If we have sincerely prepared and performed to the best of our ability, we needn't add to the pain of our loss by self-recrimination. On the other hand, we sometimes shun the responsibility that is truly ours for a loss sustained. We want to blame others, our environment, our background, our history. We are like the little boy who handed his less-than-sterling report card to his father and said, "What's the matter with me, Dad? Is it heredity or environment?" Some people even reach out into the universe and blame their shortcomings on the astrological alignment of stars and planets. To them, Shakespeare speaks in the words of Cassius to Brutus in the play Julius Caesar. In the midst of some grumbling and grousing that Caesar was born lucky and that was why he was emperor and they were not, Cassius said truthfully, "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings."

The tragedy of not seeing our self-inflicted losses is that we lose doubly. We sustain the original loss, and we also lose the opportunity to learn from it. Judgment of self and others is difficult, and the Lord counseled extreme caution: "For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged." (Matthew 7:2.) But there are times when we know from outward evidence and our own inner conviction that, in fact, our loss was self-inflicted. We have acted unwisely or sinfully and brought misfortune upon ourselves. Why we do these things is a matter of only oblique relevance to this short discussion. Psychologists speculate that we sometimes have a death wish; we choose to fail. We may get a thrill from seeing how close to the edge of the cliff we can stand; when we do this, sometimes the cliff crumbles beneath us or the wind blows us over. We may feel that we are smart enough to beat the odds, and that what causes loss in others will not cause it in us. Often selfishness, pride, or temptations of the flesh enter into our actions. Whatever the cause, we look up one day and find we have lost our fortune, our self-image, or the love and respect of friends and spouse. Or we may have lost our health, our mental capacities, or our opportunities to succeed.

My alcoholic friend in Oakland, California, was almost as complete a loss as I can conceive of in this world, but even this man's abject condition was not a total wipeout. Deep within him was a tiny, glowing ember, a weak and distant trace of memory, a dim and fuzzy picture of what he once had been. He could vaguely feel the man he had been, not only in this life, I believe, but in his previous existence when he stood as a spirit child of God. Somewhere deep inside he knew he was more than a dissipated derelict, a wasted animal. That memory was all he had left, but it was enough to give him the strength to lift his knees up onto the sidewalk, struggle groggily to his feet, and begin to shuffle slowly along the road back.

Back? No, he was not taking the road back. This is one of our most common mistakes in self-inflicted loss: we try to turn and take the road back. As an old eastern proverb has it, "You can never step in the same river twice." In this life the clock only turns one way. We blind ourselves to our future destination when we move forward with our eyes looking over our shoulders. My wasted friend, for all his mistakes and misjudgments, realized this. As far as I know, he never regained his family and his prosperity. His fine mind was a fraction of its former self. He lived alone and worked at a menial but honest job. He was humble and faithful in his church duties and kind to everyone he met. He said to me, "I'm not where I was when I was up, but I'm a long way from where I was when I was down."

No matter how heavy is our personal responsibility for our loss or the burden we bear from it, we can always move forward and upward. There is a program for making this progress. It is called repentance. There are also any number of imitations that promise relief, but cannot deliver it. Only repentance can put us back on the path of progress. This purging process can sometimes be painful, but it is not nearly as painful and debilitating as the sins that made it necessary. And the pain is the kind that accompanies healing.

Although repentance is hard, it is not complicated. It consists simply of recognizing our errors, turning from them, and making restitution to the best of our ability for whatever damage we have done. True repentance requires that we beg the forgiveness of any whom we have offended. Whether they choose to forgive us is up to them, but our repentance is not contingent on how they respond. We are not dependent on anyone else to exercise true repentance. We have the power within ourselves to begin the repentance process and to call upon God's Spirit to complete it. For it is in our Father's hands that the healing process ultimately rests. He it is whom we first grieved when we sinned, and it is he to whom we return with our broken heart and contrite spirit so he can forgive us and make us whole again. He has promised us that he will do so: "As often as my people repent will I forgive their trespasses against me." (Mosiah 26:30.)

We may sometimes feel we have sunk so low that we have lost everything, including the Lord's love and the opportunity to repent. This is a doctrine of the champion of discouragement, even Satan himself. He would have us believe that we are not worth saving, but that is not true. The Lord has specifically designated only two sins for which there is no forgiveness: denial of the Holy Ghost and the shedding of innocent blood. Even these are beyond repentance not because of God, but because of the nature of the sins. God is never so offended by his children that he slams the door and ignores their sincere pleadings to enter. But when we slam the door to him and refuse to open it, he cannot be with us. Those who commit the unpardonable sins have tasted to the fullest the love and the power of God. They have found it bitter and spat it out. God has no further ways to reach them. He will force no man. So if we choose to be unforgiven, we shall be. To any repentant sinner who knocks—though it be the gentlest of taps with feeble, bloody, sin-stained knuckles—the Lord will hear and open.

Self-inflicted loss is the bitterest loss of all, but even this can be overcome.
