Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 22

Gaining through Loss

Stephen Blake was a handsome, popular, and talented young man. He had been a high school student-body officer and a missionary. Few young men have a brighter future before them. But standing on a street corner one day, he glanced up to see a crane hit the wires of a 7200-volt power line. The two men operating the crane below were immediately frozen to the machinery and in danger of being electrocuted.

No one would have criticized Stephen Blake for standing helplessly by. People would have commended him had he run away and gone for help. But he instinctively knew there was not time for that, so he ran to the crisis. He pulled the two men free and saved their lives, but in the process he was trapped in the grip of the electricity. By the time the power line was shut down, he was in a coma from which he never recovered. He voluntarily lost what many people would consider to be his most valuable possession, his earthly life. From the narrow perspective of this world, he lost his life in exchange for a few words of eulogy at a funeral and the gratitude of the men he saved.

Weighed on the balance scales of eternity, the transaction looks different. Jesus said, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." (John 15:13.) Stephen Blake exhibited even greater love than that by which a man lays down his life for his friend. He laid down his life for strangers—two men he didn't know and to whom he had no obligation, except that they were his brothers in the human family. To be assayed in the Lord's value system and found to be pure celestial material, as he was—is that not worth even the loss of his remaining years in this earthly life?

Semantics sometimes throws monkey wrenches into our thinking mechanisms. We mistake the name for the thing—the symbol for the referent. Such may be the case when we consider loss. Loss means by definition to have something taken from us—to have less than we had before. But even if this definition is technically correct, is it misleading and myopic? Frequently, that depends on the depth and breadth of our understanding. We don't often console a baby when it loses the opportunity to be carried because it learns to walk. Although being carried is more comfortable, walking is a stage in growth that most of us would not want to do without. We sometimes mourn the loss of our youth, but few people—Peter Pan notwithstanding—would really want to be children forever. The adventures, satisfactions, and wisdom of maturity are worth the price we pay in lost childhood.

According to the scriptures, the human race itself and this world in its present state were launched by way of a loss. Adam and Eve lost their innocence, their ignorance, and their home in the weedless Garden of Eden when they partook of the forbidden fruit. At first it may have seemed to them that they got little in return. They were driven from their beautiful garden into a lonely and desolate world. In place of fruits and flowers, they saw thorns and thistles. Their honeymoon in Eden was over; ahead of them lay the sweat of the brow for Adam and travail in childbirth for Eve. They may have felt their loss was bitter indeed, but without this loss they would have remained forever in their state of childish innocence and inexperience.

Their condition was a type and shadow of our own. Like the snake bound up in his old skin, we get bound to our present possessions and satisfied with our present situation. Sometimes we have to shed this old skin to allow us room to grow. From this perspective loss, gain, and retention become harder to define.

At one time Brigham Young sent three eighteen-year-old men into the Wyoming wilderness to help a starving handcart company reach the valley of the Great Salt Lake. The three boys found the company huddled on the far shore of an icy, swollen river. Without hesitation, they crossed the stream and brought back their weary brothers and sisters one at a time in their arms. The handcart company was saved, but the boys paid a great price. The strain was so terrible, and the exposure so great, that in later years all the boys died from the effects of it. When President Brigham Young heard of this heroic act, he wept like a child, and he later declared publicly, "That act alone will ensure C. Allen Huntington, George W. Grant, and David P. Kimball an everlasting salvation in the Celestial Kingdom of God, worlds without end."

To have achieved the selflessness and character of these young men, as did Stephen Blake, and thus assured ourselves of an inheritance in the kingdom of God with our loved ones—this is the true measure of loss and gain in our lives. Anything that contributes to that ultimate end is a gain, even if it involves a temporary loss. Anything that detracts from our winning that crown is a loss, even though it may produce a temporary financial, social, or power gain in this world.

We may not recover from a financial crash in this life; we may not get back lost health; power and position may slip through our fingers; friends may prove false; and all manner of so-called losses may befall us, beyond our control. But the ultimate measure of loss and gain is within our control. If we falter, err, or sin and lose a portion of our inheritance, the Lord has promised us that we can repent and have it restored to us. We can even turn it to our gain if we learn from the experience to become more righteous and more understanding of those about us who need our help. It is only as we deliberately choose not to repent that such a loss becomes permanent to us. That is indeed a sad thing.

Let us not be too quick to judge an apparent misfortune as a loss. Let us turn it to a gain whenever we can. When we indeed do suffer a loss from our own doing, let us repent quickly so that in the final judgment all that we have done will have been toward progress and perfection.
