Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 23

Loss Can Give Us Perspective

"I would that ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility." (Mosiah 4:11.) These scriptural words of warning and exhortation remind us to beware of pride. Most of us would nod our heads in agreement with such a warning. In principle, if not always in practice, we can recognize the dangers of pride and vanity—particularly in the lives of others. From King Saul in the Bible to King Lear in Shakespeare, history and literature are full of examples of individuals and nations who had good things going for them until pride overcame them and became their downfall.

The ancient Greeks saw pride as part of a four-step process. They called it hubris, and they connected it conceptually with the act of eating. The first step in this process is to feel hunger; the second is to take the steps to satisfy that hunger; the third is to stuff the old stomach. This is where hubris comes in, and here is the danger point. If a person does not have control over his appetite, he will continue to stuff beyond his physical needs, and even beyond his capacity to hold. This can bring on the fourth stage. It can be as simple and short-lived as regurgitating what we have just eaten. Or, if the effects accumulate sufficiently, it can be as permanent as a fatal heart attack brought on by overweight.

As with any analogy, this comparison of eating and living breaks down if we push it too far. But it does point out some truths we might not see in another context. In this case we see more clearly the critical point in our aspirations. The ancients had no quarrel with people recognizing their hungers, their need for better things. They admired, as we often do, people trying to improve their lot through their physical, social, psychological, or spiritual desires. But they recognized, as we do, that once the table is spread before us, we do not automatically use wisdom about when to stop or what to eat. We sometimes gorge ourselves to destruction.

King Saul of ancient Israel had few needs for glory and popularity as a young man. He was a tall and handsome man, standing a full head above his fellows—kingly in his bearing. But he came from a humble home in one of the smallest tribes of Israel, the tribe of Benjamin. He was a farm boy, and so shy about being called a king that when they went to anoint him, he had, as the Bible said, "hid himself among the stuff." The prophet Samuel had to go dig him out and drag him up before the people. But Saul soon developed an appetite for kingly glory. When the people began to divert their applause and acclaim from King Saul to the young warrior David, it tore Saul up. He became a pitiful paranoid. He tried to kill David, and eventually took his own life. Saul was a classic example of the dangers of pride.

Shakespeare, with his unparalleled insight into human foibles, gave us another clear case in the aging King Lear. Lear is a fairly acceptable king, as kings go, but he has an insatiable hunger for affection and adoration, particularly from his daughters. Two of them are willing to pander to his neurotic needs in order to help satisfy their own selfish desires. The third daughter is too honest to lie to her father. She loves him and pays him the compliment of an honest relationship. But Lear demands more than this, disdains his true daughter's love, and turns to those he hopes will heap the table for his emotional gluttony.

Lear's lack of control is his undoing, as would be the case with all of us. Soon he loses the power to demand love and attention. When his supply of fawning adoration is cut off, he starves emotionally and goes insane. Only his true daughter still cares for him, but he is too crazy to notice very much. Lear's tragedy is twofold. First, he suffers from uncontrolled desires. Second, and perhaps even more tragic, he has the power and authority to command that those desires be fulfilled.

In real history King Henry VIII of England suffered the same deprivation of discipline when he was growing up. His doting father commanded that the young prince be given everything he wanted. Nothing was to be denied him, so that he might know from the first that he was a king. As a result, Henry enjoyed a childhood that might be envied by any kid who ever pressed his nose against the window of a store and looked at things he couldn't afford. But King Henry paid for his undisciplined childhood with a dissipated adulthood that would be envied by no king or commoner in his right mind. He also destroyed the lives of those about him, including several wives, and destroyed his own mind and body with syphilis.

Naturally, Henry attracted about him those of like disposition. Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, Henry's right-hand henchman in religious matters, suffered a sobering comeuppance and a crashing downfall from his own overarching ambition. Shakespeare has Wolsey sum up his rise and fall in these profound words:

. . . I have ventur'd, Like little wanton boys on bladders, This many summers in a sea of glory; But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride At length broke under me; and now has left me, Weary and old with service, to the mercy Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me. . . . Had I but serv'd my God with half the zeal I serv'd my king, he would not in mine age Have left me naked to mine enemies.

These unfortunate victims of their own hubris are not different animals from you and me, but they had the misfortune to possess the means to gorge themselves on the poison of pride. It destroyed them.

To help us guard against this tragedy in our own lives, the Lord has blessed us with times of loss. If our material comforts were guaranteed to us for life, we might be even more prone to hoard them and to ignore the riches of eternity the Lord has counseled us to seek. If the applause for our activities never stopped, but continued to build, round upon round, throughout our lives, would not our pride fatten to ugly proportions on this food while our humility and empathy for others dwindled and starved? If we never lost our youth, would we not continue to glut ourselves on the bravado and narcissism that are so characteristic of those early years? If we never lost a loved one, would we ever turn our eyes from the temporary relationships of this world and fix them on the eternal relationships of the next?

In our more sober moments of contemplation, we should give thanks for the losses in our lives because they help to set limits on our hubris—our insatiable appetite for pride and the temptations of this world. These are limits that need to be set, but we are usually loath to set them ourselves. And so the losses of our lives are often temporary setbacks to save us from permanent, self-inflicted destruction.
