Duane E. Hiatt, Overcoming Personal Loss ( 1990)

Chapter 24

Loss, or Change?

Back in 1949, Brent Scowcroft's P-51 fighter plane lost power and crashed, ending his flying career and almost ending his life. The Ogden, Utah, native spent the next two years in hospital beds. He lost his chances to soar among the clouds and had to resign himself to a military desk job. It would have been easy to ground his aspirations along with his body. But he refused. Instead, he made his career soar until he became national security adviser of the United States. He reinterpreted his loss and turned it into a change of direction.

Life is structured such that we almost never gain something without losing something else. We cannot gain the wisdom of maturity without suffering the loss of youth. If we gain new friends, we usually lose some of the intimacy and intensity we had with our old ones. There isn't enough time for both. Gaining popularity and fame means a loss of anonymity and the privacy that accompanies it. I have sat through concerts with trained musicians. I think I often enjoyed the music more than they did because they had lost that bright-eyed, naive joy of the novice. Subconsciously, they were analyzing and evaluating when they might have been just blissfully enjoying if they had not lost their aesthetic innocence. But in the trade they had gained a deeper understanding for parts of the music that I missed.

Jesus used an analogy of a kernel of wheat to explain this principle. Except the wheat be lost and placed in the ground, it can never bring forth abundant sheaves. The same is true with all of us. We cannot gain eternal life without losing our temporal lives. The Lord counseled us to deliberately lose our lives. He said, "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 10:39.)

The loss of something we treasure, whether it is material, social, or physical, is usually a painful experience. But the sting can be softened, and sometimes removed altogether, when we think of the experience not as loss but as change. Whether the change is for better or for worse depends upon us.

Probably no caterpillar in the world would voluntarily give up his mobility in crawling and seal himself up in a cocoon. He doesn't know that beautiful wings and soaring flight await him on the other side of his loss. Life for us is not so predictable. It is not always obvious what we shall be after the metamorphosis of loss has changed us. We ourselves have much to say about what those changes will bring.

Mark Twain had been a successful writer. He was acclaimed in his native America and in Europe. He had a lovely wife and three loving daughters. Within thirteen years, his wife and two of his daughters died. He said, "How poor I am who was once so rich!" His experience would appear to be the butterfly transition in reverse. He saw himself transformed from a flying, free spirit to a crawling, downcast grub. Such losses as his could easily bring on such an outlook. But how much comfort he could have obtained had he been able to see change instead of only loss—if he had seen his wife changed from mortality to immortality, his daughters saved much of the pain and suffering of this world and taken to a better one. He could have seen his own changed state as a chance to explore more deeply the problems and struggles of his fellow beings and portray them with his literary genius. Thus he might have changed through his loss from a witty, insightful observer of human foibles to a sensitive humanitarian. He might have exchanged his caustic cynicism for a sustaining faith in the Lord. Such changes do not come automatically from a loss, but they can be wrested from the ashes of tragedy.

One of the finest illustrations of turning loss into change for the better is the story of Silas Marner by George Eliot. Marner is a greedy skinflint, intent only on gathering possessions for himself. He hoards his time, emotions, and possessions, and especially his precious gold. But one night a thief steals his treasure. Marner is crushed, disconsolate. He has lost his gold. He has no friends, helpers, or sympathizers because he has developed none. All his interest was in his gold, and now it is gone.

Some time later he awakes to a knock on his door, peers suspiciously out, and sees on his doorstep something gold wrapped in blankets and placed in a bundle in a basket. "My gold is returned," he cries in joy. As it turns out, it is better gold than the gold he lost. It is the golden tresses of a baby girl, who has been placed on his doorstep to be cared for. The scene is rich with symbolism. One of the less obvious but significant aspects is Marner's mistaking golden hair for gold. Most people would not be confused by the two even for a moment, but Marner's eye is so single to material things that he has developed not a Midas touch, but a Midas look. He searches for gold in everything. Some people's viewpoint gets that narrow and skewed. Human relationships, experiences, earth beauties, and resources are looked at as an assayer analyzes ore for the monetary value in it.

The sight of the baby triggers the beginnings of a change in Silas Marner. He takes her in and cares for her. He gives and sacrifices for her, as any parent must, and eventually rears her into a beautiful and loving young woman. In the process his heart also opens up to friends, neighbors, and others in need. Silas Marner, the selfish skinflint, turns into Silas Marner, the loving father and devoted friend to all mankind. It is obvious that he has not lost his treasure but unwillingly invested it and reaped richer returns than he could have ever dreamed.

Much of the loss in our own lives is similar to Silas Marner's. If we respond to it in the right way, we will later look back and see it not as loss but as a change and a blessing. What, then, is the right way, the right response? First of all, the right way to respond to loss, I believe, is to face it squarely. It is not by accident that the author used the symbolism of gold to illustrate both Silas Marner's loss and the trigger for his beginnings of change. I believe if Marner had mourned the loss of his gold but then found comfort in something else—nature or books or solitary contemplation, for instance—the story would have lost much of its impact. The dark world and the enlightened world of Silas Marner had to touch at exactly the same geographical point if he were to make the transition from one into the other. The symbolism is somewhat like Michelangelo's famous painting of God and Adam on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. God, from his glorified and exalted position, reaches down. Adam, from below, reaches up. Their fingers touch. Through that contact, like an electrical connection, you can almost see the power of God flowing into his son Adam.

And thus it is with us. The sharp, painful point of our loss is exactly the appendage with which we must probe to touch the new world of change. It is not a natural response. Our tendency is to pad over the point of pain, to hope that it scabs and eventually heals. But it will not. It will only fester and continue to grieve us. Some people who have lost a loved one continue to live as though the passing never happened. This hampers their personal relationships and their continued emotional, spiritual, and sometimes even intellectual growth. Some who have lost a limb subconsciously try to hide the fact. They find frustration in trying to be exactly the way they were and having their mental construct not match their physical condition.

One of the most courageous and wise handicapped people I ever knew was a little boy in our children's elementary school. He had been born with a serious cleft palate. His mouth was misshapen, and his speech was nasal and slurred. But that did not hold him back. Every time I would meet him and talk with him, he would thrust his lip forward and let me and the world know that he knew his point of pain and was making no secret of it. If you wanted his friendship, you had to take him mouth first. Before long, I found out it was a privilege to do so. He is now a dynamic and successful man, a great contributor to his family, his church, his business, and the community.

Some people who lose material blessings can't bring themselves to face that loss and continue to live as though nothing had happened. Instead of facing their loss and making it the focal point of change for the better, they squander their remaining resources to keep up appearances to others and to themselves.

The first step in turning loss into change is to stare the loss straight in the eyes. Make it blink and back away. The first thing you will find as you do so is that the loss is not as total as you had supposed. The universe is still functioning, and you are still breathing. The heat of your gaze will peel away the mists and the mysteries, the fears and the uncertainties of your loss, and expose it for what it is. It is a sadness, a difficulty, a challenge, but it is not a paralyzing power that can overwhelm you. You and the Lord are capable of overcoming and subduing any loss.

The second step is to use this close analysis of your loss to see what, in fact, is the focal point of the pain and how that point can be used as a prod to change. We almost lost one of our sons to drugs and riotous living. My first response was to try to deal with the situation quietly—to ignore it, not only with the neighbors and people in church but in my dealings with my son. I wanted to talk about other things and hope that this demon of drugs hovering over our relationship would just go away. It didn't. We had to face it squarely, analyze what we had lost, which was considerable, and then see how we could turn that loss to change.

Looking at his loss carefully, my son decided he must change, take more control of his own life, and not let bad friends and the momentary euphoria of drugs direct his destiny. For my part, I found that the pain brought change in my theories and practices as a father. I became less exacting, more concerned with the spirit than the letter of the law, more concerned with my son's needs and desires, and less concerned with what other people might think about us.

I am constrained to believe that with the Lord as our guide and comfort, and with the proper attitude, there is no loss in this life, only change. If we will it to be so, the change will be for the better.
