Elder Joseph W. Sitati was sustained as a General Authority Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on April 4, 2009. At the time of his call, he was serving as president of the Nigeria Calabar Mission. Elder Sitati has served as a counselor in the Africa West Area Presidency. He is currently serving as First Counselor in the Africa Southeast Area.

Elder Sitati earned a bachelor degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Nairobi in 1975 and a diploma in accounting and finance from the Association of Certified Accountants. He also completed course work for a master of business administration at the same university in 2000 and worked as an executive for Reach the Children, a nongovernmental charitable organization. Prior to that, he worked in several positions with the Total Group, the fourth largest oil and gas company in the world.

Since joining the Church in 1986, Elder Sitati has served in a number of Church callings, including branch president, district president, counselor in a mission presidency, stake president, Area Seventy, and mission president. He also served as the Church’s international director of public affairs for Africa.

Joseph Wafula Sitati was born in Bungoma, Kenya, on May 16, 1952. He married Gladys Nangoni in July 1976. They are the parents of five children.

Elder Matthew L. Carpenter was sustained as a General Authority Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on March 31, 2018, at age 58. At the time of his call, he had been serving as a member of the Sixth Quorum of the Seventy in the North America Central Area.

Elder Carpenter received a bachelor of science degree in business management from Brigham Young University in 1983. In 1987 he received a master of business administration from Harvard Business School. During his career, he has worked as CEO of Bay View Commercial Financial Group and most recently as managing director of Genesis Financial Services Fund and Foundation Specialty Financing Fund.

Elder Carpenter has served in a number of Church callings, including full-time missionary in the Switzerland Geneva Mission, ward missionary, Scoutmaster, stake Young Men president, counselor in a bishopric, counselor in a stake mission presidency, ward mission leader, high councilor, bishop and stake president.

Matthew Leslie Carpenter was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, on October 21, 1959. He married Michelle (Shelly) Kay Brown in 1982. They are the parents of five children.

Elder Thierry K. Mutombo was sustained as a General Authority Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on April 4, 2020, at age 44. At the time of his call, he had been serving as president of the Maryland Baltimore Mission.

Elder Mutombo graduated in business management from the University of Cepromad in 2010. In 2012 he received a bachelor degree in human resources management from the University of Cepromad. He owned a travel business from 2000 to 2005. He has worked for the Church as a supervisor in the Materials Management Department and manager of the Human Resources Department in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He most recently worked as manager of the Family History Department in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Elder Mutombo has served in a number of Church callings, including full-time missionary in the Côte d’Ivoire Abidjan Mission, ward mission leader, ward Sunday School teacher, stake executive secretary, counselor in a stake presidency, and stake president.

Thierry Kasuangi Mutombo was born in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, on January 31, 1976. He married Tshayi Nathalie Sinda in 2002. They are the parents of six children.
