One bleak January morning, Alison Kay opened the door to find two missionaries standing in the rain. She invited them in. Later she found out they had been working in cold weather even though it was their preparation day. She was soon baptized and confirmed a member of the Church.

John was four years old when his mother, Alison, joined the Church. He has wanted to be like the missionaries ever since.

John began paying tithing when his mother did. When he heard about the Humanitarian Aid Fund and the Perpetual Education Fund, he started contributing to those too.

One day the missionaries came to visit. John likes to ask missionaries where they are from, what their families are like, and how many people they are teaching and baptizing. But on this day he asked them how they paid for their missions. Parents and family members often give support, the missionaries explained. “I want to pay for my own mission,” John said. At 10 years old, he’s well on his way to being ready for his mission in more ways than one.

Besides living the gospel and saving his money, John knows that learning to work hard will help him be a great missionary. “John is very easy to teach,” his mum says. He has learned to knit, iron, wash clothes, sew on a button, weed the garden, wash the car, and cook meals. His usual chores are tidying his room and putting the washing in.

1.  Mum’s meatloaf

2.  Judo

3.  Horseback riding

4.  His pet guinea pig, Saturn

5.  The story of Daniel in the lions’ den

6.  Playing with friends

7.  Climbing with Dad

8.  Art (his favorite subject in school)

9.  Pizza

10. Climbing the big tree in his back garden, where he goes to think

John says he tries to have a happy home by talking nicely with his family, especially with his older sister, Phoebe. “We try to listen to each other,” he says.

John’s mum says, “It’s not like John if he’s not whistling or singing ’round our house.” She is grateful for John’s caring personality because she suffers from depression. “John knows just how to treat me,” she says. “He is most loyal and responsible and has a heart filled with love.”

John looks forward to holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, not only so he can serve as a missionary but also so he can give blessings to his family. For now, he prays for them and cheers them up with his sunny personality.
