The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the January 2008 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “My Life Is a Gift; My Life Has a Plan” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Ask the children what it means to be valiant. Suggest action words that represent valiancy such as follow, serve, keep, obey, depend, and so on. Read 2 Nephi 10:23 together. Teach about the gift of agency. Discuss what it means to be valiant in our testimonies of Jesus Christ.

    Make a copy of the “Preparing for Jesus to Come” game found at the back of the Primary 2 manual. Prepare 12 small pieces of paper. Write a number on each paper, using 1 though 6 twice. Fold the papers, and put them in a container. Play the game by inviting children to come up, draw a number, and move a marker the correct number of spaces. Read the square. If it describes a right choice, ask why this was a valiant choice. If it describes a wrong choice, ask how the children could choose to be valiant. Play the game as long as time allows. Conclude by bearing testimony of the importance of being valiant in our testimonies of Jesus Christ.

2.  Prepare cutouts 1–1 through 1–25 from the Primary 1 picture packet. Invite the children to help tell the story of the Creation using the cutouts. Express gratitude for the beautiful world that Jesus Christ created for us.

    Show Gospel Art Picture Kit 101 (Adam and Eve). Help the children find Moses 5:4, and read the phrase “Adam and Eve, his wife, called upon the name of the Lord.” Discuss what this means. Show picture 1–34 (Adam and Eve teaching their children) from the Primary 1 packet, and read Moses 5:12. Ask, “What did Adam and Eve do to help their children?”

    Ask the children how their parents teach them the gospel. Provide some examples if needed, such as being a good example and having family home evening. Sing a song or hymn about families. Bear testimony that Jesus Christ created the world and that Adam and Eve were the first parents on the earth.

    For older children: Prepare a sheet of paper with a list of different terms describing events of the Creation (light, day, night, firmament, dry land, grass, tree, greater light, lesser light, and so on). Ask the children to turn to Genesis 1, find out on what day each event took place, and list the scripture reference. (Example: Light—first day, Genesis 1:3–5.)

3.  Song presentation: “I Am a Child of God” (Children’s Songbook, 2–3). Focus on helping the children identify and understand the important doctrines taught in this song. Invite the children to listen as the pianist plays the melody of the chorus and to stand up when they recognize the song. When most of the children are standing, ask them to whisper the name of the song. Sing the chorus to the children. Ask the children to sing the chorus with you and listen for action words that describe what they would like someone to do for them. Sing the chorus, and list responses on the chalkboard (lead, guide, walk beside, help, teach). Ask: “Who leads us?

    When would it be important to have a guide? Why would you want someone to walk beside you? Why would you want someone to help you find the way? What are some things we must do to live with Heavenly Father someday?” Sing the chorus again, and testify of the blessings of having parents, teachers, leaders, prophets, and the scriptures to help us find our way back to Heavenly Father.

    As you teach and review the verses of the song, use key words or phrases that will help the children remember the doctrines taught in each verse. For example: verse 1—gifts (earthly home and parents); verse 2—scriptures (His words); verse 3—blessings; verse 4—His promises are sure.
