Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Foreword

It is with interest and pleasure that I write a foreword to a book such as this. In my eleven years of work in mental health settings, I have been fortunate enough to counsel extensively with Latter-day Saint patients. Many members of the Church seek treatment from a professional only after they have tried prayer, blessings, administrations, and fasting to solve their problems. These approaches are often effective, but sometimes underlying issues reemerge and the old problems return. When this happens, the individual may wonder why the Lord allows problems to come back. It has become clear to me, however, that He will not always insulate or isolate us from the trials inherent in this mortal existence. Without trials, we would not move forward in our attempts to overcome, and to eventually become as He is.

This book, which I heartily endorse, contains a set of tools or ideas that a Latter-day Saint can use in his progression out of depression into a richer life. In my experience, after three years of developing and teaching seminars using many of these ideas, I have learned that people select the combination of tools that works best for them. Most of the material in this book comes from contemporary research, theory, or clinical experience in the treatment of depression. Dr. Mower and I have spent hours exchanging and refining some of the ideas. He has also included some material that is unique to his own experience.

Members of the Church can easily become dissatisfied with approaches suggested in modern psychology literature if they expect these ideas to be the final answer. But if these approaches are viewed as handy tools containing some truths to be used in perfecting oneself in an incremental way, then the proper perspective is maintained. Psychology is not like scripture. It never arrives at its fullness. It is a product of fallible human beings. Twenty years from now we will probably know more about depression, and we will probably be able to say much more in a book about how to overcome depression.

The thirteenth Article of Faith states, "If there is anything . . . of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." In the context of attempts to better ourselves and overcome opposition, this book is both praiseworthy and of good report. The concepts given here can be very helpful in dealing with depression. I have personally seen many individuals who were seriously depressed use these ideas to facilitate their own self cure.

Edwin R. Christensen, Ph.D. Psychologist
