Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Introduction

It came on suddenly. We had just moved and were settling down in our new house. One morning I felt really blue, and each day it got a little worse. At first I wanted to sleep all the time; then I stopped being able to sleep. I was tired and didn't want to do anything. I felt guilty. I stopped playing tennis; even that didn't seem like much fun. Then one day the Spauldings stopped by. Clark played tennis and asked me to join him. I started to think, 'Hey, I've moved before and it wasn't the end of the world. I really do like our new neighborhood.' Now I'm feeling much better. I guess I was just depressed."

Depression is a confusing word because it is used to describe a broad range of feelings, from disappointment, to "being down in the dumps," to not caring if we live or die. Depression is diagnosed by professionals from a number of emotional and behavioral symptoms that usually, but not always, include the following: loss of interest or pleasure in almost all activities; "blue" mood with feelings of sadness or hopelessness; change in appetite or weight; changes in sleep patterns; thoughts of death or suicide; loss of energy; feelings of worthlessness; diminished ability to think or concentrate; and agitation or retardation of motor behavior (movements of the body). Those who are depressed do not suffer from all of these symptoms all of the time. The number of symptoms experienced and the severity of the symptoms vary from person to person and can change over time within each person.

Depression is a common problem. Although some people are more susceptible than others, everyone can get depressed. Depression is the most frequently diagnosed psychiatric illness in the United States, cutting across all walks of life: rich and poor, religious and nonreligious, old and young. Each year one in ten adults will experience an episode of depression. Some researchers have estimated that up to 50 percent of the population is likely to experience moderate to serious symptoms of depression at some time during their lifetime, and at least 5 percent of the people in the United States would fit the most rigorous diagnostic criteria for depression at any given time. Recently it has been speculated that members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints experience depression more often or more intensely than the general population because of theological or cultural mores, such as the promotion of large families, the idea that women should remain in the home, or an insistence on high performance standards. Current studies indicate, however, that neither Latter-day Saint men nor Latter-day Saint women are more or less at risk than non-Mormons.

Everyone will experience symptoms of depression from time to time. Our moods are actually best understood as moving back and forth along a continuum, with depression at one end and euphoria at the other. Mood changes occur from day to day in everyone.

The probability that one may develop depression varies for each individual. Some important factors have been identified that indicate when the risk increases: losses or changes in life; a lack of intimate relationships; a history of past experiences with depression; and the occurrence of depression in other family members.

Losses and changes in life appear to be frequent precursors of depression. Death, marital separation, serious physical illness, financial problems, and friends moving to another city are all examples of changes. A job promotion, starting a strict new diet, moving to a new home, the birth of a child, returning to work, even a new church calling can precede depression, even though they are positive steps in one's life. Any change has the potential to precipitate depression because change requires us to move away from our old ways of thinking or doing things. As we break up old patterns, we often experience some degree of frustration while we're learning to adapt to the change. This frustration and confusion can lead to depression. Not every change or loss produces depression, but it is one of many factors that can signal increased vulnerability.

The lack of intimate relationships often contributes to the development of depression. Those who have a close confidant, particularly a spouse or steady boyfriend or girlfriend, are less likely to become depressed when faced with losses or changes in their lives. The depth of the relationship rather than the frequency of the contact appears to be the most important factor in alleviating depression.

Past symptoms of depression increase the probability of future occurrences. Both biological and behavioral explanations have been advanced to explain this tendency. For instance, there is some evidence that depression runs in families through biological or genetic causes. This does not mean that in a family where one person is depressed, everyone will become depressed, however. It is not yet fully understood why some members of families where depression occurs maintain more normal moods.

The scriptures tell us that "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) Joy, peace, and happiness are God's wish for us in this life. We can attain joy in many ways: by remaining faithful to the commandments, enjoying family and friends, experiencing success in our careers or pleasure from hobbies. There are also times when we may experience depression or despair, even if we are trying to keep the commandments of our Heavenly Father. Joseph Smith expressed this feeling eloquently while he was imprisoned in Liberty jail (see Doctrine and Covenants 121). Depression is not a punishment for unrighteousness or lack of zeal in the gospel. It also cannot always be relieved by resolving conflicts between one's current lifestyle and the commandments. Everyone has hard times because this life is a mixture of pleasure and pain, and an opportunity to learn how to enlarge ourselves and transcend our troubles.

Professionals in mental health have struggled for years to develop ways to help those who are depressed. Early treatments focused on trying to discover what might be people's unconscious reasons for staying depressed or identifying past experiences they had that promoted patterns of depression. These forms of therapy met with only limited success. Other therapists encouraged patients to express their feelings, particularly anger, which was viewed as a chief cause of depression. The idea was that depression is anger toward others that is instead turned toward ourselves. Having the person express these feelings offered initial relief, but long-term positive changes often did not occur. There have been many other remedies prescribed for depression, from "go somewhere and cry it out" to "just forget it." Current research has identified four core areas that affect depression: (1) thoughts and ways of thinking; (2) daily enjoyment of the world around us; (3) relationships with other people; and (4) physical health, including the use of medications. Successful strategies for dealing with issues in these areas have also been developed.

This book will discuss these critical areas from which depression may develop and present various strategies for overcoming depression and increasing joy. Think of it as a cookbook that allows you to identify those areas that are most important to you and the techniques you are most comfortable using to initiate changes in your life. Each individual will have his own needs and "tastes" and, therefore, will develop his own menu. Please sample each of the chapters to expand your available repertoire of options. Frequently a combination of work in each area is necessary to alleviate symptoms of depression.

The techniques described in this book have been proven effective in decreasing depression of all types, from the occasional bout with the blues to serious clinical depression. Many people are surprised at the simplicity of some of the techniques, but researchers have repeatedly established the power of these tools. The professional counselor's challenge is often to convince patients to initiate programs for change. With persistence and work, depression can be controlled.

One of the common beliefs of depressed people is that they have no alternatives to their depression, but actually, it is possible for everyone to achieve more joy from life. Just reading the ideas in this book will not make much difference, though; this would be like reading a recipe and then expecting to feel your hunger satisfied. Taking some action to change your current circumstances will be necessary. Though we all wish for instant solutions to the problems of life, there are no shortcuts to happiness; it is a reward that follows honest efforts.
