Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 1

As We Think, So We Are

For several years psychotherapists and others have been encouraging the public to express their feelings, tune in to themselves, and "let it all hang out." Many schools of therapy have taught that the truest sense of self actually resides in an individual's inner feelings, and the best way to "mental health" is to let those feelings out. Since feelings have been a predominant focus of professionals, we have become accustomed to hearing choices explained in the language of feelings: "I just don't feel like hamburger tonight," "he always felt as if his father didn't like him," "I felt like hitting her." As we listen to ourselves and to others, it is easy to begin to believe that feelings are the cause of most reactions and decisions, but where did these feelings come from?

Perhaps a few of our feelings are accounted for by genetics and actually existed before birth. For instance, babies seem to be more interested in human faces or even cards or balloons with faces drawn on them than in any other object. They respond with actions and sounds that indicate pleasure, such as cooing or looking toward the face. They lose interest, however, if the eyes, nose, or mouth are rearranged or out of place. They seem to know innately how faces are supposed to look. Infants also respond to loud noises and abrupt movements with signs of distress, such as crying. Although there may be a few other feeling-like responses present from birth, they do not explain the great diversity of attitudes and tastes of mankind. They don't explain the "feeling" that we didn't want asparagus last Tuesday, or that we do or do not like opera, or that some people "feel" better about going to the dentist than others.

Current research indicates that our thoughts create the great diversity in feelings that we experience. Thoughts give meaning to experience by organizing information received in the brain and directing the body to react. Feelings are an emotional response to thoughts. For example, imagine this scene: You are standing under the only light on a very dark street as a figure begins to approach from the darkness. The light first catches the face, which appears ashen, almost colorless, with sunken eyes and hideously deformed features. The figure seems to be coming straight toward you. If your thoughts remind you that today is Halloween, you might not feel any apprehension. On any other day, however, you would probably feel afraid. The thought that "today is Halloween" mitigates the fear.

Though our eyes and ears receive information about the world around us, it is the brain and its thoughts that differentiate between our mother's voice or that of a stranger. Thoughts place sensory experiences in perspective by assigning meaning to life. Controlling thoughts, then, is the first step in effectively dealing with feelings. For example, were you just thinking of pink elephants? Now you are because I suggested it. Images are created and feelings aroused by thoughts. If you are still not convinced about the connection between thoughts and feelings, try this experiment. Divide a small group of people into two sections and ask those in one section to close their eyes. Write the words pear, apple, and peach on a piece of paper or chalkboard for the others to see. After erasing or hiding the words, have the groups reverse roles. Show the second group these words: knot, lasso, and lariat. After removing these words, ask both groups to open their eyes. Hold up a sign or write on the board R_PE, and ask members of the groups to fill in the missing letter. The first group will answer RIPE, the second group ROPE. Their thoughts have been influenced because of the differences in the messages they received. One group thought about fruits, the other about uses for rope. We can learn to control the direction of thoughts in this way, by preparing our minds to interpret information in a positive and constructive manner.

Because feelings are affected by so many variables and are unique and idiosyncratic to each of us, they are not the most reliable information to use in interpreting what is happening around us. Decisions based only on feelings are subject to many distortions because feelings are often remnants of a past experience or former ideas that may no longer be relevant. For example, Mary was enjoying a potluck dinner with some refugees she was teaching. She particularly liked one Southeast Asian delicacy and asked what it was. When she learned it was fried pigs' ears, she felt nauseated. The fact is that she enjoyed the dish, but she allowed her emotional reaction to the idea of "pig's ears" to overrule the reality that she had been enjoying them.

Feelings can serve as signals and provide information about initial reactions, but they may not represent a realistic view of the situation. Most people have experienced getting carried away by emotions at times when their extreme reaction was not appropriate to what was really going on. Everyone makes mistakes and misjudges situations. Depressed people are, however, more likely to believe their feelings without questioning their validity or rationality. They avoid thinking rationally about situations and assume that because they feel depressed, their experiences in life are really negative. Letting the heart rule the head often ends up in heartache, however. We need to challenge feelings and allow for the possibility that they may be based on faulty information or irrational thoughts. If we do so, we will open the door to more positive attitudes and greater happiness in life.

Automatic Thoughts

As adults, we are involved in many activities that have become fairly automatic, such as driving a car, using sophisticated machinery, or sewing. There was a time, however, when these tasks were difficult and required complete concentration to do them correctly. Try to recall when you were learning to drive or type or play a musical instrument. It takes a while to learn to change chords on a guitar without looking at your finger placement, but with practice these changes begin to feel more natural. Typists don't have to think through each finger movement—hands on home base and away they go. Many things have become automatic to each of us, including the patterns of our thoughts.

A piece of folk wisdom states that optimists will say a glass is half full while pessimists will say it is half empty. Some people have developed the habit of seeing a dark side to almost everything and can find a cloud for every silver lining. Depressed individuals automatically distort or change their thoughts about what actually happens to fit a generally gloomy picture. They assume the worst from others and expect the worst for themselves and may not realize that these attitudes are actually the result of a pattern of thinking that has developed over many years.

Thought patterns begin very early in life. A child's conscience, one form of automatic thinking, develops from teachings of parents and other early experiences. For instance, a four-year-old tells his friend, "We don't jump on beds at our house; my daddy doesn't like it," even though he really wants to do it. Parental rules will eventually become the core of the normal child's conscience, as a result of years of exposure to them. The injunction not to jump on the bed will begin to feel like a natural part of the older child's internal values. For some people, however, this healthy process is twisted, and a tyrannical, critical, perfectionistic inner self develops that seems to automatically control their thoughts, color their perceptions, and contribute to their chronic depression.

Debbie, a divorcÃ©e, had gone through her life with just this kind of despotic inner voice. As an adult she had been in a series of relationships with people who were desperately unhappy themselves and took advantage of her. If she stood up to them, thoughts like these went through her mind: "You're just selfish. You're a 'meanie.' You think only of yourself." She traced the origin of these thoughts to her early life, when she had been told repeatedly that it was selfish to assert her own needs or set limits on the demands of others. If there was a disagreement within her family, she was expected to give in and was called a "meanie" if she did not. These early criticisms became automatic thought patterns, limiting her ability to interact in a healthy way with others.

Automatic thoughts are similar to the body's muscle reflexes. Many muscle reflexes do not require the brain to process information or make decisions before the body responds. For example, a doctor's hammer striking the knee causes a reflexive kick before the brain receives information about the sensation or determines what to do next. In a similar manner, the thinking of some people develops a negative inner reflex that is just as automatic. Reactions take place automatically, before they can even think about them, causing thoughts about themselves and the world around them to be grotesquely misshapen.

Some kinds of automatic thoughts or thought distortions are common to depressed people. Four of these destructive distortions can be remembered easily by using the mnemonic (memory aid) L-O-S-E: Labeling; Omniscience, Omnipotence, and Overgeneralizing; Shoulds; and Extremes. Thoughts can be reanchored in reality and depression decreased by uncovering these distortions, challenging their validity, and refusing to respond in the old automatic way. Consider your own thoughts as you read, and try to identify those distortions that may influence your own moods.

Labeling

Think for a moment about poor Charlie Brown. His friends in the Peanuts comic strip call him a "blockhead," and he thinks of himself as a blockhead, too. I assume that being a blockhead means he is stupid, but I have found him to be quite insightful at times. For instance, he clearly understands that Lucy will not hold the football while he kicks it; he just wants to believe he can trust her (perhaps it is her character that is flawed, not his). We know that Charlie Brown is good to his sister and loyal to his dog. There is really much to admire about Charlie, but he believes he is a blockhead anyway. It would be hard to convince him he is not.

Like Charlie Brown, our first experiences with labels are usually as children, when we begin to use them to categorize the many varieties and subtleties we observe in the world around us. Because of these early attempts at labeling, going to the zoo with a two-year-old can be entertaining; anything with four legs is a "doggy," "kitty," or "horsey." Children are very enthusiastic about skunks and tigers, because they believe they are just kitties.

Luckily, as adults we become more discriminating and sophisticated with our labels—or do we? Have you ever not completed a task on time, burned dinner, or not anticipated what your friend really wanted? Those who are vulnerable to depression are likely to say "I'm a failure" or some derivative of that label in these situations. Clearly they are not failures—they did finish the task or have finished other things, dinner is not always burned, and they can, at times, please their friends. What is a failure, after all? It is only one of those tragic labels, superficial shorthand that describes everything yet nothing, everyone and no one. Everyone has failed from time to time, but I have yet to meet a real failure.

Labeling ourselves and others is harmful and deceptive. Most people become accustomed to hearing labels about themselves and labeling others very early and never stop to consider the consequences. Unfortunately, labels can become as predictive as they are descriptive as we limit our choices in life based on old misperceptions. Consider the labels you gave yourself or others gave you while you were growing up: "tomboy," "jock," "egghead," "wallflower," "busybody," "cynic," "sweet spirit," "slob," "emotional wreck," "showoff," "underachiever," "introvert." Write your labels down on a piece of paper and see how well they describe you. Typically they reflect only a few events in life and a very narrow perspective.

Just as we discovered that failure doesn't really describe anyone, you'll probably agree that your own labels are mostly inaccurate and generally useless. They don't tell the whole story or offer a balanced picture of how you really are. Labeling distorts reality; people are not fixed and stagnant objects or things, but unique characters on an ever-changing stage. Labeling is like describing a cross-country drive by telling of one stop along the way.

The story about the blind men and the elephant teaches an important lesson about labeling. Six men, blind from birth, took pride in their wisdom and wanted to learn about elephants. The first man bumped into the elephant's side and declared that an elephant was like a wall. The second, after grasping a tusk, described the elephant as something like a spear. The third touched only the trunk and was sure an elephant was similar to a snake. The other three, after touching the elephant in different places, exclaimed it must be like a tree, a fan, or a rope. All accurately described the part of the elephant they had handled, but they missed understanding what it really was altogether.

Labels make us blind to the "elephant" as a whole and describe only part of the actual picture. Depressed people distort reality by negatively labeling one facet of themselves or others and then believing their label represents an accurate picture. This, of course, often deepens their depression.

Clearing your thoughts and speech of destructive labels is an important goal to work toward. There are some steps you can take immediately to reduce their use. First, try to deal only in the present with criticism; then link it to a specific event; and finally, don't exaggerate. For example, "You're a slob" can become "Please pick up your toys; I feel angry when I see them on the floor." "I'm a loser" becomes "I'm disappointed because I lost the Evans' account," or "I'm a pig" becomes "I ate too much ice cream last night." Statements that avoid labeling require that we be specific and accurate in describing a situation. This provides helpful feedback instead of fostering a cycle of recriminations or name calling, which undermines self-esteem. It also leaves room for others to change or respond to our wishes rather than creating defensiveness in them and depression in ourselves.

Though it is clear that labeling is destructive, it can still be a hard habit to break. Here are some additional suggestions to decrease the negative affects of labeling:

Omniscience, Omnipotence, and Overgeneralizing

Children and young adults experience two common fantasies: (1) they can control or predict what will happen in the future, and (2) they are the center of the universe with all decisions and actions revolving around them. Theologians refer to these qualities as omniscience and omnipotence, abilities attributed to deity. Mental health professionals call these fantasies "magical thinking" in children, but in adults they become black magic, and the magician becomes the victim of his own thoughts. For instance, believing that he already knows what people are thinking, the pseudo-magician refuses to check out with others his assumptions about what their words or actions mean, and he makes decisions based on his distorted view of reality. At other times he may try to predict the future based unrealistically on unrelated past performances or on his attitude about himself. He thereby becomes excluded from opportunities for growth and happiness. It would be a heady feeling to possess these powers, but it is really a very destructive fantasy. Belief in our own omniscience and omnipotence leads to the assumption that our experiences or feelings are true in every instance. We then overgeneralize by taking a little information and drawing broad conclusions. Let's examine a few of the ways these mistaken ideas create havoc and contribute to depression.

Mind reading is both a fascinating and a fear-provoking possibility. Several popular books have been written recently purporting to teach how to "read" the postures and actions of others for what they "really mean." People can begin to believe they know what someone else is thinking, particularly someone close to them. This kind of mind reading often leads to false conclusions, however, and a kind of paranoia can develop. A paranoid person is, in fact, a good example of mind reading taken to an extreme. People who exhibit features of paranoia seldom check out their thoughts, since they are convinced they know the truth and others would only lie to cover it up.

Another variation of mind reading is personalizing the random actions of others. For instance, from time to time I respond in anger or frustration when I hear a horn honk while I am on the freeway. I act as though it is directed at me personally, even though there are many other cars on the road toward which the honk might be directed. In fact, it might even be a friendly greeting rather than an unwelcome criticism. By distorting my thoughts in this manner, however, I can be in a very foul mood by the time I arrive at work. Deciding "it's going to be one of those days" usually follows a set of random events that one personalizes in this very same manner. It also leads one to look for even more ways in which he might be slighted during the day.

Some people become so sure they can read minds and that others want to hurt them that they jump to conclusions. They make big decisions with little information, interpreting all sorts of things from a glance, an absence, or just a few words. This is particularly destructive to intimate relationships. Arguments often begin because one party misunderstands or reads into what the other is saying without checking it out. Depressed people are very vulnerable to this type of error. Like horses with black blinders on, they see only a narrow range of life and consistently interpret the actions and words of others in the worst possible way. Some have tried to justify this kind of outlook with cynicism, saying that it helps them avoid being disappointed, but who could be more disappointed than one who expects the worst from everyone?

Janet, an attractive woman being treated for depression, described this scenario: "I was in the kitchen rushing to get dinner ready when my husband came in. He didn't even say 'hi' before he asked me to go jogging with him tonight. I know he was trying to make me feel guilty because I'm fat."

Janet's tendency to read other people's minds and jump to conclusions was not limited to reactions toward her husband. She was often upset and depressed because of her assumptions about what other people said or did. She accepted a challenge to check out her assumptions before they made her miserable, beginning with her husband. When he invited her to go jogging again, she discovered he really just wanted someone to run with; he was not necessarily critical of her weight. Taking a moment to check out her conclusions made a big difference in her thoughts, and therefore, in her feelings also.

The remedy for mind reading and jumping to conclusions is simple yet very difficult for some: check it out. Asking for more information or sharing your interpretation will give people a chance to accept or reject your conclusion.

Another form of omniscience is the belief we can foretell the future, and to depressed people, it usually looks bleak. By expecting sorrow and pain, they seem to hold a sieve that catches whatever is negative or hurtful and allows other experiences to pass through. Positive experiences are especially likely to be filtered out instead of being enjoyed or savored. Disappointments are retained and become overwhelming. A depressed person might say, "How can I enjoy anything when I'm so fat?" or "After he said I had let him down, it ruined my whole day" or "I just couldn't face them again, I felt so embarrassed."

Because of the person's inability to focus on what is good or constructive, potential positives can be twisted into negatives. We presume that we know better than to accept that something good is happening. Joan, for example, passively looked for work off and on for several years. If any job began to look promising, however, she came up with a number of objections to it. When she received the highest score on a test for one job and was told she would be contacted in a few days, she immediately began to generate reasons why the job would be unsuitable for her. She even mentioned the number of bumps on the road leading to the office building where she would work. To hear her talk, the job offer was not to be celebrated—it was almost catastrophic.

Depressed people also frequently ignore or deny any compliments or recognition they are given because it is inconsistent with their gloomy picture of themselves. A common thought is, "If he knew what I was really like, he wouldn't say that." Of course no one will ever know everything about someone else, and even if they could, chances are they would not judge us as harshly as we fear. Absolute perfection is not required to receive or enjoy a compliment anyway. When we refuse to accept positive strokes from people, they usually stop coming our way, since few people are willing to argue with someone over whether they look nice or did a good job. Depression decreases the ability to feel good about what someone says; yet it increases sensitivity to any negative feedback. Looking for and accepting the positive can bring us back into balance. Even just acknowledging compliments keeps them coming rather than closing the door, and it doesn't frustrate the one who gives the compliment.

One girl in my high school class was so good at negating compliments that almost everyone gave up on her. She flatly refused to accept that anything was positive, and she seldom smiled. For a while we thought Pat was just sad about something, and we continued to try to cheer her up. After a few months, however, her gloominess began to affect others profoundly. We felt powerless and stopped inviting her along. In retrospect, I can see that Pat's negative attitude prevented us from reaching her. She filtered out all our attempts to cheer her, and we felt put down and ineffectual. At our ten-year reunion I saw Pat again. She had not changed much, even though she now had a new group of associates and some years had passed. I realized again that the change had to come from within her. Perhaps she will wait her whole life for someone or something to make the difference that only she can make.

Pat, like other depressed people, could benefit from focusing on positives, even looking actively for them, and accepting the support, compliments, and caring of others. This is a real struggle when we're feeling down, because it is more natural to dwell on the negative. Filters seem to fall over our eyes. Just as polarized glasses keep out glare, so depressing thoughts keep us from experiencing the joyful and positive; we can see only the negative or hurtful. If we remove these filters, even try some "rose-colored glasses," our mood improves.

Depressed individuals become overly sensitive to the actions, words, and even thoughts of others. They believe that everyone is watching them and reacting critically. This belief can lead to self-consciousness and an inability to properly perceive their influence or importance to others. Often individuals will avoid making decisions or taking action because they fear what people will think of them. While we may seem to be in a powerful position when we believe that what we do is of so much interest, it is usually a false belief. Actually, the most devastating thing about what other people think about us is to realize they rarely do. We need to move away from the center of the universe and be content to just be ourselves. Developing a realistic perspective is a challenge when we are depressed, but it is essential to improving our mood.

Shoulds

"I really should try the suggestions in this book, but . . . " Whenever I hear someone say "should," I assume the person won't. Shoulds are usually a way to acknowledge some desire or obligation and then dismiss it. Think of the number of times you use the word should. How many shoulds do you actually follow through with? Shoulds often become ammunition for self-persecution and destruction of self-image rather than assets. At this moment I can think of ten or twelve things I should (and could) be doing, but I am writing this chapter. I have to decide for myself what is most important and fit in other activities as I can. If I feel guilty because of my choices, I am likely to not enjoy what I am doing and to resent those activities I should be engaged in. No study that I am aware of indicates that guilt or resentment leads to positive growth and change.

Think of a busy time recently when you had what seemed like a million things to do, maybe a holiday, a special party, or vacation preparation. Most people experience increased stress, even when they are happy about an important upcoming event. It is common to feel overwhelmed, lose the ability to concentrate, become cranky, and wish it was just over with. Shoulds, musts, and oughts give us stress in this way too. They are those millions of things that probably won't get done but take energy to worry about: the untidy attic, the letter to an old college pal, the scrapbook that needs to be arranged, and the thank-you notes to the folks who helped with the ward party. They are the gnawing pit in our stomach when we think of what we should do today and the beginnings of an overly guilty conscience.

A serious mistake is made by assuming that shoulds, musts, and oughts are really our conscience or the Holy Ghost attempting to direct us. These spiritual feelings do occur, and we can strive to accurately recognize their source by staying in tune. Usually, however, shoulds are leftovers, the rules or expectations of someone we have wanted to please.

Resentment of shoulds is also a major cause of guilty feelings. Trying to please everyone and fulfill all of our shoulds generates frustration. For example, we think we should keep an immaculate home as our mother did, but she didn't work outside the home as well. We should play football as our brother did. We should enjoy each and every church meeting, and if we don't, something is wrong with us. Shoulds can become a heavy burden, sometimes more than we can bear.

A handsome young man became depressed and somewhat of a recluse. He thought that whatever he did should have been done better, or he should have done something else. He was immobilized by his many self-critical shoulds, avoided attempting almost anything in order to escape this criticism, and, consequently, found little satisfaction in life. He was also constantly disappointed in people because he extended his unrealistic expectations to them. Those who might have been friendly avoided his rigid demands and judgment.

Directing shoulds toward our family and friends is likely to damage our relationships. A response we think should occur may not be natural for someone else. For instance, a newly married couple faced the dilemma of what they should do when one of them was sad. The husband thought people should be left alone to lick their wounds (that's what he wanted). His wife, however, thought people should try to provide comfort (that's what she wanted). Disappointment and confusion occurred until they each let go of their shoulds and responded instead in a manner that pleased their partner.

This is a very common pattern. Shoulds, musts, and oughts seldom stay inside us. They are like a communicable illness, creeping onto our friends and acquaintances. If these thoughts get out of control, they can destroy our own self-esteem and our relationships with others.

Letting go of shoulds can be accomplished in a variety of ways. For example, try using won't or will instead of should, ought, or must. You will be making a clearer statement of your intentions and reassume control over your decisions. A less radical and more ambiguous word is may. This puts you back in charge. It lets people know that you haven't decided yet. When a should appears, identify whom it really belongs to. Is it your mother's? your ex-bishop's? your brother's? Give it back to them; tell yourself, "I know you wanted me to do this, but it does not fit for me."

A recent popular book was titled Pulling Your Own Strings. Banishing shoulds will cut some of the strings from others that tie us to depression, and it will allow others to pull their own strings too.

Extremes

Life can feel like an emotional roller coaster with unpredictable changes in mood. Depressed people commonly feel this way because they think in extremes of highs and lows. Remember the wise and foolish men who built their houses on different foundations. The wise man built his house on rock; the foolish man built his on sand. (See Matthew 7:24-27.) Emotional homes are too often built on the shifting sand of feelings rather than the rock of reality. Being out of touch with the world around us leads to distortion and depression.

An example of extreme thinking is the use of absolute language that defines the world as black or white, all or nothing, leaving little room for uncertainty or partial satisfaction. Can you think of something that is absolute? A totally clean house, a perfect lesson, and an absolute disaster are all exaggerations; they exist only in our minds.

The real world is not made up of absolutes, but of mixtures. A few pure elements have been combined to create a rich variety of life on earth. So it is with mortal life. Absolute good and bad are hard to find; most experiences are some kind of combination. Even physicists are learning that their old rules of how the world had to operate must bend or change to encompass what they are now learning. When we use words like never, always, all, or none, we pretend that the world is made up only of opposites or absolutes. People who say they are always wrong or never on time or their work is appreciated by no one, for example, are just plain wrong. If they begin to believe these ideas, they may stop trying to improve themselves. Thoughts like these cause disappointment and the anticipation of disappointment because they lead a person to assume he will fail.

A woman who had recently returned from a vacation described her trip as a "total disaster." Her companions were insensitive, they had been "conned" at the airport, and the weather was too hot. She mentioned only in passing making new friends, broadening her horizons by traveling (she had not previously traveled outside her home state), and how inspired she felt when she saw some of our national treasures. It was clear that she had become depressed because of her negative focus and outlook. The report of her travels sounded depressing because of her exaggerations.

Sometimes it requires intense concentration to find a positive thought, but it is a skill we can learn. Start by ridding yourself of absolutes, the major contributor to extreme thinking. Words like always, never, everyone, and nobody are a red flag. When you think or say these words, stop and ask yourself, "Am I exaggerating?" Depressed people frequently think and speak in absolutes, and in this way they keep their world simple and simply awful.

Depressed individuals may also swing to the other extreme and minimize or underestimate the real importance of some things. Depression increases vulnerability to temptations; self-image becomes so low that ideals that were once important don't seem to matter any more.

A young man struggling with depression had recently returned to school, fulfilling one of his important goals. He had been looking forward to a fresh start. When he became mildly depressed, however, he began to skip classes and not complete assignments, minimizing the impact of these decisions by telling himself each night that tomorrow he would catch up. Soon he was overwhelmed with catch-up work. His perspective was changed by depression, and the dream of college became a nightmare.

Many couples I have seen in therapy have also developed serious problems when they have minimized the importance of their relationship or their partner's needs. It is common that at least one member of a couple seeking marital therapy is also suffering from depression; minimization, which often accompanies it, can be one of the causes of marital problems.

Another common error of extremes is to take a little information and draw a broad conclusion from it. Imagine a child taking her first wobbly step, falling down, and concluding "I'll never walk." Some of us are lucky we learned what we did when we were young! Jumping to extreme conclusions causes us to avoid many potentially pleasurable activities. The ability and motivation to attempt something new decreases when we adopt a pessimistic attitude and growth is stunted. Depression can result because we feel that we are stuck in a rut.

Depressed people frequently think that problems are outside of their control and believe there is nothing they can do to change them. This extreme conclusion usually causes them to give up. We all have experiences that are out of our control at times, but it is an error to predict, because of these events, that our actions never make a difference. Some have speculated that feeling a lack of control in life over a period of time can stimulate a form of depression called "learned helplessness." Passivity often results, even in a situation where action may make a difference, because the individual thinks he has no power to control or change things; he has, in effect, learned to respond in a helpless manner. Such persons attribute the ability to avoid negative situations to luck or chance. The belief that they are stuck in a rut becomes inviolable, even when they could improve the situation by taking some action.

For example, every winter Fred was depressed from mid-November to mid-January. It seemed to have always been that way for him. He had grown up in a large family where money was scarce and the holidays were celebrated austerely. As a boy he compared his Christmas gifts with those of his friends, and he felt disappointed. As an adult he fantasized that his friends would initiate contact with him to cheer him up, but they did not meet his expectations. Each year he gave in to depression and acted as though he were powerless to alter this pattern. Though he could have organized pleasant activities on his own, he chose to remain passive and to feel hopeless. He thought, "It's no use. I'll just have to get through it one more year."

Fred had developed a type of learned helplessness through a long series of disappointments around Christmastime. He really could not do much about his family's lack of money, and perhaps as a youngster he didn't have the skills to organize activities with his friends. For a while he passively accepted his misery as unavoidable each year. Now, however, he actively arranges positive interactions with his friends and family, and he feels much happier during the holidays.

Patience and Practice

Man has long sought a perpetual motion machine, a machine that, once started, would keep going on its own. Depression is like this machine. Initial sadness triggers in us automatic negative thoughts and a lack of interest in usually pleasant activities. We then withdraw from others, put on blinders that filter out positives, and focus on our negative experiences. There is even some evidence that memory for negative experiences is sharpened during periods of depression. This process can be halted if we recognize and change those patterns of thinking and behaving that perpetuate blue moods.

To achieve a greater measure of joy in our lives, we can begin to recognize distorted, destructive thought patterns in ourselves and use some of the specific techniques provided here to change them. These techniques are like tools, however; it takes practice to become expert at using them.

I learned about the importance of patience one Christmas when I wanted to make an intricate piece of furniture and had to use a router. The router had sat unused on the shelf for some years. At first the tool seemed awkward to use, and I made gouges in the wood. I thought it would take forever to complete the project. Then, with practice, I became quite deft and began to enjoy my work. I found I was getting better, so much so that the router almost felt like a natural extension of my hands. The project was completed in time, and I was proud of my work.

Take a moment and decide where to begin your work. Which distortions are most common for you: Labeling; Omniscience, Omnipotence, Overgeneralizing; Shoulds; or Extremes? On an index card that will fit in your pocket or purse, begin writing down examples of your distorted thoughts. Set aside a few minutes each day to review what you have written and think of more rational responses. Enlist the help of family or friends to monitor what you say; perhaps you can make it into a game among you by competing to become the most realistic. Then use the specific ideas presented here with each type of error. Exchange your negative, automatic thoughts for positive or at least neutral ones. Since negative thoughts often become second nature, eliminating them requires practice and hard work. Nevertheless, I am confident you will feel more joy if you work with these tools to control your thoughts, and in doing so, you will improve your feelings.
