Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 2

Controlling Our Environment

Some mornings I jump out of bed feeling energized and excited about the day, even if I have not slept much the night before. Sometimes, though, the alarm rings and I can't seem to get up until I am almost late. While I'm frozen in bed, I try to think of a good reason to get up: Is there anything novel about today? Is there any real reason not to get up? Is there anything good to eat if I do get up? When I finally force myself out of bed, I look for little things I must do before work—petting the cat, changing clothes again, or anything to stall. These variations in our attitude happen to all of us now and then, and many times the difference between the feelings of excitement and those of depression on these mornings is based on our anticipation of the day's events.

Peter Lewinsohn and his colleagues at the University of Oregon have studied the relationship between depression and the quality of an individual's experience with his environment. They have theorized that a decrease in pleasant events and/or an increase in unpleasant events leads to a change in how rewarding he perceives the world to be. If he is facing a great deal of stress or uncertainty in comparison to positive experiences, for example, the scales may tip in the direction of a blue mood. Not everyone will become depressed when under pressure, however, since each person is unique. An individual's responses also vary depending on the situation, the timing of negative events, and personal resources.

One consistent difference between depressed and nondepressed individuals is their attitudes about control and responsibility for their lives. According to psychiatrist Aaron Beck's theory of learned helplessness, depressed individuals believe that control over most decisions and events in life is out of their hands and is determined instead by decision-makers, such as their boss, their spouse, their bishop, or maybe just fate. This belief contributes to a depressive, downward spiral. An initial sense of hopelessness leads to a decrease in motivation to take charge of life, an increase in feeling out of control, and then the blues. Exercising control over the events of daily life is critical in alleviating depression.

The idea of controlling our environment may sound like science fiction. Images from books such as Brave New World and 1984 come to mind and may frighten us a little. Shaping the world in positive and useful ways has proven to be a powerful tool for combatting depression, however, and is already being used on us every day. For example, the last time you purchased groceries there was probably music (or more precisely Muzak) playing throughout the store. Notice it the next time you are shopping. It will not likely be a rousing piece such as "The William Tell Overture" or modern rock and roll, but a soothing, gentle melody designed to make you feel like lingering. Its purpose is to keep you in the store longer and therefore buying more (research has shown that it works, too). Computer manufacturers are also using the magic technique of controlling the environment by creating "user friendly" hardware and software programs. If you make a mistake on this type of computer, it will not display a cold and punishing word like "error," or flash "tilt" while smoke pours out of the keyboard. The computer acts politely and writes "Please try again" or even provides suggestions on how to get it right. One company has put the controls right in your hand so you only have to point at whatever it is you want it to do. Using this kind of technology has paid off handsomely for computer makers. People prefer "user friendly" equipment because it provides a positive environment for working and it helps them feel good. You can program your life like these computers with a daily dose of good, positive experiences.

Feeling in control of one's environment can do wonders for any individual, and a depressed person especially needs to find the ways to regain control. Some general principles of controlling environment are presented here. Choose from among the suggestions those ideas which seem most relevant to your situation, and experiment with changes in your style of interacting with the world around you.

The Little Things

Nina sat quietly in group therapy. She began to feel hopeless and trapped as she thought about going home to her three young children, fixing them dinner, and spending the night alone. Another group member, noticing the despairing look on her face, commented on her silence and sadness. "I don't have anything to look forward to," Nina explained. "Every day is just the same." Members of the group then began to discuss what they each found rewarding in life. The answers were as varied as the personalities of the group members: a hot bath and reading a good magazine or book, taking five minutes to do yoga, making cookies, calling a friend, sleeping in, giving the family bird a bath, and going to the library to get new books. Nina was surprised they could feel joy in such little things. She seemed to be waiting for a grand something to change her life from dull to exciting and to lift her out of depression.

Nina will probably be waiting a long time. Most of us have a fairly set routine in life. We know what to expect from each day, and may experience few variations in our routine. It is easy to identify with Sisyphus, the mythical king of Corinth, who was condemned by the gods to forever roll a boulder up a hill in Hades, only to have it roll down again as he neared the top. Focusing on the daily grind is not the way to increase pleasure in life, however. Negative thoughts about the tasks of the day can stall progress before we have even started to try; we then languish in bed searching for the energy to get up or perhaps a good excuse not to. When we believe life is made up only of "have-to's," depression is likely to follow.

"Aha," you may say, "I knew it was my job that was getting me down. I've felt like quitting for a long time." Blaming job, family, neighbors, friends, or others for the daily unpleasantness we face is deceptively easy. Placing the responsibility for happiness somewhere else, outside of ourselves, often contributes to thoughts about drastic solutions, such as a job change, a move, or a divorce. In some situations these alternatives might be part of the answer. For most people, though, a few minor changes can bring a lot of joy and satisfaction to life. You might be surprised, as Nina was, at the pleasure to be gained from programming little extras into daily life.

Following group that evening Nina sat down and wrote out a list of the little things that bring her pleasure. The only qualifications for inclusion were that they be within her reach financially and immediately at hand with little advance preparation. Here is her list:

Nina was pleased with her list. Even thinking about doing something just for fun gave her spirits a lift. The next step was to put her thoughts into action. As she planned out the rest of the week, she made sure one or two of these activities were included each day. Some of them, such as baths and crossword puzzles, she could do often. Others she wouldn't want to do more than once in a while. I encouraged her to hang the list in a place where she could see it often and add to it when she had new ideas. If she felt depressed, choosing something fun from it to do might help improve her mood.

Programming positive and pleasant activities into life is a centerpiece of many behavioral approaches to treating depression. Although many people report experiencing a lack of pleasure in any activity when they are depressed (this is called anhedonia), doing almost anything that is potentially pleasurable seems to help. This is often a difficult concept to grasp because it involves a paradox: doing what one least wants to do and yet gaining an improvement in mood from it.

Good places to start looking for helpful little diversions are memories of what you have enjoyed in the past. Take out a sheet of paper and begin to generate a list. Remember the two rules: the activities have to be financially reasonable and they must be immediately at hand. These are very short-term activities, goals, and projects. Going to Europe or finding a new job are too demanding for this list, but sending a letter for travel information or a class schedule might be appropriate if they sound like fun. When you run out of ideas, post the list in a handy place and add to it when you can. Plan to fit one or two of these activities into every day. Don't approach the ideas passively and just hope you can work them in. Make a space in your life. There will be more energy for the "have-to's" if you take time for some "want-to's."

Learning to Set Limits

Kent was a young man in a hurry. He felt far behind his peers because he was nearing thirty and had not completed college, so he decided to return to school. He did not want to decrease his standard of living, so he took on an extra job. He had also become accustomed to a healthy social life and wanted to keep it. After a few weeks of this hectic schedule, Kent became depressed. "It seems like all I do is get up, get dressed, go to school, go to work, come home, and crash," he said. "I never have any fun and I never have time for myself." Kent had forgotten that he had made the choice to try to do everything at once, and now life felt like an unbearable burden.

This situation is not unusual. People often create their own monstrous schedules by wanting to do everything, all the time. The cost can be great to our health, our family life, our sense of well-being, and, perhaps, our general feeling of sanity. Many people need to slow down or rearrange the priorities in their lives in order to achieve an improvement in mood.

One of the reasons for this earth life is to learn how to become like God. Genesis states that the work of creation was divided into six days, and on the seventh, there was rest. There are two notable ideas in this description: God did not attempt to do everything in one day, and the scriptural emphasis on the eternal principle of taking time to rest and reflect. Let's examine both ideas more closely.

For whatever reason, the world, like Rome, was not created in a day. We do not know why the creative period was divided instead of completed all at once. It would be reasonable to assume, however, that the Creators worked in accordance with eternal laws and principles as the earth was being formed. As mere mortals, in comparison we would be wise to consider ourselves as subject to some practical limitations too.

An important place to begin setting limits is to avoid not overwhelming ourselves with too many demands, regardless of how worthwhile the cause might be. Barbara, an active Latter-day Saint, said that she had been taught to "pull till you drop, like the pioneers and their animals did." She related a story about a pioneer woman who had been run over by a wagon, breaking both of her legs. Because others in the company could not care for her and were under pressure to move on, they shot her. While I doubted the accuracy of the story, its impact on Barbara was clear. For her, the journey through life is a burden to be borne and your worth is determined by how much you can bear. She thought that the idea of setting limits or organizing positive and enjoyable activities for yourself was tantamount to sin. It was not surprising that she had felt blue and overwhelmed for years!

Balancing Work and Rest

The second principle illustrated by the story of the Creation in Genesis is achieving a balance between work and rest. The work of creation was followed by a period of rest and renewal. Medical research is rapidly establishing the dangers of a workaholic lifestyle: increased risk of heart attacks, strokes, high blood pressure, and any other stress-related illness. Doubtless most people who drive themselves to these extremes believe it is necessary to suffer in order to succeed. Whatever project they are working on becomes more important than anything else, and they fail to respect the natural limitations of their body and spirit. Eventually the body will get their attention through disease and illness, and the spirit may demand consideration by losing energy and initiative (something we have learned to call depression).

Even when the goals being pursued are of unquestionable importance, there are limits to what one can do, as Kent learned while fulfilling his dream of returning to school. Though his time was committed to worthwhile tasks, he had previously derived much satisfaction from planning spur-of-the-moment activities with his friends and taking time off to relax by himself occasionally. He lost the flexibility he once had to be spontaneous and began to feel as if his life was being controlled by someone else. He rebelled (against himself, perhaps), cut classes, put off homework, and called in sick to work. He was trying to feel free again, but was saddled by increasing depression instead.

When Kent came in for therapy, he was desperate; his dream had turned into a nightmare. At first he resisted the idea of slowing down by making a lot of "should" statements, such as, "I should be able to do all this" and "I should be happy just to be back in school—it's what I've always wanted." Then he seemed to realize that joy isn't found in the way things should be, but in the way they really are. He decided to cut back the number of classes he was taking, to work one night less a week, and to spend less money on entertainment to make up the difference. In the following weeks his enjoyment of life increased dramatically. The former chores became pleasures, and he savored his positive feelings from being back in school. His experience taught him that there really can be too much of a good thing. By taking on more than we can do, we may end up not enjoying any of it or even resenting our involvement.

The principle of rest is presented along with creation in scripture. God has wisely commanded man to rest and worship Him on the Sabbath, but the importance of rest extends beyond Sunday, as does that of worship. This principle of rest is not understood by many people. Rest is mistakenly confused with sleep, which is only one of many forms it may take. The quality that makes sleep restful is its potential to recharge or invigorate our bodies and minds when we are tired.

Recreational activities can be (but are not always) restful. Some people respond with anxiety to highly competitive or challenging activities. The key concept of rest is rejuvenation, literally a re-creation of energy in life. Often people are unaware of how to rest and re-create. For instance, though we may engage in several sports activities, these might not provide the kind of diversion that is needed. We all have to discover what is really restful for us, and the discovery for each of us is likely to be different. It is similar to our personal tastes in food; what is a delight to you may be difficult for me to swallow.

To identify what is restful to you, think about the last time you really felt at ease and at peace. What were you doing? Reading a book by the fireplace? Taking a leisurely evening walk? Having a quiet dinner with a friend? Singing along with a record? Everyone is going to have a different answer, and your own choices of restful activities will change with your mood and circumstances, too. Develop a list of potential ways to rest that you can choose from when you're out of ideas. Take time to rest. You need and deserve it.

Handling the "Have-to's"

Sometimes we have to do things that are unpleasant, such as spring cleaning, talking to a creditor, or writing a lengthy report. These things are all part of life, and they cannot be ignored. What can be done is to use creativity in organizing these tasks in ways that will minimize our personal stress. Here are a few suggestions:

Learning to Say No

One of the most important strategies to assist us in arranging our life in a positive and rewarding manner is to learn when to say no. Of course, everyone can make those sounds with his mouth; the skill comes in knowing when and how to say it. For instance, I have been programmed since I was a boy not to say no to requests made of me unless they would clearly be harmful. Before he died, my father left some specific advice about saying no, which was often repeated in my family. "Never say no to a church call." So when I say no, I feel guilty, and if saying yes to a church calling means saying no to myself, I feel angry that I can't have what I want. When I say yes to too many things, I can get depressed.

Several years ago, when I was still in graduate school, I learned an important lesson about saying no and my own mental health. One evening I received a phone call asking me to direct a ward roadshow. I had directed the show the year before, so I was not naive to the many hours and psychological strain involved. At school that quarter I was taking twelve graduate hours (three of them in statistics, which had always been my Waterloo). I was also working two jobs, amounting to above forty hours a week, and was the quorum instructor for the priests in my ward. My first inclination was to decline. Then I remembered what my father had said. "Somehow," I thought, "I'll be able to do all of this." I remembered that when I had directed the roadshow the year before, a minor miracle had taken place when I had received a C in another statistics course (because of my father's injunction, of course).

This was not to be a year of miracles. School was tough and statistics boggled my mind. The roadshow took even more time than the year before. I was racing every minute and felt I wasn't doing well at anything. Depression set in. I felt trapped and unhappy. Had I taken on too much? That would mean I had poor judgment or maybe I just wasn't good enough anymore. Not much solace in those thoughts. I knew something had to give, and my schooling affected only me. I dropped statistics because I had no time to study. The show went on, but my heart wasn't in it. Dropping statistics kept me in school a couple of quarters longer, since it was only offered once a year. Every person to whom I had made commitments paid a price that spring—the cast of the show, my employers, my family, my friends, and me.

How was I to know that directing the roadshow would be too much for me? The truth is, it is probably impossible to always know what our limits are, but there are some things we can do and can watch for.

First—and perhaps most important—we can pray for guidance in deciding whether or not to accept a new opportunity. Each of us is entitled to receive personal revelation for our own life, and we need to tap this spiritual source whenever we have a difficult decision to make.

Second, if we are already overwhelmed, we should seriously consider whether one more demand can be met. Sometimes when people are under stress, a new opportunity looks particularly appealing, like a chance to break out of the grind. Perhaps there is really an option to do some schedule juggling, delay something else, or leave another project undone while fitting something else in, but we need to be careful. People are most vulnerable to bad decision making when they're overtaxed. We might be running away from current pressures instead of making a positive change.

Third, we need to think about how and where the new request fits in with current priorities and commitments. Some opportunities will eclipse in importance what we are doing right now, and we will want to try and make room for them. Others will be nice offers but not necessary, and if the time and energy are not really there, the new tasks can become like a millstone around our necks, sapping effort that could better be applied elsewhere. Remember, each person is given only twenty-four hours in a day. If we are already pushing our limits, it is doubtful that one more demand on our time will be helpful.

Some people try to avoid setting limits by letting another person decide for them what their limits should be. At times this can lead to serious resentment and rebellion. Frances, who had recently been reactivated in the Church, described her frustration: "I want to go to the temple a couple of times a week; I'm volunteering twice a week at the Genealogical Library and staying after to work on my own research; I've been very busy with the stake welfare project; and now the bishop has asked me to take another call." She felt that one more responsibility would change her enthusiasm into resentment. I encouraged Frances to speak frankly to the bishop about her concerns, and he suggested that she trade the welfare assignment for the new call.

Frances had learned that an important part of her stewardship was to live within her spiritual means. It is a mistake to expect any leader to know exactly what's right for us, particularly when we don't talk to them about the limits we are feeling. Leaders have been appointed to counsel and suggest, not to command in all things. Each one of us must take responsibility for deciding how to spend our time.

When we are altering our environment to correct potentially negative or depressing conditions, a little effort really can make a significant improvement. Often this involves a change in personal style, however, and that is difficult for some to follow through on. Initially, it is a daily effort to redirect our life in a more positive and useful manner, but with perseverance it becomes as natural as an old habit. Making these efforts now will lead to more joy from life in the future.
