Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 3

Developing Relationships

Since creation, the link between relationships with others and joy and fulfillment in our lives has been evident. Eve was joined with Adam to be a "helpmeet" or a companion to him, and they were instructed to bear children and find joy in their posterity. Jesus called twelve men to share intimately in his ministry; he had other close relationships as well, such as those with Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. Joseph Smith first shared his vision in the grove with his family; later, many faithful friends cared for him through the trials and hardships of his life. Relationships are important to all of us, regardless of our station in life. We can create joy by strengthening and extending our circle of loved ones.

Each person is born into a unique family. Some are blessed to have a loving mother, father, brothers, and sisters and to grow up knowing how good it feels to be close and to share love. Many people do not have all of these advantages, however. The number of children being raised in families with two parents has been declining steadily for some time. Lifestyles have changed too. Most people do not grow up in the same communities their parents did. Because families move more frequently, children do not have the benefits of grandmothers, grandfathers, aunts, uncles, and cousins living in close proximity as an extended family. Many of us grow up feeling inadequate or unable to relate to others because we have not had the chance to learn the skills of developing lasting relationships.

Sharon was an attractive woman in her mid-twenties, but she stayed at home most of the time and found it hard to relate to people. Most of her friends had taken the initiative to develop a relationship with her. Her parents were also socially isolated. Her father, a workaholic, had little time for others, including his family, and her mother kept to herself. The only relatives of the family lived in distant states, and visits with them were sporadic. Sharon had not learned how to enjoy people or create new friendships, and she feared feeling embarrassed or rejected. For her, relationships were a mystery. She believed it was impossible to learn how to make friends; you either knew how or you didn't. Sharon isolated herself, always spoke solemnly and softly, and avoided smiling because she thought her smile was unattractive.

Sharon's story is not unusual. It can be tough to reach outside of oneself to get acquainted with others, particularly during times of depression when one feels inadequate anyway. When I was in junior high school, I sent away for a book titled Where to Meet Girls and How to Talk to Them, anticipating that it would contain the secrets of Casanova (or at least the Fonz) and change me from resistible to irresistible. One day a thin envelope arrived, and in dismay I read such "secrets" as these: go to dances or activities at school, church, or clubs, smile, and compliment girls on almost anything. I felt angry to have been taken in by this ploy to rob naive adolescents. However, in retrospect, I can see that the advice was quite sound.

People often believe, as I did about meeting girls, that answers must be complex and mysterious. Americans spend billions of dollars on diet books, pills, foods, and paraphernalia, but the best and most effective remedy for being overweight still seems to be eat less and exercise more. I wanted a shortcut to popularity with minimal effort. Though the advice I received was fairly simple, I resisted. It seemed backward to push myself to initiate interaction when I already felt shy and insecure. I wanted to learn to swim without getting wet.

Depression's Effects on Those Around Us

Do you know someone who consistently seems cheerful, who has a warm greeting and a good word for everyone? You may also know people who are cheerless, unhappy, and cynical whenever you interact with them. Whom would you rather be with? It has been said, "Misery loves company." Research indicates, however, that the miserable are often shunned by others. When we are already depressed, this contributes to increasing depression because we feel rejected. Pat, my depressed high school classmate introduced in chapter 1, is a good example of this kind of self-perpetuated rejection. Her constant blues kept others distant from her because they did not want to be dragged down by her. Our depression does affect others around us.

College students participating in one research project spoke with depressed and nondepressed individuals by phone. The students rated the depressed callers more negatively, said they also felt depressed after making the call, and were less likely to desire further interactions with those individuals. In groups, depressed individuals typically get involved with only a few others, and many of their interactions are negative, such as complaints, criticism, or demeaning comments about themselves. They are also more passive, apparently waiting for someone else to take the initiative.

Perhaps you can see the paradox. When we are depressed and want to feel close to someone, we are likely to act in a way that creates distance instead. When we are self-focused, it is difficult to lose ourselves in others as we must to create relationships. People typically choose friends and partners who lift them and avoid those who could drag them down; thus, if we have a negative self-image or believe we are only second-rate, we tend to be shunned.

Dependency and Depression

Though relationships are helpful in creating joy and maintaining a positive outlook, it is important to keep them in perspective. There are natural currents, not unlike the tides of the ocean, in most relationships: with our spouse, our friends, or our family. It is normal to feel intense at times and comfortable with some distance at other times. But if we become dependent on love and believe we are nothing without the constant approval and adoration of someone else, we become vulnerable to their excessive or unrighteous demands. I have seen many patients who have developed this kind of dependency, allowing themselves to be abused physically, emotionally, and in some cases spiritually. The beauty of love that they sought became a tragedy in their lives.

The potential hazards of dependency are clearly seen in the desperation that occurs in some people when the intensity of a relationship appears to decline or when one is in between relationships. In these cases, almost any new acquaintance becomes the answer to one's prayers and a way to fill the unfillable void that dependency creates. The new friend frequently feels overwhelmed by this neediness and backs away because he cannot, or does not wish to, fulfill all these unrealistic needs for love and companionship. A handsome, recently returned missionary explained it this way: "If they start to cling to you and you feel like they want to get really serious after only a few dates, watch out!" He stops dating young women who act in this manner even if he likes them and enjoys their company, because they often become jealous and demanding.

Good relationships, contrary to popular myths and songs on the radio, involve sharing rather than neediness. They frequently flower when two people first feel good enough about themselves to want to give to others. In a recent magazine survey, both men and women were asked what made other people attractive to them, and not one person included any form of neediness in his or her response. By refusing to be needy, and cultivating an open, giving, and friendly persona instead, you will draw others to you.

Intimacy

The word intimacy is misunderstood and misused by many people. It does not connote sexuality; indeed, it most often exists without sexual expression. In the three definitions of intimacy in Webster's New World Dictionary, sex is never even mentioned, but such words as private, personal, close, familiar, deep, and thorough are used. Though we often think of love as having a limited quantity, one is capable of being intimate with several people at a time. Like the widow's flask of oil blessed by Elijah because of the widow's willingness to share, love is limitless if used righteously.

Intimate relationships with friends are often ignored as reservoirs of strength. Some people feel they must surrender the right to be close to others when they are married, but this often leads to marital dissatisfaction as one mate struggles to meet needs previously filled by four or five friends. The couple become angry and disappointed in each other because of their unrealistic expectations. This kind of naive togetherness is like putting all your eggs in one basket. Being human, we are bound to trip occasionally in our walk through life. If we can draw strength from others, besides our partners, we are less likely to become depressed during the natural ebbs or trouble spots in that primary relationship.

Some people resist the idea that intimate (and even superficial) relationships require work. Many have been duped into believing the great Hollywood lie that "it just happens." Waiting for the "right" people to fall into our life is a tragic mistake. It is rare to find a person to whom we are drawn from our very first meeting (I can think of two or three in my whole life, and none of them turned out to be my closest friends). In the natural process of friendships, people grow closer together over time in irregular spurts and pauses. True and lasting intimacy requires daring, sharing, and caring over long periods of time. Even if you are lucky enough to fall into a "magic" relationship, you will need to develop new tricks along the way to keep the show going.

The Dangers in Perfectionism

The search for perfectionism is a serious handicap when we are trying to form intimate relationships. Looking at the Washington Monument from a distance, it looks like a smooth, pure-white obelisk; as one gets closer, however, the different colors of stone and effects of aging appear. Often the closer we come, the more faults appear; and for someone looking for perfection, this is very unsettling. Some people avoid getting intimately involved because they cannot find the elusive perfection they seek, and their life and love are wasted on a futile and disappointing search. Looking for perfection can also distance us from others, who back away when they sense our unrealistic expectations.

Perfectionists who are willing to begin a relationship unrealistically idealize their partners to fit their "perfect" image and therefore suffer extreme disappointment and depression when they inevitably must face the fact that their loved one is only human.

David had known Beth only a few weeks, but he was sure she was the girl for him. He thought she was prettier, brighter, and more easygoing than anyone he had ever met. Even though some of his friends told him he was moving too fast, he ignored them and carried himself away in the fantasy he created. David's relationship with Beth continued for about two years. During that time they dated only occasionally, though they saw each other at work a couple of times a week. David's friends and family could not understand his strong attachment to a woman he saw so infrequently, but his lack of contact with Beth did not seem to matter to him. He really worshipped her; she was so right in every way that he sometimes thought that she was too good for him. He began to depend on her love and approval to measure his own self-worth, and he became angry or defensive if anyone suggested that Beth was less than perfect.

One day Beth told David that she wanted to date other men. A week later she told him she was serious about another man and wanted to date him exclusively. David was crushed and angry. She was right for him, and he believed he couldn't find anyone else as perfect. His own self-esteem suffered because he had depended on her love to define his worth as an individual. He became depressed and thought about suicide because he felt he had no more reasons to live; he had put everything into their relationship and their future. Only by confronting the realities about Beth and their uncertain relationship was he able to escape depression, rebuild his self-esteem, and go on with his life.

Though it is romantic to believe that your partner is the answer to all of your dreams, there is danger to you and to the relationship in this fantasy when you finally wake up, as David did. Deification of someone else inevitably brings disappointment. Be content to let others—and yourself—be human and fallible. Try to love people for what they are rather than what you wish them to be, and both you and they will find greater happiness in being together.

Growth Through Others

Relating to someone in a positive and growth-promoting manner helps us to progress toward godhood and can help diminish our chances of experiencing serious depression. God's work and glory are to bring about the immortality and eternal life of men. Is there a greater work for us than to join in this effort by developing relationships that are mutually uplifting? According to Abraham, God recognized the need for growth and progression among the intelligences that surrounded Him. He organized spirits and later bodies for them because of His love and the glory they would bring to Him. (See Abraham 3, 4.) We also can assist those around us in reaching their full potential and, thereby, expand ourselves.

Seek relationships in which both parties can win. Too often individuals compete instead of complementing each other. Friendships that have an underlying competitive base seldom stand up over a long period of time or achieve a level of commitment that allows real growth. Imagine friendship as a three-legged race; one person cannot win without the other.

Consider what impact your current set of friends has on you. Adults often look at teenagers in dismay as previously "good" kids fall in with the "wrong" crowd and begin to imitate the bad habits of their peers. We fool ourselves if we believe this phenomenon is limited to teens, however. Older "birds of a feather" also flock together, and one would be wise not to nest among the looney birds! Luckily, the company we keep can also encourage, challenge, and strengthen us. Don't be afraid to walk away from negative interactions or relationships and to seek friends among positive, vibrant people who will lift you.

Developing Relationships

Here are a few simple but effective suggestions for making interactions with other people more pleasant and more likely to develop into growthful relationships. As you experiment with them, you will find others responding more positively and more frequently to you.

Take a minute and consider those with whom you might initiate a contact: perhaps a new ward member (they are usually open to meeting friends), someone you frequently sit by in church, or an old high school or college friend. Now think of a way to begin or deepen the relationship: a plate of cookies, a no-occasion card, an invitation to dinner. There are many ways to approach people without feeling overwhelmed or vulnerable; just use your imagination. Though not everyone will become your best friend, they will surely be flattered by your kindness and you will have taken some important steps toward taking control of your interactions with others.

Almost everyone belongs to one or more organizations, such as a church, a business, a hobby club, or a union group. Meetings of these groups are likely occasions to find persons who share at least some of our interests. Take advantage of such encounters to practice some of the techniques described above. Ask people you know for suggestions about how to meet others. Your current friends might even be willing to take you along to a meeting or party where you can mix with another crowd. The Church goes to great lengths to provide opportunities for people of all ages to meet: Primary, Mutual, Relief Society, priesthood, and special interest groups; ward functions, plays, and meetings, and so on. Be brave. Chances are the people you meet are as anxious as you are, but they will admire your courage and be flattered by your attention.

Relationships can provide much needed help on the journey through life, but depending on them in a needy manner is destructive both to ourselves and to those with whom we wish to be close. The proper balance between self-reliance and interdependence must be discovered by each individual based on the unique experience of his or her life.
