Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 4

Physiology and Depression

The early writings of ancient philosophers reflect a debate over the question of the relationship between mind and body. Are they connected? How does one think, experience emotion, and initiate actions? Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) taught that the human heart was the seat of life, motion, and sensation, but he assigned reasoning and thought to the psyche, a portion of each man that was distinct from the body. Today we might recognize the psyche as similar to the modern conception of the soul. St. Augustine (A.D. 354-430) is recognized as the first philosopher to assume that the mind and body are one unit, inseparable from each other. Therefore, whatever affects the mind may affect the body, and vice versa. Though modern science has accepted St. Augustine's notion as fact, many people ignore the intimate connections between how they care for their bodies and how they feel emotionally.

The first task of the psychologist is to rule out potential physical causes for what appear to be psychological illnesses. It is not uncommon for a patient to be referred to a physician before psychotherapy is begun. A medical doctor can properly assess what effect the particular circumstances of an individual's life might have on his mood. A family history of mood disorders, a previous or current physical illness, side effects of any medications, an imbalance in the endocrine system, or metabolic disturbances are all potential culprits in the search for causes of depression. Psychologists recognize the close connection between mind and body; psychological intervention will be futile if underlying physical problems are not controlled. Individuals who have had symptoms of serious depression that have lasted longer than two weeks should therefore consult with a doctor.

Though medication can often help alleviate some of the symptoms of depression, many individuals also require counseling and the initiation of changes in their patterns of thinking and behaving. Depression that has a physical or biological component is often intertwined with a style and pattern of life that must be modified in order for the person to feel well again. Medication alone is not enough to bring about these important changes.

Basic Physical Health

Three basic areas of physical health have an important impact on how we feel from day to day: nutrition, exercise, and sleep. Imbalances in any of these have the potential to compound underlying mood disturbances.

Many sources are available from which we can learn the essentials of nutrition. If a refresher course is needed, a medical self-help book, nutritional pamphlets published by government agencies, workers in the health field, and other resources are readily available. In recent years there has been a surge in the number of books published on nutritional issues. Be careful to avoid faddish diets and books that trumpet undocumented, unrealistic claims about the efficacy of their programs, however. There is no scientific evidence for mega-vitamin therapy or "natural" (health food) cures for depression. Eating sensibly, with a goal of balanced nutrition, is the best regimen for good mental health.

Probably the most important consideration in initiating an exercise program is to do something you enjoy. Few people continue exercising if they don't find some enjoyment in it, and to receive the maximum benefit, exercise must become a regular part of life. It is advisable to consult a doctor before beginning an exercise program and to ask for suggestions about what type of exercise is best for you. Usually, it is wise to begin at a comfortable level and gradually increase your effort. Some people also enjoy exercising with others because of the social contact, mutual support, and encouragement.

It is not yet clear why we need to sleep. Some researchers think our brains create toxic substances while we are awake that must be dissipated by sleep. Others believe that dreaming during sleep allows us to consolidate the information accrued during the time we are awake or to develop strategies to deal with current problems we are facing. Whatever the reason, sleep is as much a need as food or water. For the typical person, eight hours of sleep is sufficient, but this varies widely between individuals and for the same person at different times. If you are concerned about the quantity or quality of your sleep, try experimenting with different routines, such as varying your bedtime, the amount of time slept, and the environment in which you sleep, such as the room, the temperature, and the comfort of the bed. Try to maintain some semblance of a regular schedule for sleep after you have discovered the optimal sleeping conditions, too.

Antidepressant Medication

Depression can be a medical problem, and treatment by a physician or psychiatrist may be needed. It is always advisable for everyone to have regular checkups with a doctor; if you are depressed, consulting with a doctor is vital. Depression that has biological causes cannot be resolved by using only nonmedical techniques. Such depression can keep you from feeling as good as you have a right to feel. The number of medical procedures and medications available for diagnosing and treating depression is increasing, and new theories and technology are constantly being developed. Only your physician or psychiatrist can safely use these medical procedures or prescribe medications if they are indicated.

If your doctor decides a medication trial is indicated, you have a right to be informed about any medication prescribed; you will be more likely to follow through with the doctor's recommendations if you understand them.

Some medications are effective in treating depression, though there isn't general agreement about why they work. The most widely respected explanation currently is the amine theory, which states that an imbalance exists in chemicals (neurotransmitters) that deliver messages between neurons in areas of the brain that deal with emotion; the antidepressants work to reestablish this natural balance and thus restore more normal moods. A number of medications have been developed that alleviate symptoms of depression in some patients. Most fall into three general families of related drugs: tricyclics, MAO inhibitors, and lithium. Within these families are medications that differ enough in chemical composition that they work better for some individuals than others. Physicians or psychiatrists decide which is best for each patient.

Following is a brief description of each of the general "families" of antidepressant medications. Since physicians may use the chemical or brand name when talking about medications, both will be included in this listing. The chemical or generic name is given first and some common brand names are included in parentheses.

Antidepressant medications have some common features that a doctor can also discuss with you:

Some misconceptions and fears about antidepressants exist and should be discussed openly with a doctor. For instance, the notion that using medication to alleviate depression is a sign of personal weakness is an attitude that keeps some people front getting the help they need. Taking an antidepressant is no different from taking insulin for diabetes. In biological depression a physiological imbalance exists that, if untreated, can be dangerous to one's health and well being. Also, being depressed and taking medication for it does not mean one is insane; it is a prudent, wise, and rational choice.

The probability of addiction to these drugs is low. They do not produce reactions of extreme energy and euphoria as do amphetamines, distort reality as do hallucinogens, or have the same sedating qualities as do barbiturates or alcohol. Also, it is not necessary to take increasing amounts to maintain the beneficial effects, as is the case with many other drugs. After a few months the doctor will likely decrease the prescribed dose to a maintenance level or discontinue the medication. If taken as directed by the physician, these medications are safe. Antidepressants do not make moods unnatural or artificial; rather they allow the natural balance and rhythm of life to return.
