Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 5

The Importance of Self-Esteem

Much has been written recently about self-esteem. Probably 90 percent of all the people seen for psychological treatment say that they have a low image of themselves, and it doesn't seem to matter if they are attractive or plain, super intelligent or average. Self-esteem is not a mysterious concept, however; it is simply the value you place on yourself. You are the judge.

There are many common misconceptions about self-esteem. They lead to ideas like these: "Something must be wrong with me; successful people never feel awkward or experience self-doubt," or "If I just had a better mate, or different friends, a new job, a bigger house, I would feel good about myself," or "If people would say more nice things to me, I would have more self-confidence," or "My parents didn't expect me to amount to much; I'm just a plain person, so no one could really care about me." The basic error underlying all of these misconceptions is the notion that self-esteem is stable, unchangeable, and out of one's control.

Perhaps the most destructive misconception held by many Latter-day Saints is that their self-worth is based on the "sin ratio." In the sin ratio, the number of transgressions is the denominator (the bottom number in a fraction), and the number of good deeds is the numerator (the top number). Since it is usually easier to be in touch with the negative aspects of life or our shortcomings, the denominator is often larger than the numerator, and self-esteem is fractured. We would do well to accept the invitation of the Savior to stop condemning ourselves, and to go our way and disregard our past "sins." (See John 5:14; 8:11.) Jesus understood that focusing on shortcomings and sin is more likely to make us feel hopeless and to destroy our self-esteem than it is to make us feel successful. He did not ignore sin, but He had a balanced view of people as more than just bundles of sin.

Are there good reasons for maintaining a harmful self-image? Of course not, but some people cling to old, negative ways of thinking about themselves as though they were important and beneficial truths. Take a few minutes and make a self-esteem balance sheet for yourself. Write down any advantages you may think of for maintaining a negative image of yourself. Reasons frequently given for keeping a low self-image are: "I won't have to make new efforts to change," "You can't teach an old dog new tricks," and "Other people might think I was conceited if I acted differently." Now list what you might gain by embarking on a program to improve the way you see yourself. Your reasons might include: "I will feel happier and more confident when I meet people," or "I will feel more as if I belong." Compare the two lists and see which one presents the strongest arguments. For most people, in spite of their excuses, it is difficult to make a good case for continuing to feel bad about themselves.

I have sat in countless meetings where children have sung "I Am a Child of God" to an audience of grown-ups. Invariably as I look about during the singing I see misty- or teary-eyed adults profoundly affected by the message of the song. These same people, however, probably do not often think of themselves as God's children (perhaps they think they have outgrown their heavenly parents?) or treat themselves as potential heavenly kings and queens. They act as if the song is only valid for youngsters, and they seem to have lost their eternal perspective. Adults are more prone to be self-deprecating and self-defeating than self-loving, and their self-esteem pays the price.

Children depend a great deal on parents and other caretakers for sustenance and information about the world. From these messages their first impressions of themselves evolve and become the core of their self-concept. Just as children eventually learn to feed and clothe themselves and provide their own shelter, so do we as adults have the capacity to improve our self-image and develop a new relationship with ourselves. It may not be easy, but it is possible. As adults, we no longer call our parents to find out what to eat for dinner or what to wear to the movie, and we need not be stuck with their opinion of our worth. Not all persons have a bad image of themselves from childhood, of course, nor would this necessarily be the fault of their parents if they did. Still, many people cling to these old, dusty ideas from the past even though they are no longer relevant and certainly not helpful. For instance, even though every chart that lists "ideal" weights indicates I am underweight for my height, I continue to think of myself as fat. My childhood body image (a part of self-image) is clearly not based on current reality.

Labels and Self-esteem

Inaccurate labels are a significant block to good self-esteem. They limit our perspective of who we are and what our real potential is.

A handsome young man with a negative self-concept became depressed when he broke up with a woman he had dated for three years. After a few weeks he thought about going out again, but he felt that he was too shy to attract anyone. He had been shy since his youth, he said, and he expected that he always would be. He believed this label to be as immutable as the color of his eyes. He could not seem to accept the idea that shyness is a way we act rather than the way we are. The limits prescribed by labels such as shyness are a liability, but they can affect us only as long as we accept them.

Compile a list of labels you have accepted as describing yourself. Do they represent a realistic or a distorted picture? Do they promote confidence and growth, or hesitation and frustration? Share the list with two or three friends or family members, and talk with them about how their perceptions match yours. Invariably people who do this say that their friends are much more positive and less judgmental than they have been. Continuing to indulge in so much self-criticism destroys our self-image. Why not cultivate a more positive attitude?

Self-criticism and Self-esteem

Individuals with low self-esteem frequently spend a lot of time trying to convince everyone else how awful they are. Like Rodney Dangerfield, the comedian, they tell a myriad of stories that could easily begin with "I don't get no respect . . . " They frequently relate tales of woe and misfortune, and self-critical remarks seem to be second nature. These types of behaviors turn off other people; no one who is mentally or emotionally healthy wants to associate with chronic losers. These self-critical individuals often mistakenly believe that if they criticize themselves, they will somehow avoid criticism from others. They cannot, however, provide an example where they avoided a critical remark by using this method; it is probably only as useful as knocking on wood, picking up pennies, and other superstitious acts. Being critical of ourselves actually invites others to focus on our faults.

Self-deprecatory statements are also an ineffective way to avoid appearing conceited or stuck-up. People begin to fear a constantly critical attitude and may think, "What does he say about me when I'm not around?" If other people accept the self-deprecatory remarks, this strategy to avoid appearing conceited backfires, and legitimate self-pride can be hurt. It is a no-win situation. Self-esteem cannot possibly be improved through self-criticism, and it is up to the individual to change this pattern in his or her life.

Trying to challenge the self-critical attitude of others is difficult, if not impossible. Typically, these individuals discount or ignore positive comments, and we feel less inclined to offer compliments and pleasant conversation in the future. Further, being around people like this makes us feel negated or uneasy. This weakens the self-esteem of everyone involved. Finally, depressed patients who have promulgated this kind of cycle ask in desperation, "Well, what am I good for?" When this point is reached, unfortunately, there is not much good that they will acknowledge, no matter what is said or who says it. Self-esteem has been devastated by chronic self-criticism and refusing the support of others. The best time to work on our self-image is right now, before we reach this kind of crisis. Controlling self-critical remarks is an important first step.

Pride and Self-esteem

Another common symptom of low self-esteem is the inability to enjoy or appreciate one's own accomplishments. Unfortunately, some people confuse pride with boastfulness or conceit. Old sayings such as "Pride goeth before a fall" contribute to this misconception and to wariness about celebrating achievements. Not all pride is conceit, nor is self-pride the opposite of humility, another serious misunderstanding. Though we are counseled to be humble, many individuals are mistaken about what that means. The best example of humility is found in the life and actions of Jesus. He did not deny or condemn His talents, His heritage, or His destiny, nor was He self-deprecatory in any way. He was kind, modest, and unpretentious. He was equally at ease with the poor and the mighty, but constantly aware of His important mission.

Pride can be very healthy. For instance, the recent resurgence of patriotism in the United States has led to new feelings of national pride, as evidenced by the excitement about the 1988 Summer Olympics and efforts to restore such national treasures as the Statue of Liberty. Healthy pride in ourselves and our accomplishments builds a foundation for positive self-esteem and enhances the likelihood that we will do more praiseworthy things in the future. This is a kind of positive reinforcement and recognition that has long been used to increase positive behaviors in children, and it can work just as well with adults. By feeling pride in what we do, we can build ourselves from within, without waiting for others to recognize and acknowledge what we have accomplished.

Rob, a bright young man who had just earned his Ph.D., complained that he felt he had accomplished very little. He shrugged off sincere compliments he received by saying, "It's no big deal. If I could do it, anybody can." He refused to participate in the graduation ceremony or to send announcements to his friends and family. Those close to Rob felt put off by his stoic attitudes and also refrained from celebrating very much, responding to what they thought were his wishes. Rob became demoralized and depressed because he had been waiting for someone else to convince him his doctorate was a great accomplishment. He did not realize that this validation had to start from inside himself.

Rob is no different from many of us: from the rich and famous to the poor and lowly, we all want to experience the respect of our peers. We will be disappointed, however, if we wait for the acclaim from without to change our feelings within. Happiness and self-esteem are not always achieved through popular acclaim, as brilliant stars such as Freddie Prinz and Marilyn Monroe have tragically demonstrated by killing themselves at a time when they were admired by millions of people. It is up to us to cultivate and nourish our feelings of self-pride.

The tendency to constantly compare ourselves with others can also contribute to our refusal to take pride in our accomplishments. In comparing, we usually look at only one or two facets of someone's life and decide we are a failure in comparison. This is a faultless path to depression, since it is impossible to be the best at everything. Even if we attained perfection, as we understand it, we still would not necessarily be the best looking, most athletic, or most artistic being in the universe. We will always be a unique mix of qualities and talents. Our task is to cherish what we are, and are becoming, rather than complain about what we are not.

Self-love and Self-esteem

In order to be mentally healthy, it is essential for us to cultivate positive feelings about ourselves. We all make mistakes and become disappointed in ourselves from time to time. For some it is difficult to forgive these errors and move on with life. The alternative, however, is self-loathing and fear, which can cripple our progression.

A talented college student sought help because of a self-image problem that had led to significant depression. Sue traced the origin of the problem back five years to a time when she thought a couple of young men from her high school had seen her through a window when she was undressed and admiring herself briefly in front of a mirror. Though she had no evidence that she was actually seen or that classmates had been told about it, she became extremely frightened about what people thought of her, and her self-image went into a tailspin. She imagined that people would think she was perverted, she said. Now, five years later, she was still avoiding contact with others. She looked away from people, afraid to see what might be in their eyes. She collected negative experiences as if they were stamps she could turn in for an important dividend and as proof that she was despicable to others.

Happily, a small part of Sue began to want to feel good again. She began of evaluate herself and discard some of her fears and self-loathing. She put her old negative experience behind her and started to live in the present. She practiced substituting positive thoughts about herself for ruminations about the past. To further strengthen her self-esteem, she began to treat herself as she might treat a good friend. I reminded her that the scriptural injunction "Love thy neighbour as thyself" (Matthew 19:19) presumes we have developed a good deal of self-love and self-esteem. She discovered that her capacity to care for others increased as she worked to improve her own self-image.

Sue learned an important principle. Loving ourselves is not selfish; rather, it is the only way to begin to really love others. I am astounded by the resistance I encounter about this concept. Loving oneself is mistakenly viewed as self-indulgent, childish, or conceited. While extreme self-love might lead to unhappy consequences, as extremes of any nature often do, it is unlikely that depressed people will go overboard in caring for themselves.

There is a dangerous, false belief about self-love which says that we must find someone to love before we can love ourselves or feel complete or satisfied. This idea only leads to dependency and unhappiness, however. Believing that we need someone else can spark a desperate search in which our standards are compromised because of an illusion. The truth is, no one else can really provide us with self-love, and potential worthy mates may sense our extreme neediness and self-doubt and avoid us. Further, we are likely to be overly sensitive of their shortcomings because of our insecurity and fear that if they are flawed, they cannot satisfy our many needs.

Self-love is an important prerequisite to a positive self-image. It develops over time, like any true and lasting love, through exercising kindness, forgiveness, and respect for ourselves.

Assertiveness and Self-esteem

A pattern of nonassertiveness that is found in many depressed individuals also contributes to low self-esteem. Imagine this scenario: While we are standing in a long line at a movie, someone cuts in front of us. Saying nothing can lead to self-doubt and negative thoughts such as "It's okay for people to take advantage of me—I'm nobody important," or "I must look like a real chump if he dares push in front of me." Lack of assertiveness in such situations, where we do nothing to defend our position, can lead to our feeling put-down. When self-esteem is weakened, it becomes more difficult for us to be assertive next time, and a negative, self-perpetuating cycle is strengthened. Standing up for our rights in an appropriate manner, however, can promote an improvement in self-image. Saying, for example, "Excuse me, but the end of the line is forming back there," lets the intruder know we are unwilling to be used in this manner. Chances are other people in the line will show their approval too (especially those behind us), further bolstering our self-image.

Believing in oneself enough to stand up for legitimate rights is a cornerstone of self-esteem. The notion that we must defer to others in all situations is false and potentially harmful because it can signal that we are willing to be stepped on, like a door mat. Unfortunately, many people are willing to use door mats to cleanse their own soles.

Christ's admonition and example of service to others did not include being used by them against His will. For example, when Mary, His mother, apparently asked Him to provide wine for a wedding feast when hers ran out, He told her, "Mine hour is not yet come." He considered the needs of His ministry before responding to her request and performing His first recorded miracle. (See John 2:2-11.) And when a woman who had been suffering from a hemorrhage for twelve years reached for the hem of His garment to be healed, Jesus noticed strength passing from Him and inquired who had touched Him. His power might have heated many, destroyed the Roman legions, or changed the course of rivers, but it was kept for establishing His ministry, and He alone decided on its use. (Mark 5:25-34.) Jesus defended His personal rights and those of others as well.

Some individuals confuse assertiveness with aggressive, hostile, or demanding behavior. These are not models of healthy assertiveness. Assertiveness means asking for our fair share; it is an extension of the golden rule, asking to be treated by others with the respect we extend to them. It is essentially our way of saying, "I like me, and I deserve to be treated justly."

Working toward Self-esteem

Some people may think, "Well, that's fine for others, but I really haven't accomplished anything in my life to be proud of." (That in itself would make one someone special if it were true. I don't know of anyone who has done absolutely nothing.) When we are depressed, it is easier to focus on our shortcomings, but this cannot possibly build self-esteem.

How do we improve our self-image? Let's return to the four areas we discussed earlier: thoughts, environment, relationships, and physical needs.

Take out a piece of paper or an index card and brainstorm with yourself for a minute (brainstorming means generating ideas without being critical). List your strengths, such as kindness, punctuality, courtesy, intelligence, creativity, dependability, physical stamina. Resist comparisons to other people; you don't have to be "the best" in order to take pride in your accomplishments. Many great athletes enter the Olympics, though only one gold medal is given in each event. If you are staring at a blank sheet after a few minutes, you are probably not being fair with yourself. Ask a friend to help you identify your strengths. Put this list in a prominent place where you will see it at least once a day. Memorize it and use it as a guide to reinforcing what's good in you. Rehearse these ideas when you are facing a challenge or feeling low. Perhaps you'll even feel good enough to add something once in a while. Add to the list as you feel better about yourself or receive positive strokes from others.

Learn to monitor your thoughts for distortions, such as labeling, overgeneralizations, should statements, and extreme thinking. Challenge these thoughts and replace them with more realistic ideas or with positive self-statements. Refuse to think negatively about yourself. Block out self-critical thoughts by saying no or "I don't want to think those kinds of thoughts anymore." You can also shake your head as if to say no. When you have practiced these techniques for a while, you can replace saying the words with thinking or imagining in your mind the word NO in big, bold letters.

Allow yourself to be imperfect, to be a "god in embryo." A popular poster shows a picture of a repentant-looking boy, with a caption that says, "Be patient, God isn't finished with me yet." Replace your self-criticism with positive thoughts such as this.

Another boost to self-esteem is to keep a prominent area in your home as a memento corner, where you display certificates, trophies, souvenirs, tickets, posters, and other reminders of positive experiences. Memory boxes can also be used for this purpose. Trophy cases at schools, churches, and clubs contain reminders of past glories to boost morale; this technique will work in your home, too. Create a trophy case or "hall of fame" with mementos from past accomplishments and positive experiences. Anything that makes you feel good can be included, from diplomas and ribbons to roadshow certificates (I've saved one the cast gave me for directing a roadshow almost ten years ago). Don't be shy about acknowledging what you have done, especially to yourself; it can promote self-confidence for future endeavors.

Read your patriarchal blessing frequently if you have received one. Realize that you are a child of God, and it is His desire to give you all that He has. Place evidences of your divine heritage and potential where you can see them; such as baptismal, marriage, and ordination certificates. These kinds of strategies are called "affirmations," for they remind or affirm for you in a positive way who you really are.

Practice assertiveness and don't be afraid to stand up for your fair share. Your self-respect will increase and so will the respect others show you, for mutual respect enhances self-esteem.

For better or worse, much of our self-esteem is focused on how we look, perhaps because our bodies are more observable than our thoughts, hopes, or dreams. Consider making efforts to improve your physical image. Don't be afraid to indulge yourself by losing weight, toning up, or learning to ski. Ask friends to tell you which of your outfits seem to be most flattering (and if you're daring, ask what is not flattering). Feeling confident about our appearance gives us an edge in many situations. I remember, for example, borrowing my brother's clothes for an important debate tournament because I respected his eye for fashion. Even though I was quivering and quaking on the inside, I projected a cool image on the outside.

Positive self-esteem does not mean we are totally pleased with every facet of our life. This would be impossible. A positive self-image is not a reward for perfection, but a powerful boost on the journey toward it.
