Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 6

Motivation and Depression

Sally was seriously depressed and unmotivated. She spent at least sixteen hours a day sleeping away her life. Therapy appointments were scheduled for nine o'clock to interrupt this pattern so that she would be up before noon at least one day a week. However, she left the therapist's office, returned home immediately, and went to bed. Sally was a champion at the game Eric Berne called "Why don't you . . . Yes, but . . ." in his book Games People Play. She would solicit suggestions or advice about her problems and then rattle off her prepared excuses: "Yes, but I'm too tired," or "Yes, but I'd be embarrassed," or "Yes, but I don't have the right clothes." This game destroyed her motivation and pushed away those whom she asked for help.

Sally played her game alone, without other people, as she languished in bed every day thinking of all the things she'd rather not do and all the excuses she needed for not doing them. One day, as she complained about the phone calls she had to make, how nervous she was about making them, and the disasters she anticipated if she did, the therapist had her go to his phone to make her calls. She was dumbfounded, but went to the phone, dialed the numbers, and handled herself well. In five minutes she transacted the important business she had been avoiding for weeks. She was surprised and pleased by the demonstration of what she could accomplish when pushed. After a few weeks of efforts like these, she began to do her own pushing, felt more motivated, and took control of her life, achieving the independence she had been denying herself.

Depressed individuals are not always seriously lacking in motivation as was Sally, nor is everyone who is short on motivation significantly depressed. Sally's story does, however, illustrate important principles about the interaction of motivation and depression. Sally was experiencing two of the most frequently reported symptoms of depression: dysphoria, which is a feeling of malaise or of things being not quite right, and anhedonia, a general lack of pleasure in any activity (literally, a lack of hedonism).

Because depression commonly lessens a person's ability to anticipate pleasure in advance, experience pleasure when it occurs, or relive it later, depressed individuals can feel devoid of any zest for life, even for activities that formerly brought them pleasure. The pattern of their thoughts and actions can actively maintain this state indefinitely. The primary motivation is mature, normal pleasure-seeking, and when this is stymied, depression results. No activity is fun, life has no point and no value, and consequently, depressed people feel like doing nothing.

A low level of motivation can initiate or accelerate a depressive, downward spiral. The resulting lack of energy leads the depressed individual to procrastinate even minor tasks (like making phone calls, for Sally), thus reinforcing negative thoughts and feelings of hopelessness. Things begin to pile up and feel overwhelming, the depression deepens, and the energy level spirals even further downward. This kind of cycle is self-perpetuating until one actively intervenes to counteract it.

The Effects of Procrastination

Procrastination is frequently one of the first signs that a person's motivation has begun to lag. Some tasks are inevitably more enjoyable than others, and most people can usually achieve a balance between "have-to's" and "want-to's," which helps them maintain motivation. Procrastination usually begins with "have-to's," and avoiding these mandatory tasks only increases the amount of negative energy we assign to them. It is as if we say, "Mowing the lawn must be a very terrible job, because I'll do anything to avoid it," and we thereby make it appear even more formidable. In this way, procrastination becomes a normal part of our day, even though it is an energy-sapping mind game that we play with ourselves.

To be successful, people have to be doers as well as thinkers. Procrastinators are often perpetual thinkers and worriers, unwilling to take action. In many ways, they are like the bride and her family in the children's story of "The Three Sillies." A young man went to meet the family of his bride-to-be and ask for permission to marry their daughter. As they all sat down to dinner, the young woman's mother noticed there was no jam for the rolls. She excused herself and went to the cellar to get some. When she did not return after several minutes had passed, the father left to see if he could help. Some time later, the young woman left the table to go find out what was keeping her father and mother so long.

The young man sat at the table alone for quite a while, waiting for them to return. Finally, he also went to the cellar. As he opened the cellar door, he heard wailing and moaning at the bottom of the stairs and rushed down to see what was the matter. There he found his bride-to-be and her parents crying hysterically, but he could see no injuries or threatening circumstances. The three all pointed to an ax lodged in the wood above the cellar door and the bride-to-be said, "What if we married, and had a son, and he grew up, and we were having dinner over here, and we sent him to the cellar for jam, and the ax fell on his head and killed him!" The young man, incredulous at their silly worries, reached up and took the ax down. He withdrew his promise of marriage and vowed he would return to her only if he met three people sillier than they were. Luckily for the young lady, he soon discovered several others with worries as ridiculous as hers, and he returned to her. Permitting thoughts and worries about the future to overwhelm us in this manner adds to our tendency to procrastinate, thus strengthening our depression.

Most people have had a few times in their lives when even though a situation seemed impossible, they were able to overcome challenges and have a successful experience. This could have been something as simple as getting the plaids to match while sewing a skirt with just barely enough fabric. Depression interferes with the ability to remember times when, under unfavorable circumstances, a positive outcome was reached. It therefore increases procrastination; it doesn't seem worthwhile to begin a task that may not be easily finished. Most people realize after completing a much delayed task that the worst part of it was over as soon as they began. We may also discover when the project is underway or completed that it was actually enjoyable. Procrastinators anticipate negative consequences and find it hard to focus on the possibility that the task may be less onerous than they have predicted.

Sooner or later procrastinators must face the consequences of inaction, and the experience is usually not positive. Being forced to do something at the last minute or by someone who uses coercion is unpleasant. The task then becomes the focus of negative thoughts and feelings, and resentment builds toward whatever compels us that may contribute to performing substandard work in a passive-aggressive manner.

Distortion and Motivation

Depressed individuals distort their thoughts about what is actually required of them. They exaggerate the complexity and riskiness of a task until it appears fearsome or insurmountable. For example, Sally feared calling her physician's receptionist for a referral to a specialist because she imagined that she would be insulted or made to feel stupid. She had no real basis for her fear, since no negative interactions had ever taken place. She had created imaginary obstacles to her progress and trapped herself within walls of hopelessness with her distortions (in this case, the distortion was her belief she could know the future and other's reactions to her). Real progress was achieved only when she acknowledged that the trap she had set was of her own creation and could be dismantled only by her.

Labeling is another thought distortion that contributes to low motivation, particularly the thought that we are a failure. Sam's story illustrates this problem. Sam had never learned much about baseball as a young boy; his father died when he was young and his brothers did not have much interest in teaching him about sports. He joined Little League because his friends did, but he had very little experience compared to the other boys. After two games he quit, discouraged, embarrassed, and dejected, a failure. He thought he was a physical reject and began to avoid any kind of athletics. Later in his life, he discovered by chance that he could enjoy and do well in another sport. Little by little, he tried other activities and developed a number of athletic interests. His motivation to participate in sports increased as he rejected the old label of failure.

Depressed people often expend a great deal of mental energy (which they are usually lacking to begin with), in avoiding a task or obligation. They generate explanations and excuses; they spend valuable time worrying about the consequences of their inaction, and, of course, they frequently bear a burden of guilt. More energy is spent thinking in this manner than the project itself would have required.

Memory for negative events is sharper during periods of depression, and any negative occurrences, whether real or imagined, are distorted and magnified. Preoccupation with how others act, conjecture about what they might be thinking, and our own aches and pains accentuate the possible distress or discomfort of any action. Sally demonstrated this by playing "Why don't you . . . Yes, but . . . " with people who were trying to help her. She focused on the liabilities rather than the possibilities of action, and instead of being a trouble-shooter, she became a trouble-finder.

Another factor that leads to decreased motivation is that one's ability to cope with frustration decreases with depression. Things that are normally accomplished with ease may become difficult because concentration and motor skills are impaired to some degree. Anger and frustration are turned inward because of these changes. Thoughts like "I'll never try that again" or "I can forget calligraphy—I've just lost my touch," intensify depressed feelings and decrease motivation.

Depression works in all these ways to block motivation, and that, of course, keeps us depressed. The ability to anticipate or experience pleasure decreases, as does frustration tolerance. Worry, guilt, self-criticism, and recall of negative consequences increase. Who wouldn't feel like giving up under these circumstances? Fortunately, by changing thoughts and actions we can increase feelings of motivation. Sometimes people roll their eyes in disbelief when someone starts to talk about "the power of positive thinking." The principle is a correct one, however, validated by both experience and research. It is particularly important to try to focus one's thoughts and actions in a positive manner when trying to increase motivation.

Effort and Patience

There is a natural ebb and flow of energy in everyone's life. Some days you feel strong enough to clean your whole house or finish the quarterly report; some days even minimal tasks leave you feeling drained. We can learn to take advantage of these normal changes by creative scheduling and flexibility in activity patterns. Depression, however, often changes this rhythm. The tides of motivation seem to be constantly low, and at times life cannot be put on hold until we feel like being active again.

Motivation is paradoxical: it is increased by initiating positive activity. Simply waiting to feel motivated is often fruitless and frustrating. Alma, in the Book of Mormon, offered a prescription for increasing faith that is also applicable to motivation. He challenged his readers to exercise even a particle of faith, to nurture it, and to enjoy the feelings that it would create. (See Alma 32:27-33.) Beginning small, positive activities will increase motivation in the same way as exercising a bit of faith enlarges it. The catches for many people are (1) the effort required to begin, and (2) exercising patience as their efforts start to "take root."

Today's world promotes the notion of instant, no effort remedies such as diet pills, fabulous physiques in less than three days, and get-rich-quick schemes. Many people would rather try to find an easy way out than exercise self-discipline. In spite of the claims of our "instant society," however, natural laws are still operating. One of those laws of physics states that the greatest effort is expended in initially moving a stationary object; after it is rolling, less energy is required to keep it going. The initial efforts to increase our own activity are usually the hardest; it is a struggle to get going. Perhaps President Spencer W. Kimball provided the most simple and sound advice on increasing motivation by making the phrase "Do it" popular.

Another principle that is common knowledge to farmers and gardeners, but resisted by the general population, is sowing and reaping. Food and flowers do not spring up from the ground without cultivation and patience—at least they have not done so since Eden. There must first be an investment of seed, effort, and time for things to grow. A further example of this concept is priming a pump to create a flow from a well. Some well pumps require that water first be poured down them to create the pressure gradients necessary to draw more water from the underground store. Using water serves to create more water, just as planting seeds will lead to a crop with a greater abundance of seeds in the fruit of flowers. Sometimes we have to do in order to feel more like doing.

It is not the complexity of the activity that is most important. Practically any activity is better than doing nothing. Even doing a load of wash chases the blues away for some people by giving them a sense of accomplishment. Develop a list of little things that bring you pleasure, and keep it handy for times you feel unmotivated. Then, if you're down, get up, get dressed, and try something for a few minutes. Use the list or think of a few other minor projects (ten minutes or less) and complete them. This will give you a boost and a sense of mastery and is an important precursor to feelings of greater motivation.

Successfully completing a few things increases energy, enthusiasm, and the probability we will take on a little more. Professionals who design tests understand this principle. Tests begin with questions that are easy and then increase in difficulty as the test continues because research has established that test takers score higher if they can easily complete the first answers. We can organize our time like this too. Some people do well by attacking the most difficult thing first, but the majority do better by warming up. Like athletes, we're less likely to "pull a muscle" and drop out of competition if we're warmed up.

Impatience can also drain off energy and decrease motivation. Some tasks cannot be completed at once but require a sustained effort over a long period of time. Life consists of a myriad of activities, from baking cookies to finishing postgraduate work. Each day there are a variety of things to do, some of which can be finished today, some of which will take years to complete, and many others in between. Patience contributes to motivation by decreasing the pressures we sometimes unrealistically impose on ourselves and others.

Break It Down

An old riddle provides some insight on how to increase motivation, particularly for the big jobs: "How do you eat an elephant?" "One bite at a time!"

When energy and enthusiasm are depleted by depression, even a small task can seem as overwhelming as eating an elephant. Break it down into parts that you can achieve in a relatively short period of time, and then work on it. This is a principle of eternal progression, and it applies to everything we do, large or small. We learn "line upon line, precept upon precept." Journeys begin with steps, towers are made of individual bricks, and our accomplishments are a series of smaller efforts. This book was written over a period of months—some days ten pages, some days ten words.

It is easy to become overwhelmed by our thoughts. Try this experiment: Imagine a large table. Now place on this table the food you ate today, add yesterday's, then the food you ate the day before, and so on. It doesn't take long to feel full or become nauseated from these thoughts. This kind of mind game occurs when we try to do everything at once or expend energy worrying about the next step while we are doing the current one.

Focusing only on large projects is overwhelming. Soon, even the small tasks seem like incredible chores, and getting out of bed to face the world becomes burdensome. With our thoughts and inaction, we have created negative feelings and become more depressed. This is a good time to remember the elephant. A large project has many facets, and energy can be conserved by shuttling between tasks that contribute to its completion. Think about what you could do in the next five minutes to move toward the goal. Take a small bite and enjoy.

Tasks can be made to appear less overwhelming by limiting the time spent working on them each day. This is a particularly helpful technique if you procrastinate getting started on something until you have the time to complete it. Make realistic goals; try telling yourself, "I'll shovel snow for one-half hour" or "If I clean until four o'clock, I'll quit for the day." It's better for your morale to be realistic and achieve the mark than to be idealistic and fall short, especially since depression increases sensitivity to defeat. Do something rewarding after completing the onerous activity. Call a friend, read some poetry, or take a walk and enjoy the scenery to strengthen your sense of well-being and reinforce your accomplishment.

"Have To's"

The job or task itself can seem unmotivating, particularly if it feels like a "have-to." For instance, it's easy to think we're only a Primary teacher, ward librarian, or activity coordinator, a position that anybody could fill. Why invest a lot in it? These thoughts are certainly demoralizing and can be destructive to our self-esteem. Think back on your life. Who has most influenced you outside your family? Chances are it was a teacher, not the President of the United States, or your bishop, or a General Authority, or someone in a high status position. Yet our typical thoughts about teaching assignments and other low-profile tasks are negative. Such assignments are passed off as dull and insignificant.

The bishop asked Ruth to teach the Guide Patrol, a group of boys who took pride in how quickly they could wear teachers out (and they were going for a new record). It would have been easier for Ruth to be a baby sitter, not try to teach anything, and get through the forty-five minutes until the little gremlins went home. She had higher hopes, though. She wasn't "just another teacher." She became their teacher, not the first week, probably not the first month, but through a series of efforts both large and small. As the boys grew up and had the chance to address the ward before leaving for missions, marriage, or school, several of them remembered Ruth for her courage and love. Now each time I accept a teaching assignment, I try to remember her example to bolster my own motivation. A whimsical thought about attitude in situations like these is "There are no small parts, only small actors."

Everything we do fills some role or purpose, whether it is cleaning house, herding sheep, teaching college, or digging ditches. Our own opinion of its value will make the most difference in how motivated we feel about pursuing it. Believing that a task or assignment is meaningless is self-defeating and demoralizing. Perhaps it is better to be honest and decline rather than become caught in this type of depressive cycle.

Criticism and Motivation

Criticism—whether of self or of others—seldom contributes to increasing motivation. It does, however, feed depression. Let's eavesdrop on an inner dialogue: "Get to work on that report. You always put things off until the last minute. You're a failure. You'll never get it done." Did you feel more or less motivated as you read this? Most of us feel more anxious and would be less likely to take on the task. The truth is, criticism of ourselves, family, friends, or associates can often be the least helpful and productive way to get something done. There are examples of the "drill sergeant" style being used successfully by a parent, an athletic coach, a debate teacher, or others, but unless you are absolutely certain that you respond well to criticism, it is better to use another way to get yourself going.

Resist the temptation to constantly evaluate what you do by comparing yourself with others or even what you may have done a few days ago. Today you are different. Give yourself credit for whatever you do, because your effort counts. You will not always succeed, but you will learn if you try. If basketball teams just quit playing when they lost a game, it would be a short season. Sometimes the league leaders lose to the last-place team. Perhaps the losing team has an off-night, players are out with injuries, or the other team is just hot. The fact is that this year's second-rate players may be the national champions next year if they just keep trying to improve and don't walk off the floor.

At times, all of us commit to doing more than we can do. Feeling overwhelmed can precede depression and the loss of energy. It can be exciting to accept a challenge to do more than usual from time to time, but we do have limits. Develop the skill of anticipating how much you will be able to accomplish. Your primary stewardship is to take care of yourself, and this may mean saying no to someone. Bosses, friends, Church leaders, and families all have requests for us, and ideally their wishes would balance with those of others and the natural rhythms of our own life, but since they are not privy to all of the other demands on us, they may ask too much. It is up to us to set limits and keep our balance. If you consistently wake up in the morning feeling dreadful about the day's activities, it's time to review your priorities and commitments before you engage in destructive self-criticism that will sap any energy you may have left.

Techniques for Increasing Motivation

Some people have used the following techniques successfully in increasing their motivation:
