Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 7

Perfection: A Process

Perhaps no teaching about the nature of God has been as revolutionary as the Latter-day Saint doctrine of man's divine potential. Simply stated, it is, "As man is, God once was; as God is, man may become." Perfection, becoming like the gods, is our ultimate goal, and this earth life was provided to prepare us to become heirs to our Father's kingdom. Many people, however, seem to misunderstand this principle and how it applies to this life.

Some Latter-day Saints feel like failures because they believe they must meet or exceed during their earthly mortality the level of perfection attained by the Savior. Others cite scriptural evidence to support this lofty, though unrealistic, goal. A pattern of self-condemnation because of faults and imperfections seldom provides motivation or inspiration to strive for excellence, however. It is more likely to be demoralizing and to invite depression. A review of some key scriptures and the life of Jesus places the journey toward perfection in its true perspective.

One of the most frequently quoted scriptures on perfection is part of Christ's Sermon on the Mount: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) Christ repeated this commandment on the American continent following His resurrection when He said, "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or as your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Nephi 12:48.) On both occasions Jesus had been teaching many important gospel principles to the people, and the pursuit of perfection and godliness was central to His message. His ultimate goal for us is perfection. The misunderstanding arises as to what we are actually expected to achieve during mortality.

A closer look at each of these scriptures clarifies the nature of the "perfection" that we are commanded to seek in this life. The King James Version of the Bible published by the Church in 1979 includes the words "complete, finished, fully developed" as alternative translations from Greek texts of the word perfect in Matthew 5:48. Substituting those words in the context of the scripture, it appears that Christ was exhorting the people to live the commandments until they achieved godhood.

Christ's message to those on the American continent was strikingly similar to His teachings from the Sermon on the Mount. His statement about perfection on that occasion, "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect," also appears to be His wish for us to obtain perfection and share in the glory of God. Perfection, to be like God, is the goal toward which we travel in mortality.

It is useful to examine the way in which the Savior obtained perfection and godhood in order to gain an understanding of the nature of the process and our own struggles in this life.

Elder James E. Talmage discussed the way that Christ attained earthly perfection in his book Jesus the Christ. In describing the early life of Christ, Elder Talmage wrote: "In such simplicity is the normal, natural development of the Boy Jesus made clear. He came among men to experience all the natural conditions of mortality; He was born as truly a dependent, helpless babe as is any other child; His infancy was in all common features as the infancy of others; His boyhood was actual boyhood, His development was as necessary and as real as that of all children. Over His mind had fallen the veil of forgetfulness common to all who are born to earth, by which the remembrance of primeval existence is shut off. The Child grew, and with growth there came to Him expansion of mind, development of faculties, and progression in power and understanding. His advancement was from one grace to another, not from gracelessness to grace; from good to greater good, not from evil to good; from favor with God to greater favor, not from estrangement because of sin to reconciliation through repentance and propitiation." (Deseret Book Company, 1982 ed., pp. 105-6; 1971 ed., pp. 111-12.)

The Savior grew in the same way that each of us in mortality must grow, line upon line and precept upon precept. The apostle John recorded this pattern of growth: "I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received . . . grace for grace until he received a fulness; and thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:12-14.) Jesus became the Savior because He grew in the direction of His Father and earned perfection and godhood in this manner.

Jesus was, of course, also the literal son of God, and He therefore received a tremendous genetic and biological endowment to begin His earthly journey. For thirty years He was taught by Joseph and Mary, the two best mortals available to teach Him about humanity and His unique spiritual heritage. Even with a heritage greater than that of any mortal, He still required thirty years of learning and growth before He began to perform His sacred ministry.

Who would criticize the Savior for taking so long to perfect Himself? Yet, when we are in a down mood, we feel no qualms about cursing and nagging ourselves for not completing our growth on the same schedule He did, by age thirty—or even earlier. Though the process of perfection is similar for everyone, it is important to keep a proper perspective by remembering that Christ possessed qualities beyond a mortal man's from birth. Is it fair to compare ourselves with Him when we do not have the divine lineage He had nor direct access to heavenly tutors as He did?

Comparing ourselves to Christ's perfection is like a couple who have been married only two years comparing their marital happiness and success with that of President Kimball and his wife, who were successfully married for over fifty years. It is not only unrealistic; it also leads to frustration, impatience, and dissatisfaction between the couple. They lose the proper perspective on their relationship and the progress of their marriage. Camilla Kimball, speaking candidly about the early years of her marriage, stated, "He wasn't the prophet when I married him." Choosing impossible standards with which to compare ourselves invites depression. It is much more helpful and realistic to use the Lord or the Prophet as examples of the goal toward which we are traveling rather than using them as standards against which we compare ourselves or our progress.

Eternal Progression

The system of achieving godhood that was presented in the great councils in heaven during premortality was not designed to be finished here in mortality; therefore, few, if any, will experience total perfection in this mortal phase of life. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the greater part of the work on our exaltation and perfection would be done in the spirit, not in mortality. "It is not all to be comprehended in this world; it will be a great work to learn our salvation and exaltation even beyond the grave." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 348.) There will be work to do in the spirit after death, in the millennial world, in the "little season" that precedes final judgment, and perhaps even beyond that.

Here, in this life, we start the journey toward godhood and set our feet upon the path that will eventually lead us to perfection. We cannot expect to build the perfection we are seeking in this imperfect world, which is so full of turmoil and commotion that the world cannot accommodate perfection. Enoch and the citizens of his city, for instance, were taken from the earth when they reached a certain level of righteousness. Actually, the earth itself will need to be perfected prior to its becoming the home for perfected celestial beings. (See Doctrine and Covenants 130:9.) If you are not perfect, realize that you are not really expected to be perfect in all things yet. It is very important to learn how to be happy enough with ourselves to sustain the motivation necessary to continue on the path to perfection during this life.

Perfection: A Mirage

Mirages occur when our senses are tricked into seeing something that really does not exist. Thirsty desert travelers have experienced seeing water in the sand ahead, only to find more sand when they reached the spot where the water appeared to be. Perfection in this world is also a mirage. From a distance we imagine that something or someone is perfect, but on closer inspection, the cracks, blotches, and glitches become clear. Perfection, like beauty, can only be in the eyes of the beholder and is frequently a matter of personal opinion and preference. What is a perfect day? a perfect vacation? a perfect dinner? Each person's answers would be different, and they would each be right, at least for the person himself. Perhaps we misuse an eternal principle by trying to apply it to things in this world.

The reality is that perfection in this world does not exist. A declaration that something perfect has been discovered only means that current thinking or technology is not powerful enough to detect the variation or imperfection that actually exists. For example, scientists are preparing to build a new telescope so powerful, it is said, that they will be able to observe from earth the light of a candle on the moon. Because of their unique design, the telescope's mirrors will have to be aligned one hundred times a second by as little as one one-thousandth the width of a human hair through the use of a computer. Though the telescope will be fifty to one hundred times stronger than any existing instrument, however, it will not be perfect.

Because man is constantly expanding his abilities, knowledge, and technology, his concept of perfection also changes. As we grow in the gospel, our capacity to approximate the perfection of the gods expands in a similar manner. Perfection in this mortal world, however, is impossible.

A dangerous, emotional pit develops when people make constant, unrealistic demands for immediate perfection on themselves and have inaccurate expectations about the rewards of righteous living. When trapped in these thoughts, they begin to believe that mortality is a series of inescapable frustrations and disappointments. They feel doomed because of their imperfections and angry because life does not necessarily become easier when they try harder to keep the commandments. Such thoughts also create depression, which further paralyzes progression and breeds rebellion and more anger, thus taking them even farther away from the path leading toward perfection and exaltation.

David became trapped in this pit of perfectionism because of his inaccurate expectations about the relationship between perfecting oneself and earthly rewards for righteous living. He had tried to do everything he believed he was supposed to do; as a young man he had been active in his priesthood quorums, a seminary officer, a diligent missionary, and a conscientious member of his student ward. He had dated the "right" girls, maintained his morality while dating, married in the temple, and started his family. His wife, however, began to lose interest in religion and refused to attend church with him. At first, he hoped her feelings would change if he were patient and kindly; but as the months went on, the distance between them increased. David sought counsel from a church leader, who naively pointed to several minor flaws in his adherence to orthodoxy and suggested that these problems might be contributing to his troubles at home. Following their interview, David resolved to try harder. Several months later, however, though he had followed his leader's advice and resolved his own minor problems, his wife asked for a divorce. David became desperately depressed because he had hoped that by being faithful and keeping the commandments, he could hold his young family together. He lashed out in anger because of disappointment and pain and ultimately left the Church.

David's faithfulness and obedience were commendable, but his attitude and expectations were unrealistic. His expectation that if he further perfected himself all else would automatically fall into place was false. He had, for example, failed to consider his wife's free agency, which allowed her to choose not to follow gospel principles. He had forgotten that though he could travel the road to perfection himself, he could not control the path that those around him chose to take. This realization is often very painful. As the prophet Lehi learned in his dream, families and friends do not always travel in the same directions.

The Millstone of Criticism

Criticism is often a harbinger of depression and despair. It does not offer much assistance in our struggle for perfection, since it only tells us what not to do and provides little positive direction or incentive. Since it is considered impolite to unkindly criticize others, can it be any better to unkindly criticize ourselves? The choice of chronic criticism as a tool to modify and improve ourselves has predictable, negative consequences.

Observing the consequences of criticism illustrates how unproductive it really is. For example, observe an interaction between a parent and her son on report card day:

"This is the worst report card I have ever seen."

"But Mom!"

"Don't you 'But' me, young man. You are grounded until you can improve your grades, and that's final."

This dialogue is vintage criticism of the most destructive kind. Let's analyze it carefully to understand its impact.

In the first line, the report card, and by simple implication the child, is negatively labeled. He is the "worst." The child may be trying to provide an explanation in his response, but his mother's next sentence tells him she wants no further information from him because the whole thing is completely clear to her. Her concluding comment tells him that she doesn't care how long it takes him to shape up but it will happen, and he will do it or suffer until it occurs.

All of the statements made by the parent in this example are critical and negative evaluations. The boy hears that he is terrible, not that his grades are terrible. These labels do not motivate him to change, but are more likely to generate frustration, rebellion, and anger. The mother has not bothered to try to discover what his problem is or to problem-solve with him about how to correct it. She has responded as if the grades themselves were the problem, which is usually not the case.

Each day hundreds of destructive exchanges like this one also take place within us. They are often based on real situations from our past when we have been criticized. All of these old experiences and messages become condensed into patterns of thought that have been labeled the "critical parent" by transactional analysts in books such as I'm OK, You're OK and Games People Play. These negative messages and labels, derived from an actual critical parental or authority figure, are usually carried inside us into adulthood without revision or update and become the source of our inner criticism. The result is a kind of war within ourselves because these messages often contain unrealistic or outdated ideas that can conflict with our progression as an adult. The only way to deal with this inner critical dialogue is to question the messages of the "critical parent," which are usually a tangle of conflicting rules by which we are trying to live.

For an entire day really listen to your inner dialogue and see how many times you hear someone else's values and beliefs in sentences that begin, "I should . . . ," "I ought to . . . ," or "I must" do this or that. This exercise, and listening for other forms of self-criticism, will place in perspective the impact of the "critical parent" on your moods and thinking. Remember, it is not you who are speaking when the thought is introduced by "should," "ought," or "must." If the idea or value is a part of you, it will be expressed as "I want to . . . " or "I will . . ."

Though no one seems to remember having benefited from nagging lectures when they were given by our parents, many people naively employ self-nagging as a technique for self-improvement. Being critical or hard on ourselves does not speed the journey toward perfection. Though it is healthy and mature to recognize our mistakes, it is destructive to continue to punish ourselves for them.

A new style of thinking can be fostered in order to quit nagging and hassling ourselves in ways that feed and maintain depression. It is possible to be honest and tactful with ourselves in the same way we might be with a good friend, and, in that way, we protect our self-esteem. Engaging in honest self-evaluation is completely different from self-criticism. Thinking and planning in an uncritical fashion provides information and direction. Unlike criticism, this process does not undermine the motivation we need to accomplish our goals. The object of self-evaluation is improvement and growth through self-awareness and self-acceptance.

We are much more likely to shape our behavior in positive ways through a supportive inner dialogue than by engaging in self-criticism. Find out how well you accomplish this by monitoring your thoughts and noticing how many positive affirmations—pats, strokes, or compliments—you give yourself or allow others to give you. Unfortunately there is a large gap here for many of us. Other people will provide more than enough criticism to keep us humble, but who builds us up and cheers us on in our quest for perfection? Each individual serves as his most important cheerleader in the game of life and improves his chances of winning by the kindness and enthusiasm he invests in himself. His attitude and actions also set a pattern for others who interact with him to follow.

In many restaurants where live music is part of the dinner, the musicians place a large container for tips within easy reach of the restaurant patrons. The experienced performer does not let the container start out empty. He places a few dollar bills in it to signal to the listener what he is worth. He knows that people are more likely to place bills in a container that already has paper money in it than one with quarters, dimes, or nickels. When the musician sets the tone for how others will treat him by salting the container with greenbacks, he is, in a very direct manner, engaging in self-affirmation.

Every day each of us, without thinking about it, sets the trend by which others will treat us and by the way in which we are either kind or cruel to ourselves. When people respond poorly to you, it may be because they, mistakenly but sincerely, believe you really do like the dried-out, burnt end of the roast because they never see you eating anything else at family dinners.

Growing Toward Perfection

Discipline comes from the word disciple, which means a follower of someone or some principle. This concept is commonly thought to be synonymous with punishment and is resisted as one might resist a spanking. Discipline, however, has to do with who we are following or modeling our lives after, rather than with punishment. Members of the Church, of course, try to follow our Eternal Father and His Son as well as the examples of the prophets and other great individuals. We are literally following the pathway God himself trod. God has experienced the struggle toward perfection; He understands the magnitude of the task and also the time it takes to achieve it. The prophets of today are struggling along with us to endure to the end, and they are busy working out their own salvation. We do not travel alone.

A few years ago the book Jonathan Livingston Seagull, by Richard Bach, became a very popular bestseller, read and discussed by millions. The story, a simple one with almost universal appeal, deals with the process of perfecting oneself.

The story tells of a seagull, Jonathan, who tires of following the fishing fleet and eating the garbage left behind as the men clean their catch. Against the advice of his peers, he leaves the daily routines of the flock and seeks his own self-development and enrichment. Jonathan was, perhaps, a pioneer in the "do your own thing" movement. His "thing" was learning to fly higher and faster than anyone else had ever gone before or even believed possible. The story chronicles his experiences of learning. He continues to grow and achieve despite his errors and failures because he tries to learn as much as possible from them. He recovers from his crashes and close calls and tries again. After much effort, Jonathan eventually masters the art of feathered flight and becomes perfect, as far as those principles are concerned. He is able to fly or travel from place to place in an instant, just by thinking about it.

Two important insights into the process of perfection can be gained from Jonathan's story. First, success and failure go hand in hand. One cannot be had without the other. In making attempts to grow, a person inevitably crashes; and only when he picks himself up and persists can he progress. Second, in the story of Jonathan Livingston Seagull, perfection does not have an end point. There is no place where heavenly gates part, trumpets sound, and a powerful voice announces that Jonathan has made it. Joseph Smith also taught the concept of "eternal progression," explaining that even the gods continue to grow in glory through their creations. Perfection is a continual process, not a finish line on a race course. Our concern in this life is with being on the right course and moving with reasonable speed toward the goal, not with who is in front of us or behind us. Our journey toward perfection and glory will continue into the eternities.

Faith is required to commit ourselves to embark on the journey toward godhood. Uncertainty about the existence of God and His plan for us keeps some from making a commitment. Others, who have faith in God, hesitate because they have doubts about their ability to finish the journey, or what really awaits them after they have completed this life. These questions must be answered by each of us as individuals. It is very difficult to continue through our journey in life on the testimony of others. Resolving these issues is critical to the ability to enjoy our progress through life.

We can also become overwhelmed by the multitude of commandments and suggestions that have been given about how to live life. Some commandments, such as payment of tithing or observing the Word of Wisdom, are relatively clear and we can gauge our level of compliance. With other commandments, such as "love your enemies," it is harder to measure our progress. Some members of the Church become overwhelmed and depressed by the complexity and demands of totally living their religion.

Motivation for living the gospel can be increased by breaking down into small steps the enormous, life-long journey toward perfection. For instance, it is impossible to perfectly love our enemies tomorrow, but we can speak kindly to the neighbor we have been refusing to speak to during our feud about the cherry tree. Like Jonathan, we will become perfect by taking small steps and moving forward.

As We Think, So We Become

An individual's thoughts determine what he is and what he will become. People can think their way into and out of disastrous depressions, fits of anxiety, episodes of love and hate, and even the kingdom of God. Because thinking appears to be an effortless and natural process, it is easy to become lazy and complacent with our thoughts and thus become easy prey to the negativism so prevalent in the world around us. It is a mistake to think that the only reality is the sort of thing that makes headlines or the evening news.

Some people seem to fear that they will create a fantasy kingdom out of the fluff and clouds of beautiful thoughts if they do not attend to the pain, inhumanity, and unrighteousness of the world. Unfortunately, they often lose their perspective and develop eyes that see only the rocks and ruts of the path to perfection. They also lose the ability to lift their eyes to enjoy any of the beauty along the road or see the goal in the distance.

A priesthood quorum lesson about fellowshipping those around us led to a discussion of how Latter-day Saints are viewed by those with whom they associate. Each quorum member experienced being thought of as pure and saintly by his nonmember peers, sometimes in reverence, sometimes as a subject of ridicule. In comparison to his fellow quorum members, however, each man felt he was lacking greatly in the attributes of godliness. Of course, neither of these situations presented a balanced picture of their degree of perfection. Comparisons with others almost always distort the picture. A true perspective of the journey toward perfection must take into account our own individual struggles and strengths.

A short prayer has been written that places the struggle for perfection in its proper perspective: "Heavenly Father, I am not as good as I could be, I am not as good as I should be, but I am better than I was. Amen." It is important to recognize the progress that we do make on the road to perfection. If the rewards are to be enjoyed only when the job is completely done, then Latter-day Saints are no better off than members of other religious groups who believe they must wait to experience joy in the hereafter. God made his plan for us clear when he said, "Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) Recognizing our accomplishments provides needed boosts as we journey through life.

Doing Our Best

For more than seventy-five years, millions of Boy Scouts have recited their oath, which begins, "On my honor I will do my best . . ." Leaders of the Church were so impressed by the scouting program and its philosophy that they adopted it to supplement the Aaronic Priesthood program just three years after the movement came to the United States from its birthplace in England. The Scout Oath does not promise perfection, but a genuine effort to do one's best. Those who work with young men in scouting or priesthood can attest to the tremendous growth that occurs while pursuing this commitment.

Doing our best is an attainable goal, and letting go of the wish and fantasy of immediate perfection allows us to experience greater freedom and joy. Most people can identify times when they have put forth their best efforts, and they know that they can enjoy feelings of satisfaction even when they fall short of their ultimate goals. Striving for excellence instead of perfection allows us to have daily victories as we do our best, instead of waiting through the eternities for elusive perfection. Resolving to do our best also anchors any comparisons we make to the person we are really trying to better, ourself. Our best will grow each time we outdo ourselves and move us closer to our eternal goals. In this sense we can all become winners as we experience joy and fulfillment from doing our personal best.

David O. McKay often recalled these words carved in a stone that was part of a building he saw while a missionary in Scotland: "What e'er thou art, act well thy part." He challenged members of the Church to live by this creed and perform their tasks in life as well as they could. A few years ago an alert missionary who had heard this message from President McKay noticed that the building was about to be torn down, and he took steps to obtain the stone for the Church so that its message could continue to inspire those who passed by it to do their best.

At a stake conference some years ago, Jessie Evans Smith, the wife of President Joseph Fielding Smith, told a congregation she had persuaded her husband, who was to speak next, to tell them when the world would end. Standing at the pulpit and looking solemnly out into the faces in the congregation, President Smith said, "The world will end tomorrow." Following a tremendous, audible gasp and what seemed like an eternity to the audience, he explained that for any of us, this life could end tomorrow through illness or accident. Our task was to live life in the present and do our best today in order to be prepared for tomorrow.

Those who are willing to commit their lives to the Lord, and to struggle consistently to keep the commandments and the covenants they make while in this life, will over the next thousand years or so become prepared for perfection and godhood. This is God's ultimate goal for His children, and it will be obtained in a gradual process of which this earth life is only a portion.

Those who spend their time stewing, fretting, and suffering self-criticism and doubt will be prepared only for an eternal world of worry and hassle, for that is the heaven for which they have prepared themselves. As a noted humorist observed, the most interesting thing about heavenly justice is that everyone will not get what they expect but exactly what they deserve.
