Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 9

Coping with Anger

Since the days of Sigmund Freud, some psychological theories have promoted the idea that anger is a forerunner of depression. These theories speculate that unexpressed, pent-up anger and frustration are ultimately turned against oneself because they are not dealt with in more appropriate ways. Suicide attempts and other self-destructive behaviors are viewed as linked to an individual's anger at himself or others.

As a result of these theories, a number of therapies have developed that advocate open expression of anger by direct confrontation, catharsis (yelling, screaming, crying, or talking it out), by acting out the anger through hitting safe objects or taking it out by aggressive activity, as in sports. None of these methods has been particularly successful, however, perhaps because they focus more on what to do with anger than how to avoid getting boiling mad. In fact, it has also been learned that involvement in some aggressive types of activities that were formerly advocated as therapeutic actually decreases the control one may have over coping with anger.

Some individuals believe that anger just is, and nothing can be done about it. Folklore supports this naive attitude by teaching that redheads are more easily angered than blonds or brunettes and even that whole ethnic groups are naturally "hot tempered." While there is some scientific evidence that certain kinds of illnesses, brain damage, or early childhood experiences may cause a person to suffer from a lower threshold of anger, these categories include only a small percentage of the population. Early modeling of patterns of violence or anger can also predispose one to experience increased anger as an adult and to respond more readily with aggression. These influences on behavior are so powerful that many abused children become abusive adults; such types of problems indicate a need to consult with a counselor. For most people, however, anger is an emotion they can learn to control.

The primary key for taking control over anger is contained in the expression "The more I thought about it, the angrier I became!" In a talk delivered in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in 1853, Brigham Young demonstrated insight into the connection between thoughts and anger when he counseled, "Suppose, when you arrive at home from this meeting, you find your neighbors have killed your horses and destroyed your property, how would you feel? You would feel like taking instant vengeance on the perpetrator of the deed. But it would be wrong for you to encourage the least particle of feeling to arise like anger, or revenge, or like taking judgment into your own hands, until the Lord Almighty shall say, 'Judgment is yours, and for you to execute.' . . . When anger arises, . . . know that it arises in yourselves." (Journal of Discourses 2:134-35.) President Young was correct: the root of anger is within us, and we can control its expression as well as decrease its effect on us.

Anger, like any emotion, is triggered by thoughts. For instance, in a basketball game if a player catches an occasional elbow in the ribs by a teammate, he usually attributes it to aggressive hustling. If, however, he is elbowed repeatedly by a member of the opposing team, he becomes angry. The pain is the same, but the meaning the player attributes to the action is different. When we become angry, it is because our thoughts tell us we should do so. The meaning we assign to words, actions, or intentions causes our anger. Because of the relationship between thoughts and feelings, no one can make us angry if we don't allow them to.

Why Anger?

Anger is just one emotion of many that human beings experience. Some people, however, are able to respond only with anger to events that appear to have negative consequences. This emotional pattern occurs almost like a physical reflex; without thinking, the person reacts automatically in what seems to be a natural manner. Though few people are naturally angry, many have trained themselves to respond this way because it has been superficially advantageous.

Some individuals claim that they can use angry thoughts to motivate themselves to action. This may occasionally be true, but more often anger promotes distorted thinking, depression, and decreased energy. Initially, as they plan their strategy to get even, they may mistakenly label their obsessive thoughts, inability to fall asleep, or early morning awakening as an increase in their energy level. Soon, however, motivation fades, negative thinking increases, and depression ensues.

Movies often depict so-called heroes who are wronged by others, become intensely angry, and develop creative ways to bring about justice and take revenge on their enemies. These fantasies grossly misrepresent how anger affects people because in reality it limits creative thought and productive problem-solving and replaces them with obsessive, one-track thinking and distorted ideas. The image of the angry person "seeing red" and losing control is much more accurate than that of the Hollywood hero who gets mad and reestablishes truth and justice.

People have begun to claim a right to be angry, and in a sense, they are correct. We do have a right to assert ourselves and ask for fair treatment, but just becoming angry seldom accomplishes anything. In fact, it often leads to negative consequences, such as high blood pressure from increased tension, strained relationships, and low self-esteem. Ultimately, anger can lead to depression.

There are few long-term advantages for responding with anger. It is most often an emotional attempt to get our way, to intimidate people, or to make our rules apply to others. If it works, we experience a false sense of personal power, but when it fails, we lose self-esteem and risk depression.

Learning Patterns of Anger

Some anger-centered styles of relating with others begin in early childhood. For example, while at the grocery store with his father, three-year-old Jason asks for some candy. Dad says no, but Jason takes a candy bar and begins to unwrap it anyway. When his father takes the candy away and returns it to the shelf, he begins to cry loudly and refuses to go on shopping. Reluctantly, but predictably, his father gives in to Jason's wish in order to avoid a scene. What Jason's father does not realize is that he might have avoided a scene in the store, but he has reinforced a pattern of tantrums and helped to create a spoiled boy, teenager, and adult who will continue to throw a tantrum to get his way the rest of his life. From this experience, and others like it, Jason learns that he can manipulate others in order to get his way by becoming angry and begins to use his anger to control people.

Expressing anger uncontrollably is another adult form of throwing a tantrum. Some misinformed people believe that really telling someone off and yelling are the most helpful alternatives to dealing with their feelings. Hours and days are then spent brooding about their unhappiness or injury, planning what they will say or rehashing what they said. These negative thoughts, however, make them feel more miserable than their tongue-lashing caused the object of their anger to feel. Improper or extreme responses to other people and situations generally increase during this period of angry ruminations, and even minor incidents can provoke torrents of misdirected rage. Violence is not uncommon among people who allow their simmering, angry thoughts to rule them. Perhaps this vulnerability to overreact, which people experience when they are burdened with anger, could be a reason why Christ counseled that anger can put one in danger of the judgment. (See Matthew 5:21-22.)

Anger is also frequently at the core of very destructive patterns in relationships between adults. It destroys intimacy and trust, which are essential for closeness. One expects, as intimacy develops and long periods are spent together, that each partner will come to know the other person's frailties and weak spots. This vulnerability is natural, healthy, and promotes even greater closeness if each partner continues to feel loved. When a couple begin to point to or complain about their partner's faults during episodes of anger, however, they erode the trust that is necessary to sustain the relationship. Many couples who seek marital therapy have fallen prey to this pattern of arguments or disagreements that lead to personal criticism, and for some, their wounds have become too deep to heal.

Dean and Mitzi had been married about twenty years when they entered counseling. They were both intelligent, but they had developed the habit of using their sharp minds to focus on the weaknesses of others. Whenever Dean or Mitzi became frustrated, angry, or hurt, they unleashed a torrent of criticism (which they called "zingers") on each other. They naively hoped their words would help them to "get even" and recover the self-esteem they thought had been lost. Criticism, however, only prompted the partner to respond in a similar manner. Since neither Dean nor Mitzi was willing to ignore the provocation of the other, before long a small grievance could be escalated into a marital disaster. They also feared being devastated if they didn't try to retaliate. The result of these battles was inevitably destructive to both of them, no matter who got in the last zinger, because in the aftermath, what they each remembered about the fight was the biting comments made about them, and they carried this pain with them until their next fight.

Angry and critical comments lead to defensiveness and futile attempts to regain the upper hand. The problems escalate as both partners become increasingly defensive and begin to counterattack. Even if one could win the argument, he must sacrifice so much self-esteem in the process that it is hardly worth the price. Mitzi and Dean discovered that the wounds of emotional warfare were slow to heal, even with apologies, good intentions, and progress in altering this pattern. This couple, and others with similar problems, remain like shell-shocked soldiers, hypersensitive and prone to overreact to any marital stress.

Assertiveness Versus Anger

Consistent failure to act assertively can also increase the risk that patterns of anger and depression will develop. A nonassertive approach to life may be chosen for a number of reasons: the fear of arousing an angry response from someone else, fear of rejection or retaliation if one states his opinion, unrealistic expectations that others will anticipate and meet one's needs, or the false belief that one has no rights and must accept less than his fair share because of societal rules. Regardless of the cause, nonassertive people are also prone to anger, and at times this anger leads to depression.

Women are particularly susceptible to anger generated by a nonassertive style. Former traditions tightly defined the roles and behavior of women in society and thereby limited the acceptability of women expressing themselves openly. Some women who have not dared question these societal shoulds are unaware of their anger because it has been covered for years with layers of depression. Successful treatment of their depression must include recognition of their angry feelings, coping with them, and then letting them go.

It is important to remember that assertiveness is not demonstrated through aggressiveness. Assertiveness is standing up for your rights and asking for a fair share in a direct manner. An assertive person respects the rights and individuality of others and expects the same kind of respect in return.

Black, White, and Seeing Red

It is common and somewhat comforting for people to place events and people in categories at extreme opposites of each other and thereby simplify the world into black and white, as in an old-time western movie where the good guys try to win out over the bad guys. This tendency is increased even further when people become upset and angry. Unrealistically viewing detractors as all bad or exaggerating their bad intentions provides more justification for negative feelings and causes them to escalate. Studies of racially motivated lynchings and other violent activities have documented that by exaggerating complaints and attributing inhuman qualities to victims, leaders of mobs can incite ordinary people to commit actions that they normally abhor. The early history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints contains many examples of persecution that developed in this fashion. Jesus attempted to deter this process and break down "them versus us" attitudes when He taught, "Ye hath heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." (Matthew 5:43-45.) Jesus knew that even the most evil among us is not all bad, and He has asked us to leave judgment to God.

Loving our enemies increases our ability to see their good points because it forces us to stop thinking negatively about them and to strive in their behalf, if only in prayer. This change in attitude causes discomfort or dissonance within us, which is usually resolved by our admission that we had formerly held a tainted and false opinion of them. It is by obedience to these commandments that we can gain a more realistic perspective on the world, greater control over anger, and more peace in our hearts. Jesus taught that there are no benefits to be gained by maintaining grudges, staging reprisals, or holding onto anger in any form.

Though Christ's charge to love our enemies may seem like a sign of weakness to some, it is actually a formula for replacing the inner strength lost in anger. Holding on to anger places us in a vulnerable and weak position; the ability to think and act rationally is diminished and our self-esteem is continually under attack by negative memories of what provoked the anger. To the Ephesians Paul wrote, "Can ye be angry, and not sin? . . . Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice; and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another." (Joseph Smith Translation, Ephesians 4:26, 31-32.) When we remain angry, not only are we in danger of acting sinfully toward the object of our anger, but we are also weakened and less able to resist lashing out at others.

Self-esteem and Anger

Low self-esteem contributes to a low threshold for experiencing and expressing feelings of anger. When people believe they have no value and nothing to contribute, they frequently become hypersensitive to the comments and actions of others, fearing that others will also criticize their faults. Unfortunately, their ability to discern what is being said or done is impaired by low self-esteem, and they frequently misunderstand others. Anger and defensiveness result because they feel criticized and attacked in many innocuous situations. Individuals who have a poor self-image may also express anger or criticize others in a futile attempt to feel that they are not the only ones who are not perfect.

A healthy level of self-esteem is necessary to modulate all emotions, especially anger. It acts like a filter on information we receive from the world, allowing comments or actions that are not consistent with our self-image to pass from our minds without undo worry. Without this filter, we may take many things people say or do seriously and become angry and hurt. Self-esteem also enhances our sense of humor, which is characteristically lacking in most angry people.

Righteous Anger

Christ's clearing of the temple in Jerusalem is an example of righteous anger, anger that is expressed for a positive purpose and in a useful, appropriate manner. Few people are able to distinguish what made this occasion unique from their everyday anger, however, and become confused about how and when to use it. Perhaps another look at this incident can clarify the principles involved in the righteous use of anger.

Jesus had visited the temple many times and understood its purpose and importance. He had observed the moneychangers and merchants there, knew their manner of business, which included dishonesty with others and perversion of the laws of offerings and sacrifice, and had doubtless tried to teach them the true principles of temple worship. At Passover, "Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves; and would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the temple. And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves." (Mark 11:15-17.)

Jesus, with the authority of his Father and a complete understanding of the situation in the temple, drove out those who were desecrating it. He did not seek revenge by harming them or destroying their merchandise, and He did not call them names, lecture them at length, or repeatedly attack their character. After removing the merchants and moneychangers, He briefly tried to teach them the sacred purpose of the temple so that they might make better choices in the future.

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith, Jesus repeated these principles of the righteous use of anger: "Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou has reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy." (Doctrine and Covenants 121:43-44.) Two difficult challenges are included in this commandment: using spiritual promptings to determine when to express anger, and immediately showing love to someone after we have reproved them. Anger can be useful only when it is expressed in a manner that allows constructive change to take place, and we are instructed to let that be a spiritual decision. If we act offensively or with malice, however, those whom we are trying to reach will turn away. They must be reminded with a show of love that our expressions of anger are made out of genuine concern for them.

Letting Go of Anger

Just experiencing angry thoughts and feelings is not necessarily a good reason to express them. Emotions are constantly with us—love, caring, sadness, or elation, for example—but are not frequently expressed. Some well-meaning people focus their attention on letting anger out whenever it is experienced, but except for a few cases, this does not prove useful. The truth is that just expressing anger does not, by itself, offer relief. It is actually letting go of the angry thoughts that allows healing to occur.

The benefits of expressing anger can be weighed by answering two questions: Is my anger appropriate and useful? Will it benefit me or others to express it?

We need to determine first if anger is an appropriate and useful response. This is done by checking out our understanding of what has been said or done. Communication problems, such as misunderstandings and false interpretations, are common causes of angry feelings. Because anger arises so suddenly, we too often trust our first feelings, assume we have been intentionally slighted, and refuse to try to clarify the situation. It is easy and normal to misunderstand the intentions of others from time to time. Investigating what was really meant is valuable because it delays a hasty and, perhaps, inappropriate response and allows for constructive communication instead of anger. We should also consider the usefulness of expressing anger. It will likely arouse defensiveness, limit constructive communication, and decrease our ability to problem solve. If expressing ourselves just leads to an escalation of bad feelings, we have accomplished little.

There are, of course, some possible benefits of recognizing and expressing anger. Angry feelings are a signal that something is not right; perhaps it is something about us, the situation, or the message we have just heard. Each of these variables, or a combination of them, has the power to produce anger. When expressed constructively, anger is also an important sign to others that our feelings count. Anger ceases to be beneficial, however, when it is out of control, when it is used to attack others or motivates a person to seek revenge. In each of these circumstances, the angry person goes beyond a reasonable statement of his feelings and tries to impose his will or judgment on another.

Anger frequently is more harmful to the one experiencing it than to the one at whom it is directed. Holding onto anger makes us tense, edgy, and more easily frustrated. It is extremely stressful physically, mentally, emotionally, and spiritually and takes its toll on us in a myriad of ways. If someone is genuinely out to harm us, we greatly assist them by remaining angry. If we are angry, we can ask ourselves, Is this helpful to me or is it an additional hurt?

How to Control Anger

Take time out.

There is much folk wisdom about getting control of anger, and some of it, such as counting to ten or taking the anger out on an inanimate object, is not bad. These two suggestions give us time away from the cause of anger and provide a chance to let it subside or to develop constructive alternatives. There are usually better ways to deal with difficult situations that occur to us when we are caught in a heated confrontation. Walking away from these situations is an indication of inner strength and is just good sense.

Just leaving the scene does not always solve the problem, however. It is not uncommon for people to continue to ruminate about a provocative event for some time after it occurs; anger can ruin our whole day, or even longer. The habit of holding on to anger invites depression because it inevitably includes negative thoughts and reduced self-esteem. Animals have a much better system for dealing with anger; after a fight or a scolding, they lie down to rest and forget it. Because of this strategy, they are probably much happier and healthier than humans. Have you ever heard of a dog who died of high blood pressure?

Replace negative thoughts with positive ones.

Stopping and diverting negative, angry thoughts are other ways we can cope productively with lingering feelings. Thoughts can be stopped by saying no verbally and shaking our head, wearing a rubber band on our wrist and flipping it when an unwanted idea occurs, switching to a preplanned positive thought immediately as a replacement for a negative one, or in several other ways that were introduced in chapter 1.

Whenever a thought is removed, it is important to put a positive thought in its place immediately to keep it from recurring. We might select two or three positive past or future events and practice automatically diverting our thoughts to them, imagining these events in as much detail as possible. The more we put in it, the more powerful this tool becomes. Thoughts can also be diverted to poetry, scriptures, songs, or landscapes; anything that is uplifting and can be committed to memory can be used. Redecorating our minds with pleasant and happy thoughts will free us of destructive anger.

Recognize that others have different values.

Shoulds can play an important role in the development of anger when we naively expect others to follow our rules and ideas about what constitutes acceptable behavior. Most behavior and many values are relative to the situation. If we took off our shoes before entering a home, for example, or carried our groceries home from market in a basket on our heads, or honked our horn each time we entered an intersection, most people would think we were acting in a rather bizarre manner, yet these are common practices in other parts of the world. Similarly, we are incorrect if we believe that our particular sets of rules about life and how to interact with others are shared by everyone else. It is immature to become angry simply because our rules are not followed or our needs are not met.

The old Indian axiom of withholding judgment of someone until we have "walked in their moccasins" provides another strategy to control angry feelings through empathy. Carlos, a group-therapy patient, became livid because his doctor had not greeted him in the waiting room prior to the group session, though the doctor had walked into the room to take another patient back for her appointment. For almost one-half of the group, Carlos vilified doctors and other professionals as unfeeling, uncaring, and pompous idiots. If he had observed this particular doctor during a day, however, he would have understood that focusing only on the patient he was seeing at that moment was part of his style. Even his co-worker's greetings were often ignored as he went about his tasks. Carlos's should about always greeting those you know was a custom foreign to his doctor's world.

Developing the ability to empathize with others can decrease anger dramatically. Carlos would have been much happier if he had tried to understand his doctor's behavior instead of assuming it was directed at him. Letting go of the idea that our shoulds apply to everyone else is the first step in utilizing the power of empathy. Next we must try to understand the other person's motivation in order to put the interaction with them in a more realistic perspective. Finally, decisions about what to do with our angry feelings can be made based on the two questions presented earlier: Is my anger appropriate and useful? Will it benefit me or others to express it?

Change behavior through positive shaping rather than anger.

We are able to effect greater change through positive shaping of behavior than through anger. There are a few exceptions to this rule, such as when a child has placed himself in danger by disobeying directions, and quick, strong, and memorable actions must be taken. Only when an immediate, simple point must be made in an intense manner is punishment more useful than praise, however. Angry or punitive actions undermine healthy relationships, create defensiveness, and generate negative feelings in those whom they are directed toward. Instead of pointing out behaviors that make us unhappy, we can praise and reward those actions which bring us joy. This simple formula is especially useful in long-term relationships, such as marriages, that have become strained. Focusing on what's right promotes feelings of hope and provides relief from confrontation and anger.

Let go of angry feelings.

Paul wrote to the Ephesians, "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath" (Ephesians 4:26), apparently to encourage them to deal with as much anger as they could during the day and let go of the rest. There are some things we can do to cope with angry feelings, but it is fruitless and even destructive to hold onto those feelings if nothing further can be done. A modern derivation of this rule frequently repeated as advice to married couples is "Never go to bed angry." Not all problems can be resolved in one day, of course, but making an effort to let go of those things that we cannot change will increase our sense of inner peace.

Take time to prevent misunderstandings.

It is impossible to consistently understand what others mean by their words or behavior, and taking the time to check out our interpretations of their actions can prevent a lot of unnecessary anger. This strategy offers the advantages of (1) a buffer of time between the perceived hurt and the response, (2) allowing us to clarify what we have heard, and (3) giving others a chance to consider if they have given the message they intended to give. Many people resist this method of controlling anger because they feel it is silly or they want to place the responsibility for clear communication on others. Since it is impossible for anyone to be perfectly in touch at all times with his surroundings and able to understand fully what is taking place, it is irresponsible not to take the time to check it out.

Learn to use disarming techniques to deal with criticism.

Sometimes it is necessary to deal with the anger of others when we feel that it is unjustified (just because someone is angry, it doesn't mean that they are correct, of course). In his book Feeling Good, Dr. David Burns provides a practical method for managing these situations with a tool he calls the "disarming technique." First, he advocates finding a grain of truth or a way to agree in principle with part of what the other person says. This will allow us to respond in a way that lets the other person know that his criticism has been heard. It is important to avoid fighting back or using sarcasm, because that will only make the situation worse, causing everyone's feelings to escalate and become uncontrollable. After we have acknowledged the other person's dissatisfaction, we should restate our position in a clear and unaggressive manner. It may take a few interactions for our accuser to realize that he has been heard and we do not agree, but he will feel that his opinion has at least been respected, and we will avoid a destructive argument.

It is sometimes very difficult to put this technique to work; our emotions and old patterns of behavior get the best of us, and we slip back into our former habits of confrontation and defensiveness. We can practice using the disarming technique by role-playing with a friend or mentally rehearsing the steps until they are committed to memory. Being prepared in advance to manage criticism will decrease the chances of our becoming angry and hurting ourselves further.

Allow others free agency.

It is difficult to let people we love make choices we don't agree with or that we see as destructive, particularly in a family. As children become teenagers and adults try to direct or change them, too much criticism can lead to anger and resentment. Developing the courage and skill to say "It's his choice" and then letting go of our wishes to change others can help us avoid unnecessary and unproductive worry and hurt feelings.

Anger does take time and practice to control. Because it has become a habitual response in some situations, it must be removed and replaced with other ways of responding. Unfortunately, however, the times we get angry are the times when it is hardest to think rationally and gain control; in initiating new responses that are as powerful as old habits, we must use a lot of advanced preparation and creativity.

James placed the ultimate results of anger in perspective when he wrote, "Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God." (James 1:19-20.) Controlling anger brings us closer to godliness and blocks a possible entry route of depression.
