Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 10

Helping Others

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has often been recognized for its efforts in reaching out to help in times of need, not only to its members, but also to others who have experienced misfortune. During disasters such as the famine in Africa, the floods in Utah and Idaho, and earthquakes in Latin America, the Church has provided needed food, medicine, clothing, and shelter to victims as well as structure to organize the Saints and others in relief efforts. This willingness to give assistance and support both as an organization and as individuals is a hallmark of true Christianity.

For each of us, there are also personal crises and disasters during which our burdens can be lightened by the compassionate service of others and, at times, by the giving of ourselves. Depressed individuals in particular are helped both by the love they receive and by the care they give to others. Since depression is a time when questions about our self-worth and value are endless, the concern shown by others is a reminder that we do matter. Through providing service to people in need, we can also escape, even for a few minutes, from the narrow and negative feelings of depression and, in doing so, help to rebuild self-esteem.

The Art of the Helper

Helping people through periods of depression is an art, because the helper must constantly struggle to maintain a sense of balance about his efforts. It is often difficult and frustrating to try to reach out to those who are depressed. They often seem pessimistic and uncertain about suggestions, and they challenge, deflect, and reject attempts of others to build their feelings of self-esteem. Because they feel so hopeless, they may refuse to listen at all. Sometimes it is hard not to feel personally rejected by them.

Progress for those who are depressed can be slow and unpredictable. The patterns that cause depression become so automatic that the person affected cannot experience change without making consistent and strenuous efforts. Recovery is rocky. Even under the best of conditions, there are inevitable setbacks and regressions. Those who are trying to be of assistance, even the professionals, often feel frustrated by the apparent lack of progress.

The most important role of the helper is to offer sincere and consistent understanding, encouragement, and support. The ability to listen and understand is a critical skill, and the ability to do this well will, in large measure, determine how helpful the helper will be.

Depressed individuals often feel isolated because of their belief that no one understands them. In order to demonstrate understanding and gain their confidence, it is essential to listen patiently to their story. Sometimes even offering them this much care can make a big difference and boost their self-esteem, since they have often come to expect being cut off or avoided by others.

Many well-meaning helpers mistakenly try to minimize the sadness or loneliness the depressed person feels because they believe that this will change his perspective and improve his mood. This intervention is seldom effective because it alienates the person they are trying to help. Since most people open up to others a little at a time, the helper must initially understand what the other person is experiencing and avoid making hasty judgments or trying to talk him out of his problem, since this only discourages further sharing and decreases his trust in the helper. Try to gain a clear understanding of "where it hurts" before you begin to offer suggestions.

It is important to keep in mind that each person experiences different facets of depression. Listen carefully in order to understand how it is affecting the person you are trying to help. The tendency to stereotype people and lump them together in broad categories leads people to assume that they know all about depression if they have known someone who overcame it, or if they have had personal experience with it themselves. Though there are general similarities, each person's experience is unique and requires a little different kind of help and encouragement. Ignoring these differences makes a helper seem insensitive and unskilled.

Be honest about the seriousness of the problem and the efforts necessary for change. Since patterns of depression usually develop over a long period of time, they often require some time to resolve, and a number of interventions may need to be tried before the person starts to feel better. For some people, a medical doctor may need to be consulted to evaluate potential medical concerns, or a psychologist may be needed for psychotherapy. Honesty helps create the trust that is necessary to be a successful helper.

Facilitating Change

It is difficult to know when someone is ready to experiment with changes in his life. A common problem that helpers experience is wanting to offer a lot of specific advice and suggestions before the other person is able to use them, which usually leads to frustration and sometimes disillusionment and rejection. If you choose to give advice, the best tactic is to begin with small steps and quicken the pace only after experiencing some successes. Monitor carefully what is actually done, as well as what is said. Actions are usually a truer measure of ability to change than are words.

A frequent result of offering advice before the person is ready to change is described in the psychological game that Eric Berne calls "Why don't you . . . Yes, but . . ." In this type of interaction, one person appears to be soliciting advice from another, who obliges, only to discover that the suggestions are dismissed in a wave of excuses and qualifications. This is very demoralizing for both people. The would-be helper feels frustrated because the advice was ignored, and the depressed person interprets it as reinforcement for his feeling that he is hopeless and nothing can be done. The best way to escape this destructive game is to refuse to play. If the person you are trying to assist doesn't seem to be willing to try even the smallest of your suggestions, he is probably not ready for the kind of help you can offer. Talk with him about this concern in a direct and caring manner.

Avoid offering simplistic remedies or advocating drastic changes to depressed individuals. Though they may seem to be pleading for a quick and easy cure, these are rarely successful. Oversimplifying the problem makes people feel misunderstood and the would-be helper seem superficial and naive. Offering suggestions for quick changes usually undermines the helper's credibility because the suggestions don't work, and even if they did, most people are unlikely to follow through with them.

Encourage involvement in pleasurable activities to help decrease depression. Though this is often the fastest way to improve mood, it is also one of the hardest to accomplish. If you know what the person has enjoyed in the past, get involved with him in these kinds of activities. If possible, it is usually better to participate with the person than to just make suggestions, because depressed individuals often lack the motivation to organize activities for themselves. Don't be afraid to enjoy yourself when you're together. Pleasure, like laughter, can be contagious. Providing a model of happiness or satisfaction, while still respecting the person's feelings, can help lift his spirits.

Most people excel at something, but they often neglect their positive achievements when they are depressed. Encourage those who are depressed in things they are likely to do successfully in order to rebuild self-confidence. Remember that achieving success in a few small things is better than tackling a large project that does not provide quick, positive feedback.

Obstacles to Change

A number of tactics that people use when trying to help others are destructive to their relationships and unlikely to facilitate positive changes. Most of these are based on some kind of punishment if the person fails to meet the expectation of the helper.

Making threats or delivering ultimatums is almost always counterproductive. Some people mistakenly believe that if they can just say or do something dramatic to "shake them out of it," depression can be relieved. Unfortunately, these strategies usually increase depression, since the person cannot comply and is, therefore, threatened with further loss. If you feel that this kind of intervention is necessary, it is suggested that you consult with a professional first.

Trying to motivate someone to change through the use of guilt is also not helpful and potentially harmful. A natural consequence of depression is a destructive focus on feelings of guilt. Statements such as "You've got to pull yourself together; think of how it affects your family" or "We'll feel bad if you can't do it" only add more fuel to this destructive fire. Helping people who are depressed requires that you be willing to accept them where they are, and seek to assist them through rebuilding self-esteem rather than assaults on it through guilt trips.

Fears about Change

Some individuals fear and resist changing because they believe the concern of others will cease if they get better. They perceive their relationships with others as based on being taken care of, and even though they resent this feeling at times, they fear people will ignore them if they are well. Successful helpers try to communicate genuine concern and love during the whole process of recovery from depression and thereafter, too. They emphasize through words and actions that their caring for the individual is not based solely on the need for help.

Tom had suffered from depression for several years following his divorce. During this time he lived near two of his sisters, who were married and seemed to be quite happy and successful. They often invited Tom to join their family outings, but he told himself he was a failure because of his divorce and that his family was too good for him. When they tried to get involved with him, he thought they just felt pity for him. In the course of therapy, it became clear that Tom enjoyed his family but feared that they would lose interest in him if he did not need them because of his illness. He recalled times when he was doing a little bit better and then felt that his sisters were beginning to ignore him. Tom made lasting progress only when he discovered ways to be close to his family that were not centered around his illness.

Depression like Tom's, which lingers in spite of medical efforts and help from others, may be providing to the person what psychologists call "secondary gain." In cases like these, the illness has created some benefits for the individual that he does not know how to achieve in another way, and he therefore fears and resists change. Psychological counseling is usually necessary to resolve these fears and help him discover other ways to meet his needs.

Knowing Our Limits

Truly helpful people recognize when they have reached the limits of their abilities, and they ask for help themselves. Because we are human and our skills are limited, we are likely to encounter many situations where more expert help is needed. Responsible and prudent individuals seek help from professionals rather than trying to handle problems about which they are not knowledgeable. Suicidal individuals or people who threaten harm to others should always be directed to professionals for assistance. We risk damage to ourselves, as well as those we had hoped to help, when we go beyond the limits of our skills.

Marv was a conscientious, kind member of a ward bishopric and tried to help people whenever he could. Because of his willingness to get involved, people began to seek him out for counsel and assistance. Even after he was released from the bishopric, he continued to be available at all hours, if needed. Soon, however, he discovered that it was impossible to meet with people as often as they wanted or offer solutions to their serious problems; one young woman even threatened and attempted suicide several times when he could not see her.

Though his intentions had been good, Marv was caught in a discouraging and dangerous situation because he had taken on problems greater than the skills he had with which to help. His job, school, and physical and emotional health all suffered greatly, and some of the people he had wanted to help were delayed in getting the kind of assistance they needed because he did not recognize his limits. Marv eventually learned, through some difficult experiences, how to tell the difference between a "psychological tune-up" and a "major overhaul," and he found joy in helping when he could and assisting people to identify other resources when their problems were out of his range.

It is important for us to pace ourselves in the amount of time and effort we spend in service to others. Initially when we try to relieve depression, spending a little time assisting someone else can provide the boost we need. Trying to do too much, too soon, however, can lead to our becoming overwhelmed and even more depressed.

Tammy's bishop wisely suggested a number of small projects she could undertake for needy ward members that he knew they would greatly appreciate and that would, he hoped, improve her self-esteem. After a few weeks, she felt much better and wanted to get involved helping in other ways because she recognized the lift it had given to her. When the bishop suggested that she volunteer time at the genealogical library, Tammy was enthusiastic. She had long had an interest in this work but had not had the time to pursue it.

Some time later, however, Tammy began to feel overwhelmed again. She had volunteered to work at the library almost every day because she enjoyed it, but she had trouble doing this as well as trying to meet her normal commitments to her husband and family. She lapsed back into depression and became very self-critical, thinking that the reason she could not work as much at the library was her inability to manage time and her general incompetence. Eventually Tammy learned the importance of pacing herself. The old saying "too much of a good thing" also applies to service.

Sowing and Reaping

Peter clearly presented the eternal principle of giving and receiving when he wrote to the Galatians, "Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. . . . Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. . . . Let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." (Galatians 6:2, 7, 9.) The benefits of living in accordance with this law are infinite and fall into two general categories: (1) the immediate lift we receive by stepping outside of ourselves to help someone else and (2) the potential long-term consequences of adopting an open and giving style of interacting with others.

Getting outside of their own thoughts and feelings is very difficult for most depressed individuals. A natural tendency develops in which increasingly greater amounts of attention are drawn toward themselves and their woes, which, of course, only leads to greater depression. As their focus of attention turns inward, their awareness of the outside world and the needs of others narrows and diminishes. In this state, they feel very much alone because they cannot see beyond themselves to others.

One way to break through this isolation is to force ourselves to give service to others. Through anticipating others' needs and interacting with them, we can forget our own troubles and hurts for a while. Giving of ourselves to others somehow feels good, too.

Disciples of Christ will try to adopt an open and giving attitude toward others to fulfill His challenge to love one another as He has loved us. (See John 13:34.) Through His example, Jesus personified the "sower of good seeds" among men. Though His efforts to show love and kindness to others were sometimes rebuffed and He was ultimately crucified, do you suppose He would want to change His message or style? Because we, too, live in this less than ideal world, we sometimes need to rely on faith that sowing the good seeds of kindness and understanding whenever possible is the best course of action. These seeds do not always flourish for us, but they increase the chances for a rich harvest. By adopting this style, we become a little more like the gods who govern through the power of love.

"Even the server of many must have his own pitcher filled," states an old and wise proverb. When our own reservoirs of love and energy are depleted, we have to plan ways to become refreshed ourselves. Though part of this need can be met through service, other activities and relationships that build us are also important. Many professional helpers, such as psychologists, psychiatrists, and counselors, experience burn-out, dissatisfaction, and disappointment when they focus too much of their energy on assisting their patients. If just giving to others were enough, they would probably be some of the happiest people among us.

Successful helpers try to strike a balance between being there for others and taking care of themselves. Even Jesus sought quiet times away from the demands and cries of the multitudes—in Capernaum, on the Sea of Galilee, and in the desert. He drew strength at times from His family, from His disciples, from angels, and from prayer to His Father.

Finding Ourselves Through Helping Others

A seemingly paradoxical relationship frequently exists between giving oneself and attaining personal growth and increased joy. A Primary song explains, "When we're helping, we're happy." It is as if giving to someone else, even when we feel that we haven't much to offer, actually ends up benefiting us too.

Investing ourselves in others is particularly helpful, though difficult, when we ourselves are depressed. It is difficult to become motivated to serve because we have decreased energy, and it is difficult to take the risk of reaching out because our own self-esteem is low. It is easier to follow the natural tendency to withdraw from others and to be concerned only with our own problems. Though some periods of depression are precipitated by too much attention to the needs of others, it does not mean that we must relinquish every commitment in order to feel good again. Regaining a realistic balance between serving others and caring for ourselves can help decrease depression.
