Richard King Mower, Overcoming Depression ( 1986)

Chapter 11

Other Resources

Books are limited in their ability to transmit information and effect changes in the lives of their readers. While books may provide information on identifying depression and offer sound principles to cope with it, many people need more than reading this or any book to escape from their bouts with the blues.

If you have reason to believe your depression is biologically based, if your illness fits the description for manic-depression given in chapter 4, if you have seriously contemplated suicide, or if you have made an honest effort to help yourself by applying these ideas but have experienced little success, please seek professional help. Don't settle for only a partial solution. Now, more than ever before, professionals can help people to escape serious depression through therapy and, in some cases, medication.

There are many possible medical causes for depression, including chemical and hormonal imbalances, physical illnesses, interactions between medications, and vitamin or mineral deficiencies (such as iron). A medical examination to rule out these types of problems, or treat them if necessary, is important if you are to use the techniques discussed in this book with the greatest possibility for success. Though modifying your thoughts and actions can have a powerful positive effect on your mood, that alone cannot resolve physical problems.

Many people express unfounded and unrealistic fears about seeking medical help. They naively assume that avoiding a physical exam will prevent illness or disease, telling themselves, "What I don't know about can't hurt me." In reality, our moods are very much affected by our physical health, and ignoring medical problems may subject us to unnecessary depression.

We are fortunate to live in a time when so much is known about how to treat depression that is biologically caused. With this increase in real knowledge, however, has also come an increase in "miracle cures," "secret remedies," and clear cases of quackery. The "snake oils" of today have scientific-sounding names, but their usefulness in treatment has not improved. Because depression is a serious illness that affects many people and is increasingly brought to the public's attention, the charlatans and shysters are focusing increased energy on promoting unproven and untested ideas. It is common to hear and read of new "herbal" remedies or simplistic "breakthroughs" for curing depression. The best way to protect yourself from such scams and fads is to seek competent, professional help. If you doubt the recommendations of your doctor, seek a second opinion, but be certain that the person you choose is well qualified to evaluate your condition.

Counseling and Psychotherapy

Medications or other care provided by a physician are effective in some cases, but the chances for improvement in mood are greatly enhanced when these procedures are used in conjunction with therapy with a competent mental-health professional. Not all types of psychotherapy are equally effective in treating depression, however, and not all psychotherapists and counselors work well with the problems associated with it. Many types of therapy are available, and some are more successful in the treatment of depression than are others. You have a right to know what type of therapy you will receive and how its success compares with other treatments for depression.

Gather as much information as possible when choosing a therapist. Ask people you trust for their recommendations—your doctor, your bishop, or close friends, for example. If possible, talk about your options with people who have had first-hand experience with therapy and who have problems similar to your own. Names of psychologists, psychiatrists, and social workers are also listed in the telephone book. In most states professionals using these titles must be licensed and meet established standards of knowledge and experience. If you have any doubts about a therapist's credentials, contact the professional regulatory agency for your state.

Therapy also is available from many public and nonprofit agencies. Trained professionals are found on the staffs of community mental health centers, counseling centers, and various other facilities supported through public money or charitable contributions. Because patients are charged for services on a sliding-fee scale, according to an individual's ability to pay, many people who have severely limited financial resources and/or no health insurance are able to receive help from public agencies. To identify what agencies are available in your area, check the phone book, call local government offices, or contact a local information and referral center.

Group psychotherapy is another option available in some areas from both private therapists and public agencies. It can often treat depression successfully and is frequently less expensive than individual counseling because the members, in essence, share in paying the therapist's fee. Of course, each person also shares the therapist's time and attention with other group members.

Once you have contacted a therapist, take the time to talk about your needs and expectations. Ask for information about his approach to treatment. Describe your specific goals and how soon you hope to accomplish them, and ask if they seem reasonable and realistic. During the course of treatment, provide your impressions about your progress, or the lack of it. If you become discouraged, say so; don't just drop out. It is common, even with the best of counselors, to experience frustration from time to time. Be open about discussing this before you give up. The relationship between the two of you will be a major contributor to your success in treatment; keep tabs on your thoughts and feelings and learn to express them.

Seeing a counselor is most likely to bring about positive change if you are willing to initiate and experiment with changes in your thoughts and behavior. Therapy is usually of little value if a person approaches it passively and just expects the therapist to "fix" the problems. An old joke makes this point quite succinctly: "How many psychologists does it take to change a light bulb?" "Only one, but the bulb must really want to change!"

Natural Helpers

Besides psychotherapy and medication, some nonprofessional resources, often overlooked, are available to assist and support you.

Some families are able to offer help and support to family members who are struggling with depression. Such assistance may come through verbal encouragement, including the depressed person in activities, or lending a listening ear when needed. Unfortunately, many depressed persons feel estranged from family and friends who might be able to help them. They are afraid or unwilling to ask for help, and family members feel confused by their withdrawal and do not initiate contact. A kind of stand-off occurs, which produces more estrangement and discouragement. Though it may seem risky, it is often helpful to reach out to members of your family and ask for assistance in times of need. Be explicit about how they can help you rather than hoping they will guess or somehow know how to help.

The Church has also established an organization that, when functioning at its potential, can act like an extended family and provide people you can turn to for counsel, support, or other assistance. In many areas, leaders are receiving training in counseling skills that help them to assist members as well as learning to recognize when consultation with a professional is needed.

Some persons find that it is easy to seek help from fellow church members or leaders because a relationship has already been established, they feel that they are worthy to ask for help, or they believe that it is important to solve problems using religious principles. In order to prevent misunderstandings and disappointment, try to be clear with yourself and those from whom you seek counsel about what you feel you need and why you have come to them for help. Of course, church leaders and members are likely to provide counsel that is focused around religious issues or teachings because that is the nature of their association with you. If you are afraid you might be turned off by this approach, it is best to be honest about those feelings from the beginning.

Some friends are close and intimate enough that they can help lift you when you're down. Though most depressed people avoid contact with others, friends are often willing to be a sounding board or to help provide a natural escape from your problems by getting involved with you in pleasurable activities. Relationships frequently become deeper and stronger when friends share their joys and sorrows.

Self-help Opportunities

In many communities, classes and seminars are offered by mental health professionals on how to manage depression, stress, and other common problems. Such classes can be very effective in teaching general psychological principles and strategies for change, as well as providing some structure or suggestions about how to implement these ideas into everyday life. Classes may be sponsored through mental health agencies, hospitals, community education programs, or community service agencies. They are often advertised by public-service announcements in the media, flyers in public schools, or posters in public places. Check around to discover where such classes are taught. If they are not available in your area, it may be possible to organize them by contacting community service agencies, mental health professionals, or groups that could act as sponsors.

Support groups of various kinds are available in many communities. If there is not one in your area that specifically focuses on depression, other groups may be of benefit and support if they address problems that affect you. The goal of such groups is therapeutic in nature, and they often focus on such topics as overcoming alcohol or other substance abuse, parent training and support, or recovery from serious physical or mental illness. To find out what groups are available in your area, call agencies that work with people who share these concerns.

Groups have also been organized to fill general social and psychological needs of a specific population, such as Parents Without Partners. They are usually listed in the yellow pages of the telephone book under headings such as "Associations," "Social Clubs," and "Social Service Organizations."

Suggestions for Further Reading

Several good books are available that teach principles similar to those discussed here as well as other related topics. The usefulness of reading, however, is closely related to a person's willingness to apply in day-to-day life the ideas presented in the books. Avoid getting caught in the trap of reaching for another book to solve a problem before you have really tried to use the ideas in the one you've just read. This enticing form of avoidance is likely to keep you frustrated, overwhelmed, and blue. Here are five books that I have found to be helpful:

Jonathan Livingston Seagull by Richard Bach (New York: Avon Books, 1970). This book, the fictional account of a seagull's struggle toward perfection, is an uplifting and thought-provoking story. The author's conceptions of perfection and how one grows toward it are remarkably close to LDS teachings.

Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy by David D. Burns (New York: Signet Paperback, 1981). Dr. Burns discusses ways to change thinking in order to decrease depression and improve mood, and includes many specific suggestions to help readers apply these ideas to their lives.

Intimate Connections by David D. Burns (New York: William Morrow and Company, 1985). Dr. Burns discusses loneliness and the need for approval and attention from others and provides suggestions for improving self-esteem and cultivating positive relationships.

How to Survive the Loss of a Love by Harold Bloomfield et al (New York: Bantam Books, 1976). This highly readable book provides help for dealing with obvious losses, such as death or separation, and not so obvious losses, such as aging, moving, or other changes.

The Road Less Traveled by Scott M. Peck (New York: Touchstone, 1978). The author discusses issues common to depressed individuals, though this is not primarily a book about depression. The sections on self-discipline and the problems one experiences in trying to love others are excellent.

The Dance of Anger by Harriet Goldhor Lerner (New York: Harper & Row, 1985), a good discussion of anger and how it affects our lives and intimate relationships. Though the book is written from a woman's perspective, most of the information also applies to men.
