Christmas is meant to be a time of joy, love, and peace, but our circumstances don’t always make it easy. I spent two Christmases on a mission in Brazil, far away from my family and in an unfamiliar culture. Those Christmas seasons had good moments, but they were the first times I felt some negative emotions around the holiday season, namely discouragement and homesickness.

After returning from my mission, the holiday season still didn’t feel as enjoyable as it once had when I was young. Growing older with more responsibilities, I often felt too overwhelmed with the busyness of the season to celebrate Christmas in the way I’d hoped. While I wanted to relax at home, spend time serving others, or enjoy the holidays with loved ones, I had to spend most of December working, trying to keep up with events, shopping for gifts, and studying for college finals.

I also know of many others who often spend the holiday season grieving the loss of a loved one, living far from home, dealing with difficult relationships, or feeling especially lonely at this time of year.

But as I’ve considered the hustle and bustle of this season, I’ve wondered—would Christ want a holiday centered around Him to cause us stress, hopelessness, and burnout?

I believe that if Jesus Christ were here, He would have us feel peace and hope around the holiday season. After all, He was born to help us feel those very things. He came to earth to help us face and overcome our challenges.

As Elder Neil L. Andersen of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught, “I witness that as we are righteous, all our tears of sorrow, difficulty, and uncertainty will be met and made right in Him, the beloved Son of God.”

Despite our challenges and the to-do lists and stress that escalate this time of year, our lives can be simplified and our heartaches healed when we focus on the reason for Christmas—our Savior Jesus Christ.

Every year since I was young, my family has read the New Testament account of Christ’s birth by candlelight on Christmas Eve.

Each of us receives several verses of scripture on strips of paper. We each hold a long candle, but only the first person to read aloud lights their candle. Their little flame is the only light in the room when they begin to read from Luke chapter 1:

“And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,

“To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin’s name was Mary.

“And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women” (Luke 1:26–28).

Once the first person reads these verses, they use their burning wick to light the next person’s candle. The first reader blows out their flame, and the story continues:

“And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus” (Luke 1:31).

“And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn” (Luke 2:7).

The story of Christ’s birth reverently goes on in this pattern, person by person and candle by candle. By the end of this scripture reading, the Spirit and glimmers of light fill the dark room.

Even when I was a kid and barely understood New Testament language, I always loved my family’s tradition of reading about Christ’s birth by candlelight. This simple tradition continues to show me that we do not need extravagant events at this time of year to build fond memories of Christmas or strengthen our testimony of the Savior.

When we keep Jesus Christ and His simple messages of light and love at the center of our lives, all other worries and responsibilities fall into place.

I love Christmas and all the festivities associated with it: the traditions, the decorations, the food, and the music. I especially love that Christmas focuses on the Savior. But almost every year, I look back on the holidays and feel a little disappointed. Life is too busy to live out my dream of dedicating an entire month purely to Christmas celebrations.

In my efforts to create a joyful holiday, I often overburden myself and focus more on unimportant details than my relationship with the Savior. But I’ve learned that what’s most important is making time for small, Christ-centered habits. Instead of feeling pressured to say yes to every social event or find perfect gifts, we can focus on doing good and making time for Him each day. And we can recognize our efforts to share and invite His light, even if they seem small.

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles has spoken about simplifying our lives to focus on the Savior. He said: “As we seek to purify our lives and look unto Christ in every thought [see Doctrine and Covenants 6:36], everything else begins to align. Life no longer feels like a long list of separate efforts held in tenuous balance.

“… When we look at our lives and see a hundred things to do, we feel overwhelmed. When we see one thing—loving and serving God and His children, in a hundred different ways—then we can work on those things with joy.”

Whenever I’m feeling the overwhelming emotions that sometimes accompany the Christmas season, I remind myself that if I am focusing on Christ, then I’m doing enough.

New Testament Jews may have expected their Savior to come to earth in a grandiose display, but instead he came into the world exposed to the elements and among animals. He rested not on a throne, but in a manger. Jesus Christ’s birth and life are prime examples of the simplicity and humility that we can invite into our lives, especially at this time of year.

My family continues the tradition of reading Christ’s birth by candlelight every year. One December when I felt stressed about final exams at school, I thought that I had missed my chance to enjoy the Christmas season. But this simple tradition was the one activity that left me feeling uplifted, content, and grateful. Remembering Christ’s birth brought more satisfaction than any present I received or any decoration I hung that year.

When life feels overwhelming or dark, especially around the busy holiday season, remember that Christ is the only source of lasting light. As He said, “I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life” (John 8:12).

Recently I have spent my December days stressing over social events, worrying about my financial situation, and watching my family members missing loved ones who have passed away. Yet I’ve also taken time to pray in gratitude for my many blessings. I’ve made an extra effort to serve as Christ did. I’ve spent several moments remembering how God has taken care of me in the past, and I know I can trust Him no matter my circumstances. Once again, my family read about Christ’s birth by candlelight, and I was reminded of His love and peace.

If we seek Him above all else this time of year—in the symbols of Christmas, the festivities we participate in, the gifts we buy, and the service we give—we will find Him (see Matthew 7:8). His influence and Spirit are available to us not just during Christmastime, but always.

In the words of Elder José A. Teixeira of the Seventy: “Because He came, there is meaning to our existence. Because He came, there is hope. He is the Savior of the world, and He is our greatest gift.”

Regardless of what we may be facing, we can all invite into our lives the hope, peace, comfort, and joy the Savior promises.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="157526073" id="aside1_p1"><strong>Allie Richael</strong> is originally from Idaho, USA, and served a mission in southern Brazil. In her spare time, she enjoys being in the mountains and identifying every bird she sees. Allie loves finding answers to life’s questions in the gospel and sharing those answers with others.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
