My family was experiencing some challenges in prudently balancing our finances and meeting unexpected bills, despite all our efforts.

One Sabbath day, a sister shared her similar challenges and together we counselled with the self-reliance specialist. We signed up for the Self Reliance program on personal finances. We heeded Elder David A. Bednar’s call that “taking action is the exercise of faith” and that the most important step in self-reliance is to begin. President Russell M. Nelson taught that “the Lord loves effort.’’ We know that “the Lord will magnify our small but consistent efforts.”

Our journey had begun. My husband, our eldest son, and I joined the program together with nine other members. It was indeed a sacrifice. We held virtual meetings every Saturday at 6 a.m. and each member ensured that their action partner was present.

Members of our group were remarkably candid in their responses to actions taken during the week. Assignments on evaluation of our efforts and in keeping commitments were faithfully carried out and reported. The financial stewardship success map is a spiritual journey. Through honesty and openness in sharing of experiences in the group, friendship and positive relationships were established. As disciples of Jesus Christ, we faithfully ministered to each other’s temporal and spiritual needs, guided by the love of God.

As a family, we experienced miracles through this program, and our faith in the Savior Jesus Christ increased as we held regular family councils.

Here we counselled on our spiritual and temporal needs and our commitment to being wise and faithful stewards.

Self-reliance is a principle of salvation exercising faith in Jesus Christ in our finances, in the family, or as individuals. This program of the Church is for all the members, as the Lord declared, “It is my purpose to provide for my saints…

“For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare” (Doctrine and Covenants 104:15, 17).

The First Presidency declared, “This revelation is a promise from the Lord that He will provide temporal blessings and open the door of self-reliance, which is the ability for us to provide necessities of life for ourselves and family members.”

Self-reliance is a commandment, and both temporal and spiritual blessings are one to God: “Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual” (Doctrine and Covenants 29:34).

Heavenly Father expects us to obey His commandments: “We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them (Abraham 3:25).”

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland taught, “the Lord blesses those who want to improve, who accept the need for commandments and try to keep them….

“He will help you repent, repair, fix whatever you have to fix and to keep going. Soon enough you will have the success you seek.”

The pictorial representation of the financial stewardship success map—a house—greatly inspired our spiritual journey. The foundation of the house is faith in Jesus Christ, unity with spouse, and commitment to self-reliance, while the supporting walls are work and budget.

The first step is paying tithes and offerings, the second is protecting your family from hardship, the third is eliminating debt, the fourth is saving and investing for the future, and the roof which is the fifth step, is to continue to give and to bless others. “When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God.” (Mosiah 2:17).

We are to teach our children the same principle including lifting the poor (See Mosiah 4:26.) and pressing forward in Christ. (See 2 Nephi 31:20.)

As we work, we eliminate our temporal reliance on others for “whatever causes us to be dependent on someone else for decisions or resources we could provide for ourselves weakens us spiritually and retards our growth towards what the gospel plan intends us to be.”

Paying our tithes and offerings is a principle of our faith in the Savior and it is with a promised blessing, when obeyed, will “open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it (Malachi 3:10).”

Fast offerings are used to help the poor and the needy. When we give a generous fast offering, our capacity to be self-reliant increases. Elder Robert D. Hales (1932–2017) said, “The purpose of both temporal and spiritual self-reliance is to get ourselves on higher ground so that we can lift others in need.”

Being self-reliant requires one to have a transformation in habits and behaviors, and in taking personal responsibility. Although this can be a challenge at first, faith in Jesus Christ and His Atonement will help one undergo this transformation peacefully. As one keeps trying, holding family councils, counselling with the Lord, and seeking His help, one gains power to persist.

In Mosiah 3:19, King Benjamin taught about overcoming the “natural man,” which can lead us to debt and financial stress. Prophets have counselled us to avoid debts and to live within our means. As we read the Book of Mormon and apply the precepts therein, we will seek to follow the “enticings of the Holy Spirit” we will be enabled by the power of the Atonement to become strong in the face of adversity.

“And again, verily I say unto you, concerning your debts—behold it is my will that you shall pay all your debts” (Doctrine and Covenants 104:78).

As we communicate with our Heavenly Father through prayer, let us talk to Him about our trials, experiences, and blessings.

“Our Heavenly Father hears the prayers of His children across the earth pleading for food to eat, clothes to cover their bodies, and for the dignity that would come from being able to provide for themselves.”

May the Holy Ghost guide us to keep the Lord’s commandment to become self-reliant.
