The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the March 2006 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Follow the Prophet” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1. Using simple costumes or signs, have five children represent Moses, John the Baptist, Abinadi, Joseph Smith, and President Gordon B. Hinckley. Have them read one of the following statements, and ask the children to guess which prophet each is. After they correctly guess, ask, “What did the Lord teach and promise through this prophet?” Moses: “I lived during Old Testament times. The Lord told me to lead my people out of bondage. I went to Mount Sinai where the Lord spoke to me and gave the Ten Commandments. Who am I?” John the Baptist: “I was born just before Jesus Christ. I was sent to help the people prepare to receive Him. I baptized Jesus Christ. I also conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith. Who am I?” Abinadi: “I lived about 150 years before Christ was born. I prophesied to King Noah that Jesus would come to earth and redeem His people. The people did not believe what I said. I suffered death by fire. Who am I?” Joseph Smith: “I wanted to know which church I should join. I prayed and was visited by God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ. They told me not to join any of the churches. Who am I?” President Gordon B. Hinckley: “With the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, I proclaimed that marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and families are central to the Creator’s plan. I was also inspired to build temples all over the world. Who am I?” Sing a song to reinforce the teachings from these prophets each time the children identify one of the prophets. Testify that prophets teach truth, both long ago and now.

2. Help the children become familiar with our current First Presidency and Apostles by preparing pictures of them (available in the May or November Liahona or at www.lds.org). Put one or two sentences about each on the back of his picture. (For example: President Gordon B. Hinckley served a mission to Great Britain and has dedicated more temples than any other Church leader. President Thomas S. Monson had a career in publishing before he was called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles at age 36. President James E. Faust served a mission to Brazil. He worked as an attorney. President Boyd K. Packer served as president of the New England Mission. He has carved and painted lifelike birds. Elder L. Tom Perry served a mission to the Northern States. He was a businessman. Elder Russell M. Nelson was an internationally renowned heart surgeon. Elder Dallin H. Oaks was a lawyer, law professor, president of Brigham Young University, and justice of the Utah Supreme Court. Elder M. Russell Ballard was a businessman and served as president of the Canada Toronto Mission. Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin is an Eagle Scout. He played college football. Elder Richard G. Scott was a nuclear scientist. He presided over the Argentina North Mission. Elder Robert D. Hales was a jet fighter pilot. He served as president of the England London Mission. Elder Jeffrey R. Holland served as president of Brigham Young University and as an Area President in Chile. Elder Henry B. Eyring was a college professor and president of Ricks College [now BYU–Idaho]. Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf was born in Czechoslovakia and raised in Germany, where his family joined the Church. He is a pilot. Elder David A. Bednar was a college professor and president of BYU–Idaho.) Have some children hold the pictures, name the leader, and tell something about him. Play a guessing game with the pictures (see Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 169). Bear testimony that these men have been called to be special witnesses of Jesus Christ and they hold the keys of authority to direct God’s Church. Read D&C 84:36. Encourage the children to listen to our leaders in general conference.
