One of my favorite Primary songs is “I Feel My Savior’s Love” (Children’s Songbook, 74–75). The first line says, “I feel my Savior’s love in all the world around me.” As I visit Primary children all around the world, I see that love shining from their beautiful faces.

I especially feel the Savior’s love as I read the scriptures. They teach us the things Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ want us to know and do, and they help us gain a testimony.

I gained my own testimony when I was about 12 or 13. I knew I needed to find out for myself if the Church was true. I started thinking about how Joseph Smith had been close to my age when he prayed in the grove. I had just been reading in the Book of Mormon where Moroni tells us to pray to receive a witness of the truth (see Moro. 10:3–5), so I did. I really prayed. And I felt the witness that Moroni promises each of us. From then on I knew I had my own testimony.

One of my favorite scriptures is John 13:34: “A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.” We show our love by being kind.

When I was young, I always wanted everyone to feel included. If children on the playground were being picked on, I wanted to be their friend. I remember befriending one girl other children were mean to. Years later, after I was married, she was my neighbor. When I saw her, we happily greeted one another. I thought, “Look at her now. She’s a wonderful mother who serves well and works hard to teach her children.” I am so glad that when I was little I was nice to her. Then when I saw her again, I didn’t have any regrets. We were still friends.

We should always think about how others feel. We should be kind to everyone, as Jesus was. He loves all of us. It doesn’t matter how we look—if our clothes are different, if our hair is different, if there is something different about the way we walk or the way we do things. It doesn’t matter if we come from another country or speak a different language. Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ love every single one of us. They love me and They love you.

When we read the scriptures and try to follow them, we are “anchoring” our lives to the scriptures. When we are “anchored” in the scriptures, we show our love to the Savior, and He will bless us.

He knows I will follow him,

Give all my life to him.

I feel my Savior’s love,

The love he freely gives me.

(Children’s Songbook, 74–75)

I know Jesus Christ lives. He loves me. This is His true Church. The scriptures are true.
