Prayerfully select and read from this message the scriptures and teachings that meet the needs of the sisters you visit. Share your experiences and testimony. Invite those you teach to do the same.

Blessings of Belonging to Relief Society: Relief Society helps sisters learn the doctrines of the gospel through studying the scriptures and teachings of latter-day prophets.

Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: “It is incumbent upon each of us to do everything we can to increase our spiritual knowledge and understanding by studying the scriptures and the words of the living prophets. When we read and study the revelations, the Spirit can confirm in our hearts the truth of what we are learning; in this way, the voice of the Lord speaks to each one of us. As we ponder the teachings of the gospel and apply them in daily living, we become better prepared to receive additional light and truth” (“Marvelous Are the Revelations of the Lord,” Ensign, May 1998, 32).

President Gordon B. Hinckley: “I hope that [scripture study] will become something far more enjoyable than a duty; that, rather, it will become a love affair with the word of God. I promise you that as you read, your minds will be enlightened and your spirits will be lifted. At first it may seem tedious, but that will change into a wondrous experience with thoughts and words of things divine” (“The Light within You,” Ensign, May 1995, 99).

President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985): “Intelligence, light and knowledge … are part of the promise given to the sisters by the Prophet Joseph Smith. … Relief Society sisters see the fulfillment of that promise daily as they teach children at home, in Sunday School, and in Primary, in Relief Societies, in sacrament meetings, and in daily conversation. … We encourage all our sisters to take advantage of their opportunities to receive light and knowledge in school, in personal study, and in Relief Society” (“Relief Society—Its Promise and Potential,” Ensign, Mar. 1976, 4).

D&C 88:77–78, 118: “Teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom. Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you. … Seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith.”

Bonnie D. Parkin, Relief Society general president: “The home is the central place where we teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom, but the home is supported by the teaching and the learning that takes place at church. As Relief Society leaders and teachers, we can help accomplish this mission through effective gospel teaching. In Relief Society we teach the teachers—we teach mothers, future mothers and nurturers of God’s children. … When effective teaching occurs in Relief Society, sisters will be spiritually uplifted and better able to apply gospel principles in their lives. I believe effective teaching includes knowing your sisters, relying on the Spirit, and allowing the sisters to feel the love of the Lord in their lives” (“Teaching: An Entrance to the Heart” [address delivered at Relief Society open house, fall 2004]).
