it was for the space of many still in that condition, Eve,

hours before Moses did again stretching high her hands,

receive his natural strength prayed: "O Lord ... thy

like unto man; and he said servant has fallen from the

unto himself: Now, for this Garden" and is banished to a

cause I know that man is desert place. (Genesis 3:18f.)

nothing, which thing I never

had supposed.

have beheld God; but not my our eyes having become

natural, but my spiritual eyes, terrestrial can no longer behold

for my natural eyes could not the things they once did."

have beheld; for I should have

withered and died in his

presence; but his glory was

upon me; and I beheld his face,

for I was transfigured before

him.

when Moses had said these at prayer, appears to them in

words, behold, Satan came a great light and sets up his

tempting him, saying: Moses, throne on the site, thus

son of man, worship me. claiming the earth as his

kingdom while his followers

sing hymns in his praise.

Moses looked upon Satan and prays for light, asking: Can this

said: Who art thou? For be another God here hailed by

behold, I am a son of God, in his angels? An angel of the

the similitude of his Only Lord arrives and says: "Fear

Begotten; and where is thy not, Adam, what you see is

glory, that I should worship Satan and his companions who

thee? wish to seduce you again. First

he appeared to you as a

serpent and now he wants you

to worship him so he can draw

you after him away from

God."

15-18. ... Where is thy Then the angel exposed and

glory, for it is darkness unto humiliated Satan in Adam's

me? ... Get thee hence, presence and cast him out

Satan; deceive me not; ... I saying to Adam:

can judge between thee and

God. Depart hence, Satan.

God, except ... I were

transfigured before him. [See

verse 20: "Calling upon God,

he received strength."]

Pp. 307-8. The next

morning as Adam prayed with

upraised hands, Satan

appeared to him, saying,

"Adam, I am an angel of the

great God. The Lord has sent

me to you." It was his plan to

kill Adam and thus "remain

sole master and possessor of the earth." But God sent three

heavenly messengers to Adam

bringing him the signs of the

priesthood and kingship.

P. 309. And Adam wept

because they reminded him of

his departed glory, but God

said they were signs of the

atonement to come,

whereupon Adam rejoiced.

Pp. 323-24. After a forty-

day fast Adam and Eve were

very weak, stretched out upon

tempting him, saying: Moses, but still praying. Satan then

son of man, worship me. came, clothed in light speaking

Begotten, worship me. saying, "I am the first created

of God.... Now God has

commanded me to lead you to

my habitation ...

to be restored to your former

glory."

P. 325. But God knew that

he planned to lead them to far-

away places and destroy them.

Adam said, Who was this

Satan and said: Who art thou? us? Answer: He is Satan in

human form come to deceive

you by giving you signs to

prove his bonafides but I have

cast him out.

P. 326. Adam and Eve, still

weak from fasting and still

praying, are again confronted

by Satan, who, being rebuffed,

tremble.... 22. And it came and wailing says, "'God has

to pass that Satan cried with a wrecked my scheme ... he

loud voice, with weeping, and has rendered worthless the

wailing, and gnashing of teeth; plan which I contrived against

and he departed hence. his servants.' And he retired in

confusion."

P. 327. Adam asked, Why

to inquire of [God]: for his to show you the weakness of

glory has been upon me, Satan and his evil intentions

wherefore I can judge between for since the day you left the

him and thee. Depart hence, Garden he has not let a day

Satan. pass without trying to harm

you, but I have not let him

have the victory over you."

[Adam thus learned to

distinguish between good and

evil.]

5:6. And after many days P. 329. Again Adam and

an angel of the Lord appeared Eve were sacrificing with

unto Adam, saying: Why dost upraised arms in prayer,

thou offer sacrifices unto the asking God to accept their

Lord? and Adam said unto sacrifice and forgive their sins.

him: I know not, save the Lord "And the Lord said to Adam

commanded me. and Eve: As you have made

spake, saying: This thing is a make an offering of my flesh

similitude of the sacrifice of the when I come to earth, and so

Only Begotten of the Father, save you.... And God

which is full of grace and truth. ordered an angel to take tongs

thou mayest be redeemed, and Adam."

all mankind, even as many as

will.

filled, ... saying: ... In this God said: When the terms of

life I shall have joy, and again my covenant are fulfilled, I will

in the flesh I shall see God. again receive you into my

Garden and my Grace. So

Adam continued to make this

sacrifice for the rest of his days.

And God caused his word to

be preached to Adam.

P. 330. On the fiftieth day,

Adam, offering sacrifice as was

his custom, Satan appeared in

the form of a man and smote 1:20. Moses began to fear him in the side with a sharp

exceedingly; and as he began stone even as Adam raised his

to fear, he saw the bitterness arms in prayer. Eve tried to

of hell. Nevertheless, calling help him as blood and water

upon God, he received flowed on the altar. "God ...

strength. [See Book of sent his word and revived

Abraham, Facsimile No. 1!] Adam saying: 'Finish thy

5:7. This thing is a sacrifice, which is most

similitude of the sacrifice of the pleasing to me. For even so

Only Begotten of the Father, will I be wounded and blood

which is full of grace and and water will come from my

truth. side; that will be the true

Sacrifice, placed on the altar as

a perfect offering.' ... And so

God healed Adam."

Surprisingly enough, the best documented story of a clash between Adam and Satan is the scene in heaven. One old writing with unusually good credentials that trace back to books deposited by the apostles in the archives of the early church in Jerusalem is the Coptic "Discourse of the Abbaton, a sermon based on the text delivered by Timothy the Archbishop of Alexandria." [^304]

The book belongs to the forty-day literature; and as it opens, the Lord on his last day on earth with the apostles just before his ascension asks them if there is any final request they would like to make of him—exactly as in 3 Nephi 28:1. What they want most is to understand the role of death and its horrors in God's plan for his children. [^305] To explain this the Lord tells them of the council in heaven in the preexistence where the plan of the creation is being discussed. There was great reluctance among the hosts to proceed with the creation of the earth, the earth itself complaining, exactly in the manner of Moses 7:48, of the filthiness and corruption that would surely go out of her and begging to be allowed to rest from such horrors. (Fol. 10a-b.) Because of the council's reluctance to proceed, God allows the lifeless body of Adam to lie upon the earth for forty days, unwilling, without the council's approval, to let his spirit enter. (11b.) The Son of God saves the day by offering to pay the price for whatever suffering will be entailed, thus permitting "God's children to return again to their former condition." (12a.) Christ alone thus becomes the author of our earthly existence; amid joy and rejoicing God calls for a book, in which he registers the names of all the "Sons of God" who are to go to earth. (See Genesis 5:1ff; Fol. 12b.) This of course is the heavenly book of the generations of Adam opened at the foundation of the earth, the book to which Enoch refers so explicitly in Moses 6:46, 8.

In the presence of all the hosts, Adam is next made ready to take over his great assignment. He is placed on a throne and given a crown of glory and a scepter, and all the sons of God bow the knee first to God the Father and then to Adam the Father in recognition of his being in God's exact likeness and image. (13a.) Satan, however, refuses to comply, declaring that he is willing to worship the Father but not Adam: "It is rather he that should worship me for I arrived before he did!" (13a-b.) (See Moses 1:19: "I am the Only Begotten, worship me.") God saw that Satan, because of his boundless ambition and total lack of humility, could no longer be trusted with celestial power and commanded the angels to remove him from his office. This ordinance they performed with great sorrow and reluctance: They "removed the writing of authority from his hand. They took from him his armor and all the insignia of priesthood and kingship." Then with a ceremonial knife, a sickle, they inflicted upon him certain ceremonial blows of death which deprived him of his full strength forever after. (14a.) Other accounts say that after these cuts he retained only one-third of his former power, even as he was followed by one-third of the hosts.

Next Adam was escorted to earth to enter his mortal body, and for a hundred years thereafter he was often visited by angels. (14b.) Thereafter, for two hundred years he lived happily in innocence with Eve, taking good care of the animals in his charge. Eventually Satan succeeded in getting possession of a mortal creature, which enabled him to carry on an extensive campaign aimed at Eve. (16a-17a.) Adam was greatly upset; but when Eve, the victim of a trick, took all responsibility, he joined her. (17b.)

Satan stopped Adam outside of the Garden and gloatingly told him that this was his sweet revenge for Adam's victory in heaven: Adam had got him expelled from heaven and now he had paid him in kind; what was more, he intended to continue his project—"I will never cease to contend against thee and against all those who shall come after thee from out of thee, until I have taken them all down to perdition!" (21a-b.) With the threat of death before him, Adam saw the bitterness of hell (19a, 21b), but calling upon God he received not only the assurance of salvation for the dead through the atonement of Christ (20b), but was told that death shall be sweet to those whose names are in the Book of Life (24a-b). Fear of death (the angel Mouriel) is wholesome and necessary to remind the human race of its fragility and constant need of repentance. This has the salutary effect of countering Satan's plan by providing a constant check on the tendencies of men to misbehave, a sobering and, if necessary, frightening lesson.

What comes after the showdown between our first parents and the Adversary? Our sources obligingly go right on with the story and follow Satan from his attempts to win Adam's obedience to his highly successful interviews with Cain, tracing the steady spread of wickedness among mankind down to its culmination in the days of Enoch. There is no better summary of the story than that given in the book of Moses, which is surprisingly close to the "Combat of Adam" version on every point. Let us briefly survey events leading up to the call of Enoch, as given in the Joseph Smith account.

Having been instructed by an angel of the Lord, Adam and Eve enjoyed a fulness of the gospel, "and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters." (See Moses 5:1-2.) Enter Satan, the negative one, with his nongospel: "Believe it not!" and his countergospel: "I am also a son of God." (Moses 5:13.) He gains a following by pushing downhill, in the direction of what is "carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Moses 5:13.) This called for much preaching of repentance (Moses 5:14-15), as Adam and Eve remained true and faithful, and "ceased not to call upon God" (Moses 5:16). Into this world was born Cain, who rejected his parents' teachings as irrational—"Who is the Lord that I should know him?" (Moses 5:16.) The Lord gave Cain every chance to be wise and save himself, showing him in all reasonableness the dangerous course he was taking, and warning him that he would be in Satan's power to the degree that he refused obedience: "And thou shalt rule over him." (Moses 5:23; see also Genesis 4:7.) Cain rule over Satan? Yes, that is the arrangement—the devil serves his client, gratifies his slightest whim, pampers his appetites, and is at his beck and call throughout his earthly life, putting unlimited power and influence at his disposal through his command of the treasures of the earth, gold and silver. But in exchange the victim must keep his part of the agreement, following Satan's instructions on earth and remaining in his power thereafter. That is the classic bargain, the pact with the devil, by which a Faust, Don Juan, Macbeth, or Jabez Stone achieve the pinnacle of earthly success and the depths of eternal damnation.

The Lord held forth the fatherly invitation to Cain: "If thou doest well, thou shalt be accepted," along with the solemn warning, "Satan desireth to have thee." (Moses 5:23; see also Genesis 4:7.) He is admonished against the folly of "reject[ing] the greater counsel" (Moses 5:25), and the door of repentance is held open right to the last moment, when it is Cain himself who breaks off the conversation and angrily stamps out, refusing to listen "any more to the voice of the Lord" or to his brother's remonstrances (Moses 5:26). Cain married "one of his brother's daughters" not necessarily Abel's), and together "they loved Satan more than God" (Moses 5:28), quite satisfied with their religion and quite defiant about it.

What could one do in such a situation? Nothing: "Adam and his wife mourned before the Lord, because of Cain and his brethren." (Moses 5:27.) Having deliberately severed all connection with his Heavenly Father, Cain was free to enter a formal agreement with Satan, by which he would receive instruction in the techniques of achieving power and gain: "Truly I am Mahan, the master of this great secret [The language is that of ancient colleges or guilds where the secret is the mystery of the trade or profession; in this case, his secret is how to convert life into property], that I may murder and get gain." (Moses 5:31; see also Moses 5:49.) Cain "gloried" in the power of his new-found skill and dialectic, declaring that it made him "free." (Moses 5:33.) He put his knowledge to work in a brilliantly successful operation in which "Abel ... was slain by the conspiracy of his brother" (D&C 84:16), and gleefully congratulated himself and "gloried in that which he had done, saying: I am free; surely the flocks of my brother falleth into my hands." (Moses 5:33; italics added.) This new light on Cain's behavior is confirmed in the Combat of Adam and Eve, where we learn that, after killing Abel, Cain "felt no inclination to repent of what he had done," a detail pointed out also by some of the early church fathers. [^306]

Plainly this is not the conventional novel of Cain and Abel, in which an impetuous adolescent loses his head and brains his spoiled brother in a fit of jealousy; it is a carefully planned and executed operation in which Cain slew "his brother Abel, for the sake of getting gain" (Moses 5:50), dismissing his conscience with the thought that all was fair and square since Abel was quite capable of taking care of himself: "Am I my brother's keeper?" (Moses 5:34). This was the philosophy by which Satan seduced the human race, teaching them that "every man fared in this life according to the management of the creature; therefore every man prospered according to his genius, and that every man conquered according to his strength; and whatsoever a man did was no crime." (Alma 30:17.) When God took a different view and called him to account, he still pleaded the profit motive as an excuse: "Satan tempted me because of my brother's flocks." (Moses 5:38.) Being "shut out from the presence of the Lord" (Moses 5:41), Cain started his own establishment, the main line of his descendants being Enoch (who built a city of Enoch), Irad, Mahujael, Methusael, Lamech the father of Jubal and Tubal Cain. (Moses 5:42-46.) Lamech like Cain "entered into a covenant with Satan," and like him "became Master Mahan." (Moses 5:49; italics added.) When Lamech heard that Irad the son of Enoch was violating the secrecy of these terrible things, he "slew him for the oath's sake" (Moses 5:50), since "Irad began to reveal ... unto the [other] sons of Adam" these top-secret signs of recognition (Moses 5:49). All those who covenanted with Satan were excluded from the holy covenants of God, though they pretended that everything was the same as before. The dirty business spread as such things do once started; Lamech became an outcast like Cain, not because of the murder but because his wives started spreading his secrets—the very ones he had murdered Irad for divulging. "And thus the works of darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men. And God cursed the earth with a sore curse." (Moses 5:55-56.)

Is there no relief in the terrible picture? There is: all this time the gospel was "being declared by holy angels ... and by the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Moses 5:58), while "all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance," in the assurance that "the Gospel ... should be in the world, until the end thereof" (Moses 5:59). Adam, having lost Abel, got another son, Seth, to carry on his work. (Moses 6:2.) From him comes that line of successors in the priesthood, duly registered in the Book of Life, from which the wicked were excluded. (Moses 2:5-8.) After Seth came Enos, who decided to make an important move. Since "in those days Satan had great dominion among men, and raged in their hearts," causing "wars and bloodshed ... in administering death, because of secret works, seeking for power" (Moses 2:15)—exactly as in the modern world—Enos gathered "the residue of the people of God" and with them migrated out of the country "and dwelt in a land of promise," named Cainan after his son (Moses 2:17). The line is Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah. (Moses 6:16-21; 8:2, 5-11.)

In The Combat of Adam and Eve, as Migne observes, "the author depicts the descendants of Adam as divided into two separate and distinct branches: the Cainites dedicated to following Satan, who lived in a fertile country but very far distant from Eden, and who devoted themselves to all the pleasures of the flesh and all manner of immorality," and the Sethites who "dwelt in the mountains near the Garden, were faithful to the divine law and bore the name of the Sons of God."

The occurrence of like names in the two genealogies should not surprise anyone who does much genealogy, where the same family names keep turning up in an endless round. The thing to notice is that there are two lines and that Enoch is seen as a stranger and a wild man only when he leaves his native colony in Cainan, "a land of righteousness unto this day" (Moses 6:41), to sojourn as a missionary among the wayward tribes. And so the stage is set for Enoch.

The Wicked World of Enoch

The wickedness of Enoch's day had a special stamp and flavor; only the most determined and entrenched depravity merited the extermination of the race. In apocryphal Enoch stories we are told how humanity was led to the extremes of misconduct under the tutelage of uniquely competent masters. According to these traditions, these were none other than special heavenly messengers who were sent down to earth to restore respect for the name of God among the degenerate human race but instead yielded to temptation, misbehaved with the daughters of men, and ended up instructing and abetting their human charges in all manner of iniquity. They are variously designated as the Watchers, Fallen Angels, Sons of God, Nephilim, or Rephaim, and are sometimes confused with their offspring, the Giants. [^307] Other candidates for this dubious honor have been suggested by various scholars, the trouble being that more than one category of beings qualify as Fallen Angels and spectacular sinners before the time of the Flood. [^308] The Bible uses the title sons of God—were they different from the Watchers of tradition?

"The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.

"There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare ... to them ... mighty men.... men of renown.

"And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth." (Genesis 6:2, 4-5.)

The idea of intercourse between heavenly and earthly beings was widespread in ancient times. Thus, in the newly discovered Genesis Apocryphon, when Lamech's wife bears him a superchild (Noah), he assumes almost as a matter of course that the father is "one of the angels" and accuses her of faithlessness until his grandfather, Enoch, whose "lot is with the Holy Ones" and who lives far away, clears up the misunderstanding. Significantly, the name of the child's mother is Bit-enosh, that is, she is one of the "daughters of men." [^309] The Cedrenus fragment avoids the problem of heavenly origin by identifying the sons of God and the daughters of men with the descendants of Seth and Cain respectively, and he specifically designates the sons of God as the Watchers. [^310] Recently M. Emanueli has suggested that the various terms are merely "a figure of speech in order to express the depth of the deterioration of that generation." [^311]

While the sons of God have been identified with both angels and the Watchers, the Greek Enoch does not identify the Watchers with Satan's hosts who fell from heaven from the beginning—they are another crowd. [^312] It is the Joseph Smith Enoch which gives the most convincing solution: the beings who fell were not angels but men who had become sons of God. From the beginning, it tells us, mortal men could qualify as "sons of God," beginning with Adam. "Behold, thou [Adam] art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all men become my sons." (Moses 6:68; italics added.) How? By believing and entering the covenant. "Our father Adam taught these things, and many have believed, and become the sons of God." (Moses 7:1.) Thus when "Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed ... they were called the sons of God." (Moses 8:13.) In short, the sons of God are those who accept and live by the law of God. When "the sons of men" (as Enoch calls them) broke their covenant, they still insisted on that exalted title: "Behold, we are the sons of God; have we not taken unto ourselves the daughters of men?" (Moses 8:21), even as "the sons of men," reversing the order, married the daughters of those "called the sons of God," thereby forfeiting their title, "for," said God to Noah, "they will not hearken to my voice." (Moses 8:15.) The situation was, then, that the sons of God, or their daughters who had been initiated into a spiritual order, departed from it and broke their vows, mingling with those who observed only a carnal law.

"Why have you left heaven [and] the Exalted One," says Enoch in a Gizeh fragment, "and ... with the daughters of men defiled yourselves? ... Ye have behaved as sons of Earth and begotten to yourselves giant sons. And you were once holy, spiritual, eternal beings ... and have lusted after the flesh ... as do mortal and perishable creatures." [^313]

What made the world of Enoch so singularly depraved as to invite total obliteration was the deliberate and systematic perversion of heavenly things to justify wickedness. An early Christian writer, Hippolytus, says that the Anti-Christ imitates Christ in every particular: each sends out his apostles, gives his seal to believers, does signs and wonders, claims the temple as his own, has his own church and assembly, etc. Such is the method of "the great Deceiver of the World," against whom, says Hippolytus, "Enoch and Elias have warned us." [^314] We are reminded how Satan put forth his claim. "I am also a son of God" (Moses 5:13), and commanded Cain to "make an offering unto the Lord (Moses 5:18-19) and to take his oaths "by the living God" (Moses 5:29), as if everything were still in the proper order. In the same spirit Noah's descendants in their wickedness still insisted that nothing had changed. The children of men said to Noah: "Behold, we ae the sons of God; have we not taken unto ourselves the daughers of men?" (Moses 8:21.)

The apocrypha agree: "For in the days of Jared my father, they departed from the teaching of the Lord, from the covenant of heaven. And behold they commit sin and reject [parabainousin] the proper way [ethos] ... and beget children not like spiritual but like carnal offspring." (Black, p. 44, 106:6, 13-14.)

Sophisticated deception is the name of the game. "Woe unto you who deliberately go astray [poiountes planemata]," cries Enoch, "who promote yourselves to honor and glory by deceitful practices.... Who misapply and misinterpret straightforward statements, who have given a new twist to the everlasting Covenant, and then produce arguments to prove that you are without guilt!" [^315] Cold-blooded calculation is the keynote. The "Watchers" (using the Greek word) led away "myriads of myriads ... with their Prince Satanel," says the Slavonic Enoch, "and defiled the earth by their acts. And the wives [instead of daughters!] of men did a great evil, violating the law ... a great iniquity." [^316] For "in secret places underground" we read in a very early Judeo-Christian source, "they wrought confusion; ... They committed adultery, every man with his neighbor's wife. They concluded covenants with one another with an oath touching these things." [^317] Such practices went back to the days of Cain:

Moses 5:52. ... The Lord Gizeh 6:2. (The Sons of

cursed ... all them that had Heaven wished to break their

covenanted with Satan; for covenants and join with the

they kept not the daughters of men) 3. but

commandments of God. Seimizas [Satan] said "I am

afraid you will not be willing

to go through with this thing.

5:29. And Satan said unto ..." 4. And they answered

Cain: Swear unto me ... and him all saying, We will all

swear thy brethren ... that swear with an oath, and bind

they tell it not; for if they tell each other by a mortal curse

it, they shall surely die. [lit., anathemize each other],

that we will not go back on this

5:51. For, from the days of agreement [gnome] until we

Cain, there was a secret have carried it out; ... 5.

combination, and their works Then they all swore together

were in the dark, and they and pronounced the doom of

knew every man his brother. death on each other.

5:29-30. Satan said unto En. 69:13. Kasbeel, the

Cain: Swear unto me by thy chief of the oath ... when he

throat, and if thou tell it thou dwelt high above in glory ...

shalt die; and swear thy 14. ... requested Michael to

brethren by their heads, and show him the hidden name,

by the living God, that they tell that he might enunciate it in

it not; for if they tell it, they the oath, so that those might

shall surely die; and this that quake before that name and

thy father may not know oath who revealed all that was

it.... And all these things in secret to the children of

were done in secret. men.

1 En. 69:6. It was Gadreel

"who showed the children of

men all the blows of death, and

he led astray Eve."

5:16. And Adam and Ethiop. Bk. Mysts. PO

Eve ... ceased not to call 6:431. "In the days of Cain evil

upon God.... But behold, ... and deceitful practices

Cain hearkened not, saying: increased. The wicked angels

Who is the Lord that I should set themselves up in open and

know him? solent opposition to Adam,

and glorying in their earthly

bodies learned a great sin. And 5:51. For, from the days of openly exposed all the work

Cain, there was a secret which they had seen in

combination, and their works heaven."

were in the dark.

And so we find in a Greek Enoch text the Great Angels returning from earth to report to God that they had found "Azael teaching all manner of unrighteousness upon the earth, and he has laid bare those mysteries of the age which belong to heaven, which are [now] known and practiced among men; and also Semiazas is with him, he to whom thou gavest authority [over] those who go along with him." [^318]

As bad as breaking their oaths was divulging them to those not worthy to receive them, thereby debasing and invalidating them. One of the most widespread themes of myth and legend is the tragedy of the hero who yields to the charms of a fair maiden or femme fatale and ends up revealing to her hidden mysteries. The story meets us in the oldest Egyptian epic (where the lady Isis wheedles out of Re the fatal knowledge of his true name) and in like tales of Samson and Delilah, the daughter of Jared, Lohengrin, and so on, in which the woman is Pandora who must know what is in the box. On this theme the Gizeh fragments offer a significant parallel to the Joseph Smith version, in which the common background of the text and the confusion of the later scribes are equally apparent: "Lamech had spoken the secret unto his wives, and they ... declared these things abroad, and had not compassion.... And thus ... darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men." (Moses 5:53, 55.)

Compare this to: "And now concerning the Watchers, [say to them,] You were in heaven and there you knew every mysterion which had not been made known to you as well as that mystery which God allowed; and that you disclosed to your wives in the hardness of your heart, and it was through this mystery that women and men caused iniquities to abound upon the earth." (Gizeh 16:2-4.) [^319]

Clement of Alexandria attributed to Musaeus, the founder of the Greek Mysteries, an account of "how the angels lost their heavenly heritage through the telling of the secret things [mysteria] to women," things, Clement observes, "which the other angels keep secret or quietly perform until the coming of the Lord." [^320]

Rather surprisingly, the age of Enoch is consistently described as the time of great intellectual as well as material sophistication. "Azael . . . taught [men] to make knives and breastplates and all kinds of military hardware; and to work the ores of the earth, and how gold was to be worked and made into ornaments for women; and he showed them polishing [eye-paint] and cosmetics and precious stones and dyes. . . . And the sons and daughters of men adopted all these things and led the saints astray. And there was great wickedness on the earth, and they became perverted and lost in all their ways. . . . Along with that their leader Semiazas taught them scientific formulas (epaodas kata tou nous), and the properties of roots and plants of the earth. The eleventh, Pharmakos, taught all manner of drugs, incantations, prescriptions, formulas. [Others] taught them stargazing, astrology, meteorology, geology, the signs of the sun and moon. All of these began to reveal the mysteries to their wives and children." [^321]

The leaders of the people devoted most of their wealth to all kinds of engineering projects for controlling and taming nature. But the Lord altered the order of creation, making the sun rise in the west and set in the east, so that all their plans came to naught. [^322] The idea of controlling the environment independently of God was not so foolish as it sounds, says the Zohar, "for they knew all the arts . . . and all the ruling chieftains [archons] in charge of the world, and on this knowledge they relied, until at length God disabused them by restoring the earth to its primitive state and covering it with water." [^323] Rabbi Isaac reports: "'In the days of Enoch even children were acquainted with these mysterious arts [the advanced sciences].' Said R. Yesa: 'If so, how could they be so blind as not to know that God intended to bring the Flood upon them and destroy them?' R. Isaac replied: 'They did know,'" but they thought they were smart enough to prevent it. "What they did not know was that God rules the world. . . . God gave them a respite all the time that the righteous men Jered, Methusaleh, and Enoch were alive; but when they departed from the world, God let punishment descend . . . , 'and they were blotted out from the earth' (Genesis 7:23)." [^324]

A Book of Mormon text betrays the Enoch tradition (possibly contained in the brass plates) in a transparent parallel: "Priestcrafts are that men . . . set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion." (2 Nephi 26:29.)

Compare this to: "These men [of Enoch's time] erected synagogues and colleges, and placed in them scrolls and rich ornaments . . . but they did it to set themselves up for a light, and for the honors of men; and in such a way the powers of evil prevail over Israel." (Zohar. Bereshith 25b.)

Power and gain are two faces of one coin: "We are able to do whatever we please," said the people in Enoch's day, "because we are very rich!" To which Enoch replied: "You are wrong! Your riches will soon depart from you . . ."; but they went on seeking the power of gain more grimly than ever. [^325]

An interesting connection emerges in the account of how "in the time of Enoch they committed murder, shedding of blood of the children of men; they enslaved them, they sold what did not belong to them, they entered homes without right, and took whatever they wanted . . . they rigged the laws in their favor, and imitated the abominable deeds of the rebellious angels of a former time in which, when Abel tried to check them they encompassed his death by a conspiracy." [^326] For this confirms a bold statement found in the Doctrine and Covenants 84:16: "Abel . . . was slain by [a] conspiracy." Ambition was the motivating force in all this evil. "The giants," says Ben Sira 16:7, "were aspiring spirits who desired to be great in the manner of God on earth"; E. Kraeling has pointed out that the biblical term "men of name," means "men who aspired to be great, 'to make a name' for themselves." [^327] The Slavonic Enoch version matches the book of Moses in taking us back to the beginning of the matter:

Moses 4:1. That Satan . . . Ms. R. Ch. 11: The Devil

came before me, saying— knew that I wanted to make

Behold, here am I, send me, I the world . . . with Adam

will be thy son, and I will ruling as Lord of it. . . . he

redeem all mankind . . . became Satan when he fled

wherefore give me thine from heaven, before which

honor. time he was Satan-el. He

4:4. And he became Satan, changed his nature and was no

. . . to lead them captive at his longer an angel; he preserved

will, even as many as would his identity, but his state of

not hearken unto my voice. mind was altered, as when any

righteous person becomes

wicked . . . and he conceived

the impossible idea of setting

up his throne . . . to be equal

to my power. [God has given

him great power over such as

listen to him.] [Apocalypse of

Abraham 14:1-2; see also Dead

Sea Thanksgiving Scroll VI [f]

p.X.)

Almost all our sources, and especially the Joseph Smith book of Enoch, emphasize the point that the people did not drift imperceptibly into ways of folly. They were so constantly warned that only a high and determined willfulness brought destruction upon them:

Moses 6:28. And for these Beatty 99:89. And they shall

many generations . . . have go astray in the foolishness

they gone astray, . . . and [aphrosyne] of their hearts, and

have sought their own the visions of their dreams [the

counsels in the dark; . . . dark] shall lead them astray.

6:29. Wherefore, they have And the lying words you have

. . . brought upon themselves made shall perish. 98:9. Woe

death. to you foolish ones, for you

shall perish through your own

folly!

5:57. For they would not Secrets 4 (Vaillant. p. 18).

hearken unto his voice, nor These are they who denied the

believe on his Only Begotten Lord, and would not hear the

Son. voice of the Lord, but followed

their own counsel.

6:29. . . . they have 1 Enoch 63:9. We pass

foresworn themselves, and, by away . . . on account of our

their oaths, they have brought own works . . . descending

upon themselves death; and a . . . into Sheol [hell].

hell I have prepared for them, Black 99:2. Wo unto you

if they repent not. who pervert the eternal

6:43. . . . why counsel ye covenant and reckon

yourselves, and deny the God yourselves sinless!

of heaven?

Bet ha-Midrash (BHM)

5:171. I am Enoch! When the

generation of the Flood sinned

and said of God: Turn away

from him, and in the knowing

of his ways do not rejoice.

Then God delivered men.

Nothing could be more deliberate. All the wickedness and folly of the time is summed up in one simple phrase: "Behold, they are without affection!" On this theme there are striking parallels between the Joseph Smith and the Slavonic texts:

Moses 7:32. The Lord said Secrets 11 (Vaillant, pp.

unto Enoch: 100ff). The Lord said unto

Enoch:

Behold these thy brethren; . . . Upon the earth I placed

they are the workmanship of him as the second angel, in

mine own hands, . . . honor and great glory

Moses 7:32. . . . and I gave And I established him as King

unto them their knowledge, in [lit., Caesar, Czar] over the

the day I created them; and in earth, ruling by my authority

the Garden of Eden, gave I [wisdom] . . . and I called his

unto man his agency; name Adam, and I gave him

his agency [volya yevo] 7:33. And . . . also [have] and I told him: This is good for

given commandment, that thee and that is bad [gave him

they should love one another, a choice],

and . . . choose

me, their Father; but behold, in order to determine whether

they are without affection, and he would have love or hatred

they hate their own blood. for me, by showing his love for

me among those of his own

race [v rodye yevo] . . . [but]

all the earth is filled with blood.

They will abandon their

creator.

7:34. . . . and in my hot Therefore I will command the

displeasure will I send in the abyss, and the deposits of the

floods upon them. . . . waters of heaven will descend

7:37. . . . and the whole . . . and the earth will be

heavens shall weep over shaken and lose its stability.

them. . . .

7:41. . . . and all eternity

shook.

Equally impressive is a parallel with 1 Enoch:

Moses 7:33. . . . they are 1 En. 4 (99:15). Wo unto

without affection, and they them who work

hate their own blood; unrighteousness . . . and slay

their neighbors.

indignation is kindled against indignation and destroy you

them; . . . all with the sword

[I will] send in the floods

against them . . .

heavens shall weep over shall remember your sins.

them. . . .

6:15. . . . a man's hand was For a man shall not withhold

against his own brother, in his hand from slaying his

administering death, . . . sons . . . , nor from his

seeking for power. beloved to slay him

. . . nor from his brother.

These moving passages are to explain the Great Weeping. First, Enoch weeps:

Moses 7:41. Secrets of Enoch 41.

. . . wherefore Enoch knew, (Morfill). And I saw . . . and I

and looked upon their sighed and wept, and spake of

wickedness, and their misery, the ruin [caused by] their

and wept. . . . wickedness. 2. And I

7:44. And as Enoch saw meditated in my heart and

this, he had bitterness of soul, said: Blessed is the man who

and wept over his brethren, is not yet born [etc.].

and said unto the heavens: I

will refuse to be comforted.

Manichaean Frg. [^328] Enoch

the Just said: I have seen great

sorrow, and an outpouring of

tears from my eyes, having

heard which vile things issue

from the mouths of the

wicked . . . My eyes are filled

with tears and my tongue is

tied . . .

Then, as we shall presently see, all nature weeps, and Enoch is dumbfounded to learn that God himself weeps! This bold concept (quite inadmissible to the Fathers of the fourth century) [^329] is attested in other Enoch texts:

Moses 7:28-29. And . . . Jewish Encyclopedia 8:519.

the God of heaven looked "When God wept over the

upon the residue of the people, destruction of the Temple,

and he wept; and Enoch bore Metatron [Enoch] fell on his

record of it, saying, How is face and said: I will weep, but

it . . . that thou canst weep, weep not thou! God answered

seeing thou art holy, and from and said: If thou wilt not suffer

all eternity to all eternity? . . . me to weep, I will go whither

weep? will I lament."

The angels in heaven and all the other worlds join in the weeping:

Moses 7:37. . . . the whole 2 Baruch 67:2. Dost thou

heavens shall weep over them, think that there is no anguish

even all the workmanship of to the angels in the presence of mine hands; wherefore should the Mighty One. . . . Dost

not the heavens weep? . . . thou think that in these things

7:40. Wherefore, for this the Most High rejoices, or that

shall the heavens weep, yea, his name is glorified?

and all the workmanship of

mine hands.

With the Great Weeping the universe itself is shaken:

Moses 7:41. . . . Enoch . . . Zohar. Shemoth 8a. Then

wept and stretched forth his the Messiah lifts up his voice

arms, and his heart swelled and weeps, and the whole

wide as eternity; and his Garden of Eden quakes, and all

bowels yearned; and all the righteous and the Saints

eternity shook. who are there break out

crying. . . . When the crying

and weeping resound for the

second time, the whole

firmament above the garden

begins to shake . . . and God

sets about to destroy the

wicked.

Equally shattering is the announcement that, while God sorrows, the Devil is laughing:

Moses 7:26. Satan . . . Secrets 22 (Vaillant). [^330] . . .

looked up and laughed, and a man hates his neighbor . . .

his angels rejoiced. all the earth will be full of

7:28. And . . . the God of blood . . . and they shall

heaven looked . . . and . . . abandon their Creator. . . .

wept. The Adversary will be in his

7:33. . . . they should glory [lit., will make himself

choose me, their Father; but great] and rejoice in their [his

behold, they are without angels'] works, to my [the

affection, and they hate their Lord's] great affliction. . . .

own blood.

floods . . . abyss, and the water reserves

wept . . . and all eternity the earth . . . and all the earth

shook. will be shaken and no longer

have foundation.

It is in view of the infinite exaltation and glory of the Deity that Enoch is overwhelmed by his weeping. This is expressed both in a doxology and an aretology (i.e., a speech in which God describes his own glory).

Moses 7:29-30. How is it 1 En. 71:14. And

thou canst weep, seeing thou righteousness of the Head of

art holy, and from all eternity Days forsakes him not. 15.

to all eternity? . . . Millions of . . . from hence hath

earths like this . . . would not proceeded peace since the

be a beginning . . . of thy creation of the world. 16. And

creations. . . . . . . righteousness never

peace, justice, and . . . mercy be their dwelling-places, . . .

shall go before thy face and forever and ever.

have no end. . . .

7:35. (Aretology). Behold, Gizeh 9:4. [The Angels:]

I am God; Man of Holiness Thou art the God of Gods, and

is my name; Man of Lord of Lords, . . . and God of

Counsel is my name. men [G81 of the worlds, ages],

. . . 36. Wherefore, I can and the throne of thy glory is

stretch forth mine hands and for all generations [cycles] of

hold all the creations the ages [eternities or worlds];

which I have made; and mine and thy name is Holy One and

eye can pierce them also. is praised unto all the ages.

things and hast all authority,

and all things are plain before

thee and revealed, and thou

seest all things.

7:24. . . . and behold, the 1 En. 53:3. For I [Enoch]

power of Satan was upon all saw all the angels of

the face of the earth. 26. And punishment abiding and

[Enoch] beheld Satan; and he preparing all the instruments

had a great chain in his hand, of Satan. . . .

and it veiled the whole . . . 54:3. and here mine eyes

earth with darkness; and he saw how they made these their

looked up and laughed, and instruments, iron chains of

his angles rejoiced. immeasurable weight. . . .

53:5. . . . for the kings and

the mighty of this earth, that

they thereby might be

destroyed.

With the binding, of course, goes imprisonment, a temporary prison for such fallen mortals as repent, a permanent one for the others.

Moses 7:38. But behold, 2 En. 5. [^331] This place, Enoch,

these which thine eyes are is prepared for those who

upon shall perish in the floods; practiced abominations on

and . . . I will shut them up; a earth. . . . who would not

prison have I prepared for know their Creator. . . . It is

them. for all those that this place has

been prepared as an eternal

heritage.

6:29-30. They have brought Jubilees 10:5. Noah: And

upon themselves death; and a thou knowest how [the]

hell I have prepared for them, Watchers, the fathers of these

if they repent not. And this is spirits, acted in my day; and as

a decree . . . from my own for these spirits which are

mouth. living, imprison them and hold

them fast. . . . [See 1 Pet. 3:

19-20. Jubilees does not borrow

from the New Testament!]

Those in prison, chains, and darkness are only being kept there until the Judgment, which will liberate many, not only because of their repentance, but through the power of the Atonement. It is when Enoch reaches the lowest depth of despair that the revelation of God's plan of merciful redemption turns all to joy: "And as Enoch saw this, he had bitterness of soul, and wept over his brethren, and said unto the heavens: I will refuse to be comforted; but the Lord said unto Enoch: Lift up your heart, and be glad; and look." (Moses 7:44.) It was specifically the spirits who were disobedient in Enoch's day who were to enjoy the preaching of the Lord and promise of deliverance in the meridian of times. (See 1 Peter 3:19-20.)

Moses 7:67. And the Lord 1 En. 60:5. Why art thou

showed Enoch all things . . . [Enoch] disquieted . . . 6. that

and he saw the day of the day is prepared . . . for

righteous, the hour of their sinners and inquisition . . .

redemption; and received a that the punishment of the

fulness of joy. Lord of Spirits may not come,

in vain . . . Afterwards the

1 Pet. 3:18. For Christ also judgment shall take place

hath once suffered for sins according to his mercy and

. . . 19. By which also he patience.

and preached unto the spirits Black 10:6. Azael is bound

in prison; 20. Which sometime in prison unto the Great Day

were disobedient . . . in the of Judgment, when he is led to

days of Noah. the enpyrismon, while

Moses 7:47. And behold, [of] the blow, that all the sons

Enoch saw the day of the of man may not be destroyed

coming of the Son of Man, by the mystery in which the

even in the flesh; and his soul Watchers stumbled and which

rejoiced. they taught to their sons.

7:38. . . . these . . . shall 1 En. 45:2. Such shall be the

perish in the floods; and lot of sinners . . . who are thus

behold, I will shut them up; a preserved for the day of

prison have I prepared for suffering and tribulation. 3.

them. 39. And That which I On that day mine Elect shall sit

have chosen hath pled before on the throne of glory and shall

my face. Wherefore, he try their works.

suffereth for their sins;

inasmuch as they will repent

in the day that my Chosen

shall return unto me, and until

that day they shall be in

torment.

Another parallel on the same theme:

Moses 7:57. And as many Beatty 103:7. . . . in Hades

of the spirits as were in prison shall they be in great torment

came forth . . . and the 8. and in darkness, and in

remainder were reserved in chains and in burning flame,

chains of darkness until the and your spirit will come unto

judgment of the great day. a great judgment.

World in Upheaval

An unfailing aspect of apocalyptic literature in general and of the Enoch writings in particular is the reverberation through their pages of vast upheavals in the natural world. This aspect of apocalyptic has begun to be taken seriously only within very recent years, and it is the scientists rather than the theologians who are impressed by the ancient records. [^332] Enoch, in fact, is one of their favorite references. They are impressed by the authentic ring of the catastrophic motif in the old apocalyptic writings while the ministry deplores and denounces them as unfortunate examples of a bogeyman mentality. [^333]

What was the world like in Enoch's day? Joseph Smith places the action amidst pastoral nomads ranging the mountains and valleys—and so do the other sources. They show us the righteous and the wicked, sometimes designated as Sethians and Cainites, living respectively in the mountains and the lowlands. [^334]

Moses 7:17. . . . the Lord 4 Ezra 6:51. And I gave to

blessed the land, and they Enoch a dry part of the earth,

were blessed upon the that he might dwell therein,

mountains, and upon the high where there were a thousand

places, and did flourish. mountains.

It was the archetype of Zions to follow:

D&C 49:24-25. But before Apocalypse of Adam, folio

the great day of the Lord . . . 85, lines 9-11 (p. 193). At the

Zion shall flourish upon the end of time the Saints will

hills and rejoice upon the come to a high mountain,

mountains, and shall be upon a stone of truth.

assembled together unto the

place which I have appointed.

The other side of the picture shows us the wicked gathered together in great valleys. The image not only suits this world, but is projected into the next.

Moses 7:5. . . . I beheld in 1 Enoch 13:9. Enoch came

the valley of Shum, and lo, a to them [the Watchers], and

great people which dwelt in they were all sitting gathered

tents, which were the people together weeping in Abelsjail,

of Shum. . . . which is between [the

mountains] Lebanon and

Seneser, with their faces

covered.

me . . . the people of saw a certain plain, like a

Shum . . . shall utterly be prison . . . and I sighed and

destroyed; and the people of wept . . . 8. Why is this

Canaan shall divide hollow place separated from

themselves in the land, and the the other? 9. . . . that the

land shall be barren and spirits of the dead might be

unfruitful. . . . 8. For behold, separated . . . 11. . . . set

the Lord shall curse the land apart in this great plain until

with much heat, and the the day of judgment . . . 12.

barrenness thereof shall go And this division has been

forth forever. made for the spirits . . . of

those who were slain in the

days of sinners.

Gizeh 10:11. . . . Go,

---
Notas:
[^304] 304. Text in E. A. W. Budge, Coptic Martyrdoms, pp. 225-49, translation pp. 474-96. A full account of the findings of the book by Timothy, giving strong indication of its authenticity, is included in the text, folios 1b, 41-5b.
[^305] 305. Here is powerful confirmation of the Book of Mormon version. Other "forty-day accounts," especially the Coptic Evangile des Douze Apotres, first published in 1913 (in P.O. 2:132-37), and believed by no less an authority than Origen to be older than the Gospel of Luke, tell a story very close to 3 Nephi: The Lord asks the Twelve one by one if there is any last request; and when some of them are too embarrassed to ask him more, he tells them not to hold back, since he knows their minds already—exactly as in 3 Nephi 28:4-7. Most significant is that the final questions they ask him always have to do with the problem of death and the possibility of coming to terms with it or even avoiding it—the problem of the Three Nephites.
[^306] 306. Migne, P.G. 23:338, citing St. Ephraim and St. Jerome.
[^307] 307. The subject has been thoroughly studied by Leo Jung, "Fallen Angels in Jewish, Christian, and Mohammedan Literature," Jewish Quarterly Review, new series 16 (1925-26): 45-88, 171-205, 287-336, and by Bo Reicke, The Disobedient Spirits and Christian Baptism (Copenhagen: E. Mucksgaard, 1946).
[^308] 308. Thus there are many stories of two fallen angels, going by various names—BHM 4:ix-x:127-28 (Shamkhasi and Asael); 5 (no. 2): xxxix (Harut and Marut); Bin Gorion, Sagen 1:319-21; (Aza and Azael)—whose behavior matches that of the Watchers.
[^309] 309. Joseph A. Fitzmeyer, Genesis Apocryphon (Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1971), pp. 51-55 (col. 2, lines 1-26).
[^310] 310. Georgius Cedrenus, Historiarum Compendium 1:18, and P.G. 121:44.
[^311] 311. Moshe Emanueli, "The Sons of God Took Wives Whomever They Chose," Beth Mikra 60 (October-December 1974): 150-52.
[^312] 312. Noted by Van Andel, Structuur, p. 15.
[^313] 313. Gizeh Fragment 15:3-4, in Charles, The Book of Enoch, p. 292.
[^314] 314. Hippolytus, De Christo et Antichristo, in P.G. 10:733, 737, 925-29, 933.
[^315] 315. Black, Apocalypsis Henochi, p. 39. 1 Enoch 99:10-12.
[^316] 316. 2 Enoch 18:7. Ms. R. in Vaillant, Secrets d'Henoch, p. 92. The Watchers "came down and broke their promise, . . . defiling themselves with the wives (zhenami) of men, and so debased themselves." (Ibid., p. 18.)
[^317] 317. Psalms of Solomon 8:9-11.
[^318] 318. Black, Apocalypsis Henochi, pp. 23-24.
[^319] 319. Gizeh Fragment 15:2-4. The passage puzzles Charles, Book of Enoch, appendix 1, p. 294, as it obviously did the Greek scribes.
[^320] 320. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata, in Migne, P.G. 9:24.
[^321] 321. Gizeh Fragment 8:1ff, in Charles, Book of Enoch, p. 280, giving Mss. G8 and G3.
[^322] 322. "Life of Enoch," in BHM 4:130; The Zohar, Bereshith 56a.
[^323] 323. The Zohar, Bereshith 56a.
[^324] 324. Ibid., Bereshith 56b.
[^325] 325. 1 Enoch 97:8-10.
[^326] 326. "Livre d'Adam," in Migne, Dictionnaire 1:56.
[^327] 327. E. G. Graeling, "The Significance and Origin of Genesis 6:1-4," Journal of Near Eastern Studies 6 (1947):197.
[^328] 328. Text in Philonenko, "Une citation manicheenne," 52:338.
[^329] 329. Text in G. Ricciotti, "Apocalypsis Pauli syriace," Orientalia 2 (1933): 22-24.
[^330] 330. Vaillant, Secrets d'Henoch, pp. 70f.
[^331] 331. Ibid., pp. 10f.
[^332] 332. Commented on by Koch, Ratlos, pp. 25-27.
[^333] 333. For the changing point of view, three books by Nigel Calder are instructive, namely, The Restless Earth: A Report on the New Geology (New York: Viking, 1972); Violent Universe: An Eye-Witness Account of the Commotion in Astronomy (New York: Viking, 1969); and The Weather Machine (New York: Viking, 1975).
[^334] 334. The righteous dwell in the mountains and the wicked in the deep, Harry Freedman, Midrash Rabbah (London: Soncino, 1961) 1:257; "Livre du Combat d'Adam," in Migne, Dictionnaire 1:296; Hipploytus, fragment in P.G. 10:709; B. Beer, Leben Abrahams (Leipzig: O. Leiner, 1859), quoting Rabbi Eleaser.
