Michael, and bind . . . all who

have defiled themselves . . .

generations in the valleys

[napas] of the earth.

The first warning to hit the sinners in the plain is, following the ancient pattern, a terrible drought, of which Enoch literature gives us vivid descriptions.

Moses 7:7. And the Lord Gizeh 26:2. And I saw the

said unto me: Prophesy . . . holy mountain and water

the land shall be barren and descending from the

unfruitful, and none other mountain . . .

people shall dwell there but 4. and a deep dry valley,

the people of Canaan. 8. For and another valley [see Shum

behold, the Lord shall curse and Canaan, Moses 7:5].

the land with much heat, and 5. (Both valleys were

the barrenness thereof shall go utterly desolate and without a

forth forever; and there was a tree.)

blackness came upon all the 27:2. This is a cursed land,

children of Canaan, that they reserved for the cursed

were despised among all forever . . .

people.

Black, p. 6. 100:11. Every

cloud and mist and dew and

rain shall be withheld because of your sins. 100:12. Therefore

offer gifts to the rain that it be

not hindered from descending

for you, and to dew, and cloud

and mist. 101: For if He closes

the window of heaven and

hinders the dew and rain from

descending because of you,

what will you do?

1 Enoch 18:12. I saw a place

which had no firmament. . . .

There was no water upon it,

and no birds, but it was a waste

and horrible place. 22:3. These

hollow places have been

created for this very purpose,

. . . that all the souls of the

children of men should

assemble there.

Bad times render men desperate. Obsessed by dread and guilt, they turn hysterically against each other, and soon find themselves locked in deadly combat to the point of extermination.

Moses 7:7. . . . Behold the Gizeh 10:9. Go, Gabriel, to

people of Canaan, which are the ill-begotten ones, the

numerous, shall go forth in crooked ones, and the sons of

battle array against the people adultery; and destroy the sons

of Shum, and shall slay them of the Watchers from among

that they shall utterly be men. Set them to fighting each

destroyed. other in war and in wanton

destruction.

The picture fits later dispensations as well:

D&C 87:6. And thus, with Black 7:6. The earth fell

the sword and by bloodshed under the rule of the lawless,

the inhabitants of the earth and [8:1] Azael [Satan] taught

shall mourn . . . until the them the manufacture of

consumption decreed hath weapons and how to work the

made a full end of all nations. treasures of the earth. 4. The 7. That . . . the blood of the cry of those slain of the people

saints, shall cease to come up ascended to heaven. 9:1-3.

into the ears of the Lord of The angels saw blood flowing

Sabaoth, from the earth, to be upon the earth, and heard the

avenged of their enemies. voices of the slain crying out to

God for vengeance.

D&C 1:35. . . . the hour is Secrets MS. R, 22 (Vaillant).

not yet, but is nigh at hand, Nation rises against nation for

when peace shall be taken the devil has begun to reign

from the earth, and the devil . . . and there arose warfare

shall have power over his own and great trouble.

dominion.

Besides the people of Canaan who extirpate those of Shum, seven other exotic tribes are named in the Joseph Smith Enoch, suggesting the familiar seven-pattern of tribal organizations. They are the people of the lands of Sharon, Enoch, Omner, Heni, Shem, Haner, and Hanannihah. (Moses 7:9.) What would ancient copyists thousands of years later on the other side of the world have made of such a list? They would handle it exactly as scribes have always done, by transferring it to a more familiar setting. The scribe of the Ethiopian Enoch puts in the place of those familiar tribes the names of what were to him the most distant and exotic of peoples on earth, and naturally treats the reference to lions as a familiar and highly conventional figure of speech:

Moses 7:5. . . . I beheld 1 Enoch 56:5. To the east [I

. . . a great people which saw] Parthians and Medes [the

dwelt in tents, . . . the people two great tent-dwelling

of Shum. 6. . . . and I looked nations of antiquity]:

towards the north, and I

beheld the people of Canaan, which

dwelt in tents. (Italics added.)

seven other nations] kings, . . . that they may

lions was heard out of the their lairs.

wilderness: and all nations

feared greatly. . . .

forth there were wars and

bloodshed among them.

One of nature's ironies is that not enough water usually leads to too much. Enoch's world was plagued by flood as well as drought; we are regaled by the picture of lowering heavens ceaselessly dumping dismal avalanches of rain and snow upon the earth. The constant weeping of Enoch and all the saints is matched in the powerful imagery of the weeping heavens and the earth veiled in darkness under the blackest of skies: In the book of Enoch the same imagery is applied to the meridian and the fulness of times as well as the Adamic age.

Moses 7:28. [Enoch:] How 1 Enoch 100:11-13.

is it that the heavens weep, . . . because of their sins all

and shed forth their tears as heavens weep and darkness

the rain upon the mountains? prevails, 13. with ice, hail,

cold and winds together.

1 Enoch 17:2, 4. I saw the

mountains of the darkness of

winter, . . . and the place

from which all the waters of

the deep flow.

7:37. . . . the whole heavens Miracles of Jesus. [^335] [He

shall weep over them, even all tells Peter that because the

the workmanship of mine world will reject the gospel it]

hands; wherefore should not will cause the Sun and the

the heavens weep, seeing Moon to weep . . . and at the

these shall suffer? corruption of the teachings the

shall perish in the floods. . . . weep.

the heavens weep. . . . waters under the earth are like

heavens were veiled; and all waters of creation, which in

the creations of God mourned; turn are like a small spring

and the earth groaned. . . . compared with the ocean; but 61. . . . before that day the the sea is like a small spring

heavens shall be darkened, compared with the waters

and a veil of darkness shall which weep.

cover the earth. . . . 62. And

righteousness will I send down

out of heaven; and truth . . .

out of the earth . . . and . . .

cause [them] to sweep the

earth as with a flood.

7:26. [In the days of Cain] Mysteries of Jesus. [^337] God

it veiled the whole face of the punished Cain with seventy-

earth with darkness. . . . seven days of unmitigated

rain.

7:28. And it came to pass 1 Enoch 95:1. O that mine

that the God of heaven looked eyes were [a cloud of] waters

upon the residue of the people, that I might weep over you,

and he wept; and Enoch bore and pour down my tears as a

record of it, saying: How is it cloud of waters. [Passage very

that the heavens weep, and corrupt; reconstructed by

shed forth their tears as the Charles. This is also the most

rain upon the mountains? corrupted part of Gizeh, c.

28—the scribes don't

understand it].

We find in a striking passage of the Joseph Smith account of Enoch a curious mixture of fire and water; the same oddity in the other Enoch text suggests scenes of volcanic activity with fumeroles, sulphurous vapors, rivers of fire, etc.:". . . in darkness and in chains, and in burning flame. . . ." (Beatty 103:8.)

Moses 7:34. And the fire of Secrets 13 (Vaillant). I could

mine indignation is kindled not support the fear of the

against them; and in my hot burning fire—that is how the

displeasure will I send in the words of the Lord were.

floods upon them, for my

fierce anger is kindled against bin Gorion 1:195. The rains

them. of the Flood were intermingled

with showers of fire from

heaven.

2 Baruch 53:7. It rained

black waters . . . and fire was

mingled with them

and . . . they wrought

devastation and

destruction. . . . 9. [The]

lightning healed those regions

where the waters had

descended.

1 Enoch 17:4. And they

took me to the living waters,

and to the fire of the west, [the

waters of creation and

baptism]. . . .

fire in which fire flows like

water.

1 Enoch 67:5-7. And I saw

that valley in which there was

a great convulsion, and a

convulsion of the waters. . . .

metal and from the convulsion

thereof in that place, there was

produced a smell of sulphur,

and it was connected with

those waters. . . . 7. And

through its valley proceed

streams of fire.

We are told that when the wicked tried to flee back to the safety of the holy mountain as the waters of the flood began to rise, they could not approach the ark because the rocks were burning hot. [^338] It is pictures like this that convince the scientists that there may be something to these old apocalyptic tales.

The most conspicuously and consistently reported of all the evils in Enoch's day are the earthquakes, consistent with the picture of plate tectonics that the whole thing presents.

Moses 6:34. . . . and the Gizeh 1:5. And all the

mountains shall flee before people shall fear . . . and

you, and the rivers shall trembling and great fear shall

[accordingly] turn from their seize them to the extremities of

course. . . . the earth.

7:13. . . . the earth 6. And high mountains

trembled, and the rivers of shall be shaken and shall fall

water were turned out of their and be dissolved . . . and the

course; . . . and all nations mountains shall flow down

feared greatly. [diarrhynai, "to slip

through, to leak, to fall away like

water"] and be turned into side-

channels, and shall melt like

wax before a flame.

with a splitting and a crackling

[rhagas], and everything on

the earth will be destroyed.

These events are correlated with the activities of Enoch, who does not, however, cause them; they are programmed to his purposes, and God stands behind him and speaks through his voice the words of power.

Moses 7:13. . . . Enoch . . . Psalms of Solomon 11:1. At

led the people of God, and the gathering of Zion . . . 5.

their enemies came to battle Lofty mountains has he

against them; and he spake the humbled, and made plain

word of the Lord, and the before them [the people of

earth trembled, and the God] and the hills fled away

mountains fled, even before their entrance.

according to his command;

and the rivers of waters were

turned out of their course; and

the roar of the lions was heard Black 102:1. And when he

out of the wilderness. gives forth his voice . . . 2. the

whole earth shall be shaken

6:34. Behold my Spirit is and trembling and thrown into

upon you, wherefore all thy confusion.

words will I justify; and the

mountains shall flee before 1 Enoch 52:6. These

you, and the rivers shall turn mountains . . . shall be in the

from their course; and thou presence of the Elect One as

shalt abide in me, and I in you; wax before the fire, and like

therefore walk with me. the water which streams down

from above. . . .

7:13. . . . all nations feared Secrets 13 (Vaillant). I have

greatly, so powerful was the heard the words of the Lord

word of Enoch, and so great like a great thunder amidst

was the power of the language ceaseless agitation of the

which God had given him. clouds. The Lord of the Earth

is terrible and most perilous.

6:34. [God:] All thy words [Bonner, pp. 58f, Black 102:1.]

will I justify; and the And when he gives forth his

mountains shall flee before voice against you, will not you

you. be shaken and affrighted by

the mighty sound? And the

7:13. . . . he spake the whole earth shall be shaken

word of the Lord, and the and trembling and thrown into

earth trembled, and the confusion."

mountains fled, even

according to his command.

The really spectacular show in the Enoch literature is the behavior of the seas. Like the alternating drought and flood from the skies, there is either too much sea or not enough. Before "the floods came and swallowed them up" (Moses 7:43), the sea first drew back in places, leaving its coastal beds high and dry in anticipation of the great tsunami (seawave) which came with the earthquake.

Moses 7:13-14. The earth Secrets 6 (Vaillant 106:6).

trembled, and the mountains Enoch: Are not all the sea and

fled. . . . There also came up its waters the work of the Most

a land out of the depth of the High, and did he not set their

sea, and so great was the fear limits? 7. And by his wrath

of the enemies of the people of they are affrighted and dried

God, that they fled and stood up.

afar off and went upon the

land which came up out of the 1 Enoch 60:16. Enoch: The

depth of the sea. spirit of the sea . . . draws

back with a rein, and in like

manner it is driven forward

and dispersed amid all the

mountains of the earth.

The sea misbehaved on other occasions in Enoch's day:

Moses 7:66. Before that Mid. Rab. 1:37. [Twice the

. . . he saw great tribulations sea invaded the earth.] Once among the wicked; and he also was in the generation of

saw the sea, that it was Enosh, and a second time in

. the generation of the

separation [The Tower].

bin Gorion 1:153. In the

days of Enoch, the sea rose and

flooded one-third of the land!

Combat of Adam and Eve,

p. 361. The animals were

urged on to the ark by the

trembling of the earth; the sea

rose in violent agitation, the

winds were terrible, the sun

disappeared and all the sky.

. . . The sea cast mountain

waves upon the land.

4 Ezra 6:49. And how thou

hast saved two spirits: the one

thou hast named Behemoth,

and the other Leviathan, 50.

And thou didst separate one

from the other, for the seventh

part, where the water was

gathered together, was unable

to hold them (both). 51. And

thou didst give Behemoth one

of the parts [of the earth],

which had been dried up on

the third day—that he might

dwell therein, where are a

thousand hills.

The terrors of the book of Enoch reach their culmination when the upheavals of nature extend to the entire cosmos. Many apocalyptic accounts of the disturbed heavens suggest to some scientists today an actual shifting of the earth on its axis (a phenomenon now well attested from the study of ancient magnetized ceramics) or a massive showering of meteoric particles.

Moses 7:61. . . . the Black 102:1. And when he

heavens shall shake, and gives forth his voice against

also the earth; and great you, 2. will ye not be shaken

tribulations shall be among and affrighted by the mighty

the children of men. sound? And the whole earth

7:41. . . . Enoch . . . wept shall be shaken, and

and stretched forth his arms, trembling, and thrown into

. . . and all eternity shook. confusion. . . .

be shaken and trembling, [and]

all the sons of the earth.

Bonner, p. 58. "And all the earth

was shaking and trembling, and

thrown into confusion; and also

angels having completed their

assignments, and the heaven and

the Lights [phosteres] were

shaken and trembling, and all the

sons of earth."

1 Enoch 60:1. I saw how a mighty

quaking made the heaven of heavens

to quake, and the host of the Most

High, and the angels, a thousand

thousands and ten thousand times

ten thousand, were disquieted

with a great disquiet.

But there is one concept which goes beyond the scope of astronomy in its exciting implications. It is the doctrine that when a world is destroyed, all the other worlds that have contributed to its existence join in a general mourning. [^339]

Moses 7:36. . . . and among

all the workmanship of mine

hands there has not been so

great wickedness as among thy

brethren. . . .

weep over them, even all

the workmanship of mine hands;

wherefore should not the heavens

weep, seeing these shall suffer?

(Italics added.)

the heavens weep, yea, and

all the workmanship of mine

hands.

stretched forth his arms, trembling seized me, and

and his heart swelled fear took hold of me, and

wide as eternity; and my loins gave way and

his bowels yearned; and all dissolved were my reins,

eternity shook. and I fell upon my face,

to endure the look of

this host, and the

commotion and the quaking

of heaven.

7:56. And the heavens were Apocryphon of John, p. 20.

veiled; and all the As I was thinking the

creations of God mourned; heavens opened. . . . 21. . . .

and the earth groaned and And the whole cosmos shook;

the rocks were rent. and I was afraid and fell

upon my face. [And God

appeared to him and spoke

with him comforting him

as he did Enoch.]

The peculiar nature imagery found in the Joseph Smith account of Enoch gets down to basics with the personification of the earth as Terra Mater, speaking as a living entity in a passage strikingly paralleled in the Greek fragments.

Moses 7:48. . . . Enoch looked Gizeh 10:20. And cleanse

upon the earth; and he heard thou the earth from all

a voice from the bowels uncleanliness

thereof, saying: Wo, wo is [akatharsias] and

me, the mother of men from all unrighteousness

. . . . When shall I rest, and from all sin and

and be cleansed from the corruption [asebeias]

filthiness which is and purge away

[exaleipson, "flush,

scour"] all gone forth out of me? When impurities, which have come

will my Creator sanctify upon the earth.

me, that I may rest, and 22. And all the earth shall

righteousness for a season be cleansed from all pollution

abide upon my face? [miasmatos] and from all

impurities. . . .

11:2. And then truth and

peace will dwell together

(Koinonesousin homou,

"embrace, have all things in

common") . . . for all the

generations of men.

7:49. And when Enoch 1 Enoch 7:5-6. "And they

heard the earth mourn, he began to . . . devour one

wept, and cried unto the Lord, another's flesh, and drink the

saying: O Lord, wilt thou not blood. Then the earth laid

have compassion upon the accusation against the lawless

earth? ones.

A man is called wicked

[rasha] if he merely

lifts his hand against his

neighbor. . . . But only he is

called evil [ra] who

corrupts his way and defiles

himself and the earth.

The rest and comfort that come after the flood will bring a new order of things.

Moses 7:48. . . . When Beatty 106:17b. [Enoch:]

shall I rest, and be cleansed And he [Noah] shall cleanse

. . . that I may rest, and [praunei] the earth from

righteousness for a season all the defilement

abide upon my face? 49. . . . [phthoras] which is in

Wilt thou not bless the children her. 18. And now tell Lamech

of Noah? [The name Noah that he is his son in truth,

means "rest."] 50. . . . have . . . [and] call his name [Noah];

mercy upon Noah and his seed. for he shall be a remnant of you

. . . that he would call upon a season [katapausete]

the children of Noah. and his sons, also from the

defilement [phthoras]

of the earth and from all the

wickedness [hamartolon,

"pollution"] and from all the

vileness [upon the earth].

A lengthy passage from The Book of the Combat of Adam and Eve in which that patriarch foresees the flood presents such an arresting correspondence to the Joseph Smith account as to provide a most instructive summary to this depressing part of our history. The Adam quotations are given in the order in which they occur; the matching quotes from the Joseph Smith Enoch are all from the same chapter and describe the same series of events.

Moses 7:66. And he also Combat of Adam and Eve

saw the sea, that it was 10. [^340] At the sight of him the sea

troubled. was troubled.

7:13. . . . the rivers of water The Jordan reversed its

were turned out of their course [lit., returned to its

course; . . . and the source] the mountains

mountains fled, . . . bounded like the stags and

does of the valley.

7:17. . . . they were blessed The hills resounded with

upon the mountains, and hymns of adoration, the high

upon the high places, and did peaks joined in a hymn of

flourish. praise

7:41. . . . all eternity Yea, the earth opened up

shook. and shook to its foundations,

groaned; and the rocks were

rent.

7:14. There also came up a The king of the sea saw me

land out of the depth of the and fled. O sea, why hast thou

sea. . . . fled? . . .

7:34. . . . I [will] send in the O depths of the abyss, why

floods upon them. . . . are you troubled? Currents

7:43. . . . the floods came [whirlpools] of the Ocean, why

and swallowed them up. have you overflowed [swollen

yourselves]?

7:13. Enoch . . . led the The chariot of God rumbled

people of God, and their in space . . .

enemies came . . . against them; and . . . [at] the word of

the Lord, . . . the earth

trembled, . . .

and the roar of the lions was and a great roaring arose from

heard out of the wilderness; the midst of the terrified

7:37. . . . the whole beasts. And everything on

heavens shall weep over them, earth was overthrown.

even all the workmanship of

mine hands; . . .

eyes are upon shall perish in

the floods.

Being called, Enoch shrank back in fear and pleaded his unfitness, protesting among other things that he was "but a lad," although sixty-five years old at the time! (6:31.) How is that strange anomaly to be explained? Joseph Smith could have known of none of the writings below which also deal with it. Where did he get the idea? Certainly not from apocryphal sources, although it appears not uncommonly in them. Just a few examples:

bin Gorion 1:295f: The Metatron has 70 names, but the King calls me "the Lad." Why? 296. Because I act in the capacity of one who was before me, even Enoch, who was called "the Lad" 297. because he was the youngest of the hosts.

Book of Adam 1:165-66: Enoch: "I heard my brothers say when I was small how wicked the world is; how then can I all alone achieve anything? If only my brothers were here I could ask them! Yet youthful though I am, I am still older than my brothers, though the last to come into this world. . . ."

BHM 5:172: I am small [qatan, young] in the midst of them [the Watchers, of vast age, to whom he was sent], and am but a lad among them in days and months and years; in view of which they call me 'Lad.'"

Jewish Encyclopedia, 8:519: "In the Hebrew writings . . . and . . . the Apocrypha" Enoch is represented as a young man, "since both sources represent him as a youth"—nobody knows why.

Zohar, Beshalah 66b: "They saw the light of the Shekhinah, namely him who is called 'the Youth' [or Lad] Metatron-Henoch, who ministers to the Shekhinah in the heavenly Sanctuary." And the paved world of sapphire rock [Stone of Truth]. (See also Exodus 24:10.)

Book of Adam, 1:238: Enoch's grandfather, being called on a mission in the same way, made the same objection. When Adam sent the heavenly messengers to him with a mission call, "Seth said: 'O good teacher, for barely eight years [!] have I been in this world . . . I have not yet worn the male tiara [the round cloth cap of Exodus 28:40] nor borne the sword. Go back to Adam who is over 1,000 years old and tell him these things.' But they said: 'Seth, we have already told these same truths to your father Adam. He has been through all this.'" Then the winds bore Seth on high [as they later do Enoch], and he sat on the Throne of Light.

The patronizing title of "lad" reflected the general contempt in which Enoch was held—"All the people hate me," he said, "for I am slow of speech." (Moses 6:31.) The Ethiopian passage as rendered by Charles presents a peculiarly instructive parallel to the Joseph Smith version; both contain exactly the same ideas and expressions, but the African scribe has mixed them all up in an interesting way:

Moses 6:31. And when 1 Enoch 15:24. And until

Enoch had heard these words, then I had been prostrate on

he bowed himself to the earth my face, trembling; and the

before the Lord, and spake Lord called me with his own

before the Lord saying: Why is mouth, and said to me: Come

it that I have found favor in thy hither Enoch and hear my

sight, and am but a lad, and all words. . . .

the people hate me; for I am

slow of speech. . . .

Enoch: Go forth . . . open thy the righteous and good who

mouth, and it shall be are in life: ". . . we have

filled. . . . experienced every trouble, and 33. Say unto this people: met with much evil . . . and

Choose ye this day, to serve have become few and small

the Lord God who made you. [mikropsychos, insignificant].

. . . 10. and have not found

any to help us even with a

word [i.e., in speech]. . . .

yoke heavily upon us; 12.

They have had dominion over

us; that hated us and smote us,

and to those who hated us we

have bowed our necks.

104:2. God answered: Be

hopeful . . . ye shall shine as

the lights of heaven . . . 3.

and in your cry, cry for

judgment. . . . 9. Be not

godless in your hearts.

Enoch: Go forth and do as I now, little Enoch, ["the Lad"]

have commanded thee, and no I have told you the mysteries

man shall pierce thee. of the wicked people of this

world whose appearance has

filled you with fear and

distress . . . and that the

wicked have conspired to do

away with you but in vain.

[See also xlvii: All the wicked

plotted against Enoch, but in

Behold my Spirit is upon vain.] But fear not. I will return

you, wherefore all thy words to deliver you from evil and

will I justify . . . and thou sin . . . and I shall lead thee

shalt abide in me, and I in you; from this dark world to the

therefore walk with me. dwelling of light.

justify; and the mountains Enoch, Arise, take thy way to

shall flee before you, and the the source of the waters, turn

rivers shall turn from their it aside from its course . . . at

course. this command Tavril indeed

turned the running water from

its course. . . .

As to being slow of speech, God will put his very words into Enoch's mouth, so that in a special way it will be the Lord speaking through him:

Moses 6:32. . . . Go forth Secrets 13 (Vaillant). I have

and do as I have commanded been sent by the mouth of the

thee, and no man shall pierce Lord to you to tell you what

thee. Open thy mouth, and it will be. . . . And now my

shall be filled, and I will give children, it is not out of my

thee utterance . . . and I will own mouth that I speak to you

do as seemeth me good. today, but by the mouth of the

Lord who has sent me to you.

For you hear the words of my

mouth, and I have heard the

words of the Lord.

which I have sent forth in the sent forth to you today from

beginning . . . from my own the Lord's mouth to speak to

mouth, . . . and by the you. . . . not from my own mouth

mouths of my servants, thy am I today informing you, but

fathers, have I decreed it. from the Lord's mouth, for you

have heard my words from

my mouth, but I have heard

the Lord's words. . . .

Enoch was received by the public first with curiosity and surprise, then with resentment, then with fear, and finally with a measure of acceptance that was to produce a church and the city of Enoch. First we see Enoch, the mystery man, the alien, a great curiosity:

Moses 6:38. And they came BHM 4:129. And all the

forth to hear him, upon the people gathered together and

high places, saying unto the went up . . . to Enoch to hear

tent-keepers: Tarry ye here this thing.

. . . while we go yonder to

behold the seer, for he

prophesieth, and

there is a strange thing in the Secrets 16 (Vaillant, p. 60).

land; And they all came together,

saying: Come, let us greet Enoch, and they came to the

place Azouchan.

a wild man hath come among Iesous Basileus, 2:19ff, 107.

us. John the Baptist was received

as Enos [Enoch] returned to

earth, preaching in the desert

as a wild man.

Book of Adam, p. 17. There

are false prophets who wander

through the mountains and

hills, wild men with wild hair

and wild voices. They are

called vagabond shepherds,

live on herbs, and claim that

God speaks mysteries by their

mouths. 147. One of them, by

the name of Marmon [!], led

his followers to a place of filthy

water.

unto him, whose name was went out [after his long hiding]

Mahijah, and said unto him: and there came a voice saying:

Tell us plainly who thou art, Who is the man who rejoices

and from whence thou . . . in the ways of the Lord?

comest? . . . [See Mahujah and

Mahijah, pp. 277-78.] And

all the people gathered

together and came unto

Enoch. . . . and Enoch taught

all the people again to keep the

ways of the Lord, . . . and

gave them all his peace.

His answer:

Moses 6:41. And he said Gizeh 12:1. . . . Enoch was

unto them: I came out from taken, and no man knew

the land of Cainan, the land where he went, where he is or

of my fathers, a land of what became of him. 2. But his

righteousness unto this day. works [i.e., missionary labors]

And my father taught me in all are with the Watchers, while

the ways of God. his days are with the Saints.

1 Enoch 12:1. And before

[this] Enoch was hidden, and

no one of the children of men

knew where he was hidden,

and where he abode and what

had become of him. 2. And his

activities had to do with the

Watchers, and his days were

with the Holy Ones.

BHM 4:129. Enoch . . .

served God and shunned the

ways of the wicked sons of

men. And Enoch cleaved unto

the Order of God in knowledge

and intelligence. . . . And he

separated himself in his

wisdom from men and hid

from them for many days. . . .

withdrew again, as in the

beginning, and hid himself, to

serve the Lord.

This is the familiar theme of the holy man—Adam, Seth, Noah, Elijah, Abinadi, Ether, Mormon, etc.—who goes forth to admonish the wicked world from time to time, and then withdraws to the society of the righteous, usually in a vale or on a mountain. Such prophets are a disturbing presence among the people. Nowhere is the idea more movingly expressed than in this speech in the book of Moses:

Moses 6:37. And all men Book of Adam 1:170. And

were offended because of Enoch arose in joy and went

him. forth to preach. But all

conspired against him . . . and

all the elements were thrown

into confusion.

6:39. . . . when they heard BHM 4:130. When he

him, no man laid hands on visited them, "the children of

him; for fear came on all them men feared Enoch greatly."

that heard him; for he walked

with God.

6:47. And as Enoch spake Gizeh 13:3. Then going

forth the words of God, the forth I spoke to all of them, and

people trembled, and could they were all afraid, and

not stand in his presence. trembling and terror seized

them.

speak, neither raise their eyes

to heaven for shame. . . .

1 Enoch 13:3. Then I went

and spoke to them all together,

and they were all afraid, and

fear and trembling seized them.

What caused them to tremble most of all was that Enoch produced a special book as a witness against them. He climaxes the story of his vision "by the sea east" by reminding them of a certain book.

Moses 6:46. . . . we have a 1 Enoch 93:2. I, Enoch, will

book of remembrance we have declare . . . according to that

written among us, according which appeared to me in the

to the pattern given by the heavenly vision . . . and have

finger of God; and it is given learnt from the heavenly

in our own language [a book tablets. 3. And Enoch began

meant for them to read]. to recount from the books.

The purpose of the book, to witness their fallen state and betrayal of their ancient covenants, as given in the Joseph Smith version, finds striking confirmation in the ancient records:

Moses 6:45. . . . we know Testament of Abraham.

them [our ancestors], and Adam says: Tell me all its [the

cannot deny, and even the first soul's] deeds that are written

of all we know, even Adam. down. And immediately an

6:46. For a book old man [Enoch] came forth

remembrance we have written from behind the veil with a

among us, according to the book in his hand. . . . Then

pattern given by the finger of the soul denied, thinking that

God; and it is given in our own its deeds would not be

language. remembered. . . . But Adam

said: No, there is no lie in this

place!

Black 98:7. Think not in

your souls . . . that . . . your

wrongdoings are not observed

nor written down before the

highest. 8. From now on all

your transgressions are

written down day and night

until your judgment.

Black 97:6. And all . . .

your unrighteousness shall be

read out in the presence of the

Great Holy One and in your

own presence; because

(104:9ff) . . . you have got by

through juggling the books

and falsifying reports: that is

how you got your power,

influence, and wealth!

Beatty 98:15. Woe to you

who write false words . . . and

falsify the record. . . . 91:2.

Prepare, ye righteous ones,

and present the records of your

doings as a remembrance, give

them as a testimony before the

angels, that they may bring the

sense of righteousness before

the Most High, for a

remembrance.

Testament of Dan 5:6. (and

other Testaments of the

Twelve Patriarchs). For I have

read in the book of Enoch the

righteous that your prince is

Satan, and that all the spirits

of wickedness will . . . cause

[the sons of Levi] to sin before

the Lord.

While Charles finds passages in this part of the Ethiopian Enoch "very confused" and "clearly corrupt," all the versions agree on a consistent story: Enoch, while journeying in the highlands passing by a certain sea, has a vision in which the Lord talks with him and sends him to rebuke the people; he finds them assembled in a high place and discusses with them a certain book—a Hypomnemata, or memorial. As a result of what he tells them about the book, they are completely overcome and cannot raise their eyes to Enoch or to heaven for shame. The Joseph Smith account is substantially like that of the Greek and Slavonic texts.

Moses 6:47. And as Enoch Gizeh 13:3. They

spake forth the words of God asked . . . me to read for them

[confirmed by the book], the the Hypomnemata (memorial,

people trembled, and could remembrance) before the face

not stand in his presence. of the Lord, 5. because they

were in no condition to speak,

neither could they raise their

eyes to the heavens for

shame.

1 Enoch 13:3ff. [In this

version "the passage is very

confused," says Charles,

"clearly corrupt." (P. 30.) 7.

And I went off and sat down

at the waters of Dan, in the

land of Dan to the south of the

west of Hermon. I read their

petition [or memorial,

remembrance] till I fell asleep,

visions of chastisement, and a

voice came bidding me tell the

sons of Heaven and reprimand

them. 9. And when I awaked

I came unto them, and they

were all sitting gathered

together weeping in

"Abelsjail" . . . with their

faces covered.

to them from] the book of the words of righteousness, and of

the reprimand . . . in

accordance with the command

of the Holy Great One in that

vision.

Footnotes

"A Strange Thing in the Land: The Return of the Book of Enoch" first appeared in the Ensign from October 1975 to August 1977.

---
Notas:
[^335] Sylvain Grebaut, Les Miracles de Jesus, in P.O. 17:826-29.
[^337] Grebaut, Livre des Mysteres, in P.O. 6:431.
[^338] "Livre du Combat d'Adam et Eve," in Migne, Dictionnaire 1:362.
[^339] For references, Nibley, "Treasures in the Heavens," in Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 8 (Autumn 1973): 77-78, 81-84; or Old Testament and Related Studies, The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 174-75, 181-85; or Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless (Provo, Ut.: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1978), pp. 49-84.
[^340] F. Tempestini, "Livre d'Adam," in Migne, Dictionnaire 1:118.
