Stephen D. Ricks, Hugh Nibley, Enoch the Prophet ( 1986)

Enoch's Visions

Before dealing with the success of Enoch's mission, we must consider more closely the marvelous visions which prepared him for it and which are the most significant part of the Enoch literature and the principal reason for its rejections by the conventional Christian and Jewish scholars of the fourth and following centuries. We refer to the cosmological or astronomical teachings most widely associated with the name of Enoch, who, not content with describing a purely spiritual heaven or beatific vision, insists on bringing real stars and planets into the picture—a thing which medieval and modern theologians find unspeakably crass—the very antithesis of everything worthy of the ethereal name of religion. While the Jewish doctors rejected the old cosmological absorption because it turned out to be altogether too popular with the early Christians, [^1] the Christian doctors in turn attacked them as too popular with the gnostic sectaries and even the heathen. [^2] Both agreed in tracing back their origin to Enoch.

Thus, quoting Eumolpus (140 B.C.), Eusebius reports that Abraham taught astronomy to the Egyptians at Heliopolis (the great prehistoric Egyptian observatory), giving himself and the Babylonians credit for establishing the science while actually recognizing Enoch as its true discoverer. [^3] Syncellus and Cedrenus hand down the tradition, on the authority of Enoch himself, that it was the angel Uriel who taught astronomy to Enoch. [^4] To clinch their disapproval, the doctors of Alexandria—the great "spiritualizers"—follow Clement of Alexandria, who maintains that according to Enoch it was the fallen angels who taught "astronomy and divination [mantiken] and related sciences [technas]" to the human race. [^5] Mystics and theologians thereafter rejected Enoch's cosmologies precisely because they were not mystic but scientific, sharing the Christian prejudice due to which "cosmogonic accounts are in fact exceedingly rare both in Israel and in Islam. . . . Mohammed warned that they would lead to atheism—an old Rabbinical idea." [^6]

Modern theologians see in Enoch "a curious attempt to reduce the scattered images of the [Old Testament] to a physical system. . . . It seems to repeat in every form the great principle that the world, natural, moral, and spiritual, is under the immediate government of God." [^7] And what, we may ask, is wrong with that? The Reverend Michael Stuart, foremost American theologian when the book of Enoch first came to America in the 1838-40 editions, protested that the scriptures "no where introduced such idle and Phantastic speculations about the natural phenomena of the heavens and earth, as we find in the Book of Enoch," [^8] and he speaks for conventional Christianity—even today—when he says, "Every science . . . is entirely foreign to the Scriptures, inasmuch as they were written purely for moral and religious purposes, and not to give lessons in science," for which reason Enoch's cosmology is at present a sealed book. [^9]

The churches are changing their tune so fast today that we must make an effort to remind ourselves that only yesterday Joseph Smith's "cosmism" and literalism were viewed with universal horror and alarm. A leading Catholic theologian of our time assures us that the longing of the Christian is "to be rapt away from matter" and receive "the cup of the spirit which from heaven is held out to earth," [^10] while his eminent Protestant counterpart is pleased to note that, thanks to present-day demythologizing of old teachings, "redemption and the spirit are no longer thought of in the Gnostic manner as quasi-physical entities," in spite of Paul. [^11]

It was among the early sectaries that the astronomical parts of Enoch (72-82) enjoyed their greatest favor, according to Van Andel's study. (Pp. 53, 40.) He notes that the inclusion of the physical world in the story of redemption which was indeed inevitable in a history which is a prologue to the Flood—a very physical event indeed (p. 41)—and that the exponents of such literature very sensibly hold that the cosmos itself cannot very well be left out of the picture of God's dealings with men, beginning with the Creation, another physical event. Is it not a main purpose of the Bible to make the cosmos understandable? (P. 93.) In apocalyptic literature the greatest "emphasis is laid on the [historic personality] of Enoch" as the conveyor of cosmic knowledge. (P. 118.) Long ago J. P. Migne protested that it was the very literal and "scientific" tone of it that rendered such religious literature dangerous, and that the proper apocryphal writings for Catholics to read are those which are frankly popular fables, poetic fantasies, and moral and symbolic tales claiming in the end no historical or physical reality. [^12]

It is not our purpose here to discuss Enoch's cosmological discourses, which would take us pleasantly afield but require too much paper. It will be enough to confine our attention to the cosmological passages that can be paralleled in the book of Moses. These parallels are surprisingly plentiful.

We begin with the declaration that Enoch was shown a vision of everything: indeed, receiving a total revelation of all things seems to have been a privilege of each of the great founding fathers of the dispensations, from Adam on.

Moses 1:27. . . . as the Gizeh 5. For thou hast

voice was still speaking, Moses made all, and hast all

cast his eyes and beheld the authority, and all things

earth, yea, even all of it; and appear before thee and are

there was not a particle of it revealed, and thou seest all

which he did not behold, things.

discerning it by the spirit of Secrets 17: (Vaillant, pp.

God. 62f). If you lift your eyes to the

heavens the Lord is there,

because he made the heavens;

and if you look upon the earth

or the sea, or if you think of

things under the earth, the

Lord is there also, for he made

all things.

7:67. And the Lord showed 1 Enoch 19:3. And I, Enoch,

Enoch all things, even unto the alone saw the vision, the ends

end of the world. of all things: and no man shall

see as I have seen.

7:4. . . . and he [the Lord] Gizeh 2:2. See the earth,

said unto me: Look, and I will and consider the works done

show unto thee the world for in it from the beginning to the

the space of many end, . . . and all the works of

generations. God will appear to you.

bin Gorion 1:251. The Lord

showed Adam everything,

including Abraham's story.

. . . 253. And "he [Adam] took

a leaf and wrote down his

Testament, and sealed it up

unto the Lord, the Metatron

[Enoch], and Adam."

Apocalypse of Abraham

21:1. He said to me [Abraham]

look! . . . 2. I look down and

behold the six heavens and all

that is in them, and also the

earth and her fruits and all that

moves upon her, and her

spirits, and the power of her

inhabitants [men] . . . 3. and

the lower regions . . . 4. [and]

the sea and its islands, the

animals and its fishes . . .

men, women, and

children. . . .

1:28. And he [Moses] Secrets, Ms. R., ch. 10.

beheld also the inhabitants The Angel Braboil [umpire

thereof, and there was not a or scorekeeper] said to me

soul which he beheld not; and [Enoch]: Sit down and write all

he discerned them by the Spirit the spirits of men, all those

of God; and their numbers who have not yet been born

were great, even . . . everything to the end of

numberless. . . . this world, even from the

foundation thereof! . . . And I

wrote down all the affairs of

men.

1:29. And he beheld many 1 Enoch 33:1. I went to the

lands; and each land was called ends of the earth and saw there

earth, and there were great beasts, and each differed

inhabitants on the face from the other; and (I saw)

thereof. birds also differing . . . 2. and

to the East . . . I saw the ends

of the earth whereon the

heaven rests.

Jubilees 4:19 (Charles) or

4:181 in Bekker, p. 17. And

what was and what will be he

saw . . . as it will happen to

the children of men

throughout their generations

until the day of judgment; he

saw and understood

everything, and wrote his

testimony.

6:42. . . . I [Enoch] beheld Secrets 13 (Vaillant, pp.

a vision; and lo, the heavens I 40ff). And now my children, I

saw, and the Lord spake with know all things, some from the

me. mouth of the Lord, others that

I have seen myself. . . . I have

written of the extremities of the

heavens and what is in them;

I have measured the

movements of their hosts . . .

I have explored the places of

the clouds . . . I have written about the deposits of the snow

and reservoirs of ice, . . . how

all these things are controlled

by the power of God.

Origen, "First Principles,"

in P.G. 11:409. In the same

book attributed to Enoch is

written: "Universas materias

perspexi," which would imply

that he had seen every

category of matter, divided not

separate and distinct species

from a single universal

substance, to wit, of men or

animals, or heavens, or Sun,

or of everything that is in this

world.

6:36. And he beheld the

spirits that God had created; BHM, 5:176. Enoch knows

and he beheld also things the names of the Sarim [lords,

which were not visible to the administrators] who

natural eye. administer every department

of existence. . . . Enoch knew

not only all the secrets of the

Makrokosmos, but of the

Mikrokosmos as well.

The ancients recognize that others, from Adam to Daniel, also had the great Universal Vision, but give Enoch a special rating. Enoch alone, says the Ethiopian Book of Mysteries, saw it all from the beginning to end, before it happened. [^13] "The Lord has chosen thee more than any other man on the earth, and has appointed thee the Scribe of His Creations, both visible and invisible. . . ." (Secrets, Ms. R, Vaillant, p. 61, see n. 17.)

Joseph Smith's preoccupation with mountains in his Enoch account would appear suspicious were it not that the other Enoch texts have the same obsession:

Moses 7:2. . . . there came Gizeh 32:2. And thence I

a voice out of heaven, saying— took my way along the tops of

Turn ye, and get ye upon the these mountains, keeping far

mount Simeon. [n.b. Simeon from towards the East of the

means "place of hearing," earth, and I passed above the

hence "audience, assembly"] Erythrean Sea, and went up to

turned and went up on the there passed on higher to

mount; and as I stood upon the Zoti-el. 3. And I went to the

mount, I beheld the heavens paradise of righteousness, and

open, and I was clothed upon beheld from afar among its

with glory; 4. And I saw the trees . . . two trees in

Lord; and he stood before my particular, great and laden,

face, and he talked with me. . . . and the Tree of

Knowledge [phroneseos], of

whose fruit the holy one ate

and received great

understanding.

1 Enoch 17:2. And they

brought me to the point of

darkness, and to a mountain

whose summit reached to

6:37. And . . . Enoch went heaven. 3. And I saw the place

forth . . . standing upon the of the luminaries.

hills and the high places. . . . BHM 5:172. God raised me

the sea east, I beheld a vision; to be a witness against them

and lo, the heavens I saw, and for all time to come . . . and

the Lord spake with me, and the holy one, Blessed Be He,

gave me commandment. made me one with the high

place as a prince and a ruler

among the angels of the

ministry.

The ancients were quite aware of how Enoch's mysterious departure to heaven and Moses' ascent of Mt. Nebo and his disappearance (Deuteronomy 32:49) resembled each other. Others have also found mountains to be places of special closeness to the Lord—for example, Elijah, Nephi, and the famous Rabbi Ishmael.

2 Nephi 4:24. My voice BHM 5:170. R. Ishmael:

have I sent up on high; and When I went up to the

angels came down and mountaintop to contemplate

ministered unto me. 25. And the Markabah, I entered into

upon the wings of his Spirit the six temples, room by room.

hath my body been carried Arriving at the entrance to the

away upon exceeding high seventh [the Holy of Holies], I

mountains. And mine eyes stood to pray before God; and

have beheld great things, yea, I lifted up my eyes and said:

even too great for man; Lord of Eternity, . . . grant me

therefore I was bidden that I in this hour the crown of the

should not write them. priesthood. . . . And deliver

me from Satan. And the

Metatron [Enoch] came who

[served?] the angel, the Prince

of the Presence, and spread his

wings and came to meet me

with great joy . . . and he took

me with his hand and raised

me up.

In these passages, as throughout the book of Enoch, imagery and reality seem to meet and fuse in a peculiar way. Reference to the Holy of Holies is unmistakable in the last passage cited, recalling the well-known Ziggurat concept of the ancients in which the temple itself was to represent a mountain by which one mounted to heaven and the presence of God. Let us return for a moment to Nephi's story of his father's vision, which in some ways parallels Enoch's:

1 Nephi 1:4. . . . in the 2 Enoch 1:2. On the first

commencement of the first day of the month I was in my

year . . . 5. . . . my father house alone, and I rested on

Lehi . . . prayed unto the my bed and slept [BHM 4:127:

Lord, yea, even with all his "he was praying before God in

heart, in behalf of his (his) house and chamber"],

people. . . . 7. . . . he 3. and as I slept great grief

returned to his own house at came upon my heart, and I

Jerusalem; and he cast himself wept with mine eyes in sleep.

upon his bed, being overcome . . . 4. There appeared to me

with the Spirit. . . . 8. And two men . . . 8. and these being thus overcome with the men said to me: Have courage

Spirit, he was carried away in Enoch, do not fear . . . the

a vision, even that he saw the eternal God sent us to thee,

heavens open, and he thought and lo! Thou shalt today

he saw God sitting upon his ascend with us into heaven.

throne, surrounded with

numberless concourses of

angels.

The manner in which the prophet is caught up is of particular concern and interest to the ancients. What are "the wings of the Spirit"? Lehi was "carried away in a vision, even that . . . he thought he saw God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with . . . angels," to match which Enoch says, "My spirit was translated, and it ascended to heaven; and I saw the holy sons of God . . . 10. and with them the Head of Days . . . 11. and my spirit was transfigured." (1 Enoch 71:10, 11.) The old writers also treat the idea:

2 Nephi 4:25. Upon the BHM 5:170. R. Ishmael [a

wings of his Spirit hath my stand-in for Enoch] was on a

body been carried away upon high mountain when the

exceeding high mountains. Metatron [often equated with

And mine eyes have beheld Enoch] came, who served the

great things, yea, even too angels, the Prince of Presence,

great for man. and he spread his wings and

came to meet me with great joy

to deliver me from the hands

of Satan. And he took me by

the hand and raised me up.

Moses 1:1. Moses was BHM 6:175. God laid his

caught up into an exceedingly hand upon me and raised me

high mountain. and exalted me . . . and

seventy-two wings raised me

up, so many on one side and

so many on the other; it was as

if the world was filled with

wings. . . .

Abraham 2:7. I cause the 1 Enoch 39:3. And in those

wind and the fire to be my days a whirlwind carried me

chariot; I say to the off from the earth, and set me

mountains—Depart hence— down at the end of the

and behold, they are taken heavens. 4. And I saw another

away by a whirlwind. vision, the dwelling places of

the Holy One, the resting-

place of the righteous.

Book of Adam 1:238. So

Seth arose and prayed, and put

off his envelope of flesh.

. . . Then the winds of heaven

lifted him up in the midst of

myriads of spirits . . . and

placed him on a shining throne.

As everyone knows, the Hebrew ruach means both "wind" and "spirit," giving rise to much speculation. A typical example would be Enoch's declaration that Adam "was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water," (Moses 6:64), or that Enoch's people "were caught up by the powers of heaven into Zion." (7:27.) The last indicates that we are dealing with forms of power yet unknown to men, for which the words "wind" and "spirit" may be taken to represent unknown quantities. Competent scientists have now begun to explore the reality of heretofore unknown forms of power, [^14] with surprising results. [^15] One of the special characteristics of the Enoch literature is the constant interplay between the physical and psychic, in which the Joseph Smith text leads the way.

Enoch and the Cosmos

Clement of Rome, in the opening lines of the Recognitions, says that what drew him to investigate the gospel and join the church was his burning desire to find answers to the great questions of life: "When was this world made? What was there before it? Was it always there? Is there a life after death?" He says that he wore himself out at school but could find no professor or philosopher who could give him a satisfactory answer. [^16] It was such "constant seeking for knowledge," as H. D. Betz points out, that necessarily carried the early Christians "beyond history . . . into astronomy and astrology." [^17] The later church fathers fought with "bitter polemic" against the tendency to ask such questions, [^18] and the rabbis declared that "anyone who studies the subjects of the Creation or the Chariot, or who puts his mind to the questions What is above? What is below? What is beyond? What is in the eternities?—it were better for him had he not come into this world!" [^19]

Enoch was one of the curious ones: "I raised my eyes and contemplated this universe, the sky with its glittering stars, the sun and the moon, . . . the angels [who] control the water, the wind, the fire, the earth and all that is in it, the mountains, the sea, the planets, and the trees. Who could tell me where all these powers take their rise? How do they operate? How do they keep going? Who can explain to me the alterations of dawn and dusk, day and night, moon and stars?" He summarizes: "Thus as I viewed the organizations of this world I was troubled." And prostrating himself, he prayed for enlightenment. [^20]

The objection of the religious to the astronomical teachings of the book of Enoch is that they are not in the least bit spiritual: "Through all these chapters," writes Charles of 1 Enoch 72-79, "there is not a single ethical reference. The author has no other interest save a scientific one. . . . [We] have to deal with a complete and purely scientific treatise." [^21] Moreover, the interest is in the sun, moon, and stars solely as regulators of the special calendar which set the Enoch-sectaries apart from the rest of the world in their observances. [^22] And yet Van Andel recognizes that the Enoch cosmology was for those people something more than calendar: it was nothing less than the knowledge of the eternities, "before all else the secret of the Creation . . . God's plan for the entire universe, which had been revealed to the community of the righteous" as a fundamental and organic part of the gospel. [^23]

This broader aspect of the higher knowledge is, however, conspicuously missing from the Ethiopian 1 Enoch, engrossed as it is in the meticulous business of counting and measuring times and cycles, which was to titillate the vanity and challenge the invention of generations of cabalists, cultists, astrologers, schoolmen, and pyramidologists for ages to come, and which indeed justified the doctors of the church and synagogue in their distaste for the whole business. But the cosmology of the Joseph Smith translation of Enoch in the book of Moses is something quite different—a sober concern with a few basic principles which differs so radically from the Ethiopian Enoch that Joseph's critics might well discover here a clear case of outright refutation of the latter-day scripture by the ancient sources were it not that his Enoch text is impressively vindicated by the closely matching concepts of the Slavonic Enoch. The reason for this particular affinity must be examined at a later time; for the present it is sufficient to recognize how strongly Joseph Smith's cosmology is supported by ancient texts known only long after his death. The main subjects common to these documents are the mystery of glory, the universal ongoing creation, the plurality of worlds, and the relationship of the worlds to God and to each other.

It is standard procedure in apocalyptic writings to have the hero introduced to cosmology in the course of his visit to the heavenly realms; in these accounts the leitmotif is glory in varying degrees, and what applies to one heavenly visit applies to another, so that the same descriptions fit the experience of Enoch, Moses, Abraham, Elijah, etc. [^24]

First, the principle is laid down that glory can be experienced only to the degree one is qualified to share it. The person who would behold God's glory must himself first be "clothed upon with glory," i.e., enveloped in that same glory: ". . . being clothed with robes of righteousness, . . . .in glory even as I am, . . . to receive a crown of righteousness, and to be clothed upon, even as I am, to be with me, that we may be one." (D&C 29:12-13; italics added.) Even so with Enoch:

Moses 7:3. [Enoch:] . . . I Secrets 22:8 (Morfill, p. 28.)

beheld the heavens open, and And the Lord said to Michael:

I was clothed upon with glory; "Go and take Enoch out from

stood before my face, and he anoint him with my sweet

talked with me, even as a man ointment and put him into the

talketh one with another, face garments of my glory. . . ."

to face. 10. And I [Enoch] looked at

myself, and was like one of his

glorious ones. And there was

no difference. (See also

Slavonic Enoch 9, Vaillant, pp.

25f.)

Text B, 22 (in R. H. Charles,

Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha,

2:443). After Enoch is "clothed

in garments of glory . . . the

Lord with his mouth

summoned me and said: Have

courage, Enoch, fear not,

stand before my face to

eternity. And . . . Michael

brought me before the face of

God."

Assumption of Moses,

Introduction 3 [". . . it (the

Assumption of Moses) shows

many affinities with 2 Enoch,"

Charles, ibid., p. 409]. At his

death while still "in the flesh"

Moses is met by Enoch-

Metatron, who clothes him

with light so that he will be

able to see the angels; and his

body was transformed into "a

flame of fire."

BHM 5: xlii. In this Hebrew

Enoch Book, R. Ishmael tells

how in the seventh temple he

"beholds Enoch who has been

transformed in the Angel

Metatron Sar ha-Panim [of the

Face]," and who tells him how

upon becoming an angel he

was "clothed with all glories."

The reason for the transformation is clear:

Moses 1:14. . . . I could not Gizeh 14:21. And no angel

look upon God, except his could . . . look upon his face,

glory should come upon me. because it is fearful and

glorious, and no flesh can look

upon him. 14. And I began to

tremble and to shake, and fell

upon my face.

1:5. . . . and no man can Evangelium Veritatis, folio

behold all my glory, and XVr and folio XV, p. 29. The

afterwards remain in the flesh shock of the sight of God

on the earth. would utterly destroy those

unprepared for it.

1:11. But now mine own Sophia Jesu Christi 79. No

eyes have beheld God; but not flesh can endure his presence,

my natural, but my spiritual nor can his appearance be

eyes, for my natural eyes could described. But he showed

not have beheld; for I should himself in pure and perfect

have withered and died in his flesh to us on the mountain,

presence. and we were sore afraid.

7:3-4. [Enoch:] I was Gospel of Philip 105:28-34,

clothed upon with glory; And 106:1ff. You can see only what

I saw the Lord. you are like, therefore on the

Mountain of Transfiguration

the Apostles had to be made

great in order to see the

greatness of Christ.

1:11. [Moses:] . . . I beheld Evangelium Veritatis, folio

his face, for I was transfigured XVv, p. 30. They can bear the

before him. knowledge of God to that

degree to which they can bear

the light.

It is a general principle that applies to all levels of glory; if one is not prepared, the experience of glory can only cause anxiety and alarm:

Moses 1:11. I beheld his 1 Enoch 71:1. And . . . my

face, for I was transfigured spirit was translated and it

before him. 25. He [Moses] ascended into the heavens:

beheld his glory again, for it and I saw the holy Sons of

was upon him. [Zechariah, God. 10. And with them the

Mary, the shepherds in the Head of Days, His head white

field, the apostles on the and pure as wool, and his

Mount of Transfiguration, etc., raiment indescribable. 11.

all were "sore afraid" in the And my spirit was

presence of heavenly glory. transfigured. [Italics added.]

Italics added.]

BHM 5:170. The Metatron

[Enoch] . . . said to me: Come

in peace, . . . and they guided

me to see the Shekinah and

presented me before the

Throne of Glory to

contemplate the Merkabah;

and when the Princes of the

Merkabah saw me, and the

Seraphim of flame, they placed

their eyes upon me and I

trembled and became ill and

fell from my stand and

swooned before the Zohar, the

sight of their eyes, and the

glory of the appearance of their

faces.

Seraphim turned their faces

towards me I feared and

trembled and fell from my

standing-place and swooned.

Gizeh 14:24. And I was

upon my face . . . and

trembling, and the Lord with

his own mouth called me, and

said: Come here, Enoch, and

listen to my word. 25. . . . one

of the holy ones raised me up

and stood me on my feet . . .

and I held my face down and

covered. [After this interview

when Enoch went down to the

people, they could not bear to

look upon him. See Moses'

similar experience after

descending Mount Sinai,

Exodus 34:30.]

Accordingly, when the higher glory is withdrawn and the individual reverts to his own nature, he finds himself weak and helpless:

Moses 1:9. And the 1 Enoch 39:14. And my face

presence of God withdrew was changed; for I could no

from Moses, that his glory was longer behold.

not upon Moses; and Moses

was left unto himself. And as

he was left unto himself, he fell The Combat of Adam and

unto the earth. Eve 1:301. And the Lord said

it was for the space of many me the light was with you and

hours before Moses did again you could see the most distant

receive his natural strength things but now you cannot

like unto man. even see what is near to you by

the power of the flesh. Then

Adam and Eve fell down

helpless. [^25]

Apocalypse of Abraham

30:1 And as he was still

speaking, I found myself

already upon the earth, 2. and

said . . . 3. I am no more now

in the glory in which I was

above, and what my heart

sought to know I did not

understand.

The early Jewish and Christian traditions are full of accounts in which Satan tried to beguile men by counterfeit glory, even appearing as an angel of light. The righteous however are given the discernment of spirits, and are able to endure true glory—their "confidence wax[es] strong" even "in the presence of God." (D&C 121:45.) Accordingly Satan's false glory never deceives the patriarchs:

Moses 1:12. . . . Satan Book of Adam 1:170. After

came tempting him, saying: the Angel of Life departed

Moses, son of man, worship . . . Enoch arose in joy,

me. clothed in glory to preach to

upon Satan and said: Who art planets conspired against their

thou? For behold, I am a son brethren and announced that

of God, . . . and where is thy the real glory was only a trick

glory, that I should worship crying out: They have stolen

thee? our glory! They threw all the

look upon God, except his

glory should come upon me, Falasha Anthology, 100.

and I were transfigured before [Abraham:] I do not know

him. But I can look upon thee whether thou art a great

in the natural man. Is it not so, angel . . . in this glory,

surely? because I cannot see thy

for it is darkness unto me? And me I feel strong, my soul is

I can judge between thee and fortified . . . but when thou

God. . . . camest my soul was troubled

deceive me not; . . . and weak.

upon me, wherefore I can Apocalypse of Elijah, p. 197.

judge between him and thee. The Son of Destruction shall

Depart hence, Satan. show himself and say: I am

had said these words, Satan not believe him! [Ephraim

cried with a loud voice, and Syr., 9. He will surely make all

ranted upon the earth, and the signs which our Lord

commanded, saying: I am the performs in the world; the

Only Begotten, worship me! dead however, he will not rise

up, because he has not power

over the spirits.] 20. And . . . Moses began Gizeh 13:1. But Enoch

to fear exceedingly; and as he (manuscript much confused)

began to fear, he saw the said to Azael, Depart!

bitterness of hell. [poreyou], there is no peace in

Nevertheless, . . . he thee! Great offence [krima]

commanded, saying: Depart hath gone forth from thee . . .

from me, Satan, for this one 2. And I will no longer

God only will I worship, which detain you or discuss with you

is the God of glory. because of your trickery and

weeping, and wailing, and going forth among them [the

gnashing of teeth, . . . he people] I [Enoch] told them all,

[Satan] departed hence. and they all feared and a great

name of God, he [Moses] them.

beheld his glory again, for it

was upon him. Zechariah 3:2. And the

Lord said unto Satan: The Lord

rebuke thee, O Satan; . . . 4.

Take away the filthy garments

from [Joshua] . . . Behold,

. . . I will clothe thee with

change of raiment. 5.

. . . They set a fair mitre upon

his head, and clothed him with

garments. And the angel of the

Lord stood by.

Apocalypse of Abraham

to the top of Horeb) 13:7. [The

angel:] This one you see is

godlessness—it is the [fallen

Angel] Azazel [Satan]. 8.

Then he said to him: Shame on

thee, Azazel! 9. For

Abraham's part is in the

heaven, but thy part is on

earth, 10. which thou hast

chosen for thy home . . . 14.

Depart from this man . . .

glory] which once belonged to thee in heaven is now lain

aside for him, and the

corruption that is his shall pass

over to thee!

1 Enoch 63:7. [The kings of

the earth say]: We have not

believed before him, nor

glorified the name of the Lord

of spirits . . . but our hope

was in the sceptre of our

kingship, and in our glory. 8.

And in the day of suffering and

tribulation he saves us not.

[Italics added.]

The faithful cannot escape a cosmic view of things because it is the creation that declares the glory of God:

Moses 6:63. . . . all things 1 Enoch 69:21-24. The

are created and made to bear stars . . . winds, lightnings,

record of me, . . . all things . . . and all these believe and

bear record of me. give thanks before the Lord of

Spirits, and glorify Him with

all their power.

7:28. . . . and Enoch bore Secrets 10 (Vaillant). And

record of it . . . saying: . . . without resting I wrote down

man could number the

particles of the earth, . . . it Secrets 10 (Vaillant). And

would not be a beginning to the Lord called Berebel

the number of thy creations. [Brabeusel, Thoth] . . . who

was skilled in writing down all

the works of the Lord. And the

Lord said to Berebel: Take a

book from the deposit

[khranilnitz], and give a pen to

Enoch, and explain to him and

dictate the books to him. [So

the angel taught Enoch] all the

works [doings, makings] of the

heavens and the earth and the

sea and all the elements and time-periods and

commandments and

instructions . . . while I wrote

down all the signs [znamienia,

semiea =notes]. So he wrote the

360 books of the creation.

Jubilees 2:1. And the Angel

of the Presence spake to Moses

according to the word of the

Lord, saying: Write the

complete history of the

Creation.

4:17. And [Enoch] was the

first among men that are born

upon the earth who learnt

writing and knowledge and

wisdom and who wrote down

the signs of heaven. [The

Greek adds: "and arithmetic

and geometry, and all the

Sophian."]

Creation is presented as a universal ongoing process:

Moses 1:37. . . . The Zohar iii: 61a, b (Brody). [^26]

heavens . . . cannot be This we have learned: Before

numbered unto man; . . . 38. the Holy . . . created this

And as one earth shall pass world, He had created worlds

away, and the heavens thereof and destroyed them.

even so shall another come;

and there is no end to my

works.

The creation as process is emphasized by the frequent occurrence of the word creation in the plural, usually in proclaiming the greatness and majesty of God—"millions of earths like this . . . would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations" (Moses 7:30); "And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations" (7:31); "I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also" (7:36); ". . . and all the creations of God mourned" (7:56); ". . . Zion . . . shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made" (7:64). Such passages clearly imply that creation is an ongoing drama:

Moses 1:38. And as one bin Gorion, 1:286. Seven

earth shall pass away, and the imperfect worlds were all

heavens thereof even so shall destroyed because of

another come; and there is no wickedness.

end to my works. 1:59. There are 18,000

worlds known only to God.

Book of Adam, 1:225. The

life-span of each planet is

different: Fire and water form

circles around the 18,000

worlds.

The same idea is conveyed in the Secrets of Enoch 11 (Charles, Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha 2:436), where the heavenly bodies in their "successive going" are "ever going and returning, [having] rest neither by day nor by night." Thus (Secrets of Enoch 16) "the sun is a great creation, whose circuit lasts twenty-eight years and begins again from the beginning." "Hear Enoch, . . . not to My angels have I told . . . their rise, nor my endless realm, nor have they understood my creating, which I tell thee today." (24:3.) "There is born light from light, there came forth a great age, and showed all creation." (25:3.) "I want to create another world . . . [31:3] . . . and there is no counsellor nor inheritor to my creations." (33:4.) In manuscript R, chapter 10, of the Slavonic Enoch, he sees "the exchanges of all the elements and their progressions, and their manner of changing according to the signs of the Zodiac, and the progress of their changes," and so on.

The idea of creation as an ongoing process involving many participants was, of course, offensive to the doctors with their monistic obsession. "It is a constant concern of the Midrash," writes E. Hahn, "why God needed six days and ten words for the creation when a single gesture would have sufficed." [^27] And so they effectively silenced the old teaching of creation as a process.

Equally offensive was the idea of a plurality of worlds, countering, as it did, a basic teaching of Aristotle and the evidence of common sense that this world, being heaviest, must necessarily be in the center of everything and mankind the only rational animal, not only on earth, but in all the immensity of the universe. "Millions of earths like this" was quite unthinkable—even comical. "Since God didn't even need this world," as Jonathan Edwards vociferously proclaimed, "why should he want to create even more?" Since "the fullness of good is attained once for all in God . . . ," ran the official argument, "God has no need of a world and is indifferent to it and all that goes on in it." [^28] Quite the opposite with Enoch:

Moses 7:30. And were it Mishnat ha-Zohar 1:127ff. [^29]

possible that man could God's creations are en sof,

number the particles of the "without end."

earth, yea, millions of earths

like this, it would not be a

beginning to the number of thy

creations.

1:37. . . . The heavens Apocryphon of John, p.

[galaxies], they are many, and 27. The heavens, they cannot

they cannot be numbered unto be numbered to man.

man.

1:33. . . . worlds without bin Gorion 1:59. The

number have I created. heavens are without number,

and every one of the vaults is

like an independent world

which in turn contains 1,000

other worlds.

Berayta fol. 54a. The foolish

Minaeans believe that this is

the only world there is!

Actually there are worlds

without number.

Secrets 13 (Vaillant). And

now, my children, I know all

things. . . . I have written of the extremities of the heavens

and what is in them. I have

measured the movements of

their hosts. I have completed

the counting of the stars, a vast

multitude without number.

No man can conceive of their

revolutions [or orbits]; the

angels themselves do not

know their number.

2 Enoch 40:2. I have

measured and described the

stars, the great countless

multitude of them. 3. Not

even the angels see their

number.

With all its pluralism we are never allowed to forget that "from first to last one mind alone dominates the whole boundless complex," since all receive the instructions and their inspiration from a single source: [^30]

Moses 1:35. But only an Gizeh 9:5. For thou hast

account of this earth, and the made them all, and hast all

inhabitants thereof, give I unto authority [exousian], and all

you. For behold, there are things appear before thee and

many worlds that have passed are plainly revealed [akalypta],

away by the word of my and thou seest all things.

power. And there are many

that now stand, and 1 Enoch 84:3. Thou hast

innumerable are they unto made and rulest all

man; but all things are things, . . . wisdom departs

numbered unto me, for they not from the place of thy

are mine and I know them. throne, nor turns away from

cannot be numbered unto knowest and seest and hearest

man; but they are numbered everything.

unto me, for they are mine.

1 Enoch 39:11. He knows

7:30. . . . millions of earths before the world was created

like this . . . and yet thou art what is forever, and what will

there and thy bosom is there. be from generation unto generation.

7:36. Wherefore, I can

stretch forth mine hands and

hold all the creations which I

have made; and mine eye can

pierce them also.

Origen, P.G. 11:409. He

made all things according to

number and measure. For with

God nothing is without limit

and measure, since by his

mind he comprehends all

things.

Clement of Alexandria, P.G.

9:721f. Psalm 18:2 refers to the

plurality of the heavens, where

even the demons all recognize

that Christ is the Lord. The

teaching is from Enoch.

6:61. . . . the Comforter Clement quotes Daniel,

. . . which maketh alive all quoting Enoch: (P.G. 9:700)

things; that which knoweth all And I saw all substance. For

things, and hath all the Abyss which is boundless,

power. . . comes under the same

hypostasis [definition] [as

matter], being limited and

controlled by the power of God.

One of the most remarkable teachings of the Joseph Smith book of Enoch as found in the Pearl of Great Price book of Moses is the doctrine of a spiritual creation of all things that preceded the creation of this earth. Significantly, this doctrine finds its fullest support in the Slavonic Enoch text and is not found in the Ethiopian:

Moses 3:5. . . . For I, the Secrets 17 (Vaillant). And

Lord God, created all things Enoch answered the people

. . . spiritually, before they saying: Hear my children!

were naturally upon the . . . Before anything was [prezhdye

earth. . . dazhe vsya nye byila], and

before the whole creation took place,

the Lord established the Age

3:7. . . . and man became a of Creation [n. 2, Adoil], and

living soul. . . . nevertheless, after that he made all the

all things were before created; Creation, both visible and

but spritually were they invisible; and after all that he

created. created man in his own image.

He gave him eyes to see, ears

6:51. I am God; I made the to hear with, and a mind to

world, and men before they counsel; and then he prepared

were in the flesh. the set times and places. 13. I

swear unto you my children

6:44. . . . the earth . . . the . . . that before man was in the

foundation thereof . . . he laid womb of his mother we were

it, an host of men hath he prepared, each individual, and

brought in upon the face a place for each spirit . . . and

thereof. that each should sojourn [here]

in his proper time, that man

thereby might be tested in the

balance. Yea my children . . .

there has been prepared in

advance a place for every soul.

6:45-46. . . . we . . . cannot And I have put in writing the

deny, . . . for a book of work of every man, and no

remembrance we have written living person can hide himself

among us. or dissimulate his works.

Ms. R, ch. 11. I created man

with a nature both visible and

invisible; and reason

recognized his image as

another and lesser creation

within the greater, and

inversely the greater contained

the lesser. [Referring to spirit

and body as two separate

creations.]

bin Gorion, 1:281. The

world was created in two

stages, the first being a

spiritual creation.

2 Enoch 24:4. Before all

things were visible, I [God]

used to go about in the

invisible things. . . . 5. And I

conceived the thought of

placing foundations and of

creating a visible creation.

Secrets 10 (Vaillant). Then

the angel Braboil said: Sit

down and write all the spirits

of men, all those who have not

been born yet, and the places

which have been prepared for

them. All these things were

prepared since before the

foundation of the world.

Zohar iii: 61 s-b Brody: "And

everything which is found in

this world has been before,

and has passed before him and

has been arranged [organized]

before Him . . . all the

creations of the world which

have existed in each

generation, before they came

into this world, have existed

before Him in their true form

[d'yaqnah], even all the souls

of the children of man have been

before they came down to the

world, have all been formed

before Him in heaven in the

very likeness that they have in

this world.

The council in heaven described in the fourth chapter of Moses is reflected again in the Enoch section, confirmed by other Enoch texts:

Moses 6:51. . . . I am God; Secrets 11 (Vaillant). Enoch

I made the world, and men went to the Lord who taught

before they were in the flesh. him all about the Creation and 52. . . . If thou wilt turn unto his works . . . He saw matter

me, . . . in [his] name . . . unorganized before the

whatsoever ye shall ask, it Creation . . . the Council in

shall be given you. 57. . . . the Heaven . . . He saw Satan

name of his Only Begotten is Arouchaz aspire and get cast

the Son of Man. . . . 62. out to become the foundation

. . . This is the plan of of lower things, beyond which

salvation unto all men, there is great darkness and

through the blood of mine nothing.

Only Begotten, who shall

come in the meridian of time. 1 Enoch 48:2. And at that

hour the Son of Man was

named in the presence of the

Lord of spirits. . . . 3. Yea,

before the sun and the signs

were created, . . . his name

was named before the Lord of

spirits. 4. He shall be a staff to

the righteous whereon to stay

themselves and not fall. . . .

fall down and worship before

him.

BHM 5:174. [The angels:]

God our Lord of the Universe!

It is not good what the First

Ones say before thee. Wilt

thou never create Adam again?

[God answered:] I have made

and I remove, and I am long-

suffering and I deliver! And

forthwith they saw me

[Enoch], and they said before

his face: What is the merit of

this one, that he should come

up to the highest heights?

A little-known part of the creation story is the great Creation Hymn sung in the great assembly. We hear it reverberating in Enoch's declaration, "All things are created and made to bear record of me." (Moses 6:63.) "At dawn," says the Slavonic Enoch, "the elements sing the Creation Hymn, and all the birds sing and he who gives the light arrives and gives light to his creation," for the morning hymn is the Creation Hymn. (Job 38:7; IQS Manual of Discipline, pl. 10.) Enoch joins in with "Holy, holy, holy! is the Lord of spirits: he filleth the earth with spirits." (1 Enoch 39:12.) A vision was opened up to Enoch by God (Secrets 31:1): "I made the heavens open to him, that he could see the heavens sing the song of victory and the gloomless night," or as the Gizeh text (1:2) puts it, "A vision of the Holy One in heaven. He showed me and I heard the holy acclamations of him, and as I heard I also understood everything by seeing it." That the acclamation is repeated in the Joseph Smith Enoch is clearly shown in a fragment from the Dead Sea Scrolls:

Moses 7:31. . . . from all 11 Q Psa Creat. Grace and

thy creations, from all eternity truth surround his presence;

. . . and naught but peace, truth and justice are the

justice, and truth is the foundation of his throne. . . .

habitation of thy throne; and By the knowledge of his mind

mercy shall go before thy face he brought the dawn, and all

and have no end. the angels who saw it happen

sang aloud. For he showed

them what they had not

known.

Apocalypse of Abraham

17:14. O Light, which shone

before the morning light

appeared to thy creatures . . .

other light is necessary.

In the ongoing creation the establishment of new worlds is accompanied or represented by a stretching out of curtains. These would seem to keep each world in its proper relationship to the others. A commonplace of apocalyptic literature is that God himself is necessarily screened from sight by a veil, as by the cloud on the Mount of Transfiguration.

Moses 7:30. . . . millions of Clement of Alexandria, P.G.

earths like this . . . would not 9:677. That place itself is one

be a beginning to the number of fire [eternal burnings].

of thy creations; and thy Therefore it is said that it has

curtains are stretched out still. a veil, lest things be consumed

by the sight of [Him]. Only the

Archangel can enter into his

presence, as a type of which

the High Priests once a year

entered the Holy of Holies.

T.U. 8:368. The topos of

Jeu, where Jeu, "the Father of

the Treasure of Light" rules as

"King of the Treasure of

Light," is separated from other

beings by a veil

[katapetasma].

Gospel of Philip 132:23. The

veil at first concealed how God

controlled the Creation, but

when the veil is rent [we will

know]. 133:14. If some are of

the tribe of the Priesthood,

these will be able to go within

the veil with the High Priests.

1 Jeu 39. At this topos the

Watchers move the veils aside

and you enter into the

presence of the Father, who

gives you His name and His

seal.

The purpose of numerous curtains or veils is to apportion to each world the light it is ready to receive. When Moses asked about the other worlds, the Lord informed him that he was not to know about them at the present and Moses agreed to be satisfied with learning "concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content."

(Moses 1:36.) Numerous ancient documents attest to the curtains' existence:

"And . . . all the powers of

the universe [Pleroma]. . .

sang a great hymn of praise,

. . . and he received the

[creation] hymn, and made a

veil for their worlds,

surrounding them like . . . a

wall." (2. Gnostic Work, 47a.,

in T.U. 8:260.)

"And that mystery knows

. . . why the stars . . . and

the disks of the light-givers

have arisen, and why the

firmament [has come into

existence] with all its veils."

(Pistis Sophia 214.)

"The world is a system of

concentric shells, veils, or

vestments, each a Hekal or

palace or room of the temple.

Man is organized on the same

principles." (Old Hebrew Book

of Enoch was the Hekhaloth,

a term explained in the Zohar,

Bereshith 20a.)

"There is a place from which

all aeons and all worlds take

their origin and prototype: a

place of shadowless light and

indescribable joy;. . . and

there is a veil between the

worlds." (Apocryphon of John

60:116, 118.)

"The 24 invisible [bodies of

heaven] are 10,000 times

brighter than the Sun,. . .

whose light must pass through

many veils [to reach us]" so

that we do not see it as it really

is. (Pistis Sophia 186.)

"[If] the Guardian of the

Inhabited earth [did not spread

out its wings to absorb the fire-

like rays of the sun] the human

race could not survive, nor any

other form of life." (3

Apocalypse of Baruch 6:3,

5-6.)

"Fire and water form a circle

around the 18,000 worlds

[making them a type of

unity] . . . Above the veil are

the heavens." (For "heavens"

read "fire and water," the

enveloping cloud; N. Sed. REJ

124:75, 39.)

As a place of probation (2 Nephi 2:21), this world must be isolated, both as a testing-ground and as quarantine to avoid infecting others:

Moses 7:36. . . . among all Sophia Jesu Christi, 118-

the workmanship of mine 19. He has created the veil

hands there has not been so [curtain, katapetasma] between

great wickedness as among thy what is imperishable and those

brethren. who later came into being, so

that which is set apart [marked

off, numbered] to come into

existence might follow after all

the other ages and the [primal]

chaos, that this flesh might be

tested [in struggle] for error.

But these formed a veil of

spirit.

Sophia Jesu Christi 120.

[Light reaches] all the

inhabitants of the world of

chaos . . . that he might place

the veils which were there in

their proper order

[hormazein].

T.U. 8:402. [Jeu:] The

Firmament is equipped with

veils and gates that are

guarded, far removed from the

world in which men dwell.

Hypostasis of the Archons

142:9. There exists a curtain

between the upper and the

lower aeons and shadow

beneath the curtain from

which shadow came matter at

the creation.

1:35. But only an account of 4 Ezra 4:21. The dwellers

this earth . . . give I unto upon the earth can understand

you. only what is upon the earth,

and they who are in the

heavens that which is above

the heavenly height.

Book of Adam 1:185. There

are curtains and veils, an

impregnable barrier of living

fire, between the creatures of

a celestial order and those of

the second estate.

Apocryphon of John 1:58.

Adam's deep sleep was really

the putting of a veil between

him and his former

knowledge. 59. The veil shut

Adam off from his memory, as

if he were drugged. 60. His

mind being separated by a veil

from what is really going on in

the universe.

When Moses and Enoch ventured to ask what lay beyond their veil they were properly reprimanded: to want to know everything in a single lesson is a human weakness which is not to be pampered—it is all too easy to ask the "why" of everything as small children do, but God knows that we are not ready for it:

Moses 1:30. . . . Tell me, I Secrets 11 (Vaillant). And

pray thee, why these things now, Enoch all that I have

are so, and by what thou explained to thee, and all that

madest them? 31. . . . And thou hast seen on earth, and

the Lord God said unto Moses: all that I organized and made

For mine own purpose have I . . . there was no counsellor

made these things. [Italics nor assistant; it was I alone

added.] Here is wisdom, and . . . who was my own

it remaineth in me. adviser,

power, have I created was carried out, and my eye

them. . .. beheld it all.

number have I created; and I Hear, Enoch, for not to My

also created them for mine angels have I told my secret,

own purpose; and by the Son . . . nor have they understood

I created them, which is mine my creating, which I tell thee

Only Begotten. today. 4. For . . . I alone used

to go about the invisible

things,. . . 5. and I conceived

the thought of placing

foundations and of creating a

visible creation.

Secrets 11 (Vaillant). He

asked for no counsel, his work

executed everything, just as

his mind conceived everything

[Vaillant, n. 14 refers to the

Greek version, pas logos autou

ergon.]

1 Enoch 14:22. Ten

thousand times ten thousand

[stood] before Him, yet He

needed no counsellor.

2 Enoch 25:3. And I [God]

was in the midst of the great light, and as there is born light

from light, there came forth a

great age, and showed all

creation which I had thought

to create. And I saw that it was

good. 4. And I placed for

myself a throne, and took my

seat on it.

Secrets 11 (Vaillant). And

now, Enoch, all that I have

explained to thee, and all that

thou hast seen on earth, and

all that thou hast written in thy

books, it is by my wisdom that

I organized and made all these

things . . . there was no

adviser [counsellor] nor

executive [continuer], it was I

alone . . . who was my only

counsellor, and it was by my

word that it was carried out

[lit., "the thing was my

word"], and my eyes beheld

all. [See F. Lachover & I.

Tishby, The Wisdom of the

Zohar (Jerusalem: Byalik

Foundation,

1971), 1:127ff, on how God

alone conceives his "works

without end."]

The Zion of Enoch

Enoch was not, of course, the only preacher of righteousness in his dispensation, and like the others met puzzlement, fear, resentment, and then a measure of success. People began not only to fear him but to believe him, "for he walked with God." Some of the accounts speak of "all the people" or "everybody" going after Enoch, just as we read that "all the land of Judea" followed John the Baptist into the wilderness to be baptized. (Mark 1:5.) It soon becomes apparent in both cases that this is a manner of speaking; only a select number followed those leaders all the way.

Moses 6:23. And they were BHM 4:129. And [all the

preachers of righteousness, people] gathered together to

. . . and called upon all men, Enoch . . . to hear this thing;

everywhere, to repent; and and Enoch taught the children

faith was taught unto the of men the way of God. . ..

children of men. And the spirit of God was

upon Enoch, and he taught all

6:26. . . . [As] Enoch his people the wisdom of God

journeyed . . . among the and his ways. 130. . . . And

people . . . the Spirit of God all the people were astonished

. . . abode upon him. and awed by his wisdom and

knowledge, and bowed down

6:38. And they came forth to the earth before him.

to hear him,. . . saying . . . 131. . . . And all the people

we [will] go yonder to behold gathered together unto Enoch

the seer. . .. . . . and he taught them again

heard him,. . . fear came on and gave them all his peace

all them that heard him; for he [etc., etc.].

walked with God.

Secrets 16 (Vaillant). When

Enoch spoke to his children

and the princes, then all the

other people in the

neighborhood heard that the

Lord had called Enoch, and

they all assembled to the

number of 2,000 men, and

came to Azouchan [or

Achuzan] where Enoch and

his sons and the elders of the

people were, and saluted him:

Thou blessed of the

Lord . . . bless now thy

people and glorify us before

the Lord, because the Lord has

chosen to establish thee [as]

one who takes away our

sins. [^31]

6:54. Hence came the Ms. R: For the Lord has

saying abroad among the chosen thee before all other

people, that the Son of God men on earth . . . to establish

hath atoned for original guilt. thee [as] one who takes away the sins of men, and as a helper

[savior] to the people of the

house.

6:36. . .. and from BHM 4:129. . . . and the

thenceforth came the saying saying went forth to every

abroad in the land: A seer hath region of the children of Adam:

the Lord raised up unto his Who is the man who desires to

people. know the ways of the Lord and

good works? Let him come to

Enoch! [^32]

The picture of two thousand men coming to recognize and acclaim Enoch at the place where he "and his sons and the leaders of the people were" suggests the modest nucleus of an organization. Their gathering together is the first step in a long process of withdrawing from a wicked world. [^33] Enoch himself had already withdrawn, then returned. He joins Adam, Abraham, Job, the Twelve Patriarchs, and Moses, all of whose apochryphal "Testaments" tell how the hero is first carried to heaven in a vision, then returns and describes the vision to his family and followers, then takes a final leave. The sequence of these heroic deaths later developed into a literary genre in which monkish scribes dwell with morbid fascination and dismay on the terrors of death. Enoch's departure is undeniably the most spectacular, setting the standard for fiery chariots and sky-borne hosts later. At the same time, it is the most sober and "scientific," with the exception of Joseph Smith's version, to which we shall refer shortly.

The Jewish sources tell of Enoch's departure with his people from the world's point of view—those who remained behind: "And at that time the children of men sat down before Enoch and he spoke to them. And they raised their eyes and saw something like a great horse coming down from heaven, and the horse moving in the air [wind] to the ground, And they told Enoch what they had seen. And Enoch said to them, 'That horse has come down to the earth to take me; the time and the day approach when I must go from you and no longer appear among you.' And at that time that horse came down and stood before Enoch, and all the people who were with Enoch saw it. And then Enoch went forth, and there came a voice to him saying, 'Who is the man who rejoices in the knowledge of the ways of the Lord God? Let him come this day to Enoch before he is taken from us.' And all the people gathered together and came to Enoch on that day. . ..And after that he mounted up and rode on his way, and all the people went forth and followed him to the number of 800,000 men. And they went with him for a day's journey. And behold, on the second day he said to them, 'Return back from following me lest ye die.' But none of them turned back but went with him. And on the sixth day the number of people had increased, and they stuck with him. And they said to him, 'We will go with thee to the place where thou goest; as the Lord liveth, only death will separate us from thee!' And it came to pass that they took courage and went with him, and he no longer addressed [remonstrated with] them. And they went after him and never turned back from him. And those kings who did turn back ordered a count to be made of all the remnant of men who went out after Enoch. And it was on the seventh day, and Enoch went up in a tempest [whirlwind] of the heavens with horses of fire and chariots of fire. And on the eighth day all the kings who had been with Enoch sent to take the number of the men who had stayed behind with Enoch [when the kings left him] at the place from which he had mounted up into the sky. And all the kings went to that place and found all the ground covered with snow in that place, and on top of the snow huge blocks [stones] of snow. And they said to each other, 'Come, let us break into the snow here to see whether the people who were left with Enoch died under the lumps of snow.' And they hunted for Enoch and found him not because he had gone up into the sky." (BHM 4:131.)

One thing that makes this story so noteworthy is the association with other ascensions. The parallels with Elijah are obvious down to the party of searchers Elisha sent. (See 2 Kings 2:11-18.) Adam, Moses, and other worthy men were mysteriously caught up or away at various points in their missions. (Moses 6:64, 1:1, 7:27.) The prophet Baruch, in an account first published in 1866, assembled his people, counseled them to remember Zion since "it must be renewed in glory . . . when the Mighty One will renew His creation," and named seven elders to guard the people who remain until "the new world comes which does not turn to corruption those who depart to its blessedness. . .. For in the heights of that world shall they dwell. And they shall be made like unto the angels,. . . [with] excellency . . . surpassing that in the angels." (2 Baruch 31:1-51.)

The lamentation of his people, "Truly we shall be left in darkness, and there shall be no light to the people who are left" (46:2), is a standard element in the departure of other prophets and apostles. (See the Assumption of Moses, chapter 11.) When the prophet Ezra assembles his people, they mourn: "[Why] hast [thou] forsaken us and sittest in this place? For of all the prophets thou alone art left to us . . . as a lamp in a dark place." Ezra consoles them, mourns for the passing of Zion, sees an apocalyptic vision of great destructions to come, then is "caught away and taken up into the place of such as were like him, after having written all these things. And he is called the scribe of the knowledge of the Most High [a title applied to Enoch, too] for ever and ever." (4 Ezra 12:40-14:50.)

A prophet is thus someone experienced in the process of withdrawal. The Joseph Smith version of Enoch, found in the book of Moses, chronicles Enoch's withdrawal in three stages: (1) After Enoch's return, he gathered his followers and led them out of a dangerous world to a place of safety in the mountains. The Lord fought for them, mountains fled, rivers altered their courses, and all nations feared them. (See Moses 7:13-17.) (2) Safe, the people prospered, finally building a city that lasted 365 years. (See Moses 7:17-20.) (3) At last the entire divine government was of necessity moved clear out of the world—either the blessed Zion or the cursed world would have to leave, and so "Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven." (Moses 7:21.) But what happened in the earthly city of Zion, between the lines of those three brief verses?

The interest of the Latter-day Saints in the city of Enoch is not simply a literary or even a scientific one. It is historic and prophetic. The city of Enoch is very much our concern. As we read of Enoch's community, a chorus of persistent questions hums in the background: Just how literally is all this to be taken? How are we to imagine the almost unimaginable events of that far-off time?

We cannot dodge such questions, since we are committed to forming as quickly as possible the closest possible partnership with that society.

The first step in dealing with Enoch's reality is to ask just what, according to the written record, Enoch's city is supposed to have been. Ancient records do not, contrary to a once popular belief, simply spring into existence out of wild Oriental imaginations but, as ever-expanding research makes ever plainer, must always be assumed to have some kind of a historical kernel of reality. So we ask, under what circumstances did Enoch's city come into existence. How did it operate? What really became of it? What does the record say?

All the eschatological references in the scriptures to the Zion of Enoch are found in the Prophets and the Psalms of the Old Testament—the New Testament simply quotes them. [^34] In the book of Moses, the word Zion appears only in chapter 7, where, however, it occurs no fewer than sixteen times, making this chapter the most significant single treatise on the subject. Scholars have long noted that the Prophets emphasize the moral aspect of Zion, while the Psalms, with their royal imagery and archaic ritual background, favor the political. Yet both are speaking of a very real earthly community, nailed down by references in both to "bringing again" Zion—recognizing that Zion actually has been on the earth in the past and can be enjoyed by the Saints again as soon as they are willing to "return to the original relationship with Yahweh," a condition "in which alone Israel's filial relationship to God can be renewed and which God . . . will reestablish in the future." [^35] The familiar picture of the Lord "taking possession again of the seat in Jerusalem" as he collects "his scattered people from all quarters of their heritage, at a time of gathering" is ordinarily couched in the classic terms of the book of Enoch. [^36]

The best news—indeed the only wholly good news that can come to the inhabitants of this wicked earth—is the bringing again of Zion to bless the earth with the only order of society acceptable to God and unreservedly beneficial to man. Zion is any society in which the celestial law is operative, "and though we cannot claim these promises which were made to the ancients, for they are not our property," the Prophet Joseph reminded his people, ". . . yet if we are . . . called with the same calling . . . and embrace the same covenant . . . we can . . . obtain the same promises . . . because we, ourselves, have faith . . . even as they did." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 66.) Zion is a glorious ideal, albeit a rare reality, in the world's history; it is "the Holy Order that God has established for his people in all ages of the world when he has had a kingdom upon the earth. We may call it," said Brigham Young, "the Order of Enoch, the Order of Joseph, the Order of Peter, or Abraham, or Moses, and then go back to Noah . . .", who, of course, takes us to Enoch. (Journal of Discourses 17:113.)

Indeed, it has been said that a happy condition perhaps similar to Zion prevailed in Eden itself when Adam faithfully followed God's instruction: "The Holy One of Zion . . . established the foundations of Adam-Ondi-Ahman." (D&C 78:15.)

"The Garden of Eden is the Holy of Holies, and the dwelling of the Lord . . . and Mount Zion [is] the center [or] navel of the earth." (Jubilees 8:19.)

Though the people of Moses' day were not qualified to receive it, nevertheless "God gave him the pattern of Zion and its measure." (2 Baruch 59:4.) The early Christian church is said by R. H. Charles to have modeled itself after Enoch's community, designating its leader as Enoch. The sections about Zion and the New Jerusalem in the Enoch literature are, according to Charles, "the most complete and most consistent of all the sections" [^37] and were a great favorite of all those separatist groups, both Jewish and Christian, who took to the desert, fancying themselves to be the one and only true representatives on earth of the church and kingdom of Enoch. [^38] As persecuted minorities, they all looked forward with longing to a time when they would come to their own with the glorious return of both the Lord and the city of Enoch. Passages in the Psalms of Solomon establishing a definite association between early Christians in the East and Dead Sea communties like Qumran seem to describe the migration of those eastern communities from Palestine more in terms of Enoch's migration than Moses': "Jerusalem,. . .behold thy children being gathered from the East and West, the North [and South,]. . .and from the distant islands. . ..Lofty mountains he has humbled and made plain before them. (Psalms of Solomon 11:2-4.)

"They that love the assemblies of the Saints fled away from them: and they flew like sparrows from their nests. . ..And the everlasting fountains were restrained, both the abysses and they from the lofty mountains; because none among them did righteousness. . ..At his rebuke the gentiles shall flee from before His face. . .That He may gather together all the children of God. . ..And He shall purify Jerusalem in holiness, as it was of old time. . ..And their King is the Lord's Messiah. (Psalms of Solomon 17:16, 19, 25, 26, 30.)

In the Psalms, the royal coronation has a central place, with the king representing the Lord and the people his Zion. (See Mosiah 2-5 for a well-known year-rite in which the king, though a weak mortal, figures as God's representative.) Enoch's transcendent virtue qualifies him as a vital link in "the order" of the Lord himself. Compare these verses from Doctrine and Covenants 76:56-58 with the apocryphal Slavonic Enoch:

"They are they who are "And when all the people in

priests and kings, who have the region about heard that the

received of his fulness, and of Lord had chosen Enoch, they

his glory; And are priests. . . took counsel together and said:

after the order of Melchizedek, Let us go and acclaim

which was after the order of [tsyelyim]

Enoch, which was after the Enoch. . ..And they hailed

order of the Only Begotten Enoch, saying, Blessed art

Son. Wherefore, as it is thou of the Lord the king of the

written, they are gods, even eternities! Now bless thy

the sons of God." people and glorify them before

the face of the Lord, inasmuch

as the Lord has established

thee as one taking away our

sins." (Secrets [Vaillant, pp.

60f.].)

The Hebrew Life of Enoch has the kings of the earth hailing Enoch as their supreme head, [^39] while the book of Jasher simply repeats the same story, concluding: "And they assembled in all, one hundred and thirty kings and princes, and they made Enoch king over them and they were all under his power and command." [^40] All this is according to a principle that was quite unknown only a few decades ago. As stated by Egyptologist J. Zandee, "Not only in Israel, but in all the ancient Near East, every king is a Messiah. . ..There is no difference in principle between the eschatological Messiah and the ruling King as the bearer of salvation. . ..The King is a god,. . .the King is the son of God. . ..The King is as the image of God on earth. . ..The King brings justice to earth. . ..[The King is] the Good Shepherd,. . ..[The King is the man of Wisdom]. . .. The King is the [High] Priest [endowed with power]. . ..The King is a cosmic deity." [^41] In short, the king is an Enoch, to whom God has promised his own throne.

Moses 7:59. . ..Forasmuch BHM 5:174. The Metatron

as thou art God, and I know [Enoch] said:. . ..God made

thee,. . .thou hast made me, for me a throne modeled after

and given unto me a right to the Throne of Glory, I being

thy throne, and not of myself, clothed upon with glory [a

but through thine own grace. wrapping of radiance] and

Light [Zohar]. . .and beauty

and mercy like that of the

throne of thy glory. . ..And

he caused me to sit upon it,

and a herald proclaimed in all

the firmament of firmaments,

saying, Enoch is proclaimed as

a divine King! [175. He puts a

crown on his head.]

7:68. And all the days of

Zion, in the days of Enoch,

were three hundred and sixty-

five years.

This is the pattern of the year-king of which Enoch is a prime representative. [^42]

Above all, Zion is the community of the Saints, the Elect, "the pure in heart" (D&C 97:26), who are "of one heart and one mind" so that there are "no poor among them." (Moses 7:18.) This is the Zion envisioned by the prophets; the book of Moses, the Doctrine and Covenants, and apocryphal works all expressly call it the Zion of Enoch:

Moses 7:62. . ..to gather Gizeh 1:3. [This is] about the

out mine elect. . .unto. . . Elect. . .receive my parable

an Holy City,. . .looking about them; and my Great

forth for the time of my Holy One will come out of his

coming; for there shall be my dwelling-place, 4. and the

tabernacle, and it shall be God of the Age [aeon] shall called Zion, a New Jerusalem. walk upon the earth, even

come forth out of all the will appear in the power of his

creations which I have made. might from the heaven of heavens.

great tribulations among the . . .great trembling and fear

wicked; and he also saw the shall seize them,. . .6. and

sea, that it was troubled, and the mountains shall be shaken

men's hearts failing them. down. . .and dissolve. . .

rent. . .

of the righteous, the hour of shall peace be made, and upon

their redemption; and received the Elect oneness of heart

a fullness of joy. [synteresis] and peace. . .and

He will bless them all, and a

light will appear and bring

peace unto them.

1 Enoch 45:4. Then will I

cause Mine Elect One to dwell

among them. . .5. and I will

transform the earth and make

it a blessing; and I will cause

Mine elect ones to dwell on it

. . .to dwell before me.

51:15. And the earth shall

rejoice, and the righteous shall

dwell upon it, and the elect

shall walk thereon.

Secrets 17 (Vaillant). All the

righteous who shall escape the

great judgment will be united

in the Great Age,. . .and they

shall be eternal, and they shall

no longer know weariness or

suffering or affliction, nor be

in any danger of violence, nor

fears of the night nor any

darkness, but they shall have a great light forever. . .a

great paradise, a place of safety

for them to dwell in forever

. . .and their faces shall shine

like the Sun!

The Mandean writings equate Zion to heavenly "firmaments, habitations, worlds, and Jordans," giving the most vivid and appealing descriptions of such holy places, which, they say, are to be enjoyed only by the "spirits of good people. . .the wise and the prudent of the families of Abel, Seth, and Enoch." There the Saints live without discord or dissension; they are angelic beings, wise and gentle, without malice or deceit, constantly visiting each other. There is perfect agreement among the worlds, each having its particular glory and rejoicing in the glory of the others as all share their treasures of knowledge with each other. They are vast distances removed from each other, but through their common Lord and God they all share a common glorious awareness of each other. All are incorruptible and hence without death; they do not grow old or wear out; their nature is unfading. Their number is fixed because it is infinite—beyond counting. Each of these worlds is a Zion, having no law courts, no hunger or thirst no cold or heat, no hatred or fear, no war, no slavery, no harmful creatures or plants. Magnificent buildings stand beside tranquil seas; flowing springs give life-giving water. Everything vibrates with joy. The wants of the people are few. They move through the air by an effortless power of flight; they are at home in the firmaments and the worlds and among all the dominions and powers. Their beauty is within them and shines out, as if they were of pure crystal. Force also flows through them from the King as they open themselves to it by persevering in prayer and song. They study and meditate constantly; they exhale the fragrance of divine happiness. Each is more remarkable than the other, each more illustrious. [^43]

It was natural for the church in every age to identify itself with the Order of Enoch if only because that order is the only one acceptable to God at any time: "The Lord spake unto Enoch [Joseph Smith, Jun.] saying: Hearken. . .[ye] who are ordained unto the high priesthood. . .who have assembled yourselves together. . ..the time has come. . .; it must needs be that there be an organization of my people. . .in the land of Zion—[or in other words, the city of Enoch (Joseph)], for a permanent and everlasting establishment and order unto my church,. . .to the salvation of man. . ..If ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things." (D&C 78:1, 3, 6.)

For "Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself." (D&C 105:5.) "If my people observe not this law,. . .it shall not be a land of Zion unto you." (D&C 119:6.)

A telling mark of authenticity for the Joseph Smith version is that Enoch's Zion is defined as a society where "there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:18.) The Greek Enoch, which for the first time showed how the ancient sectaries related themselves to the city of Enoch, "shows a great partiality for the lowly and humble. Here we are confronted with the ethics of the poor man;. . .these needy and humble people have to seek solace in the fact that unto them the knowledge of these mysteries will be revealed." [^44]

The presence of such a society is a standing rebuke to the rest of the world. As Brigham Young puts it, "We are following the customs of Enoch and the holy fathers, and for this we are looked upon as not being fit for society. We are not adapted to the Society of the wicked, and do not wish to mingle with them." (JD 10:306.) Enoch was hopeful that his Zion, "a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God" (D&C 45:66), was here to stay; the Lord indicated to him that this was not to be: "Enoch. . .said unto the Lord: Surely Zion shall dwell in safety forever. But the Lord said unto Enoch: Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed." The separation would have to continue until finally "Zion, in the process of time, was taken up into heaven." (Moses 7:20-21; italics added.) We see the division of the people at every stage of the history: when "their enemies came to battle against them," Enoch "led the people of God," while "all nations feared greatly" (Moses 7:13); the most dangerous of them "stood afar off" and even fled to the new land that had risen from the sea. (Moses 7:14-15.) The result was two worlds, Zion, inhabited by people "of one heart and one mind" (Moses 7:18), the other wracked by continual "wars and bloodshed." (Moses 7:16.)

The completeness of the division is strikingly expressed by one of the most ancient of literary devices, rhetorical antithesis:

Moses 7:20. . ..Zion have but the residue of the people

I blessed, have I cursed.

5:15. . ..believed in the . . .believed not and

Son, and repented of their repented not.

sins

7:16. . ..but the Lord came And from that time forth

and dwelt with his people, and there were wars and

they dwelt in righteousness bloodshed among them.

7:18. . ..they were of one 7:33. . ..they are without

heart and one mind. affection, and they hate their

own blood.

7:18. And the Lord called 7:36. . ..among all the

his people Zion, because they workmanship of mine hands

. . .dwelt in righteousness. there has not been so great

wickedness as among thy

brethren.

When the sectaries of the Dead Sea labeled their society the Yachad (lit. unity, oneness) it was a reminder that unity is the first law of Enoch's society by which the Saints are expected to live in every dispensation.

Moses 7:18. And the Lord Zohar, Noah 76b. R. Jose.

called his people ZION, From [the Tower story] we

because they were of one heart learn that as long as the people

and one mind,. . .and there of the world lived in harmony,

was no poor among them. being of one mind and one

will,

although they rebelled against

the Holy One, the supernal

judgment could not touch

them; but as soon as they were

divided, "the Lord scattered

them abroad."

2 Baruch 30:2. Then all who

have fallen asleep in hope of

Him shall rise again. . ..And

they shall come forth. . .in

one assemblage of one thought.

(Italics added.)

Even after the removal of Enoch's city, the work of redemption continued among "the residue of the people. . ..And after that Zion was taken up into heaven, Enoch beheld, and lo, all the nations of the earth were before him; And there came generation upon generation; and Enoch was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father,. . .and behold, the power of Satan was upon all the face of the earth." (Moses 7:22-24.) According to this perspective, Noah's sailing was only the last step in a process of evacuation that had lasted for generations. Even after the people had chosen sides—Enoch and the Lord, or Satan—the missionary work still went on.

Moses 7:27. And Enoch Apocalypse of Adam

beheld angels descending out (Copt.) 69-70. Downpourings

of heaven, bearing testimony of rain will destroy all flesh,

. . .and the Holy Ghost fell on "but mighty angels will come

many, and they were caught down from heaven and lead

up by the powers of heaven away those men to a place

into Zion. where the Spirit of life is to be

found."

7:28. And. . .the God of Gizeh 8. (And there was a

heaven looked upon the great wickedness in the earth,

residue of the people, and he Satan [Azael and Semiazas]

wept. teaching men all manner of

ungodliness. 9. Then the great

angels. . .went and reported

to God, saying, What shall we

do?) 10:1. So the Highest sent

Istrael [Ms. G Uriel] to the Son

of Lamech [Noah]. 2. Tell him

in My name to hide himself

[Ms G 3. Teach the righteous

what to do. . .to preserve his

soul and escape.] because all

the earth is going to be

destroyed. . .3. And teach

him how he may escape. . ..

Gabriel, 11. Michael, to

minister in this emergency.)

the angels to] destroy all the

bastard spirits. . .17. . ..all

the righteous shall flee and go

on living [safely] for a

thousand generations.

1 Enoch 105:1. In those

days the Lord bade them

[angels]. . .testify to the

children of earth. . .show [it]

unto them; for ye are their

guides.

Beatty, 100:4. And angels

shall come down, descending

into secret places in that day.

. . .5. And over all the

righteous and holy he will set

a guard of the holy angels and

they shall be preserved as the

apple of his eye until

tribulations and wickedness

shall pass by. . ..

2 Enoch 23:80. [God to

Enoch:] I will send my

archangel Michael, and he will

take the boy [Methuselah] to a

place of safety.

7:60. . ..in the last days, Apocalypse of Abraham

in the days of wickedness and 29:15f. (Great tribulations will

vengeance,. . .62. . ..truth come). . .17. [But] of thy

will I cause to sweep the earth people righteous men will be

as with a flood, to gather out spared. . .hastening in the

mine elect. . .unto a place glory of my name to a place

which I shall prepare, an Holy which I have prepared for

City, that my people may. . . them ahead of time

be looking. . .for the time of [Jerusalem].

my coming;. . .and it shall be

called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

Until the separation is completed the powers of destruction are held in check. As the book of Moses describes: "Great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve;. . .[I will] gather out mine elect. . .unto a place which I shall prepare." (Moses 7:61-62.)

Apocryphal documents present that same idea: "And the earth shall be rent, and everything which is upon the earth shall be destroyed. . ..But there shall be great peace for the righteous, and upon the elect shall be security [synteresis] and peace,. . .and I will bless them all." (Gizeh 1:7-8.)

"In the days of Enoch. . .God gave them [the wicked] respite all the time that the righteous men Jared, Methuselah, and Enoch were alive; but when they departed from the world, God let punishment descend." (Zohar, Bereshith 56b; cf. Genesis 7:23.)

"Why art thou [Enoch] discomforted with such a vision? Until this day has lasted the day of His mercy; and He hath been merciful and long-suffering towards those who dwell on the earth." (1 Enoch 60:4-6.)

When the angels beg God to get on with the work and wipe out the unworthy human race, he replies, "I have made and I remove, and I am long-suffering and I rescue!" (BHM 5:172.)

"And after that [Enoch] showed me the angels of punishment who are prepared to come and let loose all the powers of the waters . . . to bring judgment and destruction on all who dwell on the earth. And the Lord of Spirits gave commandments to the angels who were going forth, that they should not cause the waters to rise, but should hold them in check." (1 Enoch 66:1.)

The angels, then, for many years were a kind of shuttle service, preaching repentance and offering escape to all who were willing to listen. Their diligence clears God of the charge of being capricious and cruel in sending the Flood, a favorite argument of skeptics and atheists in every age. According to Jellinek, the primary object of the old Hebrew book of Enoch was to expose that argument's emptiness: "The work of the angels testified that God was just. . . . Enoch testified that he became an angel in heaven, instructed by the angels Shemashasi and Asael, in order to bear personal witness to man that God in sending the Flood was not cruel." [^45] This point is clearly brought home in the Joseph Smith version, in which Enoch and the Lord discuss the whole problem frankly and thoroughly, to Enoch's complete satisfaction. (See Moses 7:28-67.)

According to apocryphal writings, Abraham, Ezra, and Baruch, among others, questioned the wisdom and charity of sending total destruction on the human race. "Dost thou think," says the Lord to Baruch, "that in these things the Most High rejoices, or that His name is glorified? . . . Go therefore . . . and instruct the people so far as thou art able, that they may learn so as not to die at the last time, but may learn in order that they may live at the last times." [^46] To Ezra God gives a gentle reprimand, "Thou comest far short of being able to love my creation more than I!" [^47] And, as we have seen, Enoch in the Joseph Smith account gives the strongest testimony of all—that he actually saw God weep! (Moses 7:28.)

All who were willing to repent were duly removed to a place of safety; it was only those who doggedly refused to listen over a period of years, the wicked "residue of the people," who had to be left behind to perish. Those who took refuge in the ark were by no means all who were saved; many had gone before. This is another interesting phase of the Noah-Enoch relationship.

Moses 7:25. . . . [Enoch] Beatty 102:2. And while

saw angels descending out of all the earth was shaking . . .

heaven. . . . 26. And he and in confusion, 3. the angels

beheld Satan; and he had a were busy carrying out what

great chain in his hand, and it had been assigned

veiled the whole face of the [syntachthen] to them.

earth with darkness. . . . 27.

And Enoch beheld angels Apocryphon of John, pp.

descending out of heaven, 73:7. Noah was not alone [in

. . . and the Holy Ghost fell on being saved] but men of the

many, and they were caught faithful [the "unshaken ones"]

into Zion. came to a special place, 11.

and there they were enveloped

in a cloud of light. 13. And

Noah was aware of his divine

calling along with those with

him when the light

enlightened them. For

darkness had been poured out

over every place upon the

entire earth. He took counsel

with his angels, 74:1. and the

angels were sent down to the

children of men.

Apocalypse of Adam, pp.

69-70. After that shall come

great angels in high clouds,

and take away those people to

the place where the spirit of life is . . . and they will come from

heaven to earth and all the

multitude of flesh will perish

in the water.

Though communities aspiring to the glory of Zion have been on earth a number of times, it is the final return of Zion in the last days toward which all the prophets have looked. And while the church in every dispensation had certain aspects that resembled the Zion of Enoch, the closest parallel will be the Zion of the End-time.

Moses 7:62. I shall prepare Jubilees 1:27. And He [God]

. . . an Holy City, that my said to the angel of the

people may . . . be looking presence [Sar ha-Panim or

forth for the time of my Enoch]: Write for Moses from

coming; for there shall be my the beginning of creation till

tabernacle, and it shall be my sanctuary has been built

called Zion, a New Jerusalem. among them for all eternity.

abode, and it shall be Zion, the eyes of all, and all shall

which shall come forth out of know that I am the God of

all the creations which I have Israel . . . and King on Mount

made; and for the space of a Zion for all eternity. And Zion

thousand years the earth shall and Jerusalem shall be holy

rest. . . . until the sanctuary of the

Lord shall be made in

Jerusalem on Mount Zion, and

all the luminaries be renewed

for healing and for blessing for

all the elect of Israel, and that

thus it may be from that day

unto all the days of the earth.

That the city "shall be called Zion, a new Jerusalem" seems an obvious anachronism in a book written supposedly before the Flood; yet the idea is strikingly confirmed in the Testament of Levi, a very early Jewish writing totally ignored until the present century, [^48] in which is a prophecy expressly attributed to Enoch: "For the house [oikos] which the Lord shall choose for himself shall be called Jerusalem, as is contained in the book of Enoch the Righteous." (Testament of Levi 10:5.)

R. H. Charles quotes parallel passages on this theme from the book of Enoch and the book of Jubilees to show that the latter is in the authentic Enoch tradition, since, as he states, "the resemblance in word and thought . . . can hardly be accidental." [^49] He underlines key words to establish the relationship:

1 Enoch 5:9. They shall Jubilees 23:27, 29. And the

complete the number of days shall begin to grow many

the days of their life and increase amongst these

And their lives shall be children of men. . . . 29. And

increased in peace, And all their days they shall

the years of their joy complete and live in peace and

shall bemultiplied. joy.

A recent article in Scientific American indicates that some of the conventional ideas of early Judaism and Christianity must be drastically altered in view of new documentary discoveries; M. E. Stone notes that "chief among these [discoveries] were the Book of Enoch and the Book of Jubilees, both translated from the Ethiopic in the 19th century." Then he places the following passages from Enoch and Jude in parallel to show that "it is evident that the Book of Enoch served as a source for the Letter of Jude . . . and for other early Christian writings." [^50]

Gizeh 1:9: And behold! He Jude 1:14-15: It was of these

cometh with the myriads of also that Enoch in the seventh

His holy ones, to exercise generation from Adam

judgment upon all, and to prophesied, saying, "Behold,

destroy all the ungodly; And the Lord came with his holy

to convict all flesh of all the myriads, to execute judgment

works of their ungodliness on all, and to convince all the

which they have ungodly ungodly of all their deeds of

committed, and of all the hard ungodliness which they have

things ungodly sinners have committed in such an ungodly

spoken against them. way, and of all the harsh

things which ungodly sinners

have spoken against him.

Now are these parallels, given as proof positive of the authentic affinity of ancient writings, any more compelling than these between the same ancient sources and the book of Moses given to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith?

Moses 7:62. And 1 Enoch 39:5. Here mine

righteousness will I send down eyes saw their dwellings with

out of heaven; . . . and His righteous angels, And

righteousness and truth will I their resting-places with the

cause to sweep the earth as holy. . . . And righteousness

with a flood, to gather out flowed before them as water

mine elect from the four and mercy like dew upon the

quarters of the earth, unto a earth: Thus it is amongst them

place which . . . shall be called for ever and ever. And in that

Zion, a New Jerusalem. . . . place mine eyes saw the Elect

abode, and it shall be Zion, of faith, And I saw his

which shall come forth out of dwelling-place . . .

all the creations which I have

made; and for the space of a

thousand years the earth shall

rest.

Apocalypse of Abraham

7:66. But before that day he 29:14. But before the Age of

saw great tribulations among Righteousness and abundance

the wicked; . . . 67. . . . begins, the lawless Gentiles

and he saw the day of the must suffer my judgments,

righteous, the hour of their through the people of thy

redemption, and received a tribe, whom I have set apart for

fulness of joy. . . . myself.

bring over all the creatures on

earth ten plagues. . . . 17. But

of thy tribe will righteous men

be preserved . . . who will

hasten in the name of my glory

to a place prepared ahead of

time [Jerusalem] . . . 18.

[where] they shall live in

security . . . in the age of the

righteous.

Of the many striking figures of speech which definitely link the peculiar language of the Joseph Smith Enoch with that of the ancient sources, none is more interesting than that dealing with the preservation of the Ark, a passage which obviously puzzles the Ethiopian scribes, but which stands out clearly in the Joseph Smith text:

Moses 7:43. Wherefore 1 Enoch 67:2. And now the

Enoch saw that Noah built an angels are making a wooden

ark; and that the Lord smiled [building? R. H. Charles notes:

upon it, and held it in his own "This account differs from

hand. 89:1, where it is said that Noah

himself makes the ark"], and

when they have completed

that task I will place My hand

upon it and preserve it.

The Latter-day Saints have been taught to view their own dispensation as the ushering in of the final restoration of Zion. The Church itself, never again to be taken from the earth, must ever more closely approximate the Zion of Enoch as those "which have been scattered shall return to . . . build up the waste places of Zion . . . to be established, no more to be thrown down." (D&C 103:11, 13.) It is the same work under the same auspices: "I am the same which have taken the Zion of Enoch into mine own bosom; . . . even as many as have believed in my name." (D&C 38:4.) The Latter-day Saints "are they who have come . . . to the general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn." (D&C 76:67; italics added.) "The Lord spake unto [Enoch] Joseph Smith, Jr., saying: . . . it must needs be that there be an organization of my people, . . . in the land of Zion—Or in other words, the city of Enoch [Joseph], for a permanent and everlasting establishment and order unto my church." (D&C 78:1-4.)

Zion is the common designation of the Church established in the world: "the land of Zion" being "in other words, the city of Enoch." (D&C 78:3-4.) Even though the work is still in its preliminary stages, one is justified in saying, "this is the new chapel," when only the foundations are in. Thus the Church can be called Zion even though its work has barely begun: "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory . . . of Zion" (D&C 136:31), and if they are faithful "they shall have power after many days to accomplish all things pertaining to Zion" (D&C 105:37). The Saints are told not to despair: "Concern not yourselves about Zion, for I will deal mercifully with her" (D&C 111:6), and "Zion shall be redeemed in mine own due time" (D&C 136:18), "although she is chastened for a little season" (D&C 100:13). Brigham Young constantly reminded the Saints of the preparatory nature of the work in which they were engaged:

"We have commenced to organize, I will say partially, in the Holy Order that God has established for his people in all ages of the world when he has had a kingdom upon the earth. We may call it the Order of Enoch, the Order of Joseph, the Order of Peter, or Abraham, or Moses, and then go back to Noah, and then step to our own position here, and say that we will organize as far as we have the privilege, . . . under the laws of the land. Many branches of industry have been organized here to help to sustain each other, to labor for the good of all, and to establish cooperation in the midst of the Church in this place." (JD 17:113-14.)

In the years following the entrance into the Salt Lake Valley he placed the greatest emphasis on the theme of preparation and the uses of adversity:

"I never attributed the driving of the Saints from Jackson county to anything but that it was necessary to chasten them and prepare them to build up Zion." (JD 13:148.)

"We are not yet prepared to go and establish the Centre Stake of Zion. The Lord tried this in the first place. . . . He gave revelation after revelation; but the people could not abide them." (JD 11:324.)

"Are we fit for Zion? . . . Could we stay in Independence? No, we could not. . . . Can the Saints see? No, or a few of them can." (JD 15:3.)

"Then do not be too anxious for the Lord to hasten his work. Let our anxiety be centered upon this one thing, the sanctification of our own hearts, the purifying of our own affections, the preparing of ourselves for the approach of events that are hastening upon us. This should be our concern, this should be our study, this should be our daily prayer, and not be in a hurry to see the overthrow of the wicked." (JD 9:3.)

"Suppose Joseph had not been obliged to flee from Pennsylvania back to York State, would he have known as much as he afterwards knew? Suppose he could have stayed in old Ontario County in peace, without being persecuted, could he have learned as much as he did by being persecuted? . . .

"Joseph could not have been perfected, though he had lived a thousand years, if he had received no persecution. . . . You may calculate when this people are called to go through scenes of affliction and suffering, are driven from their homes, and cast down, and scattered, and smitten, and peeled, the Almighty is rolling on His work with greater rapidity." (JD 2:7-8.)

It was even so with ancient Israel: "They had to travel to and fro to every point of the compass, and were wasted away, because God was determined to save their spirits." (JD 4:53.)

"While we were in Winter Quarters, the Lord gave to me a revelation. . . . I talked it to my brethren; . . . but with the exception of one or two of the Twelve, it would not touch a man. . . . I would have given [millions] if the people had been prepared to then receive the kingdom of God according to the pattern given to Enoch. But I could not touch them." (JD 18:244.)

The excuse for the Saints' reluctance was clearly their total preoccupation with their own separation from the world, which was violent and forcible but a necessary prelude to Zion—"gather ye together, O ye people of my church, upon the land of Zion. . . . Let them . . . who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion. And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem." (D&C 133:4, 12-13.) They were looking for a place of safety, "the land of Zion, . . . for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth." (D&C 115:6.) Building the city had to come later.

The spectacular departure of Enoch's Zion will be matched by its no less astonishing return. There are things here beyond the scope of men's everyday experience: "The redemption of Zion must needs come by power." (D&C 103:15.) Once established in her place, Zion serves as a sort of bridgehead, preparing the way for the return of Enoch's Zion, when the two shall fuse.

Moses 7:63. Then shalt 1 Enoch 39:1. And it shall

thou and all thy city meet them come to pass in those days that

there, and we will receive them the elect and holy children will

into our bosom, and they shall descend from the high

see us; and we will fall upon heavens, and their seed will

their necks, and they shall fall become one with the children

upon our necks, and we will of men.

kiss each other.

4 Ezra 13:36. When Zion

appears it is completely parata

et aedificata—a city wholly

finished and perfect—coming

like a mountain cut out

without hands, whose builder

and ruler is God.

Berl. Manich. Copt. Ms. p.

D&C 45:11. Wherefore. . . 12. Kap. 1:1. When my

let me show unto you even my Apostle [Enoch] shall raise

wisdom of him whom ye say himself up he shall be lifted up

is the God of Enoch, and his along with his church, and

brethren, 12. Who were they shall be lifted up

separated from the [elevated] from the earth. 5. It

earth, . . . a city reserved until shall take the form of my

a day of righteousness shall assembly [ekklesia] and be free

come. in the height.

The "Enoch" of the Dead Sea Scrolls

Just in time for the latest episode in this examination into the book of Enoch comes the long-awaited translation of the Dead Sea Scroll book of Enoch. (J. T. Milik and M. Black, eds., The Books of Enoch, Aramaic Fragments of Qumran Cave 4, Oxford: Clarenden Press, 1976.) Father J. T. Milik, one of the first scholars on the scene when the scrolls were discovered, was assigned thirty-two fragments of the books of Enoch from Qumran Cave IV; and all scholars working on Enoch have eagerly waited during the last quarter century to see what new information would be added, what theories might be toppled, what hypotheses confirmed by these documents in Aramaic, the earliest of all known Enoch texts.

These documents, dating from the third to the first centuries B.C., corroborate the other Enoch literature that we have. There was a real book of Enoch, which was once written in five parts. This seriously challenges those critics who have claimed for years that ancient sectaries threw everything into Enoch that they wanted to pass off as scripture.

It's an added delight for Latter-day Saints to read that Professor Milik finds the Greek texts to be much superior to the Ethiopian texts—the Joseph Smith account in the Pearl of Great Price is closer to the Greek than to the Ethiopian. Latter-day Saints will also note with interest Professor Milik's deduction that one text, the Gizeh text, was undoubtedly prepared to be buried with the deceased—a parallel with the usage intended for the Abraham text.

Furthermore, Professor Milik works with the fascinating hypothesis that Enoch had prepared an account of the creation and the law of God that naturally predates Moses' account in Genesis and sees Genesis 6:1-4, long a puzzling passage to the biblical scholar, as a quotation from that earlier Enoch source. This is exactly what happens in the Joseph Smith source: Moses quotes Enoch on events shortly after the creation.

As we have already seen, the Enoch story runs into the oldest literature of the human race; and Professor Milik finds links with the mythological heroes of Sumer and Babylonia, with the astronomy of Egypt and Phoenicia, and the ideas about the earth of Mesopotamia. Even though Professor Milik does not seem to recognize the full importance of the "Enoch figure," he provides some evidence that undercuts yet another scholarly supposition: that Enoch was invented out of the hopes and yearnings of Messianic Jews in the second century B.C.; in fact, however, these very people were shunning the Enoch material at that very time. Milik reviews some important texts that show the writers of the Aramaic text gradually losing their interest in Enoch material during the first century, then the Essenes turning away from it, the writers at Masada actually expunging the name of Enoch and putting Noah in its stead, while the Christians, on the other hand, treasured it highly and embellished it with so many astrological flourishes that they unintentionally undermined Enoch's credibility for future generations.

In all of these ways, the Qumran IV Enoch fragments reinforce rather than reinterpret what we as Latter-day Saints already knew about Enoch. But these newly translated pieces add one genuinely new bit of information to our store—something that is probably the most objective test yet of Joseph Smith's prophetic powers.

What always impressed me as the oddest detail of the Joseph Smith account of Enoch was the appearance out of the blue of the name of the only nonbiblical individual named in the whole book—Mahijah. (Moses 6:40.) Mahijah is the one who asks Enoch searching questions, and in answer is told about the place Mahujah, where Enoch began this particular phase of his mission. (Moses 7:2.) It was therefore with a distinct shock of recognition that, after having looked through all but the last of the Aramaic Enoch fragments without finding anything particularly new, and coming to those very last little fragments, I found the name Mahujah leaping out of the pages again and again. (Pp. 300, 302, 305, 311, 314.) Could this be our Mahujah or Mahijah? As a matter of fact it could be either, not only because the semi-vowels w and y are written very much alike in the Aramaic script and are sometimes confused by scribes, but also because the name as written in 4QEn, MHWY, is the same as the MHWY-EL who appears in Genesis 4:18 as the grandfather of Enoch, transliterated in the King James Bible as Mehuja-el, which name also appears in the Greek Septuagint as Mai-el and in the Latin Vulgate as Mavia-el, showing that Mahujah and Mahijah were the same name, since Mai (the Greek had no internal "h") could come only from Mahi-.

So what? A coincidence—a giant or a Watcher called Mahujah or Mahijah. But far more than a coincidence when taken in its context. The only thing the Mahijah in the Book of Moses is remarkable for is his putting of bold direct questions to Enoch, thus giving the patriarch an opening for calling upon the people to repent, referring them to the book of remembrance, and telling them of the plan of salvation. And this is exactly the role, and the only role, that the Aramaic Mahujah plays in the story. The name is found in none of the other Enoch texts and neither is the story: it is peculiar to the version Joseph Smith gave us and the oldest known Enoch manuscripts. The following translation is from Milik and Black, lest the writer be charged with forcing the text.

Moses 6:39. . . . when they 4QEnGiantsb 1.20.

heard him . . . fear came on all [Thereupon] all the giants [and

them that heard him. the nephilim] took fright

6:40. And there came a man and they summoned MHWY

unto him, whose name was and he came to them: And the

Mahijah, and said to him: Tell giants asked him and sent him

us plainly who thou art and to Enoch [ . . . ] saying to him:

from whence thou comest? Go then [ . . . ] and under pain

of death you must [ . . . ] and listen to his voice; and tell him

that he is to explain to you and

to interpret the dreams.

6Q8 1. [ . . . ] Ohya and he

said to MHWY: "[ . . . ] and

(I?) do not tremble. Who

showed you all (that), tell

[us(?)] [ . . . ]" And MHWY

said: "[ . . . ] Baraq'el, my

father, was with me."

6:41. And he said to them: 4QEnGiantsc. [Ohyah,

I came out from. . . the land following MHWY's report]:

of my fathers, a land of . . . my accusers [ . . . ] they

righteousness unto this day dwell in [heaven]s, for they

live in holy abodes,. . . they

are more powerful than I.

6:42. And. . . as I 4QEnGiantsb. [MHWY. . .

journeyed. . . by the sea east, rose up into the air] like the

I beheld a vision: and lo, the whirlwinds, and he

heavens I saw. . . . flew. . . and crossed Solitude,

7:2-3. . . . As I was the great desert [. . .] And he

journeying. . . I . . . went up caught sight of Enoch, and he

on the mount;. . . I beheld the called to him and said to him:

heavens open. "An oracle [. . .]"

6:45. Enoch:. . . we . . . 4QEnGiantsa Frag. ii 7.

cannot deny. . . . 46. For a [. . .] to you, MH[wy][. . .]

book of remembrance we have the two tablets [. . .] and the

written among us, according second has not been read up

to the pattern given by the till now. 8. The boo[k

of [. . .]

finger of God. . . in our own The copy of the second tablet

language. of the Epistle [. . .] written]

by Enoch, the distinguished

scribe's own hand [. . .] and

the Holy One, to Shemihazah

and all [his] com[panions].

6:47. And as Enoch spake 4QEnGiantsa Frg. 4. [. . .]

forth the words of God, the Ohyah said to Ha[hyah, his

people trembled, and could brother. . .]. . . they

not stand in his presence. prostrated themselves and began to weep before

[Enoch(?). . .].

6:48. And he said to them: 4EnGiantsa Frg. 8. The

. . . We are made partakers of longest fragment: The

misery and woe. depravity and misery of the

6:49. . . . carnal, sensual, people described. Their

and devilish, and are shut out petition is rejected: God has

from the presence of God. cast them out. All is "for the

worst."

6:52. . . . If thou wilt turn (Closing line) And now,

unto me. . . and repent. . . loosen your bonds (of sin)

asking all things in his name, which tie [you] up [. . .] and

. . . it shall be given you. begin to pray.

7:13. And. . . he [Enoch] 4QEnGiantsc. (Ohyah the

led the people of God, and enemy of Enoch): ". . . by the

their enemies came to battle strength of my power, [I had

against them; and he spake the attacked] all flesh and I have

word of the Lord, and the made war with them. . . they

earth trembled,. . . live in holy abodes, and. . .

they are more powerful than

I."

and the roar of the lions was [Thereupon. . .] the

heard out of the wilderness; roaring of the wild beasts came

and the multitude of the wild

and all nations feared greatly. animals began to cry out

[. . .]. And Ohyah spoke

. . . My dream has

overwhelmed(?) [me] [. . .

and the s]leep of my eyes [has

fled].

7:37. . . . these shall suffer. 4QEnGiantsa Frg. 7i. Then

. . . 38. . . . these. . . shall Ohyah [said] to Hahya[h, his

perish in the floods; and brother. . .]. Then he (sc.

behold, I will shut them up; a God?) punished. . . the sons

prison have I prepared for of the Watchers, the giants,

them. and all [their] beloved ones will

not be spared [. . .] he has imprisoned us and you he has

subdued (lit. tegaf, seized,

confined).

Bearing in mind that the Aramaic fragments are few and very small and arranged in whatever order the editors think best, it is still possible to see that the themes of the Joseph Smith account emerge clearly amidst all the very obvious changes and vicissitudes that have occurred to the ancient texts.

KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS

The pseudepigraphic works found in this paper—Apocalypse of Abraham, Apocalypse of Adam, Apocalypse of Baruch, Apocalypse of Elijah, 2 Baruch, 1 Enoch, 2 Enoch (Secrets of Enoch), 3 Enoch, Jubilees, 4 Ezra, Psalms of Solomon, Testament of Adam, and Testament of Moses—may all be conveniently found in James Charlesworth, The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols. (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1983-85). The citations frequently represent the author's own translations. Similarly, materials from the Nag Hammadi literature—Apocryphon of James, Apocryphon of John, Gospel of Philip, Hypostasis of the Archons—may be found in James M. Robinson, The Nag Hammadi Library in English (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1977). Other works will be cited according to the edition from which they were taken. The following works are cited in the body of the text:

Apocalypse of Abraham

In Paul Riessler, Altjudisches Schrifttum ausserhalb der Bibel, 2nd ed. (Heidelberg: F. H. Kerle, 1966).

Apocalypse of Adam

In Douglas M. Parrott, ed., Nag Hammadi Studies, vol. 11 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1979).

Apocalypse of Elijah

In Herbert P. Houghton, "The Coptic Apocalypse," Aegyptus 39 (1959): 195ff.

Apocryphon of John

In Die Gnostichen Schriften des Koptischen Papyrus 8502, ed. Walter C. Till, vol. 60 of Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Altchristlichen Literatur (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1955). Also in James Robinson, Nag Hammadi Library in English (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1977).

Beatty

Chester Beatty Collection in Campbell Bonner, The Last Chapters of Enoch in Greek (London: Christophers, 1937). See also Sir Frederic G. Kenyon, The Chester Beatty Biblical Papyri (London: Emery Walker, 1933-41).

Berayta

Nicholas Sed, "Une Cosmologie juive du haut moyen age: La Berayta di Macaseh Bereshit," Revue des Etudes Juives 123 (1964): 259-305.

Berl. Manich. Copt.

Berlin Manichaean Coptic Manuscript, Manichaische Handschriften der Staatlichen Museen Berlin (Stuttgart: W. Kahlhammer, 1940).

BHM

Bet ha-Midrash, 6 vols. (Jerusalem: Wahrmann Books, 1967).

Bin Gorion

M.J. Bin Gorion, Die Sagen der Juden (Frankfurt: Kutter & Loening, 1913).

Black

Matthew Black, Apocalypsis Henochi Graece (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1970).

Bonner

Campbell Bonner, The Last Chapters of Enoch in Greek (London: Christophers, 1937).

Book of Adam

Livre d'Adam, in Dictionnaire des Apocryphes, 2 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1856). See note 32.

Cedrenus

Georgius Cedrenus, Compendium Historiarum 1:17 in Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae 4, ed. I. Bekker, 1838.

Combat of Adam and Eve

Livre du Combat d'Adam et Eve, in Dictionnaire des Apocryphes, 2 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1856).

Dictionnaire

Dictionnaire des Apocryphes, 2 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1856). See note 32.

Ethiop. Bk. Mysts.

Silvain Grebaut, Livre des Mysteres du ciel et de la Terre, in Patrologia Orientalis.

Ev. Verit.

Micel Malinine, ed., Evangelium Veritatis (Zurich: Rascher Verlag, 1956).

Falasha (Anthology)

W. Leslau, ed., Falasha Anthology (New York: Yale University Press, 1951).

Gizeh

Gizeh Fragment in appendix 1 of R.H. Charles, The Book of Enoch (London: Oxford University Press, 1913).

Iesous Besileus

Iesous Besileus ou Basileusas, ed. R. Eisler (Heidelberg: C. Winter Verlag, 1930).

Jewish Encyclopedia

W. Popper, ed., The Jewish Encyclopedia, 12 vols. (New York: Funk and Wagnall, 1904).

N. Sed. REJ

Nicholas Sed, "Une Cosmologie juive du haut moyen age: La Berayta di Ma'aseh Breshit," Revue des Etudes Juives 123 (1964).

Mid. Rab.

Harry Freeman, Midrash Rabbah (London: Soncino, 1961).

Ms. R.

In Andre Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets d'Henoch (University of Paris: Institut d'Etudes Slaves, 1952).

P.G.

J. P. Migne, Patrologiae Graecae, 161 vols. (Paris: J. P. Migne, 1857).

P.L.

Patrologiae Latinae, 221 vols. (Paris: J.-P. Migne, 1879).

P.O.

Patrologia Orientalis.

Secrets of Enoch (Morfill)

W.R. Morfill, The Book of the Secrets of Enoch (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1896).

Secrets (Vaillant)

Andre Vaillant, Le Live des Secrets d'Henoch (University of Paris: Institut d'Etudes Slaves, 1952).

Sophia Jesu Christi

In volume 60 of Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1955).

Testament of Abraham

In W. Leslau, ed., Falasha Anthology (New York: Yale University Press, 1951).

T.U.

Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1955).

Zohar

The Zohar, trans. Harry Sperling and Maurice Simon (New York: Rebecca Bennet, 1958).

11 QPSa Creat.

"Hymn to the Creator," in J.A. Sanders, Discoveries in the Judeaen Desert of Jordan, vol. 4 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965), pp. 89-92.

NOTES

"A Strange Thing in the Land: The Return of the Book of Enoch" first appeared in the Ensign from October 1975 to August 1977.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The book of Moses, heading to chapter 1.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, B.H. Roberts, ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1902) 1:133.
[^3] And it came to pass that I the peaks [akron] and from Pearl of Great Price: Being a Choice Selection from the Revelations, Translations, and Narrations of Joseph Smith (Liverpool: F.D. Richards, 1851), p. 1.
[^4] And I saw the Lord; and he his earthly garments, and (God sent Raphael. . .9. Smith, History 1:139.
[^5] All who dwell on earth shall Ibid., 1:135-36.
[^6] Ibid., 1:131-33.
[^7] and the earth shall be R.H. Charles, The Book of Enoch (London: Oxford University Press, 1913), p. ix, n 1. Compare his Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1912) 2:163, where he maintains that "some of its authors. . . belong to the true succession of the prophets,. . . exhibiting on occasions the inspiration of the O.T. prophets."
[^8] Charles, Book of Enoch, pp. xcv-ciii, indicates that many "passages of the New Testament. . . either in phraseology or idea directly depend on or are illustrative of passages in 1 Enoch." "In the New Testament," according to a current Encyclopaedia Britannica, 24 vols. (Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1973) 8:604, "Enoch himself is mentioned in Luke iii:37; Heb. xi:5; and Jude 14, while there is reference to him in Jude 4-15, Matt. 19:28, 26:24, Luke 16:9, John 5:22, 1 Thess. 5:3, 1 Pet. 3:19ff., and Revelation.
[^9] [and] I saw a mighty host of Charles, Book of Enoch, p. xcv.
[^10] And it came to pass that to Adam: While you obeyed Ibid., pp. xii-xiii.
[^11] Ibid., pp. lxx-lxxix for the Jewish sources, pp. lxxxi-xci for the Christian.
[^12] (The angels take Abraham Carl Schmidt, ed., Pistis Sophia, trans. by Violet MacDermot (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1978), p. 247.
[^13] And . . . Moses looked the world. But the seven Ibid., p. 349.
[^14] For behold, I could not elements into confusion. Eugenio Zolli, "Henoch," in Enciclopedia Cattolica, 12 vols. (Citta del Vaticano: Ente per l'Enciclopedia Cattolica per il Libro Cattolico, 1951), 6:1405.
[^15] . . . where is thy glory, praise. When angels come to for behold his garment [of In thy heavenly abode no [When God sends down In those days I will Charles, Book of Enoch, p. x; it was second only in influence to the canonical Daniel, Klaus Koch, Ratlos vor der Apokalyptik (Gutersloh: Gerd Mohn, 1970), pp. 19-20.
[^16] Get thee hence, Satan; . . . my tongue became heavy Adolf Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrash, 6 vols. (Jerusalem: Wahrmann Books, 1967) 2:xxx. Hereafter cited as BHM.
[^17] Ibid. For a list of Enoch citations in Cabalistic writers, see Isaac Myer, Qabbalah (Philadelphia: Isaac Myer, 1888), p. 167.
[^18] . . . his glory has been "So far only two Aramaic fragments have been published. . . . In view of this important discovery it might seem premature to publish a Greek text before the publication of these fragments. . . . Unfortunately this has not proved to be possible; and the prolonged delay. . . of the Aramaic Enoch and latterly the confused situation with regard to the custody of the Aramaic mss., make any further postponement of this provisional Greek edition inadvisable." (Matthew Black, Apocalypsis Henochi Graece [Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1970], p. 7.)
[^19] And now, when Moses anointed! though he is not. Do Adolf Jellinek, "Hebraische Quellen fur das Buch Henoch," Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 7 (1853): 249.
[^20] Charles, Book of Enoch, p. ix.
[^21] C.C. Torrey, The Apocryphal Literature (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1945), p. 27.
[^22] And . . . with your evil works . . . 3. Then St. Augustine, City of God 15:23.
[^23] Hans-Friedrich Weiss, Untersuchungen zur Kosmologie des hellenistischen und palastinischen Judentums (Berlin: Akadamie-Verlag, 1966), p. 119.
[^24] H. Leclerq, "Henoch," in F. Cabrol and H. Leclerq, Dictionnaire d'Archeologie Chretienne et de Liturgie, 15 vols. (Paris, Librairie Letouzey et Ane, 1925) 6:2245-46.
[^25] And calling upon the fear and trembling seized Charles, Book of Enoch, p. ciii.
[^26] This attitude is illustrated in the author's "Christian Envy of the Temple," in Jewish Quarterly Review 50 (1959): 99ff.
[^27] In his work Peri Archon, 1:iii:3 (J.-P. Migne, Patrologiae Graecae, Paris: J.-P. Migne, 1857, hereafter cited as P.G.) 11:147-48 and 4:35 (P.G.11:409), Origen appeals to "The Book of Enoch" to support his theories of the creation, but when Celsus quotes Enoch he objects: "Even less should things be taken seriously which Celsus seems to have picked up and misunderstood from the Book of Enoch." (Contra Celsum 5:54; P.G. 11:1265.) He says things are "very much mixed up" and "in the churches not taken very seriously as Scripture (divine)," since they contain "matter not preached (uttered) nor heard in the churches of God," which nobody would be foolish enough to take literally. (Contra Celsum, P.G., 11:1268-69.)
[^28] A.J. Maas, "Henoch," in The Catholic Encyclopedia, 15 vols. (New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910) 7:218.
[^29] J. Plastaras, "Henoch," in New Catholic Encyclopedia, 17 vols. (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1967) 6:1019.
[^30] . . . were it possible that the signs of all the creation. Michael E. Stone, "Judaism at the Time of Christ," Scientific American 228 (January 1973): 80-82.
[^31] The Syncellus fragment, from his Chronographia 1:47, found in Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae 41, ed. Wilhelm Dindorf (Bonn: Weberi, 1829), is also reproduced in appendix 1 of Charles, Book of Enoch, p. 305. Reference to this was made by Georgius Cedrenus, circa A.D. 1100 in his Compendium Historiarum 1:17 in Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae 4, ed. I. Bekker, 1838. See also P.G. 121:41, 44-45, 476.
[^32] And by the word of my and it was by my word that it G.B., "Livre d'Henoch," in J.-P. Migne, Dictionnaire des Apocryphes, 2 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1856), 1:396, in Troisieme et Derniere Encyclopedie Theologique, Tomes 23 and 24. Hereafter cited as Dictionnaire
[^33] And worlds without Secrets 24:3 (Vaillant). G.B., "Livre d'Henoch," in Migne, Dictionnaire, 1:397. It is quoted by Peter Alphonsus, and is simply a Latinized rendering of the well-known Moslem merchant's creed: Al-Kasib habib ullah!
[^34] Nathaniel Schmidt, "Traces of the Early Acquaintance in Europe with the Book of Enoch," Journal of the American Oriental Society 42 (1922): 45.
[^35] Ibid., p. 47.
[^36] Ibid., p. 47.
[^37] . . . The heavens . . . thy presence, and Thou Ibid., p. 46.
[^38] John McClintock, "Enoch, Book of," in Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature, 12 vols. (New York: Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1870) 3:225.
[^39] And . . . when they to keep the ways of the Lord See author's discussion in Since Cumorah: The Book of Mormon in the Modern World (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), pp. 32-35. Black, Apocalypsis Henochi.
[^40] James Strachan, "Enoch," in Dictionary of the Apostolic Church, ed. James Hastings, 2 vols. (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1916), 1:334.
[^41] Schmidt, Book of Enoch, p. 50, placing Postel's meeting with the priest around 1536.
[^42] As I journeyed . . . by up . . . in the heaven above, Ibid.
[^43] "Livre d'Henoch," in Migne, Dictionnaire 1:399.
[^44] Schmidt, Book of Enoch, p. 51.
[^45] Michael Stuart, "Christology of the Book of Enoch," The American Biblical Repository, 2nd Series, 3 (January 1840): 88.
[^46] Schmidt, Book of Enoch, p. 51.
[^47] Ibid., pp. 51-52.
[^48] Ibid., p. 52.
[^49] "Livre d'Henoch," in Migne, Dictionnaire 1:400. However, in 1736, Johann Albert Fabricius in his Codex Pseudepigraphus Veteris Testamenti, 2 vols. (Hamburg: T.C. Felginer, 1722), 1:22, gathered and reproduced all available passages from the church fathers concerning Enoch ("Livre d'Henoch," in Migne, Dictionnaire 1:399).
[^50] McClintock, "Enoch, Book of," 3:225.
