Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Preface

Is it possible to understand Nauvoo . . . without grasping the spiritual power Joseph [Smith] exercised and still exercises? Every Mormon knows that the Church is held together by individual testimonies that is, the connection the members have found with God through the Prophet's doctrine and the Church which he established. The power of Mormon leaders depends almost entirely on these individual spiritual convictions. . . . Through Joseph [his followers] found God, and it was the measure of divinity in him and his teachings that held them. Nauvoo would never have risen or fallen without that spiritual life. Belief powered the entire enterprise. Richard Bushman

The religious community of the Latter-day Saints has crossed three major historical watersheds since the Prophet Joseph Smith's first vision in the spring of 1820. Each of them has marked a transition from one way of expressing basic beliefs and behaviors to another. The first happened during the 1840s when The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was headquartered in Nauvoo. The Prophet's revelations on the temple and its ordinances were at the center of this adjustment. Wilford Woodruff's revelation that led to the Manifesto of 1890 stopping the practice of plural marriage signifies the second and, according to some, the most dramatic transformation. Small schismatic groups resisted both the first and second transitions and formed separate churches. The most recent emphasis, a more gradual one, acknowledges an increasingly worldwide church. One measure of that reality is the revelation through Spencer W. Kimball in 1978 that broadened participation in the lay priesthood to include all worthy males. Another indicator is the recent underscoring of core beliefs in Jesus Christ and the central place of the eternal family unit.

It is the unfolding of temple doctrines to a gathered people during the seven-year Nauvoo period of church history that attracts our attention in this study. In 1858 Sidney Rigdon commented on the effect of the Nauvoo experience on the overall sequence of events up to that time. He told a friend, "From 1830 to 1840 those developments created an unbroken chain of history. In 1840 it culminated and its history tended in a different direction and found its level in the order of things which now exist in Utah."1

Some rejected the new revelations received by Joseph Smith between 1838 and 1844, but the majority did not. For Latter-day Saints who followed Brigham Young and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to Utah, the unfolding of the gospel during the last years of the Prophet's life set the patterns of their lives for a half century. The guiding principles behind those applications continue to affect millions of adherents to the faith. Those who, with Rigdon, held to the pre-Nauvoo formulation of Mormonism founded schismatic groups to lock in an earlier pattern. The principal heir of that reactionary response was the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, headquartered at Independence, Missouri, and recently renamed the Community of Christ.

Because the enduring legacy of Mormon Nauvoo for those who care the most about its history is religious, it makes sense to tell the story from the perspective of revelations and doctrine. That is what we have chosen to do. Earlier studies of the Nauvoo years and of the people and issues of the pre-Utah period of Latter-day Saint history have laid the groundwork for such an endeavor.2 As Richard Bushman concluded after an assessment of the historical literature in 1970, "The whole story has not yet been told. At their best Mormons appear [in Nauvoo histories] as enterprising, ingenious, and strong, but the spiritual dimensions of their faith are left unrecorded."3 The story of spiritual yearnings necessarily plays out on a stage where political strains, economic realities, and social strivings in everyday life interact with the Latter-day Saint world view. The fresh perspectives and new information that we offer build upon a base of familiar narratives while enhancing the realization that the real story of the Church in Nauvoo is essentially one of a people of faith.4

In 1972, when T. Edgar Lyon accepted Leonard J. Arrington's invitation to write a history of the Nauvoo years, and when I joined the effort six years later, the book was intended as part of a larger project a multivolume history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. After Ed's untimely death in September 1978, I was left with the task. Then, three years later, plans were changed. It took another invitation, this time from Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated, through its president, then Elder Loren C. Dunn, to revive a serious research and writing schedule. The intent at that time was to encourage the history as an independent effort for the Nauvoo sesquicentennial observance of 1989-96. Even with some arranged leave time, the task was bigger than expected. I completed a manuscript at the end of the seven-year anniversary period and then set it aside to tackle another more pressing book project. With the encouragement of Deseret Book, the final cutting and shaping began two years ago, resulting in the present volume.

Because of the complex nature of reminiscences, this history draws mostly from documentary evidence from the Nauvoo period. Hundreds of letters, diaries, minutes, and newspaper reports exist to be read, digested, and understood. Ed Lyon left numerous extracts from 1840s Illinois newspapers and notes on hundreds of topics. His marginal comments on historical articles and books drew attention to new information and often challenged an author's statements. The decisions about what to do with those helpful warnings were left to my own discernment. So, too, were many important judgments on interpretive focus and emphasis. While encouraged and helped along the way by many friends and colleagues, I accept full responsibility for the book, both its content and its message.

The resulting product is necessarily different from what it would have been had Ed Lyon written Nauvoo's history. For that reason, and because of the passage of time since he first outlined his book thirty years ago, T. Edgar Lyon's name does not appear as coauthor. His family endorsed that decision. Nonetheless, his influence on the manuscript is everywhere evident. I adapted some material from two preliminary drafts of chapters on pre-Mormon Nauvoo, considered two of Ed's published articles on doctrinal developments and the Quorum of the Twelve in Nauvoo, and retained much of the original outline of the book. His newspaper files, subject files, and biographical notes provided much useful information, but inevitably, much of what this beloved teacher of Church history and doctrine knew about Nauvoo was carried in his amazing memory, and he took it with him.5

Most of Dr. Lyon's research notes on Nauvoo were assembled while he served as historian for Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated. The steady research of long-time NRI employee Rowena Miller is also part of Ed's accumulation; much of what the Lyon family made available for my use is duplicated in the agency's collection. The focus of NRI was the physical city and the biographical profiles of its people rather than broader themes of religious history.

Here and there in Ed Lyon's extensive files I discovered notes he had written to himself; they confirmed that I was creating a story consistent with his own desires. He wanted to set Nauvoo in the context of religious as well as political history. In three conversations, all that Ed's health allowed, we agreed on the central place of the temple in Nauvoo's history, on the need to correct misremembered stories, and on the meanings of a few specific happenings.6 Gradually, as I did my own extensive reading in diaries, letters, and other sources that he had not examined, I discovered new ways to tell the story of Nauvoo.

The completed book offers a narrative based on key religious themes from the Nauvoo years. The common thread is the Saints' search for places of refuge where they could unite in a quest for inner spiritual peace. In Nauvoo, they found the peace they were seeking when they entered the House of the Lord. There they received long-promised blessings for themselves. Through proxy baptisms, they offered opportunities for salvation to deceased ancestors. Despite the sacrifices, trials, and challenges of the Nauvoo years, their gathering place was a place of peace.

Moreover, the Saints defined themselves as a religious people who received God's promised covenant. The "restoration of all things" made the Mormons both latter-day Christians and modern Israelites. They became a set-apart people. Their diaries and histories became testaments of God's dealings with his children in a new "dispensation of the fulness of times." In short, they lived in places designated for sacred purposes, and their history was evidence of their belief in living prophets, new revelation, promised lands, and a chosen people. Throughout the book, I have allowed the Saints themselves to speak, to share their feelings about the meaning of the unfolding drama that defined the Nauvoo years.

To capture the religious feelings of the 1840s, the chapters in the first two parts of the book examine various aspects of the establishment of a place of refuge and the defining of a people of faith during the years 1839-43. These overlapping chapters reach backward in time to connect Nauvoo with foundational precedents in doctrine and events of the New York, Ohio, and Missouri years. This excursion beyond Nauvoo's chronological boundaries demonstrates that continuity and precedent are as important to an understanding of Mormon Nauvoo as is change. Parts 3 and 4 examine related themes in the context of the challenges of 1844 and 1845 that led to the abandonment of the region in 1846. A community of Saints socially and spiritually matured by their experiences in Nauvoo moved west. Schismatic groups who remained behind continued their quest for salvation in various places and with self-serving aberrations that changed or rejected core doctrines.

Sidney Rigdon boasted in 1858 concerning the history of the early church: "Perhaps I would not speak unadvisedly should I say that I am the only one now living who could write that history. Others may attempt it but they will fail."7 In my own generation, it was generally agreed that T. Edgar Lyon was the person to write Nauvoo's history. I appreciate his family's confidence in my abilities to do justice to what was to have been their father's historical magnum opus. Until her passing in 1980, Hermana Lyon took an active interest in my work. She reminded me of her husband's desire for an honest assessment of the period and of his trust in my ability to complete his project. As a spokesman for the six sons of Ed and Hermana Lyon, Thomas Edgar Lyon Jr. (and, more recently, Joseph Lynn Lyon) maintained an understanding and patient encouragement.

It is with gratitude for the family's support and to acknowledge their father's influence on this book that I dedicate it to their parents and to the Old Nauvooers, the old-timers who shared their fond recollections of Joseph Smith in the Salt Lake Twentieth Ward testimony meetings that Ed Lyon attended as a boy. My own great-grandfather was one of those who went about recalling his experiences with the Prophet Joseph Smith, his work on the Nauvoo Temple, and the final battle to defend Nauvoo. It was through these veterans and our other Nauvoo ancestors that Ed and I gained an early interest in the place and times and spiritual experiences of Old Nauvoo and the Old Nauvooers.8

Others who have made this volume possible include Steven R. Sorensen and the reference personnel of the Church Archives and Church History Library of what is now called the Family and Church History Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Equally helpful were David J. Whittaker and his associates in the Archives of the Mormon Experience and the Special Collections Department of the Brigham Young University library. The staffs of the libraries of the University of Utah and the Utah State Historical Society, the custodians of the vast collection of Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated, and the archivists and librarians of other repositories named in notes and visited by either me or Dr. Lyon graciously granted access to their collections.

Without the wise counsel of individuals who share my interest in Nauvoo, the manuscript would have retained many flaws of fact and message. James L. Kimball Jr. turned his intimate knowledge of Nauvoo and his familiarity with the NRI collection to my advantage by offering ready help in tracking countless errant facts. He read and critiqued the entire manuscript, as did Samuel Brown, Richard L. Jensen, Ronald W. Esplin, and Elder Loren C. Dunn. The observations of these and other friends have been invaluable. Commenting on specific chapters were Larry C. Porter, Dean C. Jessee, Kenneth W. Godfrey, and Lowell C. Bennion. Donald L. Enders and Stanley B. Kimball shared insights and information. Jan Shipps directed me toward helpful works in religious studies. Orson D. West, Michael D. Christensen, Christy Best, Ronald Read, and Bill Slaughter offered special assistance with bibliographies, facts, and illustrations. These and many other colleagues patiently listened to my musings on the meaning of Nauvoo as I sought to clarify my thinking.

At Deseret Book Company, Wm. James Mortimer, Lowell M. Durham Jr., and Sheri Dew were early and enthusiastic champions of this book. Overseeing publication under the guidance of Cory Maxwell were senior editor and project manager Suzanne Brady and art director Richard Erickson. They were assisted by Amy Felix, Shauna Gibby, Tonya-Rae Facemyer, and Kent Minson. Jack Welch, publications editor for the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Latter-day Saint History at Brigham Young University, suggested copublication with Brigham Young University Press. He offered the help of Robert Spencer, who expertly created the maps from the accumulated research of years. Under the direction of Anastasia Sutherland, Erick Carlson and others checked all quotations for accuracy.

Most important, my supportive wife, Karen, our sons, Cory, Kyle, and Keith, our daughters-in-law, Michelle and Shawnie, and our four grandchildren have allowed me to indulge my historical hobby without complaint. I appreciate their willingness to give me many evenings, weekends, and vacation days in "Nauvoo."

Barbara Tuchman has observed that a good historian should not subscribe "to the theory that all facts are of equal value." She advised, "If [the historian] cannot exercise judgment, he should not be in the business. A portraitist does not achieve a likeness by giving sleeve buttons and shoelaces equal value to mouth and eyes."9 The depiction of Joseph Smith's Nauvoo offered here includes splashes of insight gleaned from other writers. It benefits as well from the reflections of Mormon historians who have grappled with the challenges of writing religious history. This weighty volume is not the only possible portrait. As Edmund Gaustad, a veteran in the writing of religious histories, put it: "We believe that there is meaning in history: this makes the quest worthwhile. We know that our perceptions are partial: this makes the quest fallible. . . . Even as we revise the work of an earlier generation, so verily, verily, shall we be revised!"10

It is hoped that this latest, but not last, look at Nauvoo will prove beneficial in some way to each one who views it. With the analytical tools of the historian, the literary devices of the writer, and the religious orientation of a Latter-day Saint, I accepted the challenge of discovering the meaning of a place and a time called Nauvoo.11 If this retelling of the Nauvoo story realizes even a part of Richard Bushman's encouragement to give voice to the spiritual essence in the history of those years, we will have moved closer to recovering the real Nauvoo.12 Nevertheless, I agree with Pliny the Elder, who concluded, "Even if we do not achieve our goal there is something beautiful and grand in having made the attempt."13 The reward has been in the journey.

NotesPreface

Epigraph: Bushman, "Historians and Mormon Nauvoo," 61.

NotesPart I. Establishing Nauvoo: A Place of Peace

Epigraph: John S. Fullmer to John Price, February 15, 1841, John S. Fullmer Letterbook, Church Archives.
