Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Part I

Establishing Nauvoo: A Place of Peace

We are comfortably, not splendidly situated. . . . Our place is rich and beautiful; half prairie, and is susceptible, by proper management, of supporting stock to almost an unlimited extent. But what is of infinitely more importance is that we reside within two miles of the City of Nauvoo, a place founded by the church of Latter-day Saints with whom we became acquainted, and after an impartial and thorough investigation of their principles have united ourselves in Christian fellowship. . . . If you ever heard anything, be assured it was either a gross misrepresentation or perhaps an utter falsehood. They have, to be sure, been driven from the state of Missouri, two years ago, by the force of arms, but certainly not for any criminal act, . . . but because there is a prophet at their head and because the church places implicit confidence in what he teaches. Equally with the primitive Christians, this church professes to have the same priesthood, together with the same power and gifts. . . . The organization of the church, according to the apostolic pattern, is a prelude to the Millennium, which is not very far distant. From a letter by John S. Fullmer, February 15, 1841

Chapter 1

Joseph Smith's Plan for Zion

Wherefore I, the Lord, have said, . . . go ye forth into the western countries, . . . and . . . build up churches unto me. And with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that ye may purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed unto you. And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God; and the glory of the Lord shall be there, . . . and it shall be called Zion. Revelation to Joseph Smith, March 7, 1831

For early members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, western Missouri was their Zion, a holy gathering place of peace. By revelation, Joseph Smith designated the region around Independence, Missouri, as the "center place of Zion," the site of a future millennial capital. Those who relocated to the City of Zion at the center place or to other designated gathering places were expected to live at a high spiritual plane in these cities of righteousness.1 Dwelling in "a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints" implied as well a heightened sense of community. The goal of a Zion society was to create unity and cooperation for the good of the whole.

Associated with these concepts of community was a religious view of how the church would accomplish its mission to gather a people and prepare them for the Second Coming. Joseph Smith, Parley P. Pratt, John Taylor, and other leaders defined the essential elements of what constituted the church and kingdom of God on the earth. Pratt's Voice of Warning, first printed in 1837, offered a succinct summary of these factors. He wrote:

Four things are required in order to constitute any kingdom, in Heaven or on earth: viz: first, a king [Jesus Christ]; second, commissioned officers duly qualified to execute his ordinances and laws; thirdly, a code of laws, by which the citizens are governed; and fourthly, subjects who are governed. Now, where these exist in their proper order and regular authority, there is a kingdom: . . . wherever we find officers duly commissioned and qualified by the Lord Jesus, together with his ordinances and laws existing in purity, unmixed with any precepts or commandments of men, there the kingdom of God exists, and there his power is manifest, and his blessings enjoyed as in days of old.2

In their forced departure from Missouri in 1838-39, the Latter-day Saints carried with them these principles for governing sacred gathering places. The ideas of a Zion place, a Zion people, and an ecclesiastical government that would be transformed into a millennial kingdom at some future time guided the creation of new gathering places at Nauvoo, Illinois, and elsewhere.

The interplay of ideal and reality, holiness and imperfection was another theme carried over to Nauvoo from the Ohio-Missouri period. Embedded into the Mormons' consciousness at an early day was the perception that they were victims of religious persecution.3 During the winter of relocation, 1838-39, the Prophet reflected on how he and other Latter-day Saints should respond to those who challenged their Zion society. His counsel, given for circumstances surrounding the expulsion from Missouri, was equally good advice later on. Missouri's challenges were but prelude to the troubles of the Nauvoo years.

To understand the Nauvoo period, we turn first to the notion of Zion as a place and as a people. Then we review efforts to establish gathered communities and examine their failures. Finally, we summarize Joseph Smith's advice to his followers on how to view the tensions and conflicts that affected the course of Mormon history.

Zion: A Place and a People

The concept of Zion taught by Joseph Smith is central to an understanding of the events between 1839 and 1846, the years Nauvoo served as an administrative center for the church. For Latter-day Saints, Zion was a name used interchangeably for both a place and a people a place where one could find inner peace by living a life devoted to God. These ideas were modified and amplified during the last years of Joseph Smith's life, creating cultural and religious landmarks that identify the significant elements of the Nauvoo story.

It is the religious world view behind the attempt to establish a Zion place and a Zion society that offers the most useful window for understanding the Nauvoo period. The spiritual perspective that defined the Latter-day Saints as a people affected not only their inner spiritual life but also how they lived from day to day. It influenced how they interacted with others, and how their neighbors who did not share their world view reacted toward them. And the experiences of life molded and reinforced their overall understanding of life's purpose and meaning.4

The founding generation of Latter-day Saints was significantly motivated by the geographical aspect of salvation. For that first group of converts, the most certain way to heaven included physically removing themselves from the evils found in worldly cities to a designated place of gathering. Figuratively and literally, they left Babylon for Zion, a city upon a hill. Zion's biblical name was reminiscent of David's royal city built around the temple knoll called Mount Zion. The July 1831 revelation that identified Independence, in Jackson County, Missouri, as the center place, called western Missouri "the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion." Joseph Smith defined a city intended as a pattern for other gathering places. He called the secondary locations "stakes" to the "tent of Zion": "For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened."5

The people who gathered to Zion and her stakes for refuge from the destruction of the last days saw themselves as a people of destiny. Their sense of being a special people gave the Latter-day Saints an identity that fostered the unity seen by their neighbors as a clannish self-righteousness. Latter-day Saints achieved their identity as a people of divine favor through ordinances that involved making covenants with God. The process began with baptism and eventually included other priesthood covenants and ordinances received in temples.

In biblical language, Zion was Jerusalem (literally, "a city of peace") "the city of righteousness," seat of the "King of peace."6 In Puritan discourse, which early Latter-day Saints knew well, Zion was celebrated as a City on a Hill, a pattern for their own communities and a light to the world. Like the New Testament Saints, who were the model for the Puritans, the children of the latter-day kingdom were supposed to be righteous examples to others, to "shine forth as the sun," to radiate the gospel in their lives and "shine as lights in the world."7

For the Latter-day Saints, the new American Jerusalem meant a real place, whose residents were distinguished by the way they lived. Geographically, Zion was the Holy City. Socially, Zion was a divine society, an organized community that would enjoy the promise of redemption in this life and a life of glory in the next. In the world to come, heaven would be right here on an earth brightened with its own celestial glory. For the Latter-day Saints in the 1830s, Missouri was both the literal site of the biblical Eden and the sacred place for the Saints of the last days as well as the place of eternal promise, a heaven on earth now and forever.

Seeking to Establish Zion

Building a new city even planning it beforehand to fit some preconceived notion of an ideal physical or social pattern was common in the America of the 1830s and 40s. In fact, right from colonial times, city planning occupied a central role in the process of defining the social and religious life of early settlers. In the new republic, Thomas Jefferson was an eloquent spokesman for those who saw four-square cities as an ideal pattern for an expanding nation. His influence in the western territories gave rise to many cities laid out geographically to symbolize the American dream.8 To counter the image of European cities of sin and degradation, citizens of Jacksonian America sought to establish dwelling places imbued with the virtues of rural, agricultural, and small-town life. In implementing this dream, Americans developed two kinds of cities: first, the covenant communities of the New England world in which religion infused everyday life; and second, the collected communities organized under the rationalism of an Enlightenment world view requiring separation of church and state.9

Although they lived at a time dominated by collected communities, the Latter-day Saints and some other religious groups adopted the covenant community pattern. It spoke to their needs to create a community united not just geographically and socially but bound by a deeper spiritual purpose. Even before they arrived in Missouri, the Saints developed a tradition of planning the places they wanted to live in, a tradition that persisted for a generation. In upstate New York and in Ohio, they lived in established towns but overlaid their own concept of sacred space a separation from Babylon and the need to congregate together. This adaptation was applied first in Ohio, where many converts from the Campbellite and related religious groups brought with them the experience of life in covenanted religious communities.10

During the 1830s, the Latter-day Saints exerted a concerted effort to realize the dream of an ideal City of Zion.11 At Independence, Missouri, in June 1833, Joseph Smith overlaid on the existing town a City of Zion pattern. The plot for Zion was one mile square, made up mostly of ten-acre blocks, each one containing twenty half-acre lots.12 Its streets stretched generously to widths of 132 feet and were squared with the compass. The Prophet limited the city's size to prevent urban crowding. (If each lot averaged five persons, the population would approach five thousand, but the planners inexplicably projected fifteen thousand or more for the city).13 Public squares were planned for the center. Barns and stables to serve the city were to be clustered just outside the south boundary, while farms operated by the urban-based farmers would reach out north and south of the city.

All of this might be expected for any new western town; but Zion was not a secular American city. Zion was an overlay that not only echoed the American style but spiritualized it. Populated through the work of a far-flung missionary force, Latter-day Saint cities focused on religious worship with an educational emphasis and a Christian caring for the poor. These purposes were expressed architecturally in the public spaces, where the Prophet eliminated the traditional grand courthouse or city hall and substituted the House of the Lord, headquarters for the millennial King whose rule would preempt civil government in that long-anticipated Christian era of global peace. For the intended future world capital at Zion, not just one religious structure appeared on the plat but a complex of twenty-four temples situated on two sixteen-acre blocks. Plans of these projected meetinghouse-office buildings resembled the first Mormon temple at Kirtland. Joseph Smith intended them as administrative centers for presiding quorums and councils as well as halls for worship, religious observance, and schools. A third central block adjacent to the temple squares was reserved for storehouses for the goods donated as tithes and offerings. From this block, the bishop was to dispense needed resources to the poor and provide for general church needs.14

Anticipating other Mormon cities as stakes to support the tent of Zion, the Prophet instructed, "When this square is thus laid off and supplied, lay off another in the same way, and so fill up the world in these last days; and let every man live in the city, for this is the city of Zion."15

After the Saints were expelled from Jackson County in 1833, and while awaiting an opportunity to redeem or reclaim the center place, they laid out other temple-centered gathering places in fulfillment of the master plan. In the new county of Caldwell, created just for them, Far West and Adam-ondi-Ahman continued this ideal Zion city pattern, even though details differed. Each of these city-stakes of Zion anticipated a single temple situated in the central square to give the city its religious focus. Like Zion, the new cities were platted to lie four-square with the compass. In Far West, the four-acre blocks held four lots of one-acre each. In the two-mile-square Diahman, lots were one acre each, and blocks included six lots. Because it was to be the new (but temporary) capital of the church, Far West burgeoned on its hilltop site overlooking the rolling prairies. During the last days of the 1838 expulsion from Missouri, seven apostles and eighteen supporters slipped back into Far West to lay a symbolic cornerstone at the temple site and then depart on a mission to the British Isles. They offered their prayer in the dark of postmidnight to fulfill a prophecy that antagonists had threatened to frustrate.16

Implicit in the plan for the city of Zion were the values encouraged by the ideal covenant community. Living together as a community rather than in isolated farmhouses allowed Latter-day Saints to implement the social aspects of a shared destiny. "The cause of God is one common cause in which all the Saints are alike interested," Joseph Smith declared at Nauvoo in May 1842,

we are all members of the one common body, and all partake of the same spirit, and are baptized into one baptism, and possess alike the same glorious hope. The advancement of the cause of God and the building up of Zion is as much one man's business as another. The only difference is that one is called to fulfil one duty and another another duty; . . . party feelings, separate interests, exclusive designs should be lost sight [of] in the one common cause, in the interest of the whole.17

Central to that "one common cause" was the "cause of God." Souls needed saving, and that meant the elimination of sin in all its forms, whether sins of passion or greed, of violence or pride. Replacing human failings with Christian values of love, charity, benevolence, patience, and humility ensured a Zion community. Residents of Zion and her stakes were expected to live lives of purity, unity, friendship, and Christian love. Joseph Smith's revelations reaffirmed all of the obligations of the Ten Commandments and the teachings of Christ's ministry.

The "one common cause" invited the Saints to give of their means to build temples, to sustain the poor, and to support full-time church leaders. Implicit also was the obligation to assist others in gathering to Nauvoo and other stakes.18 Through fulfillment of these obligations, Latter-day Saints expected to qualify as the Lord's people the meek in spirit spoken of in the Sermon on the Mount who would inherit the earth in its glorified state. By revelation in 1833, the residents of Zion places were themselves called "Zion the pure in heart," a reference to Enoch's ancient "people Zion . . . [who] were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them."19

Political unity a sticking point in a pluralistic society meant for the Latter-day Saints a commitment to elect "good men" so that governments would not trample on the individual rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States. Latter-day Saints pledged to obey and defend the law and the rights of all citizens. With those commitments in mind and to keep their opponents from enjoying political power over them, they voted for friends and against those whose interests ran contrary to their own. These practices built a wall around the Mormon community. Neighbors felt threatened. In response, they attempted to absorb or eliminate the threat.20

Whatever its external implications, Mormon city-founding grew from a deeply held belief in the necessity of a cooperative effort. "By a concentration of action, and a unity of effort, we can only accomplish the great work of the last days, which we could not do in our remote and scattered condition," the First Presidency declared in 1841. "The great profusion of temporal and spiritual blessings, which always flow from faithfulness and concerted effort, never attend individual exertion or enterprize. The history of all past ages abundantly attests this fact."21

Challenges to Zion

As with many ideals, achievement often falls short, and the Mormon experience during the early 1830s suffered from some shortfalls. Challenges both from within the clustered gathering places in Ohio and Missouri and from outside them severely tested Joseph Smith's program for a bonded community. Within months of the expulsion from Jackson County, he organized Zion's Camp, an army of Mormon volunteers from Ohio and the Great Lakes region, and marched them toward Missouri to reclaim abandoned Jackson County property. He anticipated support from Missouri's governor in reclaiming the land but did not get it. Just short of the army's destination, a declaration known as the "Fishing River" revelation postponed the establishment of an ideal Zion society and the redemption of Zion's promised land. In northwestern Missouri and, later, in Nauvoo, this postponement allowed a transition to religious obligations easier for the Saints to live but still close to their overall objectives.22

The revelation at Fishing River laid responsibility for the failure of the expedition directly on the imperfections of the Saints. Armies could not redeem Zion. Nor was it the Missourians who had caused the lack of success in establishing Zion. It was an unrighteous people. The Latter-day Saints involved had not yet become separated from the world:

But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I [the Lord] required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them; and are not united according to the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom.23

The testimony of this disobedience was evident in Zion. At Independence, a few outspoken church leaders and members had expressed concern about ecclesiastical management of their property under the economic program of consecration. At Far West, the Prophet began the shift away from Zion's economic plan. In this city of three thousand people, no one was asked to consecrate property to the church. Most of the land was privately owned and operated. Joseph Smith encouraged some cooperative farming enterprises. In response, the Saints set up huge farms managed under a neighborhood organization as a supplement to private unconsecrated land.

But this change in practice did not resolve every question over economic policy. In April 1838, the high council in Far West finally aired issues that had lingered for years. They did so during a trial of fellowship involving Oliver Cowdery, an early associate of the Prophet. At the core of Cowdery's disagreement, according to witnesses, was his refusal to "be governed by any ecclesiastical authority or revelations whatever, in his temporal affairs." Furthermore, he had sold his property in Jackson County after the Prophet explicitly counseled against it. Cowdery admitted to his actions and criticized what he called "a kind of petty government, controlled and dictated by ecclesiastical influence, in the midst of this national and state government." Cowdery argued for his constitutional right to exercise personal judgment in matters of property.24

Other dissenters were less articulate in their opposition to a religiously motivated plan to share with the poor, but their unwillingness to live the religious order was apparent. These new Saints were not prepared, either by political upbringing or religious maturity, to live it. In their concerns over theocratic government, they appealed to the traditions of their political fathers. They preferred the safe haven of republican society and the secular, collected community.25

Even though Cowdery's opposition and other problems meant his excommunication, his argument helped to show why church members were not ready for such an undertaking. Within months of Cowdery's hearing, Joseph Smith offered a modified course for creating a more easily realized Zion society. The law of tithing, which the Lord introduced in a revelation on July 8, 1838, allowed the Saints to witness their dedication to the principles of a more equal economic society in a new way.26 First, they made an initial offering to the church of their surplus property. "And after that," the revelation directed, "those who have thus been tithed shall pay one tenth of all their interest annually."27 With the produce and cash thus collected into the bishop's storehouse, the poor would be supported, the debts of the church paid, and the families of the presidency sustained. Even though the ideal economic plan for Zion was on hold, a modified program for a stake of Zion could be accomplished.28 Consecration, after all, was but one of many principles that defined the people of God, and the new law of tithing met most of its objectives.

The principal use of the tithing would be for constructing a temple. The House of the Lord dedicated in Kirtland in 1836 had been intended as a place where converts would worship, learn the word of God, and be endowed with spiritual power to ready them for the new age of peace and prosperity. The Prophet hoped this preparation would yield religious and doctrinal unity. But internal apostasy fed by external conditions cut short the dream of a temple-centered Zion at Kirtland. Plans for temples at Independence, Far West, and Adam-ondi-Ahman were abandoned because of external opposition to the gathered community and internal challenges to the economic order taught by Joseph Smith. As of 1838, Joseph's dream of a temple on America's western borders where the Saints could participate fully in the blessings that God had promised was yet future. During the Nauvoo years, building a House of the Lord and creating a covenant people through temple ordinances would replace the effort to fashion a more broadly consecrated society.

Reflections from Liberty

Many Latter-day Saints marked the transition between the Ohio-Missouri and the Nauvoo periods by moving out of Missouri. Joseph Smith spent those months in a county jail.29 Incarcerated at Liberty, Missouri, only a dozen miles from the abandoned City of Zion in Jackson County, he reflected on many of the issues that had plagued the Latter-day Saints during their Missouri sojourn. For weeks at a time, as he sat on the cold stone floor, bounded by a four-foot-thick wall of limestone, loose rock, and oak timbers, he had time to meditate on the conflict between neighbors in Missouri and about the lack of unity within the church over economic policies both in Missouri and Ohio.30

The Prophet and other Latter-day Saints defined the two forms of opposition they had experienced in Missouri as persecution and apostasy. Opposition from outside the church had driven the Saints from several gathering places in Missouri. The vigilantes who drove them justified their actions as a political or social necessity. Church members perceived the expulsions as religious persecution and a denial of constitutionally guaranteed rights to property.31 Disagreements within the church had challenged the standards for demonstrating faithfulness in the Lord's kingdom. Religious dissenters claimed they were trying to purify the church, but others saw them as enemies of faith. The external and internal challenges faced in Missouri would continue after the Saints established their new place of peace. Therefore, what Joseph Smith said at Liberty Jail about these Missouri experiences would have meaning later in Nauvoo.

"Brother Joseph," as the Saints sometimes called their prophet, shared his musings at Liberty in letters to family and friends. One such missive was written to church members still in Caldwell County, Missouri, in mid-December 1838, a few days before his thirty-third birthday. It offered consolation, commented on the Missouri persecutions and apostasies, and established a policy for responding to Missouri's old settlers. Joseph Smith reached into the New Testament to define the Missouri difficulties in religious terms. "It is for the testimony of Jesus that we are in bonds and in prison," he explained. "We glory in our tribulation. . . . We do not care for them that can kill the body; they cannot harm our souls."32 The Prophet named directly those within the church who had turned against him and defected. Some of these early defenders of the faith later returned to the fold. In addition, Joseph Smith mentioned outsiders who had offended his rights lawyers, judges, religious ministers, and officers of the militia, as well as the dregs of society people in high station and low.33

The Prophet wished to heal wounds in the congregation of believers. He affirmed his own innocence and pronounced the charges laid against him as falsehoods. As he would do again in Nauvoo, he reassured those who had been influenced by his detractors that "the keys of the kingdom [have] not been taken from us."34 In response to charges of murder laid against the Mormon militia and its leaders, he said, "We stood in our own defense, and we believe that no man of us acted only in a just, a lawful, and a righteous retaliation against such marauders." Rumors that the elders shared "a community of wives" he challenged as a charge spread by dissenters "seeking to gain the friendship of the world." The distortion, he said, perverted a practice in which not only property but entire families a man and his wife and children were dedicated to the Lord's work. These covenanted families promised to care for the sick and the poor, and they consecrated their hearts to a life of virtue, honor, and charity.35

One more charge he wished to answer. Rumors had circulated linking the military assistance groups, the Danites, to illegal activities. Actually, according to Albert Rockwood, the Danite organization had two goals: to work cooperatively in meeting temporal needs and to defend the Saints against attack. At Liberty, Joseph Smith learned that Sampson Avard had organized one Danite group offensively, as a marauding band to steal from Missourians in retribution for wrongs against Mormon settlers. Avard had sworn his band to secrecy but informed them that like other Danite units, they were operating under the sanction of the First Presidency. Joseph Smith disclaimed any knowledge of Avard's group and denounced its activities. Even though the military attacks soon ceased, the rumors persisted.36

The Prophet claimed no ill feeling towards those who had wronged him or the church. Rather, he adopted the advice of the Book of Mormon prophet Amulek, who had told his similarly beleaguered people "to have patience, and . . . bear with all manner of afflictions; that ye do not revile against those who do cast you out."37 The incarcerated prophet reminded the Latter-day Saints who were about to leave Missouri that judgment was the Lord's.38

Along with comments on the errors of detractors, Joseph Smith's letter to the Caldwell County Saints critiqued the faults of the imperfect faithful. He counseled against drunkenness, swearing, profane language "and from everything which is unrighteous or unholy; also from enmity, and hatred, and covetousness, and from every unholy desire." He encouraged honesty and charity and condemned greediness. Despite the weaknesses of his followers, the imprisoned prophet would not relinquish his confidence in the spiritual perfectibility of the struggling Saints nor the ultimate realization of his religious hopes. He reaffirmed: "Zion shall yet live, though she seemeth to be dead."39

Another letter has lingered in even greater prominence in the Mormon memory of the painful Missouri years. Because of the letter's spiritual power, Latter-day Saint historian B. H. Roberts called the county jail where it was written a prison-temple, a place of prayer and meditation.40 The letter was written in late March 1839. Intended for a wide audience, this communication was published the following year at Nauvoo in the Times and Seasons, and extracts were later canonized by the church as scripture.41

Parts of the letter are written in the language of revelation, with the voice of the Lord offering advice to Joseph Smith in response to his deep introspection. The counsel expands on ideas explored sensitively in the Kirtland Temple prayer of dedication in 1836, where the Prophet sought to resolve the competing demands of justice and mercy toward those who caused the Saints' expulsion from Missouri's Zion.42 The guidelines outlined in the letter (now sections 121, 122, and 123 of the Doctrine and Covenants) would have a future application in the gathering place that would be called Nauvoo.

The issue foremost in every mind was the recent persecution. "Avenge us of our wrongs," the Prophet appealed to God for himself and the suffering Saints. The Lord's response offered several observations. First, it postponed justice and placed it in an eternal perspective: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes."43 Second, as Joseph Smith's earlier letter had done, the revelation denounced Sampson Avard's avenging Danites and counseled all Saints to exercise godly patience and forbearance. The third message was a prophecy that even though the fools of the world would hold Joseph Smith in derision, there would be others the pure, wise, and noble who would honor his prophetic authority and seek blessings from him. The Prophet was reassured that he would retain his role as revelator to the church. Fourth, the Lord counseled, if there should be further persecution false accusations, incarceration, fraud, conspiracy, or even death threats "know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." Finally, there follows a promise that Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo would recall five years later: "Thy days are known," the Lord reassured Joseph, "and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever."44

Writing in his own voice, Joseph Smith gave the Latter-day Saints a specific duty with regard to their persecutors. Everyone should become a historian, he said. All should compile the names of their Missouri oppressors and a list of losses, both in property and in personal injuries. A church committee would direct the effort, assemble all printed material relating to their grievances, and publish the findings. The effort, Smith said, would help to correct a tarnished public image created in the popular press. It would fuel appeals to governments and help future investigators sort out the evidence.45

The second message of the March 1839 letter from Liberty Jail addressed the consequences of dissension and apostasy. Among Latter-day Saint men of the time, priesthood was virtually universal. Those ordained to one of two lay priesthoods, the Aaronic and the Melchizedek, were given various assignments. They could administer the ordinances of baptism and confirmation, confer the priesthood on others, give blessings of healing or comfort, bless and serve the emblems of the Lord's Supper, serve as missionaries abroad, or minister to members at home. Without the authority of the priesthood, a Latter-day Saint man could not fulfill his responsibilities within the church.

The Prophet's Liberty Jail letter recognized both the rights and obligations of bearing the priesthood and identified a consequence for strident internal opposition. Those who turned against the church and its leaders, he said, would lose their right to the priesthood through excommunication.46

The inspired guidelines set forth by Joseph Smith for priesthood holders at Liberty Jail defined the ecclesiastical organization of the church as noncoercive. The revelation cautioned that "the rights of the priesthood . . . cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." Men who acted hypocritically or for self-aggrandizement or who attempted "to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men" would find themselves stripped of their priesthood authority. Failure to use that authority properly, the Prophet warned, would lead to apostasy. The insights and prescriptions of this part of the letter both reflected conditions that had existed among disaffected leaders in Missouri and predicted challenges in church administration and secular authority yet ahead. The letter concluded with counsel that Joseph Smith would apply in his religious interactions throughout the Nauvoo years and that he would encourage other leaders to follow:

We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion.Hence many are called, but few are chosen.

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, . . .Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy. . . .Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.47

NotesChapter 1. Joseph Smith's Plan for Zion

Epigraph: D&C 45:64-67.
