Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 2

Finding a Place of Peace

Many of you have been driven from your homes, robbed of your possessions, and deprived of the liberty of conscience; you have been stripped of your clothing, plunder[ed] of your furniture, robbed of your horses, your cattle, your sheep, your hogs, and refused the protection of law. . . . Dear brethren, . . . although you have had indignities, insults and injuries heaped upon you, . . . we would say, be patient, dear brethren, for as saith the apostle, "ye have need of patience, that after being tried you may inherit the promise." . . . Do not breathe vengeance upon your oppressors, but leave the case in the hands of God, "for vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, and I will repay." Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and George A. Smith, July 1839

Troubles in Missouri in the fall of 1838 precipitated an exodus that launched the Nauvoo period of Latter-day Saint history. Joseph Smith spent much of that winter in a county jail at Liberty, Missouri, where he pondered the experiences of the previous seven years. The Latter-day Saints had tried in several locations and, because of opposition, had failed to establish sacred gathering places. In these places of refuge, they had hoped to create a people striving to prepare themselves for the second coming of Jesus Christ. While this dream of Zion was the overall objective for the church, the Prophet's immediate thoughts at Liberty Jail dwelt on the expulsion of thousands of Saints from Missouri. His counsel to the forced exiles was to find a place safe from the threats of state militias and informal regulators. Leave judgment to God, he said, and focus on the spiritual goals of building a religious society in whatever place the Lord had prepared.1

Even though the Saints were leaving Missouri behind as a dwelling place, the experiences of those years influenced what happened next. The events of the Nauvoo period were deeply rooted in Missouri and built upon ideas from the beginning years of the church in New York and Ohio. For example, the central goals of preaching the gospel, gathering the righteous out of a wicked world, establishing congregations in places of refuge, and building temples continued during the Nauvoo years.

Almost from the beginnings of the church in upstate New York in 1830, Joseph Smith had directed the Saints to look westward to find safety from the wicked and to nurture peace in their own lives. The earliest revelations to address the idea of migration invited the congregations in the Northeast to move to the state of Ohio. Here, the Lord wished to gather a righteous people, tutor them in His law, and endow them with heavenly powers.2 But soon, another place was given priority status, even though its purposes were similar.3 That place was in Independence, Missouri, at the western reaches of the United States,4 a site designated by revelation as a future millennial capital:

And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion.5

As Joseph Smith revealed more about Zion, Missouri quickly became for Latter-day Saints the place to be. It was seen as a promised land for the pure in heart. The anticipated City of Zion was to develop after the order of the ancient City of Holiness established by Enoch and taken into heaven by the Lord.6 In the latter-day Zion, temples were to be erected to welcome the returning King of kings for His millennial reign. If faithful, the Saints in Zion were promised "peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come," a reward for all Latter-day Saints attainable especially by those living consecrated lives in Zion.7

Even before the designation in July 1831 of a center place, Kirtland, Ohio, had been positioned as a staging ground for the gathering to the City of Zion.8 In the temporary headquarters city of Kirtland, in northern Ohio's Western Reserve, the church dedicated its first temple in 1836, began a printing operation, and established a storehouse under a form of the law of consecration.9 It was the Lord's will, Joseph Smith revealed in 1831, "to retain a strong hold in the land of Kirtland, for the space of five years. . . . And after that day, I, the Lord, will not hold any guilty that shall go with an open heart up to the land of Zion."10

The need to define relationships among various gathering places triggered a steady trickle of revelations and instructions over the remaining years of Joseph Smith's life. Consistently, the message was that both Zion and her stakes were sanctioned. All church members shared the responsibility to cry repentance to the world and to nurture the gathered Saints. In fact, the long-range expectation was that once the New Jerusalem had reached a fixed maximum size, the Saints would establish numerous other cities patterned after this central place of peace.11

Among the continuing threads of organizational history during the 1840s were the questions of when a stake should be organized, or disorganized, and when the Saints should gather in large cities, like Zion or Nauvoo, or when they should remain in other gathering places. The question was not new. In August 1831, an immediate surge of migration to Missouri was discouraged. Only those approved by local church leaders as ready to claim their inheritance in Zion could go.12 Kirtland was not just a staging ground for the gathering to Zion but a gathering place itself, the first of many large congregations known as branches, or cities, or stakes of Zion. Kirtland became the pattern for other, yet future stakes. The revelations guiding the development of the "City or Stake of Zion at Kirtland, [known as] Shinehah," became an example applied in other places during the Nauvoo years, and beyond.13

Tensions in Zion

Many of those who remained in Kirtland did eventually join in the movement westward, but not until Jackson County the land of Zion had been abandoned for an alternate gathering place in upper Missouri. The Saints had spent a short two years of rapid growth at Independence. One of the revelations had anticipated trouble in "the land of Missouri, which is the land of your inheritance, which is now the land of your enemies."14 The "enemies" were earlier settlers, mostly from the upper South. In 1833, the old settlers expelled the Saints from Jackson County, fearful of losing political control to the culturally different Yankee Mormons. The Saints found refuge fifteen miles to the north at Liberty, across the Missouri River in Clay County, where they lived in relative harmony for another two years.

Clay County was an acceptable substitute for the designated center place. For the Latter-day Saints, the economic prosperity available to them in their western gathering places was an important aspect of their religion. As it had been with God's covenant people of the Old Testament and the Book of Mormon, those of the new covenant were promised prosperity as a blessing for their righteousness. The worthy poor would become self-reliant through the surpluses consecrated by the wealthy. And the promised land would itself yield ample harvests. "I feel well satisfied with this country," the Prophet's aunt Almira Mack Covey wrote from Liberty in 1835, in a down-to-earth reflection of the practical application of the promise:

It is pleasant, and it is a good place to get a living. There is plenty of grain of all kinds; plenty of meat, milk, [and] butter; and we have plenty of hackberries, blackberries, strawberries, gooseberries, mulberries, blue grapes, little wine grapes, and grost grapes; hickory nuts, walnuts, chinkipins, pickeas, and some apples and sweet potatoes.15

The Latter-day Saints were not alone in recognizing the potential of America's frontier. From the day Daniel Boone followed an Indian trail through the Cumberland Gap to discover a "terrestrial paradise" in Kentucky, the yearning for richer farmlands impelled generations of Americans to go west in search of a more prosperous life. Missouri attracted slave-holding migrants from the South, and in 1820 the Missouri Compromise allowed the admission of Missouri to the Union as a slave state. In contrast, the Latter-day Saint newcomers hailed mostly from the North Atlantic states. "I must say that the society of the Missourians is not so agreeable as I have seen," Almira Covey noted.

When I speak of the Missourians, I mean the old inhabitants, which are mostly southern people, and their living is mostly bacon and dodgers, . . . a sort of Johnny cake made of corn meal. This they eat in preference to wheat, which makes it much better for our eastern people who like wheat best. . . . The church in this land live in peace at this time.16

A preference for corn dodgers over wheat cakes was but one indicator of deeper differences between old and new settlers in upper Missouri. In a public meeting in late June 1836 at the Liberty courthouse, Clay County citizens identified what made them uncomfortable living as neighbors to the Latter-day Saints:

They are Eastern men, whose manners, habits, customs, and even dialect, are essentially different from our own; they are non-slave holders, and opposed to slavery, which . . . is well calculated to excite deep and abiding prejudices in any community where slavery is tolerated and practiced. In addition to all this, they are charged . . . with keeping up a constant communication with the Indian tribes on our frontier, [and] with declaring, even from the pulpit, that the Indians are a part of God's chosen people and are destined, by heaven, to inherit this land, in common with themselves. We do not vouch for the correctness of these statements; but whether they are true or false, their effect has been the same in exciting our community.17

Once again, social and political differences between two culturally dissimilar peoples led to a pressured relocation of the Mormon settlers. The citizens committee "advise[d] them to seek a home where they may obtain large and separate blocks of land and have a community of their own." The Saints moved in 1836 from Clay County to a site farther north created by state legislators as an exclusive Mormon gathering place. In Caldwell and Daviess Counties, the Latter-day Saints established settlements, the principal one being Far West.18

Around four thousand Missouri Mormons relocated onto the grassy prairies of the Far West region.19 Here, in a land of deep loam and big promises, they sought to realize the American dream of rediscovering a new Eden and the revealed mandate to establish Zion. To Levi Hancock, raised in New York and Ohio, his dreams of a peaceable kingdom for his young family seemed in hand. On a sixty-acre farm plot, the thirty-four-year-old furniture maker

built a house sixteen feet square of logs, . . . hired rails made and fenced four acres and planted it to corn, built a brush fence around my pasture, bought and paid for ten acres in the city of Far West, and partly paid for a city lot next to the temple block. . . . I had cows, hogs, and one good mare, sheep, and hens a plenty, and was in a good way to live with a plenty to eat.

Hancock captured the spirit of the search for a verdant place of peace in a song he had written, "My Peaceful Home, 1837," preserved in his memoirs. "When I got weary," he wrote, "I would take my babe and my little boy and sing these verses":

Here, far in the realm of Missouri, I'll sit and sing and tell thee a story; How many trials I have passed over Before I found this dwelling in peace. O here, here, beside of the fire, I have my sweet babe and little Mosiah; And here is Mother, I'll seat me down by her And sing, "I've found a dwelling in peace."

Here in my field all things are a growing, And on the prairie I have men mowing That I may have feed to keep my stock; While here at home I live and have peace.

May we love [God] forever and ever For peace bestowed upon the believer; And turn from him, O never, O never, But always love the spirit of peace.20

Levi Hancock's idyllic song captured the spirit of Latter-day Saint hopes in 1837. At last, they believed, they had found respite from earlier disagreements with Missouri's old settlers. Safe from physical violence, they could savor spiritual uplift and enjoy the harvest of their farms with their families. George W. Averett was another who celebrated the newfound refuge. "This land seemed to be a choice land, . . . a heaven in every deed. . . . I rejoiced exceedingly in this land of Zion."21

When the thirty-two-year-old Joseph Smith left Kirtland in the spring of 1838, he settled in Far West, which became the movement's new headquarters. It was also the place of relocation for many Jackson County exiles. Anticipating rapid growth, the initial square-mile survey was enlarged to two square miles. The Prophet created a new city for Kirtland emigrants called Adam-ondi-Ahman (so named by revelation as the place where Adam last blessed his posterity). About a thousand people settled there. The Prophet designated both gathering places as stakes of Zion and chose temple sites. Other Latter-day Saints clustered in smaller settlements in the two counties, such as Gallatin, Millport, and Haun's Mill, or established homes at DeWitt in neighboring Carroll County.22

Despite the best of intentions on both sides in northwestern Missouri, tensions between old and new settlers increased. Two public statements in the summer of 1838 by Sidney Rigdon, the Prophet's counselor in the First Presidency and designated spokesman, fueled a growing discontent. His unsettling "Salt Sermon" in June targeted dissenters from within the church, and an Independence Day speech two weeks later sparked reactions from the non-Mormon settlers.

The first of these orations unloaded the frustration of the First Presidency with dissident members and led to extralegal actions against them. The critics were challenging church leaders and suing to reclaim Kirtland loans. Rigdon declared that these Saints, the "salt of the earth," had lost their savour (had apostatized) and were "good for nothing; but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men." A few days later, in a signed petition, eighty-three Latter-day Saints challenged Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, William W. Phelps, and Lyman E. Johnson, the most prominent of the dissenters, to get out of town and they did.23

On July 4, the Saints met in Far West to place the cornerstones for a temple. Levi W. Hancock composed a new "Song of Freedom" for the event. A large procession of church members, some of them acting in their capacity as militiamen, encircled the excavation. In ringing tones that gave voice to the deep feelings of his audience, Rigdon declared the church's deep support for religious freedom. He reviewed the injustices endured with patience. But the time had come, he said, for the Saints to defend themselves. Referring to "The Political Motto of the Church" that Joseph Smith and eight others had signed a few months earlier, Rigdon issued what the Prophet later called a "Declaration of Independence." "Our rights shall no more be trampled on with impunity," said Rigdon. "We will never be the aggressors, we will infringe on the rights of no people, but shall stand for our own until death." Physical and verbal threats from Missouri antagonists must end, Rigdon proclaimed. If attacked, "we will follow them until the last drop of their blood is spilled; or else they will have to exterminate us."24

Rigdon's prepared speech had been approved by church leaders and was published in Liberty, the county seat of Clay County. In the Elders' Journal, Joseph Smith endorsed the talk's central message: "We are absolutely determined no longer to bear [mobbing] come life or come death for to be mobbed any more without taking vengeance, we will not." Attacks on DeWitt would soon turn the Saints to a defensive posture that would lead to expulsion.25

Within weeks, confrontations appeared in the northern counties. Voters scuffled at the August state election at Gallatin. As rumors magnified the problem, both the old settlers and the Mormons armed for defense against feared uprisings. Sporadic raids ensued. Both sides burned buildings and hauled off booty. Major General David R. Atchison's indecisive state militia monitored the anxious peace. Early in October, fighting broke out at DeWitt. "Far West is headquarters of the Mormon War," Albert P. Rockwood informed his parents. "The Armies of Israel that were established by revelation from God are seen from my door every day with their captains of 10s, 50s, and 100s." In addition to their daily drills, he said, the citizen soldiers helped with basic survival needs. They provided wood, meat, and other provisions, built cabins, stood watch or spied out the enemy, gathered scattered Mormon families, and cared for the sick. "The companies are called Dan," Rockwood explained, "because Prophet Daniel has said the Saints shall take the Kingdom and possess it forever." Rigdon sent off an armed Mormon militia, "the horsemen of Israel," to disperse the anti-Mormon regulators. "The fear of God rests down upon them and they flee when no man persueth," Rockwood reported. "The brethren are fast returning from the northern campaign with hearts full of gratitude. Not a drop of blood has been spilt. The mob disperse by hundreds on the approach of the Danites."26

Bloodless dispersions soon ended. On October 25, a battle at Crooked River, twenty miles west of Far West, left one Missouri regulator and three Mormon militiamen dead, including Elder David W. Patten of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. First reports of the clash exaggerated the number of deaths in Captain Samuel Bogart's Ray County camp. Two days later, Governor Lilburn Boggs was informed that the Mormons had risen up in an insurrection. He issued a declaration to the state militia: "The Mormons must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if necessary for the public good." Violence next erupted at Haun's Mill, where on October 30, Colonel William O. Jennings led more than two hundred Missourians from Livingston County in an unprovoked attack. Casualties at the small Mormon settlement included seventeen men and boys killed and as many wounded.27

At Far West, Major General Samuel D. Lucas and his Missouri militia, some of them dressed and painted like Indian warriors, met a barricaded Mormon town ready for self-defense. The Mormons assembled a militia of about five hundred men, a fifth as many soldiers as Lucas commanded. The Kentucky-born commander of the Mormon militia, Colonel George M. Hinkle, recognized the disadvantage. Disillusioned with the Danite retaliatory raids on the old settlers, Hinkle quietly negotiated a truce with Lucas. The terms: disarm the Latter-day Saints and turn over their leaders to the Missourians. Unaware of the treacherous surrender arrangement, Joseph Smith and his companions thought they were convening to negotiate terms. On October 31, 1838, Joseph Smith, his counselor Sidney Rigdon, apostles Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt, and Rigdon's son-in-law George W. Robinson were arrested. The Missouri troops, Pratt recalled, surrounded the conference tent and let out "a constant yell, like so many bloodhounds let loose upon their prey." Some of the Mormon soldiers grumbled among themselves over the surrender of their arms. They would have preferred a fight to the death in the defense of their liberties. "I ask not to live one moment but to get revenge," Vinson Knight confided to a friend. "Indeed I go the whole hog for liberty or I die."28

The Prophet escaped summary execution under a military court martial decree because of Alexander W. Doniphan. A general in the militia, Doniphan had previously served as attorney for the church in Missouri. When ordered to have his men shoot Joseph Smith, Doniphan's sense of justice prevailed: He denounced the decision as cold-blooded murder and refused to carry out the order. Taken first to Independence, Joseph Smith pondered his future in a letter to his wife, Emma, on November 4: "God has spared some of us thus far; perhaps he will extend mercy in some degree toward us yet." The Prophet shared a bittersweet rumor: the people of Independence "would allow some of the Mormons [to] settle in this county as other men do." That is, by abandoning the idea of a gathered community, the Saints would be welcome in their Zion.29

The arrested leaders and forty-eight others indicted in the case were then moved to Richmond. After a two-week hearing, Judge Austin A. King released most of them. Parley P. Pratt and four others were held at Richmond Jail for trial. Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Rigdon, Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRae were loaded into a heavy wagon and moved to Liberty on December 1, escorted by an armed guard. Rigdon was released after three months because of ill health. The others spent four and a half winter months locked in the cellar dungeon or restrained on the main floor of the limestone county jail. While these leaders were imprisoned on charges of treason, arson, murder, burglary, larceny, and theft based on actions taken in efforts at self-defense their people fled from Missouri seeking new places of refuge.30

The Exodus from Missouri

The passing of October 1838 marked the end of the Latter-day Saint hope for a peaceful home in Missouri. Just as expulsion from Jackson County in 1833 ended the dream of establishing a Zion society in the designated center place, difficulties in Missouri's northwestern counties frustrated Joseph Smith's plan for new stakes of Zion. The governor's order to expel or exterminate the Saints turned the tables on Sidney Rigdon's imprudent indignation speech and made necessary a mass removal. The Latter-day Saints had no option but to accept the spring deadline mandated by General Samuel D. Lucas. After the initial flight of a few settlers even as troops approached Far West, the Saints responded with a slow but steady exodus. Removal started in earnest in early February 1839 and continued at a rapid pace through May. As counseled by their prophet, the Latter-day Saints leaving Missouri chose their own new places of refuge.

Many departed from Missouri in fear; all left filled with frustration. The first to go were several Mormon men who saw the Missouri militia as an immediate threat to their personal freedom. About thirty of David W. Patten's men stood accused of murder and arson for their part in a raid to free hostages claimed by Captain Bogart's state militia during the attack on Crooked River.31 Fearing execution without a fair trial, these men first arranged for others to transport their families to the ferry crossing of the Mississippi at Quincy, Illinois. Then, as the Missouri militia approached Far West, they fled northward to the Iowa border and headed east to safety. One group made their way to Warsaw, Illinois. Another party crossed the mile-wide river to Commerce, Illinois. They became the first Latter-day Saints to set foot on what would replace Far West as the site of the headquarters stake.32

The hasty departure from Far West of these few was followed gradually by an estimated three thousand or more settlers from Far West and surrounding Caldwell County. Perhaps another two thousand or more left Daviess, Carroll, Clinton, Livingston, and other counties. Besides these "settled" Mormons, another three thousand Saints from the Kirtland area had arrived in northwestern Missouri during the summer and early fall of 1838. In all, at least eight thousand people left their newly adopted western homeland and turned eastward. For Heber C. Kimball, the expulsion was a time of sifting: "The number that had gathered in to this state," he wrote to a friend, "is about ten thousand members. By the first of May there will not be one member left in the state that has any faith."33

In the spirit of the terms agreed to at the surrender of Far West, the Saints who could do so made their own plans and left during the winter on schedules that varied depending upon ability and opportunity. Those few families that struck out in mid-January for the two hundred mile trek to the Quincy ferry hit constant snow and rain; they walked from two to eight miles a day through mud and water.34 More than a hundred families in Far West left during February and March to escape increased harassment by marauders; a few delayed departure until weather improved as the deadline approached. "When spring came, the Mormons left the state as soon as they could," one refugee remembered.

We were on the road as soon as the snow disappeared. Teams were poor and often two or three families would be loaded into one wagon, but corn and meal were cheap and sometimes the teams were fed too much. The roads were muddy and our progress seemed slow while traveling through the enemy's country.35

For many of the Missouri Saints, neither the route to follow nor the ultimate destination was known in advance. To assist the exiles, a church committee of removal dispatched Reuben Hedlock and Levi Richards to Richmond, Missouri, where they helped ship families and their belongings down the Missouri River to the St. Louis area. Some of the Saints cruised northward to Quincy, Illinois, a major port and one of the finest towns on the upper Mississippi. Ferries there had served many Latter-day Saints heading west from Kirtland in 1838; now the emigrant flow was reversed. An eleven-member refugee committee organized by Mormons at Quincy sought out arriving families at the river's edge and directed them from wintry refugee camps to the comfort of local homes and inns.36

The evacuation from Missouri was reported at the time and remembered later by participants as an arduous and exhausting experience. First, they had to fit up and get across the state with household furnishings, food supplies, and the implements of a farm or trade. Then, just as many of the Latter-day Saints reached the Mississippi River landing across from Quincy, river ice began breaking up. Some exiles walked over the frozen portions of the river. Others used skiffs, canoes, or other small boats to navigate the open waters because regular ferries had ceased operation for the season. More than once, Quincy citizens helped rescue Mormon groups stranded on the Missouri side of the river in snow storms without provisions or warm clothing. The citizens "donated liberally, the merchants vying with each other as to which could be the most liberal," a Mormon already living in Quincy said of one rescue effort. "They soon had their contributions together, which filled a very large canoe with flour, pork, coffee, sugar, boots, shoes, and clothing everything these poor outcasts so much needed." A Latter-day Saint who admitted he couldn't swim volunteered to row the precious cargo across the ice-clogged river and "after much hard labor landed the canoe safely near the camp."37

Once they reached Illinois, every fleeing family faced two challenges. They needed a place to settle, even if temporarily, and work to earn a living. The Quincy area offered immediate haven for many, if only a rented room and odd jobs.38 Jesse W. Johnstun remembered, "Everything was overrun, hundreds of men out of employ, wages very low." His mother rented an empty shell of a room for them at four dollars a month. Johnstun, a responsible thirteen-year-old, found Quincy shops fully staffed but worked a couple of days at a saw mill and then as a mail contractor for six dollars a month.39 Not all were so lucky. Some exiles became so discouraged with the overcrowding along the Mississippi that they left the region entirely. After six weeks in Quincy, Jesse Haven, single and twenty-five, set off on foot for the East. He reached the home of relatives in Richmond, Massachusetts, in late June after a three-month journey.40

In a number of instances, fleeing Mormons found refuge with fellow church members. Wandle Mace, an 1836 convert of Parley P. Pratt in Illinois, had been stopped by bad weather at Quincy while headed west to Missouri in 1838. Mace's rented house served as commissary and meeting place for the Mormon refugee committee at Quincy and for church gatherings. As a makeshift inn, it became a shelter from the cold and storms. Mace later recalled, "Many nights the floors both up stairs and downstairs were so closely covered with beds, it was impossible to set a foot anywhere, without stepping upon someone's bed." The families of Joseph Young and John Taylor lived there all winter. Taylor used Mace's lathe to turn butter prints (used for imprinting patterns into fresh butter), bench screws, and other items to make a living. Israel Barlow boarded there and married the nurse who cared for Mace's wife during a February birthing. When the Maces left Quincy later that year, they moved to the old fort at Montrose, Iowa.41

Inland from Quincy, on the road toward Jacksonville and Springfield, were additional opportunities. The migrants found farms and houses to rent throughout Adams County and beyond. Other Latter-day Saints scattered into the northeastern quadrant of the county between Carthage and La Harpe, at such places as Ramus and Fountain Green.42 Some of the refugees found an oasis of tolerance in St. Louis, where sympathetic newspapers were encouraging fund-raising for the Mormon exiles. Others found temporary refuge even farther south in Missouri. The Zodak Judd family spent two years farming at Bloomfield, in southeastern Missouri, and then a year just outside Springfield, Illinois, before joining his brother's family south of Warsaw in 1842.43

Although most of the Saints succeeded in getting themselves out of northwestern Missouri and settled in a safe haven, some lacked the means to do so. Under normal circumstances, the bishop of the church would have managed relief for the poor. Missouri's bishop, Edward Partridge, one of those tried and released at Richmond in November, was himself destitute and in failing health. He moved to Quincy and by February was helping with relocation there.44

Remaining in Missouri were the two senior members of the Twelve, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, and the newly ordained apostle John Taylor. Joined by the Prophet's uncle John Smith, brother Don Carlos Smith, and others, they called for a mass meeting in Far West to organize for the task ahead. In a demonstration of their fulfilling their religious obligations to the poor, the Saints in Caldwell County agreed to share their resources. Groups were formed in late January 1839 to accomplish specific tasks to aid those financially unable to leave Missouri. Chairman John Taylor's committee of the remaining apostles and others agreed to petition upper Missouri residents for help. William Huntington headed an eleven-member body that assumed the "arduous task" of getting the poor safely out of harm's way.45

To encourage a united removal effort, Brigham Young proposed that the Saints sign a covenant making their surplus property available for the committee's use. Sensitive to the issue of control that had alienated some church members in Jackson County, Huntington's group made two allowances. First, they preserved agency: the Saints could give priority to their own needs and could volunteer help independent of the committee if they wished. Second, the committee promised to keep careful records and to refund surplus property. Young secured eighty subscribers immediately, plus another three hundred the next day.46 The solicitation of resources continued for weeks in Far West among those with known wealth, at a conference in Quincy, and via a traveling delegate to church members in the eastern United States.47

Another financial resource needing attention was the abandoned property owned by the church and its members in Missouri. Earlier revelation had prohibited its sale, but Joseph Smith now counseled property owners to move ahead. Committeeman Alanson Ripley secured the power of attorney from private Mormon landowners as far afield as Quincy. With the Prophet's blessing, the committee assigned Charles Bird and David W. Rogers to sell church holdings in Missouri. These two set off for Independence in mid-March and returned a month later claiming to have sold all the lands in Zion. Elias Smith sold his holdings at one-fourth their value.48

The committee of removal turned its attention to the needs of destitute families. An initial survey in Caldwell County located thirty-nine families without wagons, a number that later increased to nearly one hundred. The committee arranged for as many as possible of these families to sail with their goods from Richmond on riverboats down the Missouri River to Quincy, Illinois, an option recommended by a church relocation committee in Quincy. Others went overland to the ferries operating at several crossing places along the mile-wide Mississippi. The committee contracted ferriage for departing families and placed caches of corn along the road between Far West and the ferry landings.49

Committee members first looked after the families of the First Presidency and other Latter-day Saint prisoners. On February 6, Stephen Markham and an unnamed family started on the nine-day trip to the Mississippi with Emma Smith and her children in a carriage sent from Quincy. The Prophet's family found refuge for themselves four miles east of Quincy with Judge John and Sarah Cleveland. A week later, Joseph Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith left Far West in their wagon pulled by an ox team. The Prophet's father agreed to leave the appointed gathering place for Quincy only after a revelation from his imprisoned son satisfied him that it was the Lord's will.50

On April 6, a Saturday, the Missourians in Daviess County delivered a petition to Far West demanding that all remaining Latter-day Saints leave Caldwell County within a week. The committee on removal scoured the countryside for teams to transport people the twenty-five miles to Tenney's Grove. At that way station, crews chopped firewood, furnished cornmeal ground at the committee's horse mill at Far West, and slaughtered livestock for meat. By April 15, three days beyond the deadline, the last of the destitute families was out of Far West. Shortly afterward, the Saints at Tenney's Grove were on their way to Illinois.51

The removal of the Saints from Far West did not satisfy the Missouri enforcers. They entered the settlement and smashed tables, windows, clocks, and other property of the committee and a few other remaining residents. The church committee gathered up what they could but left behind several thousand dollars' worth of property that had been contributed to help the poor. The loss of many of the committee's financial records in the hasty retreat made their promised accounting infeasible. Nonetheless, the Latter-day Saint commitment to remove the poor had been met. It was an experience that would prove useful for the future. With its job completed, the committee on removal disbanded and fled.52

During all this time, Joseph Smith and his companions remained incarcerated at Liberty, and Parley P. Pratt and others languished in Richmond. The prisoners at neither place accepted their fate quietly. Both groups worked vigorously through legal appeals and grassroots petitions to win release from their Missouri captors. Sidney Rigdon won his freedom on a plea of habeas corpus in January 1839 before Judge Joel Turnham of Clay County. His jailers helped Rigdon sneak out of town during the night. Similar writs submitted by the others failed. So did two attempts to break free.53

In the long run, it was the incessant petitioning for legal relief that brought release. These appeals took place on two fronts and over a long period of time, first through the courts and then in appeals to government officials. To aid in their defense against the first Missouri indictments in September 1838, Joseph Smith and Sydney Rigdon had even begun the study of law with their attorneys, David R. Atchison and Alexander W. Doniphan, whom they considered the finest counsel available in upper Missouri. Because of Judge Austin A. King's anti-Mormon bias, the prisoners avoided appeals to the Fifth Circuit Court.54 Instead, they turned to other local courts and twice sought help from the Missouri Supreme Court. Each unsuccessful petition recited the facts of the illegal hearings, recounted false testimony, and pointed out failed justice.

The more effective approach reached beyond the local courts to state lawmakers and officials. Even though state officers lacked the power under Missouri's strong county government system to interfere locally, they could exercise leverage in the crisis. During the winter of 1838-39, the Missouri legislature considered material on the "Mormon War" submitted to it for study by Governor Lilburn Boggs. With legal action still pending and to avoid jeopardizing a fair trial, legislators twice recommended against further consideration of the governor's message. By July, the pressure to resolve the matter had quieted; the issue remained unresolved.55 When a new legislative session began in December 1840, debates over the governor's missive once again divided delegates. Those embarrassed by the unchecked vigilante action against the Saints and the resulting condemnation by the national press encouraged an unbiased examination to clear the state's name. In the end, however, lawmakers opposed to Mormon expansion and others seeking to hide their own participation in the vigilante action prevailed. The House took no action.56 The same fate met Latter-day Saint appeals for redress for lost property and requests for an impartial trial for Joseph Smith.57

In a final effort, Heber C. Kimball and Theodore Turley personally carried entreaties to state officials on behalf of the prisoners. After failing to find Governor Boggs in Jefferson City, they rode hundreds of miles only to learn that state supreme court justices would not issue writs of habeas corpus because of flaws in the legal documents. Nevertheless, the secretary of state, though lacking the authority to intervene, chastised Judge King in writing for holding the prisoners on such flimsy evidence.58

With national opinion strongly opposing the state's insensitivity to the civil rights of the Mormons,59 with the legislature stalled, and with the need to prove or relinquish the claims against the prisoners ever present, it was time to act. On their way back to Far West in early April 1839, Kimball and Turley informed Judge King of their visit to Jefferson City. Angered that state officials had been informed of the case, the judge ordered all visitors barred from the county jail. Kimball and Turley nevertheless reported their trip to the prisoners through the iron bars of the dungeon. Then they headed to Far West. Two days later, on April 6, 1839, Joseph Smith and his fellow prisoners at Liberty were loaded into wagons. The drivers headed toward Daviess County for a hearing before Judge King at Gallatin. According to the prisoners, it was a drunken judge and grand jury that heard the case on April 11. The jury indicted the Prophet and his brother Hyrum, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin for murder, treason, burglary, arson, larceny, theft, and stealing.60

Because the legislature had granted the prisoners the right to seek a change of venue upon their own affidavit, they selected Boone County. On April 15, they set off for Columbia under a heavy guard commanded by Daviess County sheriff William Morgan and assisted by former sheriff William Bowman and three other men. According to Hyrum Smith, after traveling twenty miles, the prisoners "bought a jug of whiskey, with which we treated the company." Morgan showed his prisoners an undated, unsigned order and told them that the issuing justice had instructed him "never to carry us to Boon[e] county, and never to show the mittimus." The sheriff then said, "I shall take a good drink of grog and go to bed; and you may do as you have a mind to." Three other guards followed this example, drank freely of whisky that had been sweetened with honey, and were soon asleep in bed. The sole remaining guard helped the men saddle the horses. For their "negligence" of duty, Morgan and Bowman were roughed up by angered citizens of Gallatin. On April 22, Joseph Smith and his companions rejoined friends and family in Quincy. Their assisted escape granted them freedom, but the unresolved legal charges would yet again become a hindrance for the Prophet and his people.61

Release of the prisoners at Liberty left several others still under guard in Richmond. Two of them were dismissed on April 24 after a grand jury heard their case. Those remaining were granted an appeal to Judge King for a change of venue. In late May, they were moved to Columbia, in Boone County. While awaiting a trial, they planned and executed an Independence Day escape.62

Americans and the editors of the popular press responded to the "Mormon War" in Missouri with differing perspectives. Some saw the Mormons as law-abiding citizens whose constitutional rights had been violated by Missouri's citizens. In this view, the Missouri vigilante groups acted outside the law when they resolved tensions by robbing, raping, pillaging, and expelling the Mormons. The Latter-day Saints and their friends applauded this interpretation. In contrast, other editors characterized the Latter-day Saints as a rebellious, lawless group of religious zealots undeserving of the same rights as other Americans. This was the anti-Mormon viewpoint in Missouri. It applied the stereotype of other disfranchised people to the Saints and saw them as murderers, robbers, bandits, thieves, and counterfeiters. The two perspectives, though oversimplified in this summary, shared a common feeling that a lawless element had denied good citizens their rights.63 Another view, held by people from many backgrounds, concluded that the Latter-day Saints were a distinctive people, defined by a religion that outlined a complete way of life. They created political strength by forming close bonds within a community or region. Their differences as a people simply made it impractical to live among others not part of their community.64

The lawless actions of their Missouri neighbors left deep, negative feelings with the Latter-day Saints. The refugees sometimes wondered if the answer to it all might not be another Zion's Camp an armed invasion to recover their lost inheritances. Six members of the Twelve, preparing for a missionary journey to the British Isles, tempered these feelings in an epistle written in July 1839. Be patient in affliction was the message, echoing the Prophet's own counsel from Liberty Jail: Leave judgment to God.65

The friendly welcome in Illinois would soften the effects of the expulsion. Even though the Saints wanted to redeem their Missouri lands, they would set aside military options. For a half dozen years ahead, they would instead seek to redress the inequities committed against them by using legal supplications, public pleas, and presidential entreaties. They would exercise patience, but they would not soon forget the wrongs of Missouri.66

NotesChapter 2. Finding a Place of Peace

Epigraph: T&S 1 (November 1839): 12. The epistle was written by the Twelve in July, just before they left for England.
