Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 3

A Beautiful Place of Rest

I would suggest . . . that our brethren scattered abroad who understand the spirit of the gathering . . . fall into the places of refuge and safety that God shall open unto them between Kirtland and Far West . . . in the most safe and quiet places they can find . . . until God shall open a more effectual door for us. Joseph Smith, Liberty Jail, March 20, 1839

In early March 1839, Joseph Smith received at Liberty Jail a packet of letters from Bishop Edward Partridge and his associates in Quincy. The refugees shared rumors of Smith's pending release and reported on the growing number of displaced Saints congregating in and around Quincy. Included were letters from Isaac Galland of Commerce, Illinois, to David W. Rogers and Israel Barlow. Galland, who owned land in both Commerce and across the river in Iowa, offered to help find rental homes and farms for the Saints in both places. He claimed that territorial governor Robert Lucas had promised the Saints a safe refuge in Iowa.1

After reviewing the letters, Joseph Smith dictated a long response to Bishop Partridge and the church. Among other things, the Prophet offered observations on the pressing question of relocating the Saints. His suggestions would set a course for settlement and lead to the creation of a new headquarters city in western Illinois.

Joseph Smith moved cautiously on the issue of a concentrated relocation. For years, the Saints had longed to realize the Lord's counsel in a December 1833 revelation to "gather together and stand in holy places."2 Earlier in March, Joseph had authorized the Saints to sell their property in Missouri or to trade for available land elsewhere. "Concerning the places for the location of the Saints," he wrote, "we cannot counsel you as we could if we were present with you. And as to the things that were written heretofore we did not consider them any thing very binding," he told Partridge. Weighing present circumstances, the Prophet advised that those who understood the spirit of the gathering should seek a place of refuge and safety somewhere between Kirtland and Far West "in the most safe and quiet places they can find" until the Lord opened other doors.3

Perhaps that open door was the offered land in Commerce and Iowa. Willing to accept aid from helpful friends, the Prophet said that he was impressed to encourage church agents to secure a contract for Galland's land. He felt it wise to cultivate a friendship with the seller as long as "he shall prove himself to be a man of honor and a friend to humanity."4 Not wishing to mandate either of these solutions, Smith advised Partridge to counsel with available authorities and together find their own answer to the questions. He agreed to review minutes of their meetings and correct the leaders, "by the word of the Lord," if necessary.5

Joseph Smith soon would be personally involved in the question of defining a new Mormon community and in selecting Commerce, in Hancock County, Illinois, and Lee County, Iowa, as two sites among many for gathering places. Smith informed Galland that when he was freed he would personally sign a contract purchasing Galland's land if no one else had done so.6

Even though Joseph Smith left open to individual members the entire West between Ohio and Missouri as a field in which to find religious refuge, his acceptance of Galland's offer meant that the next attempt at defining a headquarters community would take place on lands in two counties on opposite sides of the Mississippi River. On the east side, at a wide bend in the river would rise a city of peace echoing the pattern of the New Jerusalem. Across the river, in the Half Breed Tract recently vacated by Native Americans, the Prophet would soon envision a New Zarahemla, a city of hope.7

The Welcome in Illinois

When Joseph Smith crossed into Illinois, he found a large number of exiled church members at Quincy, the region's principal town, with a population exceeding fifteen hundred.8 Many other Saints had scattered beyond Adams County, wherever homes and farms could be found to rent or buy. The people of Illinois who offered much-needed help reacted with genuine reprehension against Missouri's extermination order, which they labeled illegal and cruel. For various reasons, the old citizens of Illinois and neighboring Iowa welcomed the exiles without much initial prejudice against this "peculiar people."

The kindly interaction of the Quincy Democratic Association with Latter-day Saint leaders and agents exemplified this friendly response with an outpouring of philanthropic sympathy. On February 25, 1839, Quincy Democrats appointed merchant J. W. Whitney to head an investigative committee. Whitney invited Mormon spokesmen to identify needs. A church committee led by Elias Higbee found only two dozen destitute widows and poor families but cataloged the consequences of the expulsion and prioritized needs: "We have been robbed of our corn, wheat, horses, cattle, cows, hogs, wearing apparel, houses and homes, and, indeed, of all that renders life tolerable," Higbee wrote. "We think that to give us employment, rent us farms, and allow us the protection and privileges of other citizens, would raise us from a state of dependence."9

In an effort to offer genuine help and to minimize local prejudices, Whitney's committee denounced the Missourians for their injustice and pledged that Illinois citizens would be "guided and directed by that charity which never faileth." The committee encouraged association members to lead out in finding jobs for the immigrants and reassured local workers that the job-hungry newcomers would not depress wages. The exiles, Whitney said, sought only "to procure something to save them from starving." They should not be viewed as a despised religious minority but as American citizens "entitled to our sympathy and kindest regard." The association solicited donations of cash, clothing, and provisions from its own members, from the Quincy Grays (the local militia), and from citizens at large. They raised one hundred dollars locally and signed endorsements for Latter-day Saint fund-raisers to use in St. Louis and New York City.10

Behind the warmth of the humanitarian welcome in Illinois lay other motivations as well. Located midway between St. Louis, Missouri, and Rock Island, Illinois, the Adams County seat acted as a river port for agricultural exporting and commerce. It served twelve thousand county residents and influenced others as the region's largest town. At the time, the state was suffering under a severe national economic depression, the Panic of 1837. Hundreds of destitute Latter-day Saints would be a welcome stimulus to the sluggish economy of Adams County as they purchased necessities or rented houses and farms. Sensing an economic benefit to themselves, Whitney and his associates public-spirited merchants, lawyers, editors, doctors, and government officials welcomed the Latter-day Saints.

They recognized as well political opportunities resulting from an infusion of new people. The local Democratic party was a key player in Quincy's public life, and its influence extended outward into rural northwestern Illinois. The community and county had been named in 1822 for John Quincy Adams, an independent-minded member of the national Democratic-Republican party, who was Secretary of State at the time. Adams's defeat of Andrew Jackson in the 1825 presidential election created a schism within their party and the subsequent creation of the Whigs. The citizens of Quincy in the 1830s and 1840s vacillated between the policies of the Jacksonian Democrats and those of the Whigs. With existing support almost equally divided between the two parties, both Whigs and Democrats began to contend for Mormon sympathy. The Quincy Whig denounced Democratic persecution in Missouri as immoral and Democratic charitable efforts in Illinois as an attempt to win votes. The Democratic Quincy Argus implemented the resolutions of the party's public meeting by condemning Missouri and her radical politicians as well as the local Whigs for their vote seeking.11

Latter-day Saint activist Lyman Wight, a forty-three-year-old New Yorker who had recently served in the Adam-ondi-Ahman stake presidency, joined in politicizing Quincy's humanitarian efforts. Despite cautions from local church members, Wight published three letters in the Quincy Whig criticizing Missouri Democrats for instigating the anti-Mormon mob actions. His comments offended Illinois Democrats, including some in state office. It was a delicate situation for Joseph Smith. Remembering the Missouri apostasies and interpersonal controversies, he wished neither to interfere with Wight's political opinions nor to alienate the charitable Quincy Democrats. Officially, he wanted to maintain political neutrality. A First Presidency letter published in the Whig thanked Quincy citizens for their support and defended Wight's freedom to speak out. The leaders added, "We disclaim any intention of making a political question of our difficulties with Missouri."12

Joseph Smith did not wish to offend Wight, "an old fellow prisoner" at Liberty Jail. The Missouri difficulties had helped the Prophet realize the importance of tolerance toward his trusted associates despite the difficulties they had caused. He would apply that principle in Nauvoo, sometimes with undesirable results. In a personal note to Wight, whom he would ordain an apostle two years later, he expressed confidence in Wight's good intentions but counseled him to avoid "making the Church appear as either supporting or opposing you in your politics."13 The question of Latter-day Saint influence in politics would survive the move to western Illinois and grow with Nauvoo's burgeoning population.

The Western Illinois Frontier

The eventual replacement for the abandoned headquarters settlement in Missouri was fifty miles upriver from Quincy on a peninsula-like piece of land jutting out into the Mississippi River. This place at the head of the Des Moines Rapids would soon be renamed Nauvoo. It had been identified by many visitors as one of the most beautiful sites along the river for many miles. A large, level floodplain with wooded bluffs beyond, it measured about two miles north to south and a mile east to west. The flatland rose gently toward the east, nestling against bluffs that rose seventy feet above the river. Small streams of water from the prairie to the east cut through the bluffs toward the river in ravines, nurturing groves of native oak, black walnut, butternut, birch, elm, locust, and sugar maple trees. In its general contours, the bluff at the bend in the river was not unlike a similar peninsular site along Missouri's Grand River that just a year earlier Joseph Smith had named Adam-ondi-Ahman.

Nearly forty years before the arrival of the Latter-day Saints, Native Americans abandoned the last of a series of agricultural villages on this Illinois site. They were led by a minor chieftain, Quashquema, who oversaw perhaps fifty Algonquin Indians of the confederated Sauk and Fox tribe. Migrants to Illinois from the Lake Michigan area, they later abandoned their bark lodges and moved west of the Mississippi.14 William Ewing, a government Indian agent, lived among them for a time, as did Denis Julien, a St. Louis trader, who later became a western fur trapper. Major Zebulon Pike visited the site in 1805 during his expedition seeking out sites for military posts and the source of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers. Not long before they moved from the peninsula, the Indians helped Pike's exploring party get around the Des Moines Rapids.15

American military policy significantly influenced settlement patterns and the availability of land in the upper Mississippi River Valley. In response to Pike's report, the United States government established several army posts. Those affecting Mormon settlement were Fort Des Moines, south of present Montrose, Iowa, established after the Indian Removal Act of 1830, and Fort Edwards, founded in 1814 at the junction of the Des Moines River with the Mississippi. Barracks at Fort Des Moines provided a temporary refuge for the Saints fleeing from Missouri in 1839. By the time Fort Edwards was abandoned in 1824, a civilian population had assembled to form the beginnings of the town of Warsaw. In the 1840s Warsaw became a major competitor with Nauvoo for river trade and for political dominance in Hancock County.16

Military policy also helped veterans of the War of 1812 get farmland in the West. In Illinois, most of the region south of Rock Island between the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers was set aside as the Illinois Military Tract. Even though some veterans homesteaded their 160-acre claims as permanent settlers, many gave up after a short stay. Others sold their rights to land speculators at prices ranging from fifty cents to $1.50 an acre. It was from such speculators that Joseph Smith purchased some of the parcels of land that became Nauvoo.17

As the prairies opened up, publicity brought in a wave of settlers from the British Isles and later another one from northern Europe. These immigrants opposed slavery and prided themselves on becoming freeholders through their own hard work. Many of them found homes on the northern and central Illinois plains. In the twenty years following statehood in 1818, population density in the military tract tripled from two people per square mile to six. Density in other regions reached eighteen persons per square mile.18

To make way for this energetic influx, Native Americans along the upper Mississippi were pressured to relinquish their farms in treaties signed at St. Louis in 1804 and at Chicago in 1816. Not all of the Indians left willingly, however. Black Hawk led a thousand supporters in a resistance movement in 1832 that ended in the slaughter of 90 percent of those who followed him back to their former lands in Illinois. Afterward, a fifty-mile strip in Iowa called the Black Hawk Purchase was removed from Native American control and opened to white farmers.19 To protect a new boundary between white expansion and the Sauk and Fox territory, in 1834 the army established Fort Des Moines, with Lieutenant Colonel Stephen W. Kearny in charge. When the army abandoned the post in 1837, a few white families in nearby Cut Nose Village renamed their community Montrose.20 With Native American claims resolved, the Iowa region was prime for expanded white settlement. The fertile military tract across the river in western Illinois already was attracting large numbers of settlers and speculative investors.

Settlement and Speculation

The formation of towns and governments on the riverside parcels that later became Nauvoo began with the arrival of white settlers in the 1820s. The growth of a settlement there paralleled the development of Warsaw downstream at Fort Edwards. The two emerging communities quickly became competitors for political influence in the region. Hints of the rivalry appeared first when residents at the site of Quashquema's Indian village at the head of the rapids petitioned Illinois legislators to create Hancock County to localize services for the people of what then was northern Adams County.

Among these petitioners was Captain James White. He had moved to the peninsula to tend to a flourishing keelboating business he had started while homesteading in the Half Breed Tract near Montrose, Iowa. With him came an extended family: his two sons, Alexander and Hugh, a son-in-law, Isaac Campbell, and their wives and children. The men unloaded the deep-river steamers, moved the cargo through the rapids, and loaded cargoes onto the smaller steamers navigating the upper Mississippi. The Whites may have lived in the log house reportedly built by Denis Julien half a mile downstream from the wharf at the head of the rapids. In 1824, according to family tradition, White paid the Indians two hundred sacks of corn to secure title to his quarter section.21 Five years later, he built a handsome limestone dwelling using local stone and lumber. The two-and-a-half-story structure soon became a center for the social and political life of the emerging village.22

Active in Adams County politics, James White functioned as one of its three county commissioners. He served with his neighbors George Y. Cutler and Luther Whitney as judges of the fall election at Fort Edwards in 1829 that picked officers for the newly created Hancock County. Citizens elected the experienced White along with Cutler and Henry Nichols as the new county's first commissioners. These officers held quarterly commission meetings and all court sessions at White's new stone house.23

White's extended family and other settlers purchased land both on the flats and above on the bluffs extending eastward toward the prairie. Before long, homesteaders had built at least twenty homes within a mile radius of James White's limestone dwelling. As yet, these citizens had no town organization or formal name for the settlement beyond its identification as the place "at the head of the rapids." On March 13, 1830, in response to a petition from county commissioners, the United States Postmaster General named George Y. Cutler postmaster of a new post office to be known as Venus.24

At that time, Hancock County had only five hundred scattered residents. As the quarterly commissioners court and probate and circuit courts moved from place to place to meet the needs of citizens, the question arose of establishing a permanent county seat. Promoters at Fort Edwards (later Warsaw) most actively sought the honor. By then the largest town in the county, Fort Edwards was a thriving center of keelboat traffic and an export center for grain and livestock to St. Louis and other markets. Ignoring the plea from Fort Edwards, a county study committee followed an emerging Illinois pattern. They placed the seat of government at Carthage, a new settlement of scattered residents near the county's geographical center. For the residents of Venus, Carthage was an eighteen-mile trip southeastward along the Carthage Road. Carthage citizens applied for a post office immediately, and the state permitted the town to incorporate in 1837. Meanwhile, county commissioners hired a local builder to erect a courthouse of round logs in the summer of 1833. Six years later, they replaced it with a new building closer to the center of town. Another county necessity was a jail, completed in 1841 next to the original courthouse at a cost of $4,105. It was a two-story red sandstone building, providing space for the jailer's family and, upstairs, an extra bedroom and a small, secure iron cage for prisoners.25

While Carthage was establishing the structures of governance, citizens served by the Venus post office recognized in their cluster of settlers the potential for an important town.26 Local landowners Alexander White and Joseph Teas surveyed a townsite and recorded it in county records as Venus. They sold a dozen or so lots, but their expectations of a growing city did not materialize.27 By 1834, prospects for growth looked better, so White and Teas expanded their plat for Venus along the river northward and renamed it Commerce, a moniker reflecting hope for economic growth. Twenty-four of the town's 144 lots fronted the river, an appropriate location for keelboating and warehousing enterprises. Further expansion was possible, because the proprietors owned much of the adjoining land. The county approved the surveyor's plat in May.28 The name Venus gradually dropped out of use after Commerce became the sole mailing address for the peninsula.

By 1835, changing times had replaced Quashquema's abandoned Indian village and its bark lodges with a small town and a few log and frame homes. In the speculators' dreams for quick fortunes for themselves, the flats along the river bore promise of becoming a thriving commercial center. These expectations were part of the general optimism found throughout western America in the mid-1830s. The United States government had a multi-million-dollar cash surplus and a reliable currency backed through the Second United States Bank with gold or silver. New factories, their products protected by high tariffs, were foreshadowing a great industrial revolution. Cities were springing up all along the large rivers of the country. Especially was this noticeable in the Mississippi Valley. At St. Louis, people arrived faster than houses could be built. Unemployment was unheard of in the city, and laborers were in demand by burgeoning industries. St. Louis land speculators were reporting profits of as much as 1,000 percent in two years as farmland was divided into city lots. Upstream and down, on both sides of the Mississippi, promoters surveyed scores of townsites, recorded them at county seats, and spread their advertising brochures proclaiming the coming greatness of their cities. Each sponsor envisioned for his own proposal a second St. Louis.

Feeding the growth was an increasing foreign migration, particularly from the British Isles and the Germanic states of northern Europe. America's constitutional self-government appealed to people living under monarchies in lands surrounded by constant threats of war. Just as alluring to many was the chance to buy land inexpensively, almost an impossibility in Europe. Immigrants flocking to buy cheap land found it easily in the Great Lakes area and in the Midwest.

In the expansionist spirit of the age, Commerce, Illinois, was but one of many towns awaiting buyers for its platted lots and available farms. By the time the first Mormons visited Commerce, the early promoters of the area were gone, victims of the devastating national Panic of 1837. The Latter-day Saints would meet and deal with others who had replaced the White family and who would have an influence extending throughout and beyond the Mormon era.

One of those who befriended the Saints was Hiram Kimball, who arrived at Commerce from Vermont in 1835. Soon afterward, he set up his mercantile business and became a land agent for absentee family members. The Kimballs purchased hundreds of acres in the Commerce area when land values dropped during the economic slump.29

Another friend to the Saints was Kimball's neighbor Daniel H. Wells, an emigrant from New York in 1834. Among his landholdings was an eighty-acre parcel of land strategically situated on the bluff overlooking Commerce.30

A third important settler on the peninsula was Amos Davis, a Vermont native, who arrived at Commerce in the fall of 1836. Not quite twenty-two at the time, Davis married Elvira Hibbard, daughter of Davison Hibbard, one of the original land patentees. The couple purchased two lots from Hiram Kimball in Commerce. Amos may have worked in Kimball's store, but by 1838 he owned his own mercantile business, operated a tavern, and held the franchise for the Commerce-to-Montrose ferry. A surviving store ledger for May 1839 lists ninety-five active credit accounts, many of them farmers homesteading parcels on the peninsula and to the east. The Panic of 1837 may have dampened land business in Commerce, but Davis served a growing regional clientele and carried on a brisk trade with steamer captains, to whom he sold cordwood, grain, and local meat and dairy products.31

The original land purchases by the Latter-day Saints were negotiated with Isaac Galland and with an Eastern land syndicate. Galland was a developer of Keokuk, Iowa, and agent for thousands of acres in Iowa's Half Breed Tract. At Commerce, where he lived and served as postmaster, he owned the 47.17 acres of James White's tract, including the stone house, as well as the Alexander White home and adjacent lots.32

A second speculative town had been created in April 1837 north and west of Commerce. It was carved out of a five-hundred-acre parcel purchased over the previous two years by absentee landlords Horace R. Hotchkiss, John Gillet, and Smith Tuttle.33 The new townsite contained 376 lots of about 8,000 square feet each, with sixteen lots in each block. In contrast, the older Commerce plat had eight lots per block, each with 11,925 square feet. Hotchkiss and his associates promoted Commerce City with advertising handbills promising public parks and gardens, a town hall, hotel, and commercial warehouses, even though the official plat designated no land for public facilities. Lots were offered at a minimum price of $250. At an auction in May 1837, half a dozen bids were entered. Nobody actually built anything in Commerce City. Like so many speculators on the Illinois-Iowa frontier, the Hotchkiss syndicate owned only a "city on paper."34 The venture was ill-timed. The initial sale failed just as news reached Hancock County that major United States banks had suspended specie payments for currency. The great Panic of 1837, brooding since March, unleashed its gloomy portents upon the nation. Local banks failed everywhere (including the Mormon bank at Kirtland). Inflated prices for land quickly deflated as the bottom fell out of the real estate market.

A Resting Place for the Saints

It was this buyers' market that the fleeing Latter-day Saints discovered in the upper Mississippi Valley. Mormon militiaman Israel Barlow, making his way across Iowa and into the Keokuk area, encountered Isaac Galland. Learning that Galland wished to help the Saints find shelter at Commerce and farms near Fort Des Moines, Barlow hurried on to Quincy. There he convinced a meeting of Latter-day Saints chaired by John P. Greene that the offer should be investigated.35 Departing around February 1, Barlow and David W. Rogers traveled to Commerce, where they claimed to find as many as forty empty dwellings in the area. After making tentative arrangements to rent them, the agents crossed the Mississippi River to examine the military barracks built at Fort Des Moines during the Black Hawk War. These they estimated would house upwards of fifty families.36

The two men reported their findings in Quincy ten days later at a meeting chaired by William Marks, a former Kirtland high councilor. The explorers had set off to find winter housing and had done so. Beyond that, they had returned with information that raised a larger question. Only two high-level church authorities were available in Quincy, the former Campbellite colleagues Sidney Rigdon, a counselor in the First Presidency since 1832, and Edward Partridge, the guileless hatmaker who had been named the first bishop in 1831. The two had been released from Missouri jails and expelled from the state. One other high councilor besides Marks was in town, Elias Higbee, who had served in Missouri. Partridge, Marks, and Higbee all attended the meeting; Rigdon is not mentioned in the minutes. John P. Greene, spokesman for the agents, explained "that a liberal offer had been made by a gentleman [Galland], of about twenty thousand acres, lying between the Mississippi and Des Moines rivers, at two dollars per acre, to be paid in twenty annual installments, without interest." Rogers and Barlow encouraged purchase of the property. Marks tentatively supported the idea but wondered whether "we should again gather together."37

The question of gathering was on everyone's mind that winter. When Albert P. Rockwood arrived in Quincy near the end of January after a miserable twelve-day trek from Far West, the word circulating was "that the Prophet's advice for the brethren [was] to scatter, hold no meetings in this place, and be wise servants that the wrath of the enemy be not kindled against us." Rockwood wrote to his father, "It is thought by some we shall not gather again in large bodies at present, still we do not know. Our leader is gone. We have none to tell us what to do by direct revelation."38 Marks wondered aloud if the consolidated settlements in Caldwell and Daviess Counties had not been a significant factor in the Saints' expulsion from Missouri. Even so, he was willing to support the purchase of a new Iowa gathering place, "providing that it was the will of the Lord that we should again gather together." He proposed an open discussion, convinced that, even in the absence of the Prophet, if "the brethren would speak their minds, the Lord would undoubtedly manifest His will by His Spirit." Barlow offered another theory of the persecutions that the Saints had brought it upon themselves through their failure in "building according to the pattern." His explanation echoed the Fishing River revelation of 1834, which blamed the loss of Jackson County on the unwillingness of the Saints to live the law of consecration.39

After Mace encouraged "an immediate gathering," Bishop Partridge turned the thinking in the other direction. He "thought it was not expedient under the present circumstances to collect together, but thought it was better to scatter into different parts and provide for the poor, which would be acceptable to God." The bishop's comments convinced Higbee to abandon his strong support for the purchase. After hearing several other speakers, those at the meeting voted unanimously "that it would not be deemed advisable to locate on the lands for the present." Rogers so informed Galland in a letter written February 11. Even with this decision, which Sidney Rigdon supported, Partridge, Rigdon, and Higbee traveled to Commerce sometime between February 17 and 23 in company with Barlow as their guide. Hoping to meet Galland, they stopped at the old stone house, but the land dealer was away.40

Meanwhile, like Isaac Galland, the Hotchkiss syndicate welcomed inquiries from Mormon agents. Since first advertising Commerce City lots for sale in May 1837, the Hotchkiss partners had sold only one lot and still lacked clear title to all of their land. The Latter-day Saints were without funds but had much in their favor as potential buyers. First, they owned thousands of acres of improved farmland in Missouri. They could not return to their lands, but they could sell or trade. Second, they had a reputation as hard-working people of integrity with a strong sense of community cooperation. Even during the economic depression caused by the Panic of 1837, they had built up Far West, Missouri, and had commenced other cities.

With these factors in their favor, the Saints were able to buy property in the Commerce area. Joseph Smith had urged acceptance of Galland's offer in his March 20, 1839, letter from Liberty advising Mormon agents "to lay hold of every door that shall seem to be opened unto them to obtain foothold on the Earth."41 Galland was especially anxious to be helpful. In late February, the former minister informed one of the Mormon agents that although a stranger to the Saints and uninformed of "the doctrine, order or practice of the church," he saw himself as a friend, "both towards you collectively, as a people, and individually as sufferers." Joseph Smith responded with a long letter reviewing Mormon sufferings and outlining church beliefs. In a postscript, he accepted Galland's offer.42

In late April, the Prophet led a party north from Quincy to examine available lands on both sides of the Mississippi. On May 1, at Commerce, the men purchased the farms of Hugh White and Isaac Galland near the south end of the peninsula. For White's farm of 123.4 acres, the Prophet, his brother Hyrum, and Sidney Rigdon signed notes for five thousand dollars. For Galland's smaller 47.17-acre plot, plus other nearby land, the trio committed to pay nine thousand dollars. White turned over his small log house to Joseph Smith, while Galland gave up his two-story stone residence to Sidney Rigdon.43

The Prophet moved Emma and their four children into the log house on May 10, "hoping that I and my friends may here find a resting place for a little season at least." This did not end his traveling back and forth to Quincy, at least for a time. Compared with the trauma of the Missouri exodus, it was a leisurely season. While advising others on relocating at Commerce and conducting other church business, the Prophet found time on June 11 to sit down with his clerk, James Mulholland. On that day, Joseph Smith began a regular process of dictating his personal history, beginning with his youthful search for salvation in upstate New York.44

Other land purchases soon followed these first investments. On June 24, church agent Vinson Knight, soon to become bishop of Nauvoo's Lower Ward, acquired Galland's 13,000-acre parcel in the Half Breed Tract, together with the town of Nashville, Iowa, for more than $39,000. In mid-August, back in Commerce, church leaders made a large purchase from the Hotchkiss partnership with no down payment and nothing due on the principal for five years. In this acquisition, the church committed to pay $50,000 plus interest and fees for upwards of 500 acres on the Commerce peninsula. Located north of the first Mormon acquisitions, the parcel included the speculators' Commerce City and part of Commerce, both towns including valuable riverfront property where steamboat captains stopped to buy supplies and firewood from Amos Davis. The agreement, with interest and fees, payable in installments over twenty years, obligated the buyers for $114,500.45

On August 18, the church purchased William White's eighty-acre plot lying directly south of the Hotchkiss purchase; this bridged the gap between the Hotchkiss parcel and the land purchased in May from Hugh White. Apparently Hotchkiss shared an interest in this property with William White, because Hotchkiss received a $2,500 bond for the land and White a promise of $1,000 from Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. Hotchkiss also later added to this sale a ten-acre strip reaching west from the William White property to the river.46

These purchases created the original property upon which the new Mormon gathering place was platted. Joseph Smith called the new community Nauvoo. The name is the English phonetic spelling (nah-VOO) of a Hebrew verb meaning "beautiful." A similar word appears in the grammar book assigned to the Prophet by his Hebrew teacher, Joshua Seixas, in Kirtland.47 The verb is rendered "are beautiful" in Isaiah 52:7:

How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!

In a proclamation to the Saints, the First Presidency explained, "The name of our city (Nauvoo) is of Hebrew origin, and signifies a beautiful situation, or place, carrying with it, also, the idea of rest; and is truly descriptive of this most delightful situation."48

These understandings made Nauvoo an appropriate name for a city situated on the pleasant peninsula at the head of the rapids. More important for the Latter-day Saints who would live there, the implications of its religious meanings could be expanded. Nauvoo would become a city of refuge, where the Saints could rest from their troubles, as well as a place where they could unite in their search for an inner, spiritual peace.49

The name Nauvoo at first applied only to the newly platted area. Both the occupied town of Commerce and the speculative plat of Commerce City continued to exist on county records. Nauvoo merely included previously unplatted land on the peninsula. Commerce continued as an address for everyone, because its post office served the entire area. At first, Commerce was the name used in church publications, minutes, and other official records as well as in private correspondence. Before long, however, the minutes of meetings held within the new town adopted Nauvoo as the official place name, but most correspondence used Commerce until the Nauvoo post office commenced operation under its first postmaster, George W. Robinson, who was appointed April 21, 1840. Robinson operated the post office in James White's stone house, and it remained there after Robinson's father-in-law, Sidney Rigdon (who lived in the house), received the appointment on February 24, 1841. After the federal government recognized Nauvoo as a mailing address, Commerce as a place of reference quickly faded out of local use. As Nauvoo's population grew, the few residents of Commerce adopted that name and her government as their own. The city's promoters eventually vacated the old plats.50

Nauvoo would be the last name given to a place that had previously been known informally to the Indians as Quashquema, to the traders as the "head of the rapids," and to the early settlers as Venus and then Commerce. The change of name from Commerce to Nauvoo symbolized a shift in the central purpose of the community. Even so, both purposes would compete for dominance the secular ventures of building the area as a center of industry and commerce and the religious program of promoting the good tidings of salvation. Both activities also would create tension between new settlers and old-timers in Hancock County.

Nauvoo was planned to support a rural lifestyle in an urban setting. To allow space for orchards, gardens, and quarters for livestock, the blocks contained about four acres of land divided into four lots. (Many of these one-acre parcels were soon subdivided to serve a rapidly growing population.) Like most American towns of that era, no provision was made for commercial sections. Business in Nauvoo was truly a home industry, existing to sustain a people whose purposes were to find salvation for themselves and to thresh the nations seeking converts. On their residential lots, craftsmen set up shop and merchants set aside a room or erected a separate building for a store. Whether farmer, housewife, public servant, churchman, craftsman, seamstress, or laborer, the men and women of Nauvoo sought a substantial part of the basic foodstuffs needed to sustain life by cultivating a garden and orchard on their town lot. Religious, social, and cultural groups built halls without attention to anything resembling a master plan. The Prophet did not immediately designate a temple site within the city, but one was soon found in an 1840 addition to Nauvoo, the Daniel Wells property on the bluff, at the geographical center of an expanded Nauvoo and with a commanding view of the river.

Besides grazing and some farming on undeveloped areas within the city limits, there were large agricultural plots beyond Nauvoo, reminiscent of those planned for Adam-ondi-Ahman. For convenience, farmers often lived on their farms, a departure from the original Zion concept. But even for these people, Nauvoo was a place of special interest. Those in the surrounding countryside and other nearby towns made regular visits to the City Beautiful to participate in its commercial, social, and religious life.

The initial plat of Nauvoo, filed with the county recorder on August 30, 1839, contained about 80 percent of the 671 acres of the original four purchases. Excluded were that part of the town of Commerce not in the Hotchkiss purchase and most of Commerce City. The original Nauvoo also wrapped around the riverside land of an absentee investor named Munson. As a reference point, surveyors planted a stone pyramid in the ground at the northeast corner of what became Block 155, the site of Joseph Smith's log homestead. On paper, the town stretched two miles from the White and Galland purchases on the south to the Hotchkiss purchase on the north, a strip about half a mile wide for most of its length. The original plat contained more than five hundred potential building lots. As Nauvoo's population grew, city leaders opened up new areas in the Commerce City area, and other landowners annexed property along Nauvoo's eastern boundary. By 1843, Nauvoo had more than fourteen hundred potential building lots available (plus those further subdivided) in an area nearly three times the size of the original Nauvoo plat.51

The city grew because church members in small Latter-day Saint branches in the United States and in the British Isles responded to an invitation to find refuge in this place of peace. Missionaries were already at work gathering modern Israel, and Nauvoo had a clear role to play in that proselytizing effort. As the new Mormon resting place, the city would become the central focus of a renewed effort at gathering Latter-day Saints into compact religious communities. The idea had not died with the expulsion order in Missouri. The benevolence of Illinois proffered another chance, according to the First Presidency: "From the . . . necessity of the gathering of the Saints of the Most High, we would say, let the brethren who love the prosperity of Zion, who are anxious that her stakes should be strengthened, and her cords lengthened, . . . come, and cast in their lots with us, and cheerfully engage in a work so glorious and sublime, and say with Nehemiah, 'we his servants will arise and build.'"52

NotesChapter 3. A Beautiful Place of Rest

Epigraph: Joseph Smith and others, Liberty Jail, Clay County, Missouri, March 20, 1839, to the Church at Quincy and elsewhere, and to Bishop Partridge, in Smith, Personal Writings, 442, spelling and punctuation standardized.
