Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 4

Gathering the Saints

Go ye forth unto the land of Zion. . . . Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon. . . . Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh. Revelation to Joseph Smith, November 3, 1831

Where the fountain is, the Saints wish to be, and there is their asylum, and this of necessity requires a gathering together. Like cleaves to like, intelligence to intelligence, and Saint to Saint. Consequently the Brethren naturally desire to be together. Every effort has been made all the while to accomplish this grand object, but never did Providence seem to favor our wishes so much as at the present time. Newel K. Whitney to George Miller, February 15, 1845

A most important concept for understanding the history of the Latter-day Saints in the nineteenth century, including the Nauvoo years, is that of the gathering. Fully half of Joseph Smith's revelations received during the six-month period beginning in the fall of 1830 emphasized the need to prepare a people to receive the returning Christ. Two additional revelations in November 1831 reaffirmed the role of missionaries in sounding the warning voice and helping the righteous to flee from wicked Babylon to places of spiritual refuge to await the imminent Millennium.1 Early church publications reaffirmed and made widely available these basic teachings of a righteous people living together in harmony and love awaiting the Millennium.2 Preaching and gathering, to "declare both by word and by flight that desolation shall come upon the wicked," were clearly defined components in Joseph Smith's revelations and teachings about the church's mission for the last days.3

When Joseph Smith and his generation spoke of "the world," they meant the "wicked people" of the earth and their wicked deeds.4 To gather out of the world meant literally to isolate oneself from these wicked others, to establish a saving sanctuary apart from society's evils and evildoers.5 "God has told us to flee, not dallying, or we shall be scattered, one here, and another there," the Prophet said in 1839. "The time is soon coming," he added, "when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes."6 "It is emigration," the Twelve declared in 1841, "that is the only effectual remedy for the evils which now afflict the over-peopled countries of Europe."7 The Saints on that side of the Atlantic sought refuge in an American Zion, a New World of purity and promise. Those who already lived within the promised land found peace in congregations near their homes or headed west to the major gathering places, in Zion and her stakes.

The revelatory background to the doctrine of the gathering began with Joseph Smith's tutoring during successive visits by the angel Moroni, who quoted entire chapters from the Old Testament. During the translation of the Book of Mormon, the young prophet must have been impressed by the regularity of the Lord's promises to set his hand a second time to recover the remnant of his people. Then, he translated the book of Moses, which contained an outline of Enoch's original City of Zion, with a promise of its restoration in the last days.8

The terms the Prophet used to describe the gathering to others echoed the familiar images of peoplehood in the Bible and Book of Mormon the chosen family of God, a sacred society sharing a common interest in salvation.9 His own translations and revelations emphasized that there would be a coming together of all things from every period of Judeo-Christian history and the faithful remnant would be gathered. Conversion and baptism created saints in a New Testament sense; migration and temple covenants echoed Old Testament concepts to make modern Israelites.10

Many of those who gathered out of Babylon spiritually, by accepting the call to repent and be baptized, participated in a second, physical gathering as a further demonstration of their faith in the revealed word. In their letters and reminiscences, Latter-day Saints who gathered to Nauvoo in the 1840s saw their conversion and their migration as a seamless process. For them, to gather with the Saints meant two things: a condition of righteous living and residence in places of refuge. These converts saw themselves as both a Zion people (the pure in heart) and citizens of a designated Zion place (a new American Jerusalem, or its supporting branches and stakes).11 In the places of safety from a troubled world, the nascent saints were promised they would learn more about God's reward for choosing righteousness, "even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come."12

The doctrinal basis of the gathering defined the need to identify a righteous people and bring them together in religious congregations or communities. The church did not neglect those who, for whatever reason, did not migrate to the centers of the gathering. An ecclesiastical organization cared for the spiritual needs of members everywhere. Presiding elders were responsible to nourish the flock, to care for their spiritual and temporal needs, wherever they lived. Both of these aspects of the church's mission to bring souls to Christ by gathering them out of Babylon spiritually and physically and by teaching them the good word of God in congregations large and small, in stakes and branches in Nauvoo and beyond shaped the lives of Latter-day Saints.

The Geography of the Gathering

To accomplish the goal of building a vast Zion society, from time to time church leaders adjusted specific geographical expectations of the gathering to meet immediate needs. That was true both before and after Nauvoo became the headquarters of the church. Always, the strategy included the idea of a central city to serve as a headquarters and other places for outlying congregations. When building up a headquarters stake, leaders generally encouraged the Saints to assemble in or near that central gathering place. A focused gathering helped build up that city in anticipation of an ultimate presence in dozens of other major cities. The policy during the initial and final years of the Nauvoo period, however, permitted the Saints to cluster more broadly in the United States.

Implementation of a physical gathering began in 1831 with the Lord's command to gather to Ohio to join converts previously affiliated with Alexander Campbell. Near the same time, Latter-day Saints began moving to western Missouri to establish the center place of Zion in Jackson County. Joseph Smith taught that the central City of Zion (and, later, the cornerstone stake at Nauvoo) would give rise to other stakes. Instructions penned on the Plat of the City of Zion anticipated that the Saints would fill up the promised land with satellite gathering places for the righteous after the center place reached its capacity.13

The revelations anticipated that the plan for the City of Zion would not immediately succeed. The Lord's commission was to "lay the foundation for Zion." The designated gathering place would not be replaced or relocated geographically. Rather, the revelations anticipated "other places which . . . shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion."14

Expulsion from the designated center place in 1833 was followed by the creation of several new stakes of Zion in northwestern Missouri. After three years in Clay County, the church moved northward. Far West became the headquarters city-stake until 1838, with nearby communities as supporting stakes. This pattern was followed in western Illinois after a two-year period without a designated central temple city. With the rise of Nauvoo, the imperative to reclaim the center place in Jackson County, Missouri, was deferred.15 So were directives to build up other major gathering places.

During the period between the expulsion from the Far West area and the focus on the region around Nauvoo, church leaders allowed members to choose their own gathering places over a broad area in the safest and quietest places they could find, somewhere between Far West and Kirtland.16 "There will be here and there a Stake [of Zion] for the gathering of the Saints," Joseph Smith said in 1839. He authorized new Latter-day Saint settlements during the next two years and proposed other stakes for existing American cities.17

Then, to serve pressing spiritual and practical needs, the First Presidency in April 1841 called for a concentrated gathering to Nauvoo and nearby stakes. The Illinois legislature had approved a charter for Nauvoo. That document authorized a city government, a university, and a militia. Construction had begun on a temple and a hotel, and missionaries were steadily baptizing converts. It seemed to church leaders that a time of peace and prosperity lay ahead. "In the language of one of our own poets," an official statement noted, "we would say,

In Illinois we've found a safe retreat, A home, a shelter from oppressions dire; Where we can worship God as we think right, And mobbers come not to disturb our peace; Where we can live and hope for better days, Enjoy again our liberty, our rights: That social intercourse which freedom grants, And charity requires of man to man. And long may charity pervade each breast, And long may Illinois remain the scene Of rich prosperity by peace secured!

With a place of peace secured, the focus on building up the Nauvoo region continued for three years. Church leaders encouraged a united effort to populate a city and erect its public buildings. They did not neglect the far-flung branches during this time. Nauvoo's priesthood holders had been newly organized into quorums. The First Presidency encouraged similar structuring of the priesthood holders "in every stake and branch of the church, for the Almighty is a lover of order and good government."18

In April 1844, Nauvoo was thriving. Construction of the temple was moving forward. Once again, the Prophet brought to the forefront the master plan and sanctified it with "a great, grand, and glorious revelation" that defined Zion to include both North and South America. After receiving their ordinances in the temple, he said, selected priesthood leaders could set up new stakes in major cities of the United States and beyond. The Prophet's vision of filling the New World with gathering places remained his ultimate goal.19

Geographically, the focus for a headquarters city in the 1830s and 40s was at the far western boundary of the United States. The City of Zion was near displaced Indian tribes. Latter-day Saints believed these people would play a major role in building a millennial capital and its great temple. Both this theocratic seat of government, at Missouri's western limit, and Nauvoo, on the Illinois frontier, qualified as border towns. Although located at the very edge of the United States, Zion was for Latter-day Saints the center place. When early Mormon writers mentioned the American continent, they meant both North and South America. The millennial New Jerusalem was to be at its center.20

In a discussion of this idea, William W. Phelps described the Indian preserve between the Mississippi and the Rockies as the land of Joseph, a reference to Book of Mormon peoples, descendants of the biblical Joseph. This land, said Phelps, lay midway between the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Gulf of California and between Baffin's Bay in the Arctic and Cape Horn near the Antarctic. Parley P. Pratt anticipated that converted Gentiles would establish their gathering places in the region eastward from the millennial capital. In the wilderness to the west and extending through South America, he said, the continent's Indians would claim their inheritance. Pratt added: "Both the remnant of Joseph from the west, and the Gentiles from the east, [will] resort to the house of God, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel, to learn wisdom and to pay their devotions."21

Nurturing the Saints

Latter-day Saints who had been expelled from Missouri found their own places of peace, sought out nearby members, and formed local churches where they could focus on spiritual growth. Numerous new groups came into being, adding to the hundreds of congregations of varying sizes already existing from a decade of missionary labor. Throughout the Nauvoo period, numerous Latter-day Saints continued their affiliation with these bodies away from Nauvoo, in many parts of the United States and in the British Isles.

The organizational structure to serve these clustered Saints consisted of branches and stakes. The branch could serve the smallest of groups, as few as four or five people, under the jurisdiction of a presiding elder or priest. Sometimes the leading officer served with two counselors. Men who had been ordained elders, priests, teachers, or deacons in the branch were registered as "official members," that is, persons who held priesthood office. Unordained men and all women and children were enrolled as "regular members." A clerk in each branch kept a record of the members, with dates of arrival or baptism, ordination, and departure or death.

Sometimes a decade's work by missionaries had developed larger branches. These were entitled to a more complex organization, a dual set of leaders. A presidency of three high priests (a president and his counselors) looked after the spiritual affairs of the branch, while a bishop (sometimes with two counselors) managed the temporal affairs. Though it lacked a high council, a large branch was sometimes called a stake. The two terms were often used interchangeably in these congregations. The few larger groups that did have a high council had the most ideal stake government.

On a regular schedule, usually quarterly, delegates from each branch or stake attended an administrative assembly known as a conference. The geographical sector within which these branches were located was also called a conference. (In later years, the geographical term was district.) The presiding officer of the assembly took care of administrative needs, instructed the delegates, and received statistical reports on the number of members in various categories. In their capacity as a traveling high council, members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles regulated the business of the branches through the conference meetings, which they often attended. In Great Britain and the eastern United States, one of the Twelve often resided in the locality and exercised jurisdiction over all of the conferences as a president over that area.

Even as the exiles from Missouri were settling into dozens of gathering places of their own choosing, one of those locations emerged as a headquarters for the church. When Joseph Smith and his friends found refuge at the head of the rapids, Commerce became that place. For a short time, the Prophet encouraged everyone gathering nearby to congregate in what soon became Nauvoo. Church leaders had land to sell and loan repayments to make. But the church had purchased lands across the Mississippi as well. In April 1840, after Nauvoo had been sufficiently established, the Prophet relaxed his restriction and once again allowed the Saints to move onto the purchased lands in Iowa, "or wherever the spirit might lead them."22

The twin-cities area of Commerce and Montrose became part of greater Nauvoo. Because of a concentration of members resulting from an active promotion of building lots, both areas soon qualified for stake organizations.23 But with the presence of the First Presidency at Nauvoo, and, after 1840, the designation of the headquarters city itself as a temple site, Nauvoo's rise eclipsed in importance that of the Iowa stake and other new Latter-day Saint communities. Nauvoo became the hub of a clustering of settlements that reached out radially into nearby areas on both sides of the Mississippi River.

On the western shoreline of the Mississippi, the abandoned Fort Des Moines and other opportunities in nearby Montrose, Iowa, attracted dozens of fleeing Latter-day Saints. Purchase of a vast tract from land speculator Isaac Galland in the late spring of 1839 opened the land to sanctioned settlement. Hundreds responded to the opportunity to begin again on cheap land. By October, the Iowa Saints, like those at Commerce, had their own stake. With Montrose as its center, the Iowa stake reached out as far as forty miles north and west to include several small congregations scattered over three counties. The Iowa stake (soon renamed Zarahemla) claimed a significant Latter-day Saint presence. At a conference in August 1841, officials reported 750 members residing in nine branches. Among its members were many of Joseph Smith's relatives from his parents' families.24

At first, it appeared that stakes similar to those named Nauvoo and Zarahemla would flourish wherever sufficient numbers of Latter-day Saints justified an organization. Joseph Smith's April 1840 directive allowed the Saints living in and around Hancock and Adams County, Illinois, and Lee County, Iowa Territory, to remain where they had settled. Several communities soon requested stake organizations. The first of these, the Ramus stake, was created later that year to serve the Saints in the Crooked Creek settlement, twenty-two miles southeast of Nauvoo. After the October 1840 general conference, four new stakes were organized in Adams County and three elsewhere in Illinois.

With gathering sanctioned elsewhere in the United States, other congregations soon requested and were granted permission to follow the example of the Saints in the upper Mississippi Basin. The October 1840 conference allowed the Kirtland Saints to reconstitute a stake in Ohio. The following April, the Saints in Philadelphia and New York City received authorization for stake organizations. For these congregations, perfection of their local organizations meant the appointment of a presiding elder and two counselors as a branch presidency "to preside over the spiritual affairs of the church in this place" and a bishop and two counselors as a bishopric "to take charge of the financial affairs."25 Unlike the Saints living in Nauvoo, members in these urban stakes had no need to establish their own municipal governments. The Saints went about their way, a mere religious curiosity in the larger flow of society.

In Hancock County, the potential was different. The Latter-day Saints who moved into sparsely settled areas created both ecclesiastical congregations and the possibility of secular municipalities. The situation in eastern Hancock County exemplified the potential for replicating Nauvoo's boomtown growth in the nearby rural areas of Illinois and Iowa. The Latter-day Saints at Crooked Creek were delighted when Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith approved their July 1840 request for a stake. Joel H. Johnson became president and William Wightman bishop of the new stake. The local leaders took seriously their opportunities. "A stake has been organized," Johnson reported in November, "lands purchased, a town laid out, lots sold, and already quite a number of buildings, mechanical shops, etc., have been erected, and many more in progress." When the county surveyor platted the new Mormon town, he named it Ramus, a word with Latin roots meaning "branch," because the town was to be a branch of the church at Nauvoo.26

Some believed Ramus was better situated than Nauvoo because of the beauty of its prairie setting away from the river lowlands. Johnson touted its healthful location twenty miles inland from Nauvoo "in the midst of a beautiful and fertile country, surrounded by a variety of prairie and timber land, the soil rich and productive." Besides plenty of available town lots, in both the original town plat and a first addition, Ramus was surrounded by cultivated farms and mills, plus convenient creeks for more mills.27 The enthusiasm for building a city bode well for this new Mormon town (which, before long, was being called by a Greek name, Macedonia). The county had potential sites elsewhere as well.

Smaller branches outside the upper Mississippi headquarters region faced an uncertain tenure. Many of these scattered assemblies had existed for years; some sprouted in consequence of the Missouri exodus; others were raised up during the Nauvoo years through the efforts of missionaries. Because of new baptisms, apostasies, and migration, the branches constantly fluctuated in size. Sometimes they combined to form what was often termed a union branch. Taken together, the branches formed a widely scattered support network for the cornerstone stake at Nauvoo. Most of them sent funds to sustain construction projects in the headquarters city, enlisted subscribers for the church newspaper, and lost migrants to Nauvoo. Because of local kinship and friendship networks, the hometown branches often competed with Nauvoo for allegiance, but a number of them eventually dissolved when Latter-day Saints from their numbers gathered to greater Nauvoo.

In the first stage of the dispersion from Missouri, the paths of exile did not lead a large number to the Commerce area. Those for whom peace beckoned elsewhere often moved several times before settling in on their own farms. Many enjoyed the gracious hospitality of the people of Quincy, Illinois, but only a few stayed there for long. A good number found an enduring refuge elsewhere along the Mississippi River basin in the first tier of Illinois counties. When church leaders collected affidavits certifying losses in Missouri in the months and years following the expulsion, they found exiled Saints in ten counties in western Illinois and two in Iowa. To link these people with the church, by February 1840 the Times and Seasons had subscription agents serving in eight western Illinois counties outside Hancock County.28

A favored path from upper Missouri took many fleeing Saints along the Missouri River directly toward St. Louis. Had that booming river town not been in the state of Missouri, it might have attracted an even larger number. Missionary work in the mid-1830s had established a small Latter-day Saint branch there. St. Louis public opinion in 1838 opposed the Mormon expulsion from Missouri. Influential citizens condemned Governor Lilburn Boggs and through the winter welcomed refugees to a labor-hungry market. Local citizens even organized a Quincy-like fund-raising effort to help the exiles. The Saints who accepted refuge in St. Louis kept a low profile to avoid raising the expulsion issue, and some crossed the river to settle in the east-side shadow of the busy port. Even after Nauvoo emerged as the designated gathering place, St. Louis attracted and retained Latter-day Saints. British immigrants traveling upriver from New Orleans stopped at St. Louis to change boats; some stayed for months and even years. In addition, the scarcity of jobs in Nauvoo fueled a constant flow of laborers downriver, seeking temporary and long-term employment. By mid-1844, Heber C. Kimball reported as many as seven hundred members in the greater St. Louis area. The St. Louis branch itself, formally organized by local priesthood officers that spring, reported four hundred members at its peak in early 1845. Not all Latter-day Saints in the city remained faithful. According to Joseph Fielding, the area attracted those who "had been to Nauvoo but had not faith enough to live there." In nearby Belleville, Illinois, a handful of Saints organized a tiny branch.29

Another magnet for the Saints was the familiar territory of northern Ohio. The old Western Reserve had once been a favored gathering place, with more than two dozen branches functioning by 1838. The temple at Kirtland remained a physical reminder of the golden days of the early 1830s, and a sizable number of Latter-day Saints chose to remain (or return) there. Joseph Smith's directive from Liberty Jail named Kirtland as the eastern limit of the acceptable havens, and the old stronghold soon contended with Nauvoo for prominence. Branches also existed in southern Michigan.

In New England and the Atlantic States, Latter-day Saints who had not joined the migration to Missouri waited for direction, and some who had made the trek west returned to familiar scenes in their home states. The northeast attracted mostly those who had relatives willing to offer refuge. Throughout that area were kinfolk who had refused the message of the Restoration but who retained a willingness to nurture an errant son or daughter, brother or sister. In urban areas, concentrations of Latter-day Saints eventually resulted in relatively large branches, subject always to the diminishing effects of Nauvoo's primacy. The Philadelphia branch, organized in 1839, quickly grew to more than two hundred members. An active branch in Baltimore launched a short-lived newspaper, the Mormon Expositor, in 1842. A year later, the Boston area reported fourteen branches and hundreds of members. That same year the Peterborough, New Hampshire, branch had 115 members.

Some of the Saints hailed from the Southern United States, particularly from Kentucky and Tennessee. Many of these were converted as migrants in southern and central Illinois. They visited their ancestral homelands as missionaries during the 1840s but seldom went there to live. Except for Kentucky, Virginia, and North Carolina, not more than a few branches prospered in any of the Southern states.

In all of these North American areas, the nurturing of the Saints during the Nauvoo years continued as before. Branch leaders looked after the local Saints and welcomed returning members seeking safety from the Missouri extermination order. Those who had been gathered in this way met together to receive spiritual nourishment from local and traveling elders. They learned what they could of the Prophet's teachings at Nauvoo, but the church newspaper and word-of-mouth transmission sometimes left scattered members without a full understanding of key developments in doctrine.

In Great Britain, where missionary efforts harvested a vast number of converts, the organization for nurturing these new Latter-day Saints followed the same pattern previously established in North America. As in America, the reports at quarterly conferences that were passed along to the church paper reflected an active system of branches and conferences. In England, the first conference was established by Heber C. Kimball in Preston in 1837. During Nauvoo's founding years, the second wave of apostles expanded church organization to many other parts of the British Isles.30 As the Twelve prepared to return to Nauvoo, Joseph Smith counseled them to "be diligent, organize the churches and let every one stand in his proper place, so that those who cannot come with you in the spring may not be left as sheep without shepherds."31

Relocating to Headquarters

Nurturing the branches of Great Britain carried with it an implication somewhat different from the same process in America. Whereas the elders in America were always free to explain the gathering to Zion at Independence and, later, to her northern Missouri stakes, across the Atlantic the message was kept quiet. At first, the Twelve emphasized the need for the British Saints to remain at home. They told the men that every able elder was needed for the work of threshing the Old World for converts. They were not to teach the millennial revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants. Joseph Smith had advised the missionaries to focus on first principles. "Remain silent concerning the gathering," he counseled, until the church was firmly established.32

Even with this restriction, new members heard in the voice of warning sounded by the elders an urgency to withdraw not just from spiritual Babylon but from its temporal host as well. The call to repentance was nested in an apocalyptic pessimism about existing social and political conditions in the Old World. Public discourse and private correspondence convinced British converts that dire consequences faced their ancient nation. Some in England speculated that serious rioting between Whigs and Tories would lead to revolution and social upheaval.33 In addition, British cultural expectations ran parallel to Mormon concepts that cast America in the role of a promised land. Increasingly, missionaries and emigrant friends admonished the Saints to flee to the peaceful trans-Atlantic refuge.

By the end of 1840, migration was part of the gospel message in Great Britain. Besides, a yearning to meet the living prophet and listen personally to his counsel, a desire to live among the veteran Saints, and the promise of the temple added attractive reasons for breaking with the past. Commenting on the fervor of the English Saints to emigrate, Brigham Young said, "The Saints have got a start for to gather to America and go they will, and nothing can stop them. . . . They have so much of the spirit of gathering that they would go if they knew they would die as soon as they got there or if they knew that the mob would be upon and drive them as soon as they got there."34

Those who went first invited others to join them in the land of Zion. William Clayton, newly arrived in Nauvoo in 1840, advised his friend Edward Martin in England, "You must come or suffer the vengeance of heaven."35 But it was not just the millennial judgments expected upon the wicked and their cities that motivated converts to escape to Nauvoo. For the poor of England, the United States offered economic opportunity unavailable to many in Europe. The same inducements that attracted Americans from the Atlantic coast pulled the British westward. Land was cheap and fertile. A man could be his own boss and enjoy prosperity unheard of in the homeland. Emigration agencies active in England promoted America and published attractive guides to the land of opportunity. The Millennial Star praised the New World as a place of abundant land where life was less difficult. "Living [in America] is about one-eighth of what it costs in this country," the periodical advised. "Millions on millions of acres of land lie before them unoccupied, with a soil as rich as Eden, and a surface as smooth, clear, and ready for the plough as the park scenery of England." Then, to disabuse the would-be emigrant of a popular misconception of America as untamed wilderness: "Instead of a lonely swamp or dense forest filled with savages, wild beasts, and serpents, large cities and villages are springing up in their midst, with schools, colleges, and temples . . . , there being abundant room for more than a hundred millions of inhabitants."36

For Latter-day Saints, the American refuge offered physical safety along with inspired preaching and temple blessings.37 "The western continent is the place appointed of the Lord for the assembling of his people," the Millennial Star reminded the British Saints, "that they may learn his will, receive blessings at his hands, and escape the consequences of the fury that shall be poured out upon the nations."38

Nauvoo offered a special opportunity to be taught. Migrants from both sides of the Atlantic gathered there with eagerness to hear and see for themselves the man they accepted as God's living spokesman. "This day for the first time in my life did my eyes behold a Prophet of God," Millen Attwood wrote in his diary upon arrival from Connecticut. "I washt my body, bowd before the lord in thankfulness for the preservation of my life and the sight I beheld." These words mirrored an oft-repeated sentiment among those who gathered to Nauvoo in faith. "One Lecture from [his] mouth well repaid me for all my troubles and journeyings to this land, which were not a few," Alfred Cordon remembered. Newcomers to Nauvoo delighted in meeting this affable young man. "He was easy, free and sociable with all," Attwood discovered.39

The Millennial Star's reminder of a place of learning and refuge cited numerous scriptural arguments for the gathering but did not neglect the practical needs of life. It concluded with a reflection of America as an agricultural Eden:

Then away to the west, the glorious west, The land which the Lord hath greatly blest; Where the soil hath rested for ages past, To make a rich home for the Saints at last.40

Away to the west the Saints of the British Isles headed, beginning in 1840 and continuing through the Nauvoo years. The Twelve opened the doors to the British migration quietly in mid-April 1840 in response to an inquiry from Francis Moon. Spokesman Parley P. Pratt told Saints who lingered in Preston after a conference that the Twelve wanted to prevent a hasty, mass migration. Those desiring to leave, he said, should do so with as little public notice as possible. The policy echoed a pattern established in Kirtland and magnified in Missouri's exodus: Emigrants should use their resources to help others who were financially unable to gather.41

John Moon headed up the first British emigrant party, forty-one Saints who left from Liverpool on June 6, 1840. The voyage was rough, and many of the emigrants were seasick. But after they reached New York, Moon wrote back to friends in England, convinced of his decision. "You must expect great tribulation in the way to Zion," he said, adding, "I can say with truth that if things had been 10 times worse than they was I would just have gone right ahead through all." He found prices fair and commodities available and of good quality.42

The optimistic reports of the first British immigrants to Nauvoo and similar letters from later boatloads bolstered the desire among the British Saints to make the arduous trip. These encouraging words added a personal touch to the doctrine of the gathering. English immigrant John Greenhow published for his friends his discoveries of the stark contrasts between the old and new worlds. In vivid words, he compared the poverty and starvation among the English working classes with the comparative plenty and economic independence of the new migrants. "If peace and happiness is to be found in the world," he advised, "it is at Nauvoo."43 The clear message to the English Saints was that Nauvoo delivered an improved life in this world besides its promise of a better one in the next.

Not all who made the trip to Nauvoo stayed there. Some left feeling unhappy with conditions in the undeveloped city and found other places to live in the United States. A few returned to England. Those most disgruntled published their unhappiness, but Latter-day Saint elders in England quickly countered.44

Not surprisingly, opposition papers in Illinois picked up on the murmurings of dissatisfied immigrants, who often criticized frontier living conditions of the new city. The negative message that reached England depicted Nauvoo as a wretched place of log and mud cabins and knee-deep muddy streets, where people lived in poverty and starvation under "the awful delusion of Mormonism" and the "villainy and roguery" of its inhabitants. Church spokesmen responded that dissatisfaction was limited mostly to those with unrealistic expectations. "Those who have come expecting to find gold in our streets, and all the luxuries of an old country, will find themselves disappointed," they said, "but those who have maturely considered the advantages and disadvantages, are perfectly satisfied and contented." One such satisfied immigrant, William Rowley, expressed surprise at how far the negative reports had missed the mark. Discovering a boomtown under construction in late 1843, he found "a most cheering picture of the enterprise and industry of its inhabitants." In contrast with many other and older western towns seen along his trip up the Mississippi, Nauvoo looked very good.45

A few discomforts and a few malcontents did not halt the gathering. The first expedition under John Moon had sailed on a commercial route to New York City, America's busiest port. In August, comfortable that they had the support of the Prophet, the Twelve launched an official church-sponsored emigration program, complete with chartered ships.46 The second company of 1840 numbered 201 emigrants under the direction of Theodore Turley and William Clayton. When fifty of the Saints from Herefordshire could not come up with the fare, John and Jane Benbow paid for forty of them. Even with that subsidy, the party lacked the funds to complete the trip from New York. A number of these stranded Saints stopped off at Kirtland. Thereafter, church agents decided to route the British Saints through New Orleans, the world's fourth-busiest port. They also reinforced the need for a cooperative effort in the migration.47

Once the British floodgate to Zion was open, Brigham Young and his associates assisted in the enterprise and offered practical advice for getting to Zion. Ever mindful of the underprivileged, Young urged wealthy entrepreneurs to go first and build factories to employ the migrating poor. He warned against fraudulent emigration agents and urged the Saints to travel under church auspices. "A word of caution to the wise is sufficient," he said. By chartering a ship and purchasing provisions wholesale, a company could guarantee cheaper passage. It helped that Mormon voyagers usually took the poorest accommodations, in steerage. In addition, a chartered company steamboat at New Orleans would save half on the upriver passage. Traveling together would ensure good company en route and the advantage of experienced men as leaders. Hard coin such as sovereigns rather than American bank notes was the preferred money for emigrants, the Twelve advised; and the heat of summer was absolutely the wrong time to travel through New Orleans. Finally, to prevent fraud upon the Saints at Nauvoo, departing members were encouraged to take along letters of recommendation from the local elders to identify themselves as trustworthy Saints.48

Late in 1841, Parley P. Pratt reorganized the Mormon emigration agency. Without diminishing comforts, he halved traveling costs. "The entire expense of a passenger from Liverpool to Illinois (1500 miles inland), including provisions, will not exceed 25 dollars," he noted; "heretofore, it would cost them fifty at least." Pratt said that the economical plan astonished commercial agents in Liverpool.49

Between the first English boatload in 1840 and the last to Nauvoo in 1846, an estimated forty-eight hundred Latter-day Saints made the voyage from Liverpool. More than half the six-year total emigrated during 1841 and 1842 in seventeen voyages. England contributed significantly to Nauvoo's growth. Stranded in St. Louis with 250 British Saints, Parley P. Pratt observed in April 1843, "They are flocking as doves to their windows, from all parts of England and the States. . . . I think that thousands will land in Nauvoo in the course of the spring. Yes, as soon as the ice is out they will throng Nauvoo in swarms."50

The journey from Liverpool to New Orleans by sailing vessel averaged nearly eight weeks and often took twice as long as a trip to New York. From New Orleans, the steamship ride on a shallow-draft sidewheeler to St. Louis and then, often in a second boat, to Nauvoo, could add another two weeks to the trip. In low water, the river crafts sometimes ran aground on sandbars. The trip up the Mississippi on a noisy sidewheeler had its personal risks as well. Accidents of various kinds killed and injured hundreds of travelers each year. Disease claimed other victims, and rowdies sometimes assaulted passengers or stole their belongings. The Saints were not immune to these problems.51

For British converts, leaving home meant selling not only homes and land but most of their household goods as well. Shipboard passengers could take little more than the necessities and a few small personal treasures. Migrant Robert Crookston remembered, "Our Scots neighbors thought we were crazy, and as they knew we could not take much of our possessions with us, we had to sell everything at a great sacrifice."52 But with the dream of Zion firmly implanted within, Latter-day Saints left for their new homes with hope for the future. One company of 207 Mormon passengers leaving Liverpool in September 1841 looked down on hundreds of well-wishers and burst into song as the boat moved slowly out into the Mersey River, singing:

Lovely native land, farewell! Glad I leave thee, glad I leave thee, Far in distant lands to dwell.

As the American sailing ship lifted anchor the next morning and moved away "under the flag of liberty the American stars and stripes, with a majesty seldom surpassed," the Saints on the deck sang "How Firm a Foundation," a familiar hymn that would become a Mormon favorite. Its verses noted the trials of discipleship and reflected the emigrants' own dependence upon their newfound faith in Jesus Christ:

In ev'ry condition in sickness, in health, In poverty's vale or abounding in wealth, At home or abroad, on the land or the sea As thy days may demand, so thy succor shall be.53

The Call to Gather American Saints

Even as the first British Saints were landing in Nauvoo, a number of factors made their arrival timely. Nauvoo was taking on an aura of permanence and centrality among gathering places with a new city charter and the launching of a major church construction program centered on the temple and the Nauvoo House, an inn for world visitors. With these significant projects underway, the First Presidency was ready now to invite scattered Saints from every location to relocate in Nauvoo. It would take "the concentration of the Saints, to accomplish [this and other] works of such magnitude and grandeur," they said. For those interested in assisting in "the work of the gathering . . . , we say let them come to this place."54

Three months later, in a January 1841 revelation, the Lord commanded the Prophet to proclaim the virtues of the Nauvoo stake. Nauvoo had been "planted to be a cornerstone of Zion," the revelation said. Only in Nauvoo would the Saints be able to receive temple ordinances. These ordinances, Joseph Smith taught, would allow the elders to preach the gospel in power and build up and govern additional gathering places.55 Temples had been an important feature in every central gathering place before Nauvoo, and Nauvoo was both a temple city and the headquarters stake. Even though it was only one of several stakes of Zion designated "as a place of safety and gathering for the last days," it held a superior ranking in the years following the First Presidency's October 1840 proclamation and the Prophet's January 1841 temple revelation.56

Responding to the revelations, church leaders launched an active promotion of the new city. In a January proclamation to the church, the First Presidency applauded the virtues of Nauvoo as a healthy, rapidly growing city and endorsed the doctrine of the gathering as "a subject of paramount importance." Anticipating some opposition to this new emphasis, the presidency conceded that "the idea of a general gathering has heretofore been associated with most cruel and oppressing scenes." This time, because of "the liberal policy of our State government," they optimistically anticipated in Illinois "a scene of peace and prosperity."57

The Saints heard regular invitations thereafter to leave their homes elsewhere and move to western Illinois to help build the temple. In May 1841, the First Presidency decided to eliminate all stakes outside Hancock County, Illinois, and Lee County, Iowa. This meant the official end of the five gathering places in Adams County, although Lima, just outside the Hancock County border, remained an active branch. A directive from the First Presidency enjoined everyone living outside the two counties to move quickly to Nauvoo and help ensure "the prosperity of this the corner stone of Zion." The construction of a temple, university, and other edifices, they said, "can only be done by a concentration of energy, and enterprise."58 To accomplish these purposes, the physical gathering would, for a time, be centered on a single region, reflecting the pattern of northwestern Missouri. A clustering of communities was once again the designated place of peace.

To help manage this concentrated gathering, the Prophet expanded the responsibilities of the Twelve at the headquarters stake. Previously, the apostles had traveled about on foreign missions or regulated those American branches without a high council. Among their new assignments was the task of helping immigrants get settled in designated refuges Nauvoo, Ramus, and Warren in Hancock County, Illinois, and Zarahemla and Nashville in Lee County, Iowa. Warren, near the foot of the rapids on the Mississippi, one mile below Warsaw, was a new Latter-day Saint town endorsed by the Twelve and given their special attention. It had the advantage, they said, of proximity to the steam flour mill and lumber mill at Warsaw, a town of about five hundred residents. As an authorized place for settlement, it fulfilled the Saints' obligation to "stand in holy places" as the end of time approached.59

The newly formed Ramus stake at Macedonia in eastern Hancock County had been exempted from the consolidation during the summer of 1841. But in December, Hyrum Smith presided over its dissolution, accompanied on the assignment by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, and John Taylor of the Twelve. Relieved of his responsibilities in managing the business side of the stake, Bishop William Wightman transferred to church trustee Joseph Smith the deed to all remaining unsold lots, notes from buyers, bonds on expansion property, and other resources. Besides the original plat and first addition, the bishop had anticipated future expansion by bonding for the property of John F. Charles and that of Ute and William J. Perkins, some newly converted old-timers. The church accepted all of these obligations along with ownership of the unsold property.60

The refining of the policy of the gathering in 1841 soon created a major Mormon core area in and around the Nauvoo stake and two minor clusters of settlements nearby. One of these clusters reached out twenty-five miles to the eastern border of Hancock County and another stretched an equal distance south to its boundary with Adams County. The old citizens at Warsaw and Carthage understood very well the potential effect of these settlement patterns. The old settlers in Nauvoo's commercial rival at Warsaw and her political nemesis at the county seat in Carthage were being surrounded by citizens they neither understood nor trusted. The Warsaw Signal promised to protect Latter-day Saint religious rights, but, its editor asserted in a prescient warning in May 1841, "Whenever they, as a people, step beyond the proper sphere of a religious denomination, and become a political body, as many of our citizens are beginning to apprehend will be the case, then this press stands pledged to take a stand against them."61 Established residents could see their control of local politics shifting into the hands of a new majority, influenced, they suspected, by the leadership of a few. As the Latter-day Saints increased in numbers, Hancock County became increasingly and controversially Mormon country. The success of the gathering merely intensified the exchange between Nauvoo, the place of peace, and Warsaw, a center of opposition.62 Two societies one a covenant community seeking to unite all aspects of life, the other organized under a civic contract of individual effort moved toward certain conflict.

The increase of population in the Nauvoo-Montrose area came about because the Saints responded positively to the call of religious gathering, although evidence is difficult to find concerning departures from nearby settlement clusters. From farther afield, reports document a small but steady departure of Latter-day Saints from branches throughout the Northeast and the upper South. A missionary passing through New York City en route to England reported in late 1840 that there were four hundred members living in western New York State and that another one hundred had emigrated westward. At almost every conference of members, tallies of membership in the branches were amended by the numbers who had departed for Nauvoo. When Isaac C. Haight resigned his presidency of the branch at Moravia, New York, in 1842 to move to Nauvoo, he was followed by Saints in nine other wagons who, on July 24, joined "God's people in Zion." In the six-month period ending in May 1843, the New York City branch lost a quarter of its 160 members thirteen to excommunication and twenty-five to Nauvoo. The New York conference voted to excommunicate "any Elder who taught doctrine contrary to the spirit of gathering" if he did not repent. That singlemindedness in doctrine supported the call to Nauvoo, and church agents made the decision easier by offering to trade the land of departing Saints for property in Nauvoo.63

To get to the cornerstone stake in Illinois, emigrants in the East took established routes along rivers and rail and canal lines. The trip from New York along the Allegheny Portage Road crossed the mountains by railroad. The cars reached an elevation of nearly twenty-four hundred feet, assisted on the steep inclines by cable and stationary engines. From Pittsburgh to Cincinnati, travelers followed the "canal," a term used to refer, in part, to the Ohio River.64 Converts from Kentucky joined the migration at steamboat ports in Cincinnati and Louisville, or they followed established roads from Louisville across southern Indiana through Vandalia to the Mississippi and from there along the river road to Quincy and Nauvoo. The Kirtland Saints joined the Ohio River route at Cincinnati or took a northern course along the Erie Canal from the Hudson River above Albany, New York, to Lake Erie. Passengers continued by lake steamer to Detroit and then went overland across northern Indiana and Illinois to their destination at Nauvoo.65

Many of the Saints chose commercial transportation for this most important trip of their lives. They crated their goods and shipped them west. Others loaded wagons and managed their own freighting to Nauvoo. To help those yet to make the trip, American travelers, like their English cousins, shared the experience in letters home to friends and family, with details of the trip its costs and comforts and descriptions of the new City Beautiful.66

Perhaps church leaders feared that their glowing praises of the new Eden at Nauvoo would disappoint some emigrants. As an occasional British emigrant had done, a few Americans went home after realizing that Nauvoo was not all that they had expected. For many United States returnees, the disillusionment lay not in the promises buried under the prairie sod but in the paucity of sainthood in Nauvoo's people. Apparently, they had expected the gospel net to be more selective in its harvest. Even though all Latter-day Saints were expected to live a minimum standard especially those who gathered to the places of righteousness some did not.67 As the Times and Seasons editorialized in 1842, "Nauvoo, at present is, figuratively, the great fish market of the earth, where all kinds, both good and bad, are gathered where the good are preserved, and the bad cast away for until the savior comes, there will be wise virgins and foolish; blessed are they that continue to the end faithful."68

The First Presidency had warned against such disappointments as early as January 1841. Those arriving in Nauvoo "must not expect to find perfection, or that all will be harmony, peace and love," the presidency cautioned. The city included people from many states and several nations. Despite their common religious conversions, they said, individuals "have their prejudices of education, and . . . there are many that creep in unawares, and endeavor to sow discord, strife and animosity." Church leaders encouraged migrants to tend to their own personal righteousness and to exercise patience "until 'the floor be thoroughly purged' and 'the chaff be burnt up.'" Subsequent statements cautioned those "who may feel disappointed in not finding the saints angels, to first cast the beam out of their own eye."69

From this counsel on interpersonal relationships in Zion and her stakes came an attitude and a commonsense aphorism popular in Missouri and often repeated in Nauvoo: "Mind your own business." As Amasa Lyman explained it, "Never be troubled about others' concerns but trouble yourselves just enough about your own, and not too much."70 In short, the gathered Saints were counseled to be tolerant of imperfect people and leave them alone. The better effort would be to demonstrate through their own faith and actions what it meant to be a covenant people.

The traveling elders carried the message of the gathering everywhere, but some Saints simply stayed put. The reasons for remaining outside the stream of Saints gathering to Nauvoo varied with each individual including matters of faith, funding, or family pressures. Some were short on zeal; others lacked financial resources. Unbelieving friends and families discouraged some, or even drew them into apostasy. Snug homes and adequate incomes held still others back. For many who were living comfortably away from the designated cornerstone stake of Zion and its satellite communities, small Latter-day Saint congregations elsewhere satisfied their spiritual needs.

Convincing lingering Saints in the Kirtland area to abandon their established homes and farms and the church's first temple proved an especially formidable challenge. Ironically, in the early 1830s, they had wanted to move west to Jackson County, but a revelation counseled them to retain a stronghold in Ohio for five years.71 That barrier expired in September 1836, opening the way for the removal of more than sixteen hundred Saints to northern Missouri over the next two years. (Most of these people eventually resettled in the Nauvoo area.) Remaining behind in Kirtland in the 1840s were nearly 30 percent of the membership, or around six hundred people. Most of them remained loyal to Joseph Smith.72 Some entrenched leaders left Kirtland for Far West in 1838 only because the Prophet chastised them in the name of the Lord and offered them new opportunities in Missouri. That is how William Marks became president of the Far West stake, Newel K. Whitney a bishop "not in name but in deed" in Adam-ondi-Ahman, and Oliver Granger the proprietor of a proposed church mercantile store.73 Among the leaders remaining in Kirtland were dissidents whose actions gave the city an ill-earned reputation as a center of apostasy.74

As Nauvoo began attracting settlers, the Kirtland Saints who had been displaced from Missouri wondered if they should anchor themselves in Hancock and Lee counties or exercise the option of the Liberty Jail advisory and return to Kirtland. The First Presidency and Nauvoo high council in December 1839 acknowledged the agency God had given individuals to decide for themselves but urged the Kirtland Saints to remain in the Nauvoo area and accept that advice without murmuring.75

The following October, Kirtland gained short-lived recognition as a gathering place for the Saints from the East when the general conference held in Nauvoo accepted Joseph Smith's proposal to authorize a new Kirtland stake. Seven months later, the First Presidency disbanded all stakes except those in Lee and Hancock counties, thus returning Kirtland to its peripheral status.76 Nonetheless, a council there quickly found in the revelations a justification for multiple gathering places. With this support, the former stake president, Almon Babbitt, advocated a continuing role for Kirtland as an administrative center and publishing hub. Ignoring a January 1841 reprimand for failing to follow counsel, he led an October conference that revived programs to help the poor, designated elders to serve as missionaries, and authorized a new religious periodical, The Olive Leaf. These actions heightened tension and placed Kirtland in direct competition with Nauvoo in a challenge to centralized authority.77

While the Kirtland Saints were approving these actions, a conference in Nauvoo disfellowshipped Babbitt for his intransigence and for encouraging British immigrants and others to settle in Kirtland. Nauvoo's Times and Seasons published an itemized rebuke of the errors of the church in Kirtland. Written by Hyrum Smith, the article called upon the Kirtland Saints in the name of the Lord to move to Nauvoo to help build the temple and enjoy its blessings. The letter declared that a formal branch in Kirtland was "not according to the spirit and will of God" nor were plans for setting up a printing press, the ordaining of elders, and the sending out of a committee "to beg for the poor." Surplus funds, the directive said, were needed for the Nauvoo Temple. The Lord's will was to develop Nauvoo first and then enlarge Kirtland as part of the premillennial master plan to fill up North and South America. The strategy in 1841 was to work toward that end one step at a time.78

Babbitt's counselors and the Kirtland bishopric next appealed the decision in a letter to Joseph Smith. Convinced of their loyalty, in December 1841 the Prophet granted their request for a temporary continuation of the stake as long as its leaders did not persuade westering immigrants to stop short of Nauvoo. Acknowledging their efforts and the desire of those wanting to stay, the Prophet said, "You may as well continue operations according to your designs . . . but do not suffer yourselves to harbor the Idea that Kirtland will rise on the ruins of Nauvoo."79

Despite this uneasy truce, a number of the Ohio Saints left. One of them told Lyman Wight that he was anxious to raise his children among a community of the faithful. "His oldest daughter," Wight reported, "said that she had always wanted to go to Nauvoo ever since she had heard there was a Nauvoo."80 Overall, the effort to bring the Saints out of Kirtland during the mid-1840s was reasonably successful. Even so, that comfortable location remained an important, though tenuously sanctioned gathering place for some Latter-day Saints.

Farther to the east, in the Northeastern states and eastern Canada, lay the homelands of many of the church's first members and prominent early leaders. Those who answered the call to gather first to Ohio and Missouri and then to Illinois left behind family, friends, and farms. Many traced a proud heritage to America's Anglo-American colonists and the patriots of the American Revolution. These important economic and kinship ties had kept some converts from leaving. They remained as gathered Saints in dozens of small hometown church branches, each supervised by a presiding elder. The number of branches and their members changed constantly as new converts joined the church and others migrated. During the 1840s in New York State, for example, presiding elders reported members in sixty-eight different branches ranging in size from fewer than ten members in many of the smaller village branches to more than two hundred in New York City.81 Members lived in small clusters in every other northeastern and Atlantic seaboard state as well. During the Nauvoo years, besides those in New York State, at least 109 branches operated at one time or another in this region.82

Across the border in eastern Canada, energetic missionary work in the late 1830s had generated at least thirty-eight branches serving about two thousand members. Most were English-speaking residents of upper Canada in the Great Lakes area. A few English-speaking Latter-day Saints could be found in Protestant townships south of the predominantly Catholic, French-speaking areas of lower Canada. Converts were made as well in the Maritime Provinces. Most Latter-day Saints in British North America moved to Missouri in the 1830s. Many of the remainder joined the migration to Nauvoo. Thus, during the late Nauvoo years, few Latter-day Saints remained in Canada. Missionary contacts were infrequent and relatively unfruitful.83

Nor were many Latter-day Saints living in the Southern United States at the beginning of the Nauvoo period. Sustained missionary work in that area was yet future. Preaching would increase in the 1840s as the elders of Israel expanded their work of warning the world.

For all who heard and accepted the message of the gathering, the invitation to repent and prepare for the Savior's return to earth changed their lives. Through the ordinances of baptism and conferral of the gift of the Holy Ghost, they launched a spiritual withdrawal from the world and accepted membership in a society seeking to protect itself from worldliness. Many of these converts left family, friends, and livelihoods as they relocated from local branches to central gathering places. Those who crossed the Atlantic or moved west from hometowns in North America during the years of Nauvoo's preeminence, 1841-45, found themselves in a place of growing civil and religious influence as the booming city of Nauvoo became a spiritual beacon (and a political lightning rod) in the wilderness of western Illinois.

NotesChapter 4. Gathering the Saints

Epigraph: Revelation to Joseph Smith, November 3, 1831, in D&C 133: 9, 14, 17; Newel K. Whitney to George Miller, February 15, 1845, Whitney Collection, BYU Library.
