Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 5

Nauvoo's Magna Charta

The legislators of this state, . . . without respect to parties, without reluctance, freely, openly, boldly, and nobly, have come forth to our assistance, owned us as citizens and friends, and took us by the hand, and extended to us all the blessings of civil, political, and religious liberty, by granting us, under date of December 16, 1840, one of the most liberal charters, with the most plenary powers ever conferred by a legislative assembly on free citizens, "The City of Nauvoo," the "Nauvoo Legion," and the "University of the City of Nauvoo." First Presidency, January 15, 1841

Latter-day Saints of the Nauvoo period wanted the communities where they lived to provide a moral haven for their families. As a religious people, they strived for holiness by withdrawing from worldly attractions and temptations. To support this objective, they endorsed laws and lifestyles in their neighborhoods consistent with their own ideals. In addition, they wanted to live free from religious harassment. They wanted protection for the constitutional rights denied them in Missouri. To achieve this goal, they sought to elect public officials who would protect their civil and religious rights.

Because of this active citizen involvement in the public arena and because of the religious views of government held by Nauvoo's Latter-day Saints, the lines between church and state sometimes blurred. In Nauvoo (and, later, in Salt Lake City), local civil government began with a religious forum resembling a town meeting. Eventually, these central gathering sites not only were places to live apart from the world but became municipalities as well. As civil governments, the cities functioned under established legal principles alongside a separate but interested ecclesiastical organization.

In western Illinois, as in northwestern Missouri, citizens took seriously the operation of local government. County officials held the most significant authority and were the most politically important public servants. Following a pattern most strongly established in Southern states, the county provided such basic services as roads, business licenses, a judicial system, and law enforcement through the sheriff and the county jail. The county served residents in unincorporated areas known as townships and offered some benefits to citizens within organized towns and cities.

Town government in Illinois was available under an 1831 law to any cluster of 150 or more settlers. After registering with the county a plat no larger than one square mile, citizens sought incorporation through the state legislature. Commerce, Carthage, Warsaw, and most other Illinois communities functioned as towns. An elected five-member board of trustees appointed a justice of the peace and such other officers as policemen, assessors, and tax collectors. The town board could enact local ordinances; issue licenses; provide for streets, sidewalks, and fire protection; and levy taxes on real estate.1 Larger communities could seek incorporation as a city by requesting a legislative charter. This created a relatively independent, self-governing community with expanded legislative and judicial powers. These options were available to the Missouri exiles seeking refuge in Illinois.

Government before Incorporation

When Nauvoo was first platted, the few residents used the traditional services of Hancock County and the justice of the peace and post office of the town of Commerce. Instead of organizing as a town under Illinois law, they adopted an ecclesiastical approach. For sixteen months, until a municipal government was set up, a religious body known as the high council functioned in a dual role as a town board and in its traditional ecclesiastical capacity. For a religious group whose millennial worldview defined all aspects of life as ultimately spiritual, this was not an unusual mingling of civic and religious governance.2

High councils of twelve men appointed by church leaders and headed by a president, with or without two counselors, had been an important administrative-judicial body since 1834 in larger Mormon congregations, or stakes.3 These bodies had functioned in Kirtland, Ohio, and in Jackson County, Missouri, essentially for ecclesiastical purposes. In its judicial role, the council heard grievances between and against individuals. As a church governing council, the group approved appointments and ordinations. In Far West, Missouri, the high council managed the sale of building lots on church-owned property, a quasipublic function.4

This precedent set the stage for an expanded role for a high council in the unincorporated Nauvoo area. A church conference authorized the council in October 1839 when it approved Joseph Smith's proposal that Commerce be "appointed a stake and a place of gathering for the Saints." The stake included the newly platted Nauvoo, the incorporated town of Commerce, and the region extending into the farmland to the east. William Marks was named stake president, with no counselors. He had served as the presiding elder in Commerce since early May and was a former high councilor in Kirtland. Of the twelve men named to the high council in Nauvoo, half had served elsewhere in the calling.5

From the time of their appointment until the transition to a city government was completed, the high council kept one eye on ecclesiastical needs and another on the process of getting a community up and running. At its weekly Sunday evening gatherings in the homes of council members, the group deliberated and issued resolutions to meet the day-to-day needs of residents as church members and as citizens. Council regulations were published in the Times and Seasons for all to see.6 After Joseph Smith became a regular attender at the high council meetings in the spring of 1840, the body met on Saturday afternoons in his log home office and began to conduct certain business for the entire church.7 This pattern had been set when Kirtland was the seat of church government. It exemplified the foundational principle of making important decisions in conferences and in leadership councils.8

The Nauvoo high council had precedents to follow in both town and ecclesiastical governance. The obvious civic model was that of the New England town, whose business included "land distribution, appointment of town officers, economic regulations and taxes, church affairs, farming, personal quarrels in the community, relations with neighboring towns, relations with Indians, and relations with the [state] government."9 The guide for religious responsibilities was easily found in the revelations that defined the first high council in Kirtland and in additional instructions from Joseph Smith.10

That the high council operated in both arenas can be seen in a synopsis of typical actions. Among its first civic decisions were resolutions regulating ferries and stray animals.11 The council devoted considerable attention to the sale of town lots from parcels owned by the church.12 It regulated the construction of business buildings a boarding house in upper Commerce and a water-powered mill adjoining Nauvoo. The council helped launch a public school system by appointing trustees, an architect, and a building committee for a stone schoolhouse. It appointed a committee to petition the legislature for changes in the boundaries between Nauvoo and Commerce, which had been subsumed into Nauvoo. Finally, it organized a committee that included representatives from the Iowa high council to gather affidavits itemizing grievances against Missouri and appointed delegates to seek redress in Washington for these losses of personal property.13

The other side of the high council's enlarged role was the regulation of ecclesiastical affairs of a general nature under the oversight of the First Presidency. As an ad hoc board of publications, it authorized a hymnbook, launched a religious newspaper, and sponsored a new edition of the Book of Mormon.14 Certain economic matters that Nauvoo bishops could not resolve were handed to the council. It agreed to complete an office for the church president, provide financial support for the families of full-time church leaders, and arrange housing for the worthy poor.15 As requested by Joseph Smith, the council authorized agents to conduct church business in the East. It advised against plans by certain Latter-day Saints to move back to Kirtland.16 To resolve another lingering question, it released Missouri exiles from their written pledges to fund the Far West Temple. At times, the council regulated priesthood quorums but not without challenges from those somewhat self-reliant groups.17 Along with these administrative duties, the council exercised its basic judicial function in the stake by resolving disagreements between members and by deciding issues of individuals' standing in the church.18

With no legal status under state law, the council's only recourse against individuals who acted contrary to its regulations was disfellowshipment from the church. Thus, the council threatened to withdraw fellowship from anyone who operated a Commerce-Montrose ferry in competition with the one they had sanctioned or who allowed stray livestock to destroy crops. Similar sanctions were applied against those who blatantly ignored its spiritual counsel or whose personal behavior flouted church standards.19 This was a powerful tool, for in a religious society to be excluded from fellowship effectively curbed a person's opportunities political, economic, social, and religious.

The high council began the shift to an exclusively religious role during 1841. The process began in February, after a city government took over temporal affairs and a special religious meeting appointed Joseph Smith as sole trustee over church finances.20 Even with a civil court system in place, the council encouraged Latter-day Saints to bring to it all but the most serious issues. The body also continued to help the First Presidency with certain temporal matters until the Twelve returned from England that fall. Transferred to the apostles at that time were responsibilities for "the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the stakes," such as managing "all debts and temporal business."21

By February 1842, after a year in transition, members of the Nauvoo high council were ready to formally reemphasize their normal role "as watchmen upon the walls of Zion." Accepting an exclusively religious focus, the body became Nauvoo's conscience and schoolmaster. An open letter to local residents promoted social union and counseled against gossip, trivial lawsuits, immorality, drunkenness, theft, and other un-Christian conduct.22

Local governments for the Latter-day Saints who were assembling on church lands in the Montrose area of Lee County, Iowa, followed the Nauvoo pattern. So did some later branches in western Illinois. When questions of general policy surfaced, or when matters involved people from different stakes, Joseph Smith and his counselors in the First Presidency formed the bridge to encourage uniformity of action or to resolve issues.23

The same conference that established the stake at Commerce set up a stake for "the west side of the river, in Iowa Territory," with John Smith, the Prophet's uncle, as president. He was assisted by two counselors, a high council, and two bishops. The Iowa stake presidency and council met infrequently, as needed, on various days of the week and in rotating meeting places, but often they met at Montrose in the home of Elijah Fordham, one of Smith's counselors. Within two years, the stake was serving 750 members in nine branches over a three-county area, with the greatest concentration in the Montrose area.24

One of those branches was named Zarahemla, organized to serve a townsite chosen by Joseph Smith in 1839. The community did not attract many settlers, nor did it expand as anticipated to envelop the adjacent village of Montrose. A revelation in March 1841 designated Zarahemla and Nashville, three miles south of Montrose, as Iowa's central gathering places. Zarahemla grew to thirty homes that summer. At an August conference, the Zarahemla branch, which included the Saints living in Montrose, reported 326 members, the largest congregation in Iowa. The Ambrosia branch, two miles farther west, served another 109 scattered members. Nashville had 90. In August, under the direction of two members of the Twelve, the Iowa stake was renamed the Zarahemla stake. This name had meaning for the exiled Missouri Saints in Iowa. Zarahemla was an ancient American land of refuge for a Book of Mormon people who fled Babylonia's conquest of Jerusalem in 587 to 586 b.c. Later on in the Book of Mormon narrative, the city of Zarahemla became the center of political, military, and religious life for the Nephite people.25

Under John Smith's direction, the Saints in Iowa strived to build an ideal Zion society, but their efforts were not without challenges. In its efforts to address social and civic needs, the Iowa high council faced a number of issues carried over from Missouri. In the civic arena, for example, the council recognized the impracticality of requiring impoverished exiles to pay what they owed others. So, personal debts that Latter-day Saints had incurred in Missouri among themselves, including debts consecrated to Missouri's bishop, were invalidated. Related civil suits between members were forbidden, upon penalty of disfellowshipment. In other civic actions, the council implemented the Nauvoo high council's request to collect affidavits on property lost in Missouri. And it threatened to disfellowship Montrose branch members who persisted in keeping tippling shops.26

In its strictly religious rulings, the Iowa high council struggled with questions about the system of religious consecration that had been implemented unsuccessfully in Missouri. Conscientious exiles wanted to honor their Missouri consecrations. How else, they wondered, could they achieve the desired unity and equality of a Zion people? The council reminded them that the plan in Missouri for sharing surplus wealth to help the poor had been supplanted by the law of tithing. A Nauvoo sermon by Hyrum Smith supported this perspective. Until the Saints were restored to their confiscated Missouri property or compensated for their losses, he said, it was folly to try to keep that law of the Lord. Even after hearing his nephew's sermon, stake president John Smith struggled with the Iowa council's decision. The council revisited the question and reinstated the law of consecration after President John Smith convinced them that the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were still binding. It took a visit by Joseph and Hyrum Smith in March 1840 to finally resolve the issue. Supporting Hyrum Smith's perspective, the Prophet told the council that it was the Lord's will to suspend all efforts to apply the consecration law at that time and place.27

Acquiring the Charter

Nauvoo's founders did not intend the new settlement to continue indefinitely without a civil government. By practice, by revelation, and by proclamation, the Saints had subjected themselves to secular rule under a Christian tenet that defined compatible allegiances to both God and Caesar.28 When their spiritual expectations were misunderstood in Kirtland, Latter-day Saints had adopted a declaration on governments that defined separate roles for civil and religious powers. That August 1835 statement bound the Saints "to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments." While faithful American Latter-day Saints looked forward to the ultimate reign of the millennial Christ, they lived under a federal constitution that preserved the autonomy of religion. They celebrated and emulated this American inheritance in Nauvoo because it guaranteed a neutral secular state that protected all religions without favoring any one.29

Before initiating a request for incorporation, the leaders of Nauvoo's covenant community presented the idea to a religious gathering, the October 1840 general conference. This gathering followed the pattern of the area's high councils. Echoing the role of a New England-style town meeting, the conference considered matters both temporal and ecclesiastical ordinations and appointments, thieves and debtors, new stakes and a house of worship, the debt on Nauvoo's land, publications, persecutions, and a civil government for Nauvoo.30

Leading the way on incorporation, under Joseph Smith's direction, was Nauvoo newcomer Dr. John C. Bennett. The thirty-six-year-old physician had moved to Nauvoo from Fairfield, in neighboring Wayne County, just a few weeks earlier. Prior to his relocation, in letters to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, Bennett had used his typical flattery to declare his intent to accept "an immediate immersion into the true faith of your beloved people." "I hope that time will soon come," he wrote, "when your people will become my people, and your God my God."31

Bennett had first met Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon when introduced to them by William McClellin in Kirtland in 1832, a meeting Smith seems to have forgotten in the intervening years. That brief encounter failed to convince Bennett to sever his loyalty to Alexander Campbell's version of restored Christianity. Bennett's renewed interest in Mormonism in 1840 was meshed within a larger pursuit. In July, he had been appointed Illinois Quartermaster General. For a year before that, he had served as brigadier general of the Invincible Dragoons, a multicounty private militia combining the men of three southeastern counties (White, Edward, and Wabash). Over the previous fifteen years, in Ohio and other states, Bennett had been a medical practitioner and teacher, a college administrator, an itinerant minister, and a promoter of agricultural and social causes. This impressive resumé helped him win the trust and friendship of influential people in the blossoming City of the Saints. He offered his talents, expecting to fulfill his ambitions for personal political power.32

Dr. Bennett fit nicely into Joseph Smith's strategy for neutralizing any future opposition to Mormon settlements in Illinois. During the Nauvoo years, the Prophet would accept the help of a number of influential men outside the faith to further his religious objectives. Smith had embraced Isaac Galland's offer to sell land, he would welcome Bennett as a confidant and adviser, and he would befriend other men of ability and position. Bennett's skills as a lobbyist had convinced legislators in Ohio, Virginia, and Indiana to support his ideas, and that was the present need in Nauvoo.

In one of his letters, Bennett had advised church leaders to concentrate their energies in a single gathering place "with Commerce for its commercial emporium." Smith's response acknowledged the region's potential for commercial and agricultural growth and applauded the state charter just issued for a Warsaw-to-Nauvoo railroad. If realized, that link would overcome the deficit of the Nauvoo rapids that hindered commerce by stopping the large riverboats. Smith encouraged Bennett "to come as early as possible. . . . You will be of great service to us."33

Bennett did come, and for thirty-nine weeks boarded in the Smith home. The next session of the state legislature was set to convene in late November at Springfield, the place designated in 1839 to replace Vandalia as the state capital. During the Sunday morning session of the October conference, church president Joseph Smith, his clerk Robert B. Thompson, and Dr. John C. Bennett accepted the assignment to draft legislation "for the incorporating of the town of Nauvoo, and other purposes." Following a one-hour adjournment, Bennett presented to the reconvened conference an outline of a proposed bill to authorize a city charter. No doubt considerable discussion of its contents and perhaps an entire draft of the bill had been underway prior to the weekend gathering. The conference assigned Bennett to guide a charter request through the legislature. Nauvoo leaders recognized that Bennett's knowledge of governmental affairs and acquaintance with state officials might help win approval.34

During the previous two years, the Illinois legislature had granted city charters to the lead-mining city of Galena on the northern border of Illinois, to the new state capital at Springfield, and to Quincy, Nauvoo's charitable Adams County neighbor. Prior to that, only Chicago and Alton had been issued city charters, both in 1837.35 Each of the charters in that succession had built upon its predecessors, creating a pattern of familiarity for Illinois legislators. Quincy's planning committee had referenced the charters issued to Chicago and Alton and one in St. Louis, Missouri. Nauvoo's proposal patched together provisions imitating those already approved in the three more recent franchises Galena, Quincy, and Springfield. A lengthy treatise on the Nauvoo city council's legislative authority was copied verbatim from the Springfield charter a common and legitimate practice.36

Nauvoo's charter for municipal government provided for a city council, city officers, justices of the peace, and a municipal court. The council consisted of a mayor, four aldermen (one from each municipal ward), and nine councilors, all to serve two-year terms. Additional aldermen and councilors were permitted as the city grew and new wards became necessary. By December 1841, Nauvoo's mayor served with eight aldermen and sixteen councilors, equally divided among the four wards. To have both aldermen and councilors was a departure from the Illinois pattern. Commonly appointed officers were a recorder, treasurer, assessor, marshal, and streets supervisor.37

The charter defined a specific geographical area as the "City of Nauvoo" but allowed an unlimited expansion of city boundaries. Adjoining land would become part of the city by laying it out into town lots and recording the plat at the county courthouse. Quincy and Springfield enjoyed the same authority.38

Like the city councils in Galena, Quincy, and Springfield, Nauvoo's municipal council held legislative authority within its own jurisdiction like that of the state general assembly for the entire state. In effect, these city councils could pass ordinances that contradicted state law, as long as those ordinances did not conflict with the state or national constitution. Quincy lost that power in 1840.39

A provision in the charter that granted judicial functions to the Nauvoo city council was not unusual in American municipal government. It differed only slightly from other Illinois cities. Like Chicago and Alton, the City of Nauvoo had two juristic levels, justices of the peace and a municipal court. The Nauvoo charter named the elected mayor and aldermen justices of the peace. They received commissions from the governor. The mayor held exclusive jurisdiction over all judicial matters concerning city laws. He was joined by the aldermen when considering civil or criminal cases grounded in state laws. Decisions of the justices of the peace could be appealed to Nauvoo's municipal court, consisting of the mayor as chief justice and the aldermen as associate justices in other words, all of the city's justices of the peace sitting together. Appeals could also be heard before the chief justice by a twelve-member jury. Decisions of the municipal court could be appealed to the Circuit Court of Hancock County.40

These provisions differed only slightly from other chartered cities in Illinois. In all Illinois cities, the mayor served as a justice of the peace. In Chicago and Alton, the only other cities with a municipal court, the municipal judge was not automatically the mayor, as in Nauvoo, but someone appointed by the governor with approval of the general assembly. Unlike in Nauvoo, this judge sat without associate justices. The courts in Chicago and Alton exercised concurrent jurisdiction with a circuit court, whereas Nauvoo cases had to go first to the Hancock Circuit Court before an appeal could be sent to the state supreme court.41

Another judicial provision granted to Nauvoo's municipal court "power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases arising under the ordinances of the City Council." The Alton charter had been amended in mid-1839 to give it this power, a precedent for the Nauvoo document.42

In all of these municipal arrangements, it was in their use rather than in their definition that Nauvoo city officials offended their neighbors. A number of Nauvoo's municipal leaders served at the same time in religious positions. So, when they used the charter to defend Joseph Smith and his colleagues against legal attacks and vigilante threats, opponents accused them of melding church and state authority to protect religious interests. In one sense, Latter-day Saints agreed. They believed that beneficent legislators had empowered them to protect their own civil and religious rights and to defend themselves against opponents. Nauvoo's charter may not have been as unique as it appeared to the First Presidency, who described it in 1841 as "one of the most liberal charters, with the most plenary powers, ever conferred by a legislative assembly on free citizens." But in a local context, Nauvoo's independent authority stood in stark contrast to the small town governments elsewhere in Hancock County. Ultimately, because of its large population, Nauvoo's influence at the polls in county and legislative elections were perceived as the greater threat to minority rights in the region.43

The Nauvoo city charter differed most significantly from others in granting power to the city council to organize "a body of independent military men" and "an institution of learning." In essence, the legislature wrapped three state charters into one a city, a militia, and a university. Once they were set in motion by city council action, the University of the City of Nauvoo and the Nauvoo Legion became self-governing entities. Although no other city university existed in Illinois at the time, the legislature had created other colleges and named their boards in the authorizing charters. In Nauvoo, city officials named the board of trustees for the university, including the chancellor and regents. Similarly, the militia elected its own officers from among those commissioned by the state. The militia could be called into action by the mayor to defend city laws or by the governor. The board of trustees for the university and the court martial for the militia created and enforced their own laws. The only restriction was one applied to the city council as well: they could contradict existing state laws but not the state or national constitutions.44

With its base in a single city, Nauvoo's militia differed on paper from most other volunteer military groups in the state. The typical militia served an entire county or group of counties. The Nauvoo militia would soon take on that characteristic, like the multicounty Invincible Dragoons in southeastern Illinois that John C. Bennett had helped create. Bennett's previous experience with that military company and his role in creating the Fairfield Institute at Fairfield, Illinois, suggest that he played a key role in defining the university and militia in the Nauvoo charter. Similarities between the provisions for the Fairfield and Nauvoo schools and between charters for the two militias support that probability.45

The city charter proposed for Nauvoo seemed appropriately familiar to legislators at Springfield when introduced on Friday, November 27, 1840. More than 80 percent of its provisions closely followed franchises authorized for other Illinois cities. No one saw the need for extended debate. This was but one of many requests for political recognition in a rapidly growing state. Seven other requests for city charters were approved by the Twelfth General Assembly. More city charters would follow, until 1870, when a constitutional revision ended the practice.46

Whatever encouragement was needed to ensure passage came from John C. Bennett, who lobbied key political leaders, both Whig and Democratic. State supreme court justice (and later governor) Thomas Ford remembered, "Bennett managed affairs well for his constituents. He flattered both sides with the hope of Mormon favor; and both sides expected to receive their votes." The vivacious Bennett had hinted of such political promises when the October conference approved the charter proposal. It was a duty placed upon the Saints, he had said, to support with their votes those who had helped them as suffering exiles. The conference clerk described these as "very appropriate remarks," but they were later dropped from the historical record.47

The Nauvoo bill was the second of the session presented to the forty senators meeting in the new capitol building. Senator Sidney H. Little, a Whig who represented McDonough and Hancock Counties, was its chief sponsor. His brief introduction drew attention only to what he termed an "extraordinary militia clause" that he considered harmless. Little would be honored in Nauvoo as "a patriot, statesman, and lawyer" in a special day of fasting eight months later when he was killed jumping from a runaway wagon.48 Following two readings of the bill by title, delegates referred the bill to the Senate's judiciary committee. Eight days later, the eloquent Adam W. Snyder of St. Clair County the committee's chairman and Democratic nominee for governor in 1842 reported it back favorably with one amendment to adjust the city boundary. After a third reading, the Senate approved the bill on December 9 by voice vote.49

The following day, the ninety members of the House of Representatives, gathered in the Methodist Church, considered the bill on the motion of A. R. Dodge. Suspending the rules, the House read the bill the first and the second time by its title and sent it to the House judiciary committee. Reported unchanged to the full House after two days, it was read under suspended rules a third time by title and passed by voice vote with only a few nay votes. The governor affixed his signature on December 16, and the bill was issued two days later. It became effective on the first Monday of February 1841, the day set for Nauvoo elections.50

Immediately, in a report to Nauvoo published in the Times and Seasons, John C. Bennett hailed the package as "very broad and liberal. . . . Every power we asked has been granted, every request gratified, every desire fulfilled." He specifically thanked Senator Little (for his "untiring diligence") and Representative John F. Charles ("an acting and not a talking man") and their colleagues for ensuring a unanimous approval in the Senate and little dissent in the House. "Illinois has acquitted herself with honor," he beamed, "and her State Legislature shall never be forgotten."51

Bennett paid tribute to Whig Representative Abraham Lincoln. Nauvoo's political leaders had removed Lincoln's name from November's legislative ballot ("not, however, on account of any dislike to him as a man, but simply because his was the last name on the ticket, and we desired to show our friendship to the Democratic party by substituting the name of Ralston for some one of the Whigs"). After the House vote, Lincoln personally and cordially congratulated Bennett on the charter's approval.52

Bennett's objective as Nauvoo's chief lobbyist, he said, had been to eliminate "unjust prejudice and unreasonable opposition." He called for a similar response from the Latter-day Saints: "I have said that we are a law abiding people, and we must now show it. . . . Justice, equal justice, should be our fixed object and purpose." Bennett encouraged the residents of Nauvoo to seek unity in basic principles, both religious and political, while allowing individuals the freedom to express their feelings in nonessentials. An accompanying editorial comment by Don Carlos Smith praised the charter for its permissive provisions, an idea repeated often in later commentaries.53

In a follow-up proclamation and taking their cue from Bennett's effusive report, the First Presidency published its own thanks to the legislature for setting aside partisan differences to grant a liberal and powerful charter and for granting these rights in "perpetual succession." Significantly for the future, church leaders interpreted this phrase to mean the conferral "in all time to come, irrevocably" of civil, political, and religious liberty. These rights had been denied the Saints in Missouri, church leaders noted; they belonged to all citizens "'tis all we ever claimed." The presidency thanked Illinois for guaranteeing constitutional rights and "the protection of law the security of life, liberty, and the peaceable pursuit of happiness." It was, they declared, "our magna charta." Church leaders promised to extend equal privileges and friendship to Nauvoo citizens of every religious persuasion.54

In a later personal reflection, Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother, saw the charter as a shield against Missouri's attempts to arrest the exiled Mormon leaders. Protections offered by the city government, she understood, would allow her fugitive son to "remain at home in peace."55

Passage of the charter drew an immediate response from the Whig press. At Warsaw, Thomas Sharp picked up on the Mormon delight in the charter's character. Ignoring the similar handling of other city charters, the twenty-two-year-old editor of the Warsaw Signal criticized the legislature's apparent nonchalance in authorizing the franchise. The editor of Springfield's Sangamo Journal reprimanded the Illinois senate and house for failing to record votes by name. If citizens objected to the provisions of Nauvoo's charter, he wrote, who among the elected delegates should they hold responsible?56

The Latter-day Saints were not interested in counting votes. In their minds, the Illinois legislature had acted above partisanship to secure their constitutional rights. Under the city charter, they could create any law not repugnant to the constitution of the state of Illinois or of the United States. The common political theory of the day, exemplified in other Illinois city charters as well, ensured the home rule of the common man through his own local representatives.

In an effort to reassure the old residents, church leaders publicly proclaimed that the Saints would exercise "implicit obedience to the laws." The new city would enact ordinances to serve the common good. By fulfilling their military obligations apart from other local groups, the First Presidency declared, the Saints would avoid conflict and demonstrate their loyalty to constituted government.57

Nauvoo's City Government at Work

With the charter in place, the Saints turned their attention to the task of governing Nauvoo. From the beginning, Nauvoo's leaders attempted to assure Hancock County's doubters that the city would operate under civil rather than ecclesiastical rules. As a replacement for the high council, the city council reflected the secular pattern of other cities. In its day-to-day operations and passage of ordinances judged "necessary for the peace, benefit, good order, regulation, convenience, and cleanliness, of [the] city; for the protection of property . . . and for the health and happiness" of residents, Nauvoo differed little from other communities.58

John C. Bennett was still basking in the gratitude of the people of Nauvoo for his help in securing their city charter when he organized a series of public nominating meetings. The first convened at the store of brothers William and Wilson Law on January 2, 1841. Bennett encouraged a diverse slate of candidates. Seven men stood for the four aldermen slots; twenty-one for nine positions on the council. Only Bennett himself, seeking the office of mayor, was unopposed.59

At the February 1 election, majorities ranging from 330 to 337 votes elected the city's first officers. All of them reflected the electorate's preference for men of public stature and ability. Another possible influence on Latter-day Saint voters was an 1833 revelatory reflection on Missouri's troubles: "When the wicked rule the people mourn. Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold." All but two of Nauvoo's first elected officers were Latter-day Saints. Considering the overwhelming Mormon character of the growing city of five thousand residents, that was a generous inclusion of old-timers among the good and wise men elected to office.60

Skeptics read the election as evidence not only that Latter-day Saints dominated public office but also that church leaders controlled civic affairs in Nauvoo. Among the winners were the entire First Presidency, the stake president, and one member of the high council. Within a year, this question became an issue that enticed Ebenezer Robinson and Gustavus Hills, editors of the Times and Seasons, to offer a defense: "A large number of the officers of the Nauvoo Legion; several members of the City Council, both Aldermen and Councillors; and a large portion of the Regents of the University; are not members of any church many of them are old citizens who resided here long before we were driven from Missouri." The civic councils of Nauvoo, they claimed, made room for "men of sterling worth and integrity," even though "they do not believe in our religion." The bottom line, they said, remained the equal protection for all citizens under the supremacy of the Constitution and the laws of the land.61

The reality in Nauvoo was that the various governing councils did indeed involve men of affairs regardless of their religious orientation, although nearly all were Latter-day Saints. During the four years through 1844, the city council always included two or three non-Mormons. Hiram Kimball, Daniel H. Wells, John T. Barnett, Hugh McFall, and Benjamin Warrington were those who served. But church leaders played an increasingly dominant role. After the first election, the council of nine always included five to seven members of the Quorum of the Twelve among its numbers. Joseph Smith became mayor in 1842 and played an active role in suggesting new laws. By 1844, only one apostle, John E. Page, had not served on the council (he spent most of his time as the presiding church officer in Pittsburgh). High council representation was more limited three high councilors served as elected city officials; others accepted appointive positions.62

The university's twenty-three regents counted three who were not Latter-day Saints Daniel H. Wells, John T. Barnett, and Zenos M. Knight. Two other old-timers on the board, Isaac Galland and Davison Hibbard, had been baptized. As with other civic bodies in Nauvoo, the university claimed in its highest councils its share of prominent Latter-day Saints, including all of the First Presidency and five other church leaders.63

Operationally, the municipal government of Nauvoo passed ordinances and functioned for the most part just as did any other government of a city of its size in the 1840s. Section 13 of the Nauvoo charter incorporated an exact copy of Springfield's list of legislative powers. Ordinances based on most of these topics became part of Nauvoo's corpus of laws during 1842. Echoing the pattern of the times, the city granted the franchise to white adult male citizens of good moral character who had lived in the state for six months.64 In administrative matters, Nauvoo's city council opened and named streets and appointed a coroner, auctioneer, pound keeper, city attorney, and other officers.65 Because of the press of legal work created by a booming town, the city appointed its own notary public. The council regulated the morals of the community by restricting entertainments, prohibiting brothels, and strictly controlling the dispensing of liquor.66 It involved itself in economic life by licensing businesses and by regularizing weights and measures, brick sizes, and specie. The city owned two hay scales used by farmers to weigh their crops. In response to complaints, it issued edicts to control loose livestock and the removal of dead animals.67

One of Nauvoo's most perplexing problems was that of crime prevention. City officers contended with the vices of a few of Nauvoo's own population as well as those of undesirable visitors. As a river town, Nauvoo attracted the usual drifters including thieves, counterfeiters, and renegades. Even though such ne'er-do-wells visited other Mississippi Valley towns as well, opponents of Nauvoo unfairly blamed all such crimes on the Latter-day Saints, when, in fact, lawbreakers were found among both residents and transients.68

The responsibility for maintaining peace and order within city limits fell upon the justices of the peace, a municipal court, and the marshals. Although the marshals appointed in each municipal ward acted as policemen in the city, general law enforcement in western Illinois fell to the county sheriff, a system common in the Southern United States, where (unlike New England) county government played a primary role. But Nauvoo's residents knew another system, the English tradition of citizen responsibility employed in New England, in which men over sixteen took turns standing watch. That approach to peace keeping, operating in tandem with the court system, became the pattern for addressing Nauvoo's urban needs.

Like the municipal government, the police system of Nauvoo evolved over the years from a volunteer force to paid watchmen and back again. Sponsors included an unusual mix of religious, military, and municipal officials. The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles first proposed establishing a police force after some Latter-day Saints were expelled from the church and from the Nauvoo Legion for stealing property in Ramus in November 1841. Nothing came of that proposal.69 Six months later, Mayor Joseph Smith, concerned by an alleged attempt on his life during a sham battle of the Nauvoo Legion, directed militia officers to organize a city watch. The Legion appointed sixteen men, headed by city marshal Dimick Huntington, to protect the city against theft and other mischief. The watchmen spent much of their time enforcing Nauvoo's laws against disorderly conduct and the sale of liquor by the drink.70

In January 1843, the city council exercised its legislative right "to establish, support and regulate night watches." The council appointed Jonathan Dunham as captain of police. Presumably, he took control of the municipal patrol named the previous spring by the Nauvoo Legion. In December, the city council increased the number of police to forty and defined their duties. They were to maintain the peace, enforce city ordinances, ferret out thieves, and act as watchmen day and night. They paid particular attention to the safety of Joseph Smith.71

Despite a promise to pay the men, the city lacked sufficient funds and soon owed its watchmen considerable back pay. Offers from several city councilors to forego their own salaries did not provide sufficient funds, so the police were dismissed. In November 1844, a council of religious and civic leaders met at the Masonic Hall. To satisfy the discharged police, the church agreed to pay their back salaries. Then the council authorized a corps of several hundred part-time volunteers. In just over two months, five hundred new policemen had been identified and oriented to their duties. These men assumed their duties just as the Nauvoo charter was being rescinded. Known thereafter as the "old police" and under church oversight, the volunteers continued service as personal bodyguards for the Twelve and nightwatchmen at the temple.72

The Nauvoo Legion

Another means for protecting life and property in Nauvoo was the municipal militia. Acting under the authority given it in the Nauvoo charter, the city council empowered the Nauvoo Legion on February 3, 1841. Formal organization took place the next day, with Joseph Smith at the head and John C. Bennett next in command. During the next four years, the military group played a visible role with impressive public appearances on Independence Day and for other ceremonial occasions. As an independent element of the state militia, the Legion or its subgroups drilled regularly to prepare the volunteer army to defend the city and her people.

Nauvoo's Latter-day Saints lauded their military organization as a means to protect their rights against threats by organized opponents. They defended the militia's motives in prose and poetry. "In the time of peace," wrote the editors of the Times and Seasons, "it is necessary to prepare for war." Then, quoting George Washington on defensive preparations, the editors added, "'If we desire to avoid insult we must be ready to repel it.'" Poetess Eliza R. Snow reaffirmed the Legion's role as the opponent of oppression, the defender of law, "a strong bulwark of Freedom of pure Liberty."73

It was not the rights of the Saints that concerned citizens elsewhere in Hancock and nearby counties, however. As the old citizens watched the Mormon population and its militia grow in numbers, they came to believe that the Nauvoo Legion would be misused in offensive action against their own freedoms. When Nauvoo's militia first came under verbal attack in 1842, John C. Bennett defended the basis of its authority. Claiming authorship of the charters for both the Legion and the Invincible Dragoons, Bennett touted them as the two best militias in the state. If anyone had anything against Nauvoo's militia, he said, they should criticize the Dragoons as well.74 Nauvoo's militia followed an organizational system based on Roman legions. It consisted of two cohorts (or brigades), each commanded by a brigadier general and his staff. The first cohort was a mounted cavalry; the other, foot soldiers. By late 1841, the Legion had increased from six companies to fourteen in Illinois and two in Iowa, eleven of them infantry units. A few months later, a report listed twenty-six companies in the Legion.75 Regulations adopted by the court martial allowed these companies to range in size from thirty-two to sixty-four privates. None of the companies was filled completely, nor was a full complement needed to function.76

Under Illinois law, the state militia was made up of the sum of all local military companies. Each elected its own officers, who were required to have a commission from the governor. Through his quartermaster general, the governor furnished the soldiers with arms. He could call up local units in times of need, or he might authorize Illinois mayors to activate a local militia to enforce laws or suppress riots. Most local groups were organized as county militias. They held general inspections at the county seat. As needed, detachments within the county were formed at the precinct level for convenience in drills. The state could also authorize multicounty units, such as the Invincible Dragoons, or independent city militias, such as those at Quincy, Carthage, and Nauvoo. The Nauvoo Legion's independent status meant that it was not subject to Hancock County's brigadier general. Like the county militias, the Nauvoo Legion and other independent groups reported directly to the governor.77

The Nauvoo Legion's most unusual organizational feature was its chief officer, who held the rank of lieutenant general. Not since George Washington had the United States known a lieutenant general; and during the war with Mexico in the late 1840s, Congress would refuse to grant the title to the head of the United States Army. Joseph Smith secured the unusual rank without contest from Illinois governor Thomas Carlin in March 1841, even though Smith's previous military experience was limited. He had led Zion's Camp, a group of willing volunteers, from Ohio to Missouri in 1834. In Missouri, the lasting effects of an early operation on his leg and his status as a full-time minister of the gospel had exempted him from official military service. Yet he did lead an armed force in one of the retaliatory raids.78 In practice, Lieutenant General Smith played only a ceremonial role in the Nauvoo militia. He left the details to his subordinates. Even so, he had a personal staff of fifteen men, including two colonels of cavalry and a third who oversaw a personal bodyguard of twelve captains of infantry.

As second in command, John C. Bennett took effective day-to-day control of the Legion through his appointment as major general.79 Bennett's staff planned regular training for the Legion and organized its appearances in public engagements. His assistants included the operational officers and appropriate assistants. The major general's staff also served the brigadier generals, Wilson Law and Charles C. Rich, who headed the two cohorts. Bennett relished his military authority, as he had his previous experience as an officer in the Invincible Dragoons.

While in Nauvoo, Bennett continued to serve as state quartermaster general. It was in this role that he outfitted the Nauvoo Legion from the federal armory in Springfield. As was typical for state militia units, Nauvoo Legion troops received outdated weapons from an annual federal allotment to the states. Because they competed with other units for the meager supplies, some Illinois residents believed that Bennett favored the Nauvoo Legion in his 1841 distribution.80 A report the following year in the Alton Telegraph claimed that the Legion had received 5 six-pounder cannons, 500 muskets, 460 pistols, 85 rifles, 113 yeagers (a rifled musket), and 123 swords from the state armory. That summary prompted a short-lived effort in the state legislature to have the arms returned to the state and reallocated to militias that felt shorted.81

While the state copies of the legally mandated annual reports cannot be found in order to verify Bennett's dispersals, a year-end report completed in Nauvoo in 1843 does account for arms held by the Legion's second cohort, the infantry. That official register lists 63 muskets, 133 rifles, 98 swords, 4 pistols, and 3 cannons.82 Major General Wilson Law stated in mid-1844 that the Legion's entire inventory included three cannons and "about two hundred fifty stands [complete sets] of arms and their accoutrements." If Law is correct, then the Legion's cavalry brigade, or first cohort, must have received around fifty long guns from the state. Officers typically provided their own swords.83 Thomas Sharp disagreed with Law. "The fact is," he argued, "the Mormons had eight or nine hundred stand of state arms." But Sharp may have been remembering the Alton Telegraph's controversial 1842 report.84

There are good reasons to accept the Legion's 1843 inventory as an accurate accounting of the arms held by the infantry brigade. If the cavalry were equally equipped (an unlikely situation), the Nauvoo Legion would have had around six hundred pieces, plus whatever individuals secured for themselves. In most American militias, the soldiers provided for themselves more often than they had arms furnished to them. That would have increased their defensive capability and, perhaps, explained the discrepancy in numbers.

Because Illinois did not provide uniforms for the militia, the soldiers depended upon their own resources for their dress. Most of them probably used whatever they could reasonably get but with some attention to consistency. Nauvoo's leading officers quickly outfitted themselves with a full and costly uniform consisting of coat and pantaloons, epaulets, sash, hat with feathers, gloves, spurs, sword, and belt costing $208. Another $185 bought the necessary "horse equipments." John Bills, a Nauvoo tailor, made the military coats for at least the five top officers of the Legion. He used patterns secured from Philadelphia by Hyrum Smith.85 By April 1841, more than a dozen of Joseph Smith's personal staff sported what were described as "splendid uniforms," and several entire companies had simpler but consistent attire. A year later, a large proportion of the soldiers wore some kind of uniform.86

One controversial issue in the first months of the Legion's existence was that of membership. All eligible Illinois males between the ages of eighteen and forty-five years were expected to enlist in a local militia and train a certain number of days each year. Nauvoo Legion officers secured a specific legislative act confirming that their militia could accept as a volunteer any eligible male in Hancock County. In addition, the Legion's legislative body, the court martial, banned city residents from enlisting elsewhere. The result was a countywide militia made up mostly of Latter-day Saints. Outsiders perceived the expanding Nauvoo Legion as a private Mormon army controlled by church leaders to serve their own interests.87 Nauvoo militia leaders insisted that their forces played a traditional role:

The Legion is not, as has been falsely represented by its enemies, exclusively a Mormon military association, but a body of citizen-soldiers organized (without regard to political preferences or religious sentiments) for the public defence, the general good, and the preservation of law and order . . . against misrule, anarchy, and mob violence.

In this same document, Joseph Smith and John C. Bennett encouraged existing militia companies in Hancock County as well as unaffiliated citizens to join the Nauvoo Legion. They promised "correct military instruction under the teachings of experienced officers, according to the drill and discipline of the United States Army."88

In response to this solicitation, Latter-day Saints soon formed detachments of the Nauvoo Legion at Ramus and Seven-mile Mound. (Interestingly, two other affiliated companies were formed in the Mormon settlements across the Mississippi in Iowa.) The officers in certain precinct units of the Hancock County militia challenged this clustering of their Latter-day Saint neighbors by levying fines when Mormons failed to register with local units. But an 1833 Illinois law that permitted such fines to discourage the formation of independent companies had been repealed in 1837. State supreme court justice Stephen A. Douglas confirmed the illegality of these fines. Furthermore, Douglas sustained the Nauvoo charter's provision exempting Legion soldiers, wherever they lived, "from all other military duty." The Mormons in Hancock County could join the militia of choice, and they chose the Nauvoo Legion.89

Some men neglected their duty and ignored the state requirement to enlist. Legion commandants did what they could to "enroll every man residing within the bounds of their respective commands, and not attached to any other company of the Legion." An 1842 Legion ordinance authorized officers residing outside the city to withdraw if they proved enrollment within their own precincts. This minor exception did not silence critics who challenged efforts to enlist in the Nauvoo Legion every Latter-day Saint in the region.90

Like the population of Nauvoo itself, the actual number enlisted in the Legion was sometimes exaggerated. Presumed reliable is the annual report to the state adjutant general in September 1841, which lists 1,490 soldiers. An accounting two years later listed 1,751 men in the Legion's infantry brigade. No report has survived for the cavalry, which had only one-third as many companies as the infantry.91 A St. Louis newspaper put the total number at two thousand in June 1844. The editor had heard Joseph Smith claim twice that many fighting men just a few weeks earlier. Some reports had the Legion as high as five thousand men in 1845. If all eligible Latter-day Saint men in Hancock County were enrolled, along with some in Iowa, that number of men might have responded if needed for an emergency. Actual regular involvement probably fell short of the ideal.92

State military regulations required regular drills and reviews of the local companies, and the Legion marched at various places set aside for public use. Its first drills were near the site later used for the Masonic Hall. In June 1844, the Legion paraded at the Masonic Hall field one day, met at the Arsenal ground west of the temple the next day, then moved for drilling to "the ground near Spencer's northeast of the Temple." On June 27 they assembled again at "the parade ground North East of the Temple."93 Companies living outside the Nauvoo precinct were excused from attending all but the July parade and the Legion's business meetings (the semiannual court martial) but were required to hold their own regular exercises.94

Besides its scheduled drills, the Legion participated in regular public appearances. Perhaps the best attended by the public was one in April 1841 when the troops assembled for their first full dress review behind the Masonic Hall on the flat before participating in the cornerstone-laying ceremonies at the temple site on the bluff. Every May and September thereafter, the Legion paraded to meet its military obligations and for the enjoyment of the citizens. The Legion also played a major role in the annual Independence Day patriotic programs. Although the general parades were always held in Nauvoo, musters of battalions and companies took place within the precinct defined as that group's boundaries.95

The general parades were spectacles of military pomp that attracted onlookers from Nauvoo and beyond. At times, thousands arrived by riverboat, wagons, and carriages for the event. In some officers' drills, on the two days preceding a general parade, the wife of an officer would ride alongside her husband. An 1843 report described "six ladies on horses, with white feathers or plumes waving over black velvet, riding up and down in front of the regiment."96

Observers were impressed by the precision of the military exercises and with the lack of intoxication. "This Legion will surpass anything for splendor and martial spirit in the State or perhaps all the States," John S. Fullmer boasted in March 1841. "It is determined that the scenes acted out in Missouri shall not be acted over again in any State with impunity, or at least without an honourable defence."97

But at least to a few, the military pomp portended an uncertain future for the City of Peace. Commenting on the physically short but ambitiously towering John C. Bennett's move to Nauvoo, Vilate Kimball informed her missionary husband, Heber, in England: "He is a big man and I hope a good one. He is a great warrior. Many of our brethren have got the same spirit. I expect it is all right."98

NotesChapter 5. Nauvoo's Magna Charta

Epigraph: First Presidency (Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Hyrum Smith), "Proclamation," T&S 2 (January 15, 1841): 273 (HC 4:267-68).
