Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Part II

Life in Nauvoo: A People of Promise

The Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them. And Enoch continued his preaching in righteousness unto the people of God. And . . . he built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion. And . . . Enoch . . . said unto the Lord: Surely Zion shall dwell in safety forever. From a revelation to Joseph Smith, December 1830

As to the church at large, at home and abroad, if they will now repent of all these evils, and come together as the heart of one man; and be governed by counsel, and seek to employ themselves and each other, and to support and build up in perfect union, according to the plan of heaven; they shall be saved; and no power shall scatter or destroy them; but if not, behold your house is left unto you desolate, and the kingdom of God shall come with power for the deliverance of those who will do these things. From a letter by Parley P. Pratt, September 1844

Chapter 6

The Promise of Prosperity

The whole time and attention of the Saints in this place since their beginning have been, in consequence of persecution and banishment from Missouri, devoted to opening new farms, building habitations, and to supplying themselves with food. Orson Hyde, February 1843

There is little hope for worldly prosperity in Nauvoo. The city is neither a commercial mart in itself, nor does it supply the markets of others. It is to a certain extent quite isolated, and has absolutely no principle of aggregation if we except that of accumulating population. Henry Lewis, 1845

Every immigrant arriving in Nauvoo after 1840 and every visitor, too, it seems, noticed the same thing about Nauvoo. The city was growing, and growing rapidly. Wherever they looked, newcomers found the sights and sounds of buildings under construction. "The sound of the ax, the hammer, and the saw, greet your ear in every direction," Don Carlos Smith wrote in an article celebrating the arrival of spring in 1841. "Habitations are reared for miles in every direction, and others are springing up." He applauded the effort necessary to provide housing for arriving immigrants. "Hundreds of houses, shops, mills, &c., are expected to go up in the course of the summer, when," he noted, "our city will present a scene of industry, beauty, and comfort, hardly equaled in any place in our country."1

Missionaries returning after extended service abroad reacted similarly. Heber C. Kimball arrived from England in July 1841. "When we got in sight of Nauvoo," he wrote back to Parley P. Pratt, "we were surprised to see what improvements had been made since we left home. You know there were not more than thirty buildings in the city when we left about two years ago, but at this time there are twelve hundred, and hundreds of others in progress, which will be finished soon."2 Many of these new buildings were temporary log structures, created to offer immediate shelter and then abandoned when better was available.

Benjamin Winchester, who left Commerce just as Mormon settlement was beginning in the spring of 1839, was "completely astonished" at the progress he found two and one-half years later. From the vantage point of the temple, he observed the residential patterns that would define Mormon Nauvoo:

On the left, south, as you front the river the lots are mostly taken, and a great share of the improvements seem to be bestowed upon this part of the city. . . . On the north of the Temple there has also been a great improvement, and a large portion of that part of [the] corporation is quite densely populated. East of the Temple lot some ten miles, which you are aware is more or less timbered land, it is completely spotted with dwellings. The large prairie east of the city presents a very pleasing prospect: several buildings are completed and others in progress. Some are engaged fencing, others plowing, and preparing their land for the ensuing season.3

Winchester's overview summarized the economic realities of Nauvoo. Nestled against a gentle bend in the Mississippi, Nauvoo was, first, a boomtown expanding to house a people and, second, a hinterland of outlying farms flourishing to feed them. The first need in the new city was to house a burgeoning population. Beyond that, the economy seemed devoted to sustaining the gathered people with foodstuffs. Little time remained for other tasks. Some wondered if Nauvoo's effort had been so singlehandedly focused on opening farms and erecting houses that other needs, particularly the creation of factories to provide goods and jobs, had been neglected.4

Despite the expectation of some that Nauvoo should join the industrial revolution to realize its urban potential, that dream would not be realized during the city's short life as a Mormon gathering place. Construction and crops would be the keywords in Nauvoo's economy. Commerce and crafts supported the task of providing basic human needs in an economy based on an agrarian credit system. Whatever their hope for societal change, the people of Nauvoo would maintain the agrarian lifestyle of traditional society.

As with other activities for the Latter-day Saints, the very task of housing and feeding a family in Nauvoo acquired a religious meaning. The Saints saw themselves as God's people of the covenant, eligible for the biblical promise of life's necessities if they lived righteously.5 According to an apostolic proclamation from Nauvoo, "The saints have found a resting place, where, freed from tyran[n]y and mobs, they are beginning to realize the fulfilment of the ancient prophets, 'they shall build houses and inhabit them, plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof, having none to molest or make afraid.'"6

With their American and scriptural ancestors, the Saints in Nauvoo believed that righteousness and hard work would bring economic as well as spiritual rewards. Not that they expected great wealth; on the contrary, the Book of Mormon contained regular warnings against those who were tempted "to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and the vain things of the world."7 A tithe of everyone's income for the temple and occasional contributions for the poor would bring to all a comfortable sustenance and meet the needs of the church. Most Latter-day Saints sought not for riches but for the kingdom of heaven. In the meantime, the city's rapid growth focused much energy into building the city and feeding a growing population.

Housing the Gathered Saints

Right from the start, finding a place to live in this sacred refuge challenged the ingenuity of many Latter-day Saints. They sought out existing facilities to buy or rent. And when those filled up, they moved in with friends and strangers. Their leaders and agents had scouted out Commerce, Illinois, and Fort Madison, Iowa, to identify housing for a people in exile. Isaac Galland claimed to own facilities for fifty families in the barracks at old Fort Des Moines and had "about 10 or 15 houses or cabins . . . and several farms" for sale in the Commerce area. Others also may have owned places abandoned during the exodus of old settlers caused by the Panic of 1837 and the resulting business stagnation.8 Wandle Mace remembered only six unoccupied places available right in Commerce. But a year later, in June 1840, the Times and Seasons established the common view of the base from which Nauvoo was built: "We behold . . . the saints comfortably situated, with already about 250 houses put up by their own hands; whereas, only 12 months since, 10 or 12 houses were all that could be numbered in this place." That dozen or so cannot be identified with certainty; however, not all of them would have been for sale, since Davison Hibbard, Hiram Kimball, Amos Davis, Daniel H. Wells, and others stayed on after the Mormons arrived.9 (See map, page 32.) Whoever the owners and whatever the numbers, the few ready rentals and quick buys did not last. The first Mormons to arrive rented or bought them. Thus, Sidney Rigdon acquired the James White stone house on the river bank, and Joseph Smith moved into Hugh White's two-story log home a quarter mile downriver on land purchased for the church. Other incoming Saints claimed what remained and then had to begin doubling up while building new structures.

Heber C. Kimball looked in vain for accommodations in Commerce around the end of May 1839. "I pulled down an old stable and laid up the logs at the back end of the Bozier house," he recalled, "putting a few shakes on to cover it; but it had no floor nor chinking; and in this condition I moved my family into it; whenever it rained, the water stood near ankle deep on the ground."10

Visitors and residents alike noticed how these ramshackle buildings gave the city the appearance of being a temporary camp during its early years. Charlotte Haven, a visitor who stayed more than a year, gave a frank interpretation of what she saw as late as January 1843: "Such a collection of miserable houses and hovels I could not have believed existed in one place," she wrote to her family in the East. "Oh, I thought, how much real poverty must dwell here." While Haven emphasized the scarcity of permanent homes, the Rev. Samuel A. Prior, a Methodist minister visiting from Carthage later that spring, recognized the potential manifest in Nauvoo's humble beginnings. He was surprised to see more than "a few miserable log cabins and mud hovels." He said, "The buildings, though many of them were small and of wood, yet bore the marks of neatness which I have not seen equalled in this country." Prior saw a few "tall majestic brick house[s]," which he took as representative of the true "genius and untiring labor of the inhabitants."11 He correctly discerned the residents' interest in building a better Nauvoo than necessity had imposed at first.

In the same spirit, the church newspaper in Liverpool cautioned the British Saints not to see Nauvoo in 1842 as the way it would remain. "The buildings are mostly temporary cabins, built of wood, and are very small, unfinished, and inconvenient," an editorial noted, "but they are such as are generally erected in the beginning of new settlements in every part of the country, and will soon give place to those of brick and stone. Indeed, several brick buildings are already erected, and hundreds of others are in process of erection."12 As soon as lumber or bricks could be found, and a way to pay for them, all of Nauvoo's families looked forward to a more comfortable abode.

While the church looked to the needs of the poor, able Nauvoo settlers left their temporary shanties and shared rooms in order to occupy homes of their own. Most of the more than two hundred houses built the first year were block houses. These log homes were typical of those found anywhere on the American frontier and could be quickly built. To dress them up, many Nauvoo residents whitewashed both the exterior and the interior of the cabin each spring.13 In the late spring of 1839, after he had planted his corn and potatoes, Theodore Turley built what is credited with being the first new home in Nauvoo, on Hyde Street just northeast of Joseph Smith's homestead. Set on a simple stone foundation, the log house provided Turley's family a place to live when he left three months later for a mission with the Twelve in England.14 Heber C. Kimball and Parley P. Pratt of the Twelve followed the process typical of all new immigrants. Anxious to get their families out of temporary shelters, in mid-July 1839 they purchased adjoining five-acre tracts from Hiram Kimball in a wooded area about a mile from the river. The nearest neighbor at the time was half a mile away. They went right to work, cut some logs and invited old citizens and new to join in a house raising.15

Some British immigrants to Nauvoo had their own version of a basic home the wattle. Built of posts set into the ground, with willows woven between the posts and then plastered with mud, it formed a small but tight protection from the weather. The English Saints built a number of these homes in Nauvoo and in a self-appointed British gathering place about five miles east of Nauvoo.16 Yankee converts seeking "permanent" housing preferred a New England-style frame or brick house. Lumber was less easily obtained and more difficult to fashion into a traditional frame home than were locally harvested logs or willows used for wattles and similar shelters. "There has been however several commodious framed houses built; and several more now in lively operation," the Times and Seasons reported in June 1840.17

Even as tiny frame homes began to appear in Nauvoo, the first brick structures were built. They, too, were small. According to John Taylor, "vast numbers of brick houses" were built during the summer and fall of 1843. That construction continued on during the succeeding two years, as Nauvoo reached its peak in population and gained its distinctive mix of log, frame, and brick dwelling places.18

For a full six years, the immigrants to Joseph Smith's Nauvoo kept tradesmen and laborers busy building houses. In the spring of 1844 John Taylor concluded optimistically, "In every direction may be heard the sound of the mason's trowel, the carpenter's hammer, the teamster's voice; or in other words, the hum of industry." The industrial sounds Taylor heard were the sounds of the construction industry. Tradesmen commanded high prices for their labor, up to $1.50 a day in 1842, when common laborers received half to two-thirds that amount.19 The few who specialized as building contractors could not meet the demand for housing nor was that necessary. Many would-be homeowners did some of their own building (especially on log homes). They often worked together as friends and neighbors, sharing skills and combining talents to raise a house or barn. For finer homes, they contracted directly with men of the building trades. Supporting these tradesmen were lime burners, sawmill operators, brickmakers, and hardware merchants. By 1843, Nauvoo booster John Taylor found the city well supplied with employment opportunities for brickmakers, carpenters, bricklayers, masons, plasterers, blacksmiths and other such tradesmen.20

Yet, not everyone shared immediately in the American dream. Some required help from the community to achieve that goal. In nineteenth-century America, that usually meant help from the church. Ever concerned about the poor and the fatherless, the Latter-day Saints in the Commerce area paid special attention to the needs of widows and missionaries' wives. The church offered free lots to the widows of men killed at Haun's Mill and to other widowed women.21 A private developer built and rented ten or eleven one-room apartments, each with its own fireplace. This apartment unit was called "widow's row," a long brick home on the corner of Main and Kimball streets.22 To look after the wives of the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles during their mission to Great Britain, the high council appointed a committee to contract for the plowing and fencing of certain city lots for the women and for the building of houses on those lots.23

Although single-family housing was the ideal, it was often not a reality in Nauvoo. As the city grew, the demand for temporary housing did too. The old places, and new ones as they were ready for occupation, became immediate inns for the homeless. Of necessity, a house often served several families. Widows rented out rooms and did cooking and laundry for boarders to earn a living. Families made room for friends and relatives who arrived with nowhere else to go. Some individuals and families shared housing throughout their years in Nauvoo. When George and Ellen Douglas arrived in early April 1842, they felt lucky to rent a house with a wood lot and half-acre garden. "Our house is not such a fine one," Ellen informed her parents in England, "but there are many that are much worse, and I prayed that we might have one to ourselves for there is 3 or 4 families in one room, and many have to pitch their tents in the woods, or anywhere where they can, for it is impossible for all to get houses when they come in for they are coming in daily. Scores of houses have been built since we have come here and they still continue building."24

It was a speculator's dream fulfilled, but the promoters of Commerce and Commerce City had not realized it. It took a religiously motivated people intent on gathering to sacred places to turn the steamboat landing at the head of the rapids into a real town. By 1843, Nauvoo was beginning to look like an expansive city. The view discovered in February of that year by Parley P. Pratt was that "hills had been leveled, [and] blocks, streets, houses, shops, gardens and enclosures were now extending in every direction." When the boom ended and that wasn't until the exodus from Nauvoo began in February 1846 newcomers had created around two thousand houses in the city and another five hundred nearby. Irving Richman counted the dwellings from the top of the temple: "One half of these were mere shanties built of logs and some poles; others were framed. Of the remainder about twelve hundred were tolerably fit dwellings; six hundred of them at least were good brick or frame structures. The number of buildings made wholly of brick was about five hundred, a goodly portion of them large and handsome."25

As the inventories of 1845-46 suggest, the appearance of Nauvoo in these later years of the city's growth included houses built of every available building material the earlier log, wattle, and frame homes, with the later frame and brick buildings. Even at the end of the period, Nauvoo was still a young city, anxious to gain respectability as a city of promise but not yet mature enough to overcome its log cabin beginnings.

The Agrarian Ideal and Zion's City

For all of the effort expended in building up a city, it was country life, not urban, that the Latter-day Saints sought. As with other nineteenth-century Americans, being a farmer and living on the land held meaning for the Saints beyond that of the practical needs of feeding the family. They felt at home with the views of such classic agrarians as Thomas Jefferson, who believed that human perfection was possible only through a rural and idyllic life. Being close to the soil was being close to God. "Those who labor in the earth," Jefferson wrote in his Notes on Virginia, "are the chosen people of God, if He ever had a chosen people, whose breasts He has made His peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue." Yeoman farmers sought prosperity as independent, self-made entrepreneurs on new frontiers. Self-sufficient and distrusting of the privileged aristocracy, they feared city life, which represented Babylon, everything that was evil. As examples, they referenced the ugly cities of Europe, crowded with poor peasants and defamed by debauchery and sickness. The dream of the new world for Europeans and Americans was a country of landed gentlemen and private entrepreneurs, each the owner of his own healthful estate; however, this was beyond the dream of Levi Hancock in his peaceful dwelling place in Missouri and of Latter-day Saints gathered later on at the upper Mississippi. They wished to rise above poverty but shunned wealth. They sought the spiritual safety of the middle road, the prosperity of adequacy described in Proverbs: "Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: Lest I be full, and deny thee . . . or lest I be poor . . . and take the name of my God in vain."26

In other ways as well, agrarian views dovetailed nicely with Latter-day Saint religious expectations. Agrarianism satisfied doctrines of the Millennium and the gathering among converts on both sides of the Atlantic. Latter-day Saint missionaries who visited European cities found evidence to support their pessimistic assessments of urban life. British converts from the industrial urban centers fled to America's agrarian Zion. English agrarians found new opportunities to till God's earth in the prairies near Nauvoo. The agrarian dream of American Saints likewise seemed attainable at Nauvoo. For all the Saints so attuned, agrarianism and millennialism were parallel dreams, yet, when pressed, they would give precedence to their religious dream of a special people and place. Nauvoo was first of all a religious sanctuary from a world doomed to destruction and only secondarily an agrarian Eden, although the Latter-day Saints typically failed to distinguish between the two in their predilection for subsuming the secular into the sacred. They spoke almost exclusively of their religious goals, but an undercurrent of the Jacksonian dream also moved them.27

In the City of God, Latter-day Saint agrarians had the possibility of realizing the best of both worlds. Of the thousands who lived in their small city, many traveled out to the surrounding countryside to work as farmers. The urban environment they built lacked crowding and held at bay many illnesses, and with their religiously motivated desire to work and live Christian lives, they eliminated much of the poverty and wickedness they identified with the old cities. Abundant land and hard work, they believed, would put an end to poverty. As William Mosely explained in 1844 to his father in England after he contracted for a fifty-acre farm near Nauvoo: "We are in a land of freedom where every industrious man may be his own landlord and pay his taxes to God. . . .I assure you a working industrious man will do well here. He will get him some land, a house, and things of his own, but an idle man will come to poverty and nobody wil[l] give him bread; we have not seen so much as one beggar since we landed."28

The city of Nauvoo blended gradually into the woodlands and then into the farmlands to the east, and the residents brought the country into the city in other ways. When the summer corn grew ten and twelve feet high on large city lots, it dominated the landscape. The city looked like a garden. More importantly, the Saints imported the values of agrarian life into the city. In this way, they found their rural Eden in a city purified from the sins of Babylon because it was a holy place. The Latter-day Saints sought for the best of both the agrarian and the urban worlds the virtues of being close to God's natural world and the companionship of the community of the Saints in the Lord's holy city.

To a certain extent, every migrant to Nauvoo was a farmer. For some that meant a garden in the backyard. But for many, acreage outside the city demanded attention and qualified them as true agriculturists. "Extensive farms are beginning to spread themselves for miles in every direction from our city, on the bosom of the great prairie, as far as the eye can reach; fencing, ploughing and building, seems to be the order of the day," John Taylor reported in January 1844 in a report that made homesteading into a prophecy fulfilled: "'The wilderness is' indeed being 'made glad, and the desert blossoms as the rose.'"29

Those who did not own farmland often hired out as laborers during the labor-intensive seasons of plowing, planting, and harvest. Newly arrived young immigrants or part-time craftsmen were among those most anxious for work to help support their families. Harvest wages for adults ranged from $1.00 to $1.50 for a day's work, half that for young men. Those who owned oxen rented them out for the work and often hired themselves out along with the cattle to help in the redemptive effort of subduing the earth and of feeding Nauvoo's families.30

Latter-day Saints purchased or rented farms and farmland on both sides of the Mississippi, in the central counties of Lee and Hancock and in surrounding areas. The Pre-Emption Act of 1841 made land more affordable by reducing the minimum purchase required of homesteaders from 320 acres to 160 acres. This so-called Log Cabin Bill allowed settlers to stake out a claim and pay for it later at $1.25 per acre.31 It was this provision that defined the 160-acre tract that Joseph Smith purchased in 1844 from the original patentee. Many first purchasers subdivided their land, making twenty-, forty-, or eighty-acre parcels available to others. Thus, one British immigrant purchased eighty acres of fenced and cultivated land, with a house, for £160 ($800) and found uncultivated land selling for from eight to twenty shillings ($2 to $5) per acre. Another English convert purchased a twenty-acre parcel "in its wild state at eight dollars per acre, with a tax title."32 Land closer to Nauvoo sold at a premium of as much as twenty times the amount a similar parcel might bring farther away. The open prairie with its three feet of black loam topsoil caught the immediate fancy of the British Saints, accustomed to the rolling hill country of their native land. "The land which I have bought," William Mosely wrote home to his father in Staffordshire, "is a kind of common called in this country Prairie, which contains thousands of Acres uncultivated which could settle all England. . . . We cannot see anything at all but land, not a tree nor a hedge, but the land is as level as a board, not a bank nor a valley in all the plain."33

A huge community farm east of Nauvoo helped Mormon farmers get started. Surrounded by a single ditch-and-bank fence running three miles in one direction and two miles in another, the 3,840-acre "Big Field" contained parcels to meet every need: ten, twenty, thirty, forty, and sixty acres. A similar community farm had been established near Far West. Those accustomed to scratching an existence out of New England's rocky soils prospered when they applied themselves to the fertile plains along the Mississippi River Valley. Thriftiness learned the hard way paid great dividends in the New West. "It is a perfect garden as respects soil," George Alley noted in 1843.34

Unless the owner of small, individual farms hired extra help, which many of them did, a farmer and his older sons could open the larger farms to cultivation only gradually. The process of turning the fertile but heavy clay soil of the prairie was slow, because neither the old wooden plows nor the newer ones made of cast iron would scour the moist muck would cling to the plows. It took at least three yoke of oxen or three teams of horses to break through the tough roots of prairie grass. One immigrant found that he could hire the work done at two dollars per acre; once broken up and given time to rot, the soil could be worked easily with one light horse.35

Fencing for protection from livestock was a necessary imposition on farmers. Livestock ran free, so crops were protected with fences built with scarce prairie timber or from plentiful sod. Many of the farm fences were the common worm fence, built by stacking rails in a zig-zag pattern. A man could enclose thirty acres this way with a week's hard work. The ditch and sod fence took more labor but cost less for materials. Some even surrounded fields with rough picket slab fences.36

Many farmers lived on the land they cultivated rather than in the city as Joseph Smith's City of Zion plan suggested. This scattering eventually put nearly three thousand Latter-day Saints into the wide rural area in the Nauvoo hinterland. Those closest to the city considered themselves adjunct members of the urban community because they had no towns of their own. Those farther afield, such as at Ramus (or Macedonia), became members of other church branches and clustered together for civic purposes in villages or, more often, simply resided as scattered farmers within a township. They found a sense of community despite their scattered condition with the members of the branch with whom they worshiped.37

For the resident farmer, a small plot within the farm became the family's residential lot. On it were the house and other outbuildings typical of any city plot, plus barns for livestock and their foodstuff and the storage of crops used for home consumption, for market, and for next year's seed. The barns in Mormon Illinois and Iowa were most likely simple log or frame structures of the rustic pattern common on emerging frontiers.38 As was true of the structures in the new city of Nauvoo, agricultural buildings had yet to reach their potential.

For most Latter-day Saint farmers, it was the rich prairie soil rather than its lush grasses favored by grazing livestock that offered a living. Some farmers mixed grazing and cultivation, but in many instances, the only livestock kept were those needed by the farm family for their own sustenance. Every farmer needed a few oxen or workhorses to pull the plows and the wagons used for hauling crops to barns, mills, and markets. To sustain the family, every farmer and many city residents kept a cow for milk, butter, and cheese; hogs and sheep for meat; and chickens and other fowl for eggs and meat. If families needed to supplement their home production, they could find meat at reasonable prices in local markets for purchase from producers, butchers, or merchants. Prices were higher than in the East but were comparable to markets in other western towns.39 In addition, many city-dwelling residents had not yet insulated themselves from the rural hunting life as a means of supplementing the diet. They stalked the nearby woods and prairies for game birds and waterfowl. Rivers and streams offered a variety of fish.

Agricultural mainstays throughout the region were corn and wheat. Farmers also produced hemp, oats, buckwheat, and potatoes.40 Each year saw an increase in the acreage under cultivation. With few exceptions, the quality and quantity of the harvest increased. In 1843, for example, Latter-day Saint farmers had a bad year, but after a mild winter, they planted early in 1844 and enjoyed a good harvest. By 1840, Illinois ranked seventh of all twenty-six states in production of Indian corn; the Latter-day Saints grew their share for local consumption.41

Corn, long a Southern staple, soon rivaled wheat the favorite of the Yankees and British for the kitchen table. Corn meal could be baked into a bread, fried as corn pones, boiled as mush, and used in other ways. The wheat-flour Saints who were not accustomed to cooking with cornmeal soon adapted, for it was the most prevalent grain for household use in western Illinois. "Our family had not had any corn meal during the two years we were in England," Mary Ann Stearns Winters remembered, "and we were just feasting on it in any way it might be cooked, but the poor English Saints, who had never been used to eating it, fared badly with it; they did not relish it."42

Although summer meals included other fresh garden produce and winter suppers featured stored root crops (including potatoes) and dried fruit and vegetables, it was corn that fed Nauvoo, summer and winter. Corn stored on the cob or shelled into a sack or bagged as meal provided the source of flour for a variety of dishes. Wheat and other grains added variety to the diet, as did such mainstays as potatoes, beans, and cheese. It was corn that made Nauvoo most visibly a country town. With corn used in every diet and with every spare lot planted, the sprawling community appeared in summer as a scattering of buildings set into a cornfield. "The corn is so high we can [look] out upon the city and [only] see the tops of the houses," Irene Pomeroy wrote in July 1845. She measured selected stalks at nearly twelve feet high and observed, "We have had green corn here several days; green peas, shell beans, new potatoes, etc."43

Nauvoo, like small-town America everywhere, functioned economically in an agrarian model that celebrated the household as the unit of production for many needs. Each family sought self-sufficiency. Any land not developed for housing within Nauvoo's city boundaries and suitable for crops was turned to residential agriculture, if the owner was willing. Some craftsmen traded their wares for the foodstuffs needed by their families, but even these families kept a backyard garden, usually tended by the wife, and many of them kept small farms. One shoemaker, for example, harvested four acres of corn and a one-acre garden in 1843 and increased his farm to double the corn plus ten acres of wheat the following year. With that acreage under cultivation in his forty-acre plot in the Big Field, he expected "bread stuff enough for myself and to spare. . . . I find no reason to regret having come into the garden of the West," he informed an unbelieving relative.44

The backyard garden offered tasty produce throughout the harvest season. During winter months, fruit and vegetables that had been dried or stored in cool cellars, and fresh, dried, and smoked meat gave variety to the cornmeal diet. Wild honey, jams, and jellies added welcome flavor. "We have got our garden plowed and planted," Ellen Douglas reported to her parents in England two months after the family's early April arrival in Nauvoo, "and all our seeds have come up and looks very well. We have planted corn, potatoes, beans, peas, onions, pumpkins, melons, cucumbers and a many other things too numerous to mention, and we have all so got a pig . . . [and] a flock of chickens, . . . and I think we are far better here than in old England."45

Few Americans had learned to enjoy tomatoes, in part because of fear that they were poisonous. One of John C. Bennett's contributions to Nauvoo was his active promotion of tomatoes as a healthy food. During the winter of 1840-41, he published extracts from various horticultural publications on how to grow tomatoes and information on their history, botanical nature, and chemical properties.46

Trees for planting were gradually brought into Nauvoo by nurserymen to supply the demand met by an expanding city. By 1844, residents could select from thousands of fruit trees and berry plants in virtually every variety desired. Additional kinds were available from St. Louis.47 Domestic fruits and berries supplemented berries gathered from wild plants on the prairie. A barrel of honey was another typical staple. In every garden, a large sampling of herbs provided seasoning for cooking and main ingredients for warm drinks. From ginger, for example, the Saints could make a mild tea or a hardtack candy.48

Perhaps mostly because of the gardens behind Nauvoo's houses, it was necessary to erect fences to protect the growing plants from wandering cattle, horses, and pigs. Nauvoo's governing high council threatened to disfellowship anyone who knowingly allowed his animals to destroy a neighbor's crops. Later on, the city council required hogs to be penned, levying a fine of five dollars against the owners of pigs allowed to run loose in the city. This regulation was enacted during a time when some people in Illinois were lobbying for state laws requiring hogs to be penned. In Nauvoo, several petitions circulated in the summer of 1843 seeking repeal of the local hog law, but the council let its progressive law stand.49 To help manage loose livestock and for more effective feeding, herders gathered many of the milk cows each morning and took them out of the city to the pastures during the day, returning them for milking each evening.50

Many homes were surrounded by picket fences, often of split oak or maple. Others used rail and pole fences, a common fencing for the undeveloped lots used for urban farming.51 The Mansion House had such a rail fence around it in 1844, and Brigham Young hired Samuel Eggleston to build one around his house the following spring.52

In other ways, too, Nauvoo's citizens dreamed of improving their city. Housing and feeding their families were essential tasks for the men and women of Nauvoo. But the building trades, farming operations, and household tasks did not provide employment for everyone, especially not for British immigrants from factory towns. If Nauvoo was to achieve her full economic potential, the city needed manufacturing, and that required capital. Very early in the city's history, industrialization became a central theme for the most ardent champions of Nauvoo.

NotesPart II. Life in Nauvoo: A People of Promise

Epigraph: Moses 7:18-20; Parley P. Pratt, "Mirror for the Saints to Look In to See Themselves," T&S 5 (September 2, 1844): 631.

NotesChapter 6. The Promise of Prosperity

Epigraph: Orson Hyde, in T&S 4 (February 1, 1843): 90; Lewis, Valley of the Mississippi, 257.
