Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 7

Economic Expectations

Our affairs in Nauvoo are prosperous. . . . Great numbers of merchants have settled among us. . . . Vigorous efforts are being made to improve our wharves, and facilitate the landing of steamboats on our shores. . . . Many branches of mechanism are going on; . . . and many other branches of business have found abundance of employ. There is however one thing which we would respectfully call the attention of our brethren to; that is, the business of manufacturing. There is perhaps no place in the western country, where cotton, woolen, silk, iron and earthen-ware could be manufactured to better advantage than they could in Nauvoo. John Taylor, January 1, 1844

In earlier gathering places, Latter-day Saints had aspired to do away with poverty. This desire was an essential part of their spiritual goal to realize an equitable balance in material things. The ideal "to be one in all things" included religious and social activities as well. In church gatherings, the Saints acted in a spirit of common consent and sought unity in doctrine. In personal interactions, they tried to eliminate contention and strife. The revealed economic plan invited them to consecrate all their property to the church, with the bishop returning to each man an adequate means of livelihood, "as much as is sufficient for himself and family."1 Retained surpluses were earmarked for ecclesiastical needs, construction of temples, and support of the poor.2

Expectations for living the law of consecration changed following the period of apostasy in Ohio and Missouri. After 1834, participants were invited to contribute only their surpluses. Then, at Far West and in Nauvoo, the tithing revelation of 1838 formalized this approach. The tithing law asked new converts to make an initial offering of their surpluses. This met the requirement for a consecration of property. Afterward, participating members contributed a tenth of their income. Once a year, they settled their accounts with the bishop.3

During the Nauvoo years, the Saints did not expect to attain the level of compliance reported among early disciples of Jesus Christ.4 Instead, the revealed law of tithing set a preparatory standard grounded in the teachings of the Old Testament prophets. Nevertheless, it preserved much of the language and spirit of the law of consecration. Economic objectives remained unchanged: fund temple building, support administrative needs, and sustain the poor.

The move away from the economic ideal of Zion elicited a variety of responses. Most comfortable with the change were those who had opposed the original law of consecration as an inappropriate intrusion into personal finances. Least supportive were those who had been staunch adherents of consecration in Kirtland or Missouri. Some from both of these positions stayed away from Nauvoo. Others in various locations outside Nauvoo continued with the old plan or pooled their resources in the spirit of equity. These included ardent Saints in the Iowa stake; Mormon lumber workers in camps on the Black River in Wisconsin known as the Pineries; and a colony founded by James Emmett among Native Americans on the western frontier. Most converts had not been invited to participate in the ideal economic law (required especially for the Saints in Missouri's Zion). These inexperienced people adjusted comfortably to the law of tithing, with its simpler way to contribute their time and means for the Lord's work.5

In public pronouncements in Nauvoo, the Prophet made clear his support of the enduring economic principle of individual ownership. The issue was raised in September 1843, when a traveling English socialist, John Finch, preached from the stand in the grove. Smith responded by denouncing Finch's socialism. At the same time, he also discounted a communitarian system that Sidney Rigdon had endorsed in Kirtland before converting to Mormonism.6 Kirtland's common stock "Family" effort had failed, Smith said, "the big fish there eating up all the little fish." In a second sermon ten days later, with Acts 2 as his text, the Prophet preached for an hour, "designing to show the folly of common stock. In Nauvoo," he said, "every one is steward over his own." Always the prevailing economic pattern within the church had given to the head of each family the individual responsibility to provide for his own.7

The Prophet had concluded that the leveling effect of the New Testament ideal could not be realized in the world of ordinary men. His coworkers agreed. John Taylor, an ardent opponent of common stock systems, had rebutted Finch in his own lengthy discourse. Taylor supported the law of tithing. The apostle also advocated a cooperative attitude among tradesmen in manufacturing and marketing their goods. While a missionary in England, Heber C. Kimball had concluded that the world would see an end to economic oppression by the rich and the achievement of universal peace and plenty only "when the Lord Jesus shall descend in the clouds of heaven."8

Merchandising and Commerce in a Zion City

The law of tithing applied only to individuals. Yet Nauvoo merchants were not entirely free to operate under the American dream of unfettered competition. Not stated in the revelation of tithing but preached from pulpits in Nauvoo and discussed in private councils was an additional obligation expected of Latter-day Saint businessmen that they be benevolent entrepreneurs. In the absence of total consecration, they were expected to exercise a sacred watch-care over their personal secular concerns. Church leaders encouraged prosperous businessmen to invest their surplus capital in business ventures that would both curb the export of dollars and create jobs for the poor. Expected also was, first, that businessmen would honor religious values in the community and, second, would donate generously to church building projects, namely, the temple and a hotel known as the Nauvoo House.

Whenever successful businessmen departed from these religious objectives, Joseph Smith and others reminded them that Nauvoo was a gathering place, a religious community created to save souls, not a commercial center where entrepreneurs could amass personal fortunes. For instance, two days after passage of Nauvoo's first commercial licensing ordinance in April 1842, the Prophet preached "concerning the building of the temple, and pronounced a curse on the Merchants and the rich, who would not assist in building it."9 Regularly over the next two years, merchants heard admonitions to embrace community prosperity over personal wealth. Some businessmen struggled with these competing values. They had to choose between speculation and benevolent philanthropy, pursue the so-called American dream or strive to fulfill the hope of Zion.

Most of Nauvoo's merchants operated in one of two commercial zones in the city on the flat at the south end of town or on the bluff near the temple. These areas in the new city of Nauvoo augmented the original riverfront business district in Commerce. A few tradesmen clustered near the merchants. Most, however, plied their trade in shops wherever they could obtain a lot and build a home.

The business sector on the flat centered in the original tract that Joseph Smith purchased from Hugh White. About half a dozen merchants sold goods in stores scattered over six blocks along and near Water and Main streets. Among the most enterprising of the lowlands merchants were the Irish-born Canadians William and Wilson Law. Immediately after these prosperous general merchants arrived in Nauvoo in November 1840, they saw opportunities for personal economic betterment. The brothers established a store on Water Street a short distance from the Mississippi. They built steam-powered grist and lumber mills at the river's edge. Wilson and his wife, Jane, were especially generous with their substantial resources. Not only did they invest in businesses that provided much needed goods and services in Nauvoo, but for several years they supported the church with loans, gifts, and personal service. For a time, at least, they were exemplary stewards.10

The Laws had only one significant mercantile competitor on the flats. Beginning in January 1842, Joseph Smith tried his hand at merchandising, as his father had done for a time in Vermont. To house his venture, the Prophet built an impressive two-story red brick store just west of his log home on Water Street and directly opposite the Law brothers' store. The interior of the main floor interior was large and handsomely decorated "for a backwoods establishment" with imitation oak, mahogany, and marble finishes.11 When Smith opened for business, he offered goods that Edward Hunter had shipped from the East as payment on a land purchase, plus an additional thirteen wagonloads of merchandise from St. Louis. The shipments included clothing, textiles, sugar, salt, glass, nails, and other goods not produced in Nauvoo.12 This plentiful offering attracted a steady but modest flow of customers; a typical day averaged two dozen transactions.13

The Prophet tended store himself at first, but after a few months he hired others to manage it for him. In the spring of 1844, he got out of the mercantile business entirely, disappointed with its lack of success. Nauvoo had too many merchants, he noted. The unpaid bills kept his profits slim at best and contributed to the store's demise. His well-stocked store had attracted a broad clientele, including other church leaders and close friends. Smith's growing extended family of plural wives and their relatives were among those drawing upon the store's goods. In his merchandising, as in his land sales and other business dealings, the Prophet was a generous steward, anxious to lift those in need.14

From a financial perspective, a more successful buyer and seller of goods was Nauvoo's first merchant. The youthful Vermonter, Amos Davis, was in business near the upper landing for two years before the Saints arrived, and he kept selling for a decade after the Saints left the city. His account books reveal a prosperous business. The twenty-three-year-old merchant became an immediate friend to the Saints; he and his wife joined the church at the April 1840 conference. As his businesses grew, Davis moved from his riverfront store in Commerce to a new brick building on Mulholland Street a block east of the temple. He completed an even larger, three-story store and warehouse immediately south of the temple early in 1846. Davis was a trusted citizen, active in Nauvoo's civic life. In that way, at least, he magnified the expectation of community betterment. Along with other merchants, he squabbled over Nauvoo's restrictive liquor laws.15

Other entrepreneurs besides Davis opened stores in Nauvoo's business district on the bluff. The dozen or so operating along and near Mulholland Street were all within the area opened in April 1840 by Daniel H. Wells. Wells owned the eighty-acre section before the Latter-day Saints arrived. Like Davis, he was a friend to his new neighbors and was supported by them as a justice of the peace and civic leader. In part because of his wife's resistance, he did not join the church until after the Nauvoo years. Several other merchants on the bluffs were likewise not Latter-day Saints. Some of these men sympathized with Joseph Smith's detractors or caused problems for city officials by ignoring laws regulating the sale of liquor.

At the west end of this secular business district, excavation for the temple began in the fall of 1840. This prominent site, with its adjacent outdoor preaching grounds, was located at the geographical center of Nauvoo and became the religious center as well. With the temple walls rising at the brow of the hill on Mulholland Street, the Wells Addition became an even more favorable location for businesses. New shops appeared there during a period of expansion between 1841 and 1843.

The number of mercantile establishments grew especially in 1843 to meet the needs of an exploding population.16 That was the year Amos Davis moved onto the bluff. It was also the year the Prophet began to ease out of business. After Joseph Smith closed his store, the large room on the main floor attracted other merchants; the last of the renters left in 1846 with the exodus of the Saints.17 Indeed, the roster of Nauvoo merchants changed constantly due to the economic hazards of such ventures, the difficulty of marshaling resources to capitalize a store, and the shifting interests and migrations of men involved in trade. These same conditions created many partnerships. It helped to have a junior partner to tend the store while the principal owner was off on a buying trip. Partnerships often lasted only a short time. (One agreement ended after the pair earned profits enough to pay for new houses and provide support for their families while they responded to mission calls.) Nauvoo's market even attracted the attention of some St. Louis merchants who advertised directly in Nauvoo's secular newspaper, the Wasp. These entrepreneurs, too, recognized in Nauvoo a people hungry for life's amenities.18

Competition in the marketplace benefited the buyer while reflecting the reality of an import economy. By the end of 1843, Nauvoo's most vocal supporter, editor John Taylor, could report that "the amount of merchandise which has been imported, has placed goods within the reach of the citizens of Nauvoo, at as reasonable a rate as they can be purchased at any of our western cities."19 Even though prices were higher than the city's residents had been accustomed to paying in the East, rates reflected typical markups for goods imported to the upper Mississippi Valley. Imported goods sold briskly, and thus merchandising attracted much speculative investment. While other people in Nauvoo struggled to get established, the merchants fared well.

As Nauvoo's commercial activity burgeoned, the city council protected community interests with laws to license and regulate commerce. Beginning in April 1842, the city required merchants and grocers to take out licenses.20 To ensure honesty in the sale of produce, the city appointed a sealer of weights and measures whose duty it was to check all scale-beams, weights, and measures including steelyards and hay scales at least twice a year. The inspector confiscated and adjusted any such devices found not to comply. Stiff fines punished violators. The sealer's mark ("W") ensured customers at Nauvoo's stores, shops, and markets of a fair measure for their money.21

Of particular concern to civic leaders in a community pledged to temperance out of religious principle was the matter of social drinking. Almost immediately after its organization, the city council took action on the issue. Mayor John C. Bennett named councilor Joseph Smith to head a temperance committee to draft a bill prohibiting the sale of liquor by the drink. The only legal exception liquor for medicinal use required a recommendation from a physician accredited by the chancellor and regents of the city university.22

To protect the community's moral values, the city monitored keepers of taverns (inns) or ordinaries (eating places). A half dozen hotels operated in the city, most of them near the river, where steamboat travelers sought board and room. To obtain a license, proprietors needed the written endorsement of six neighbors and the city inspector's verification that the tavern did indeed offer appropriate accommodations and a suitable stable. All of this helped to ensure that the tavern was used as a hotel, not as a bar. Stiff fines, including revocation of license for a second violation, were levied against those who sold liquor.23

Merchants in the new city imported goods from brokers in St. Louis and New Orleans and from sources in such places as Cincinnati, New York, and Boston. The Ohio and Mississippi rivers funneled a steady flow of goods to Nauvoo. Merchandise arrived on steamboats that kept regular schedules on the upper Mississippi above St. Louis. The ships and their captains became well-known in Nauvoo; others equally familiar docked ten miles downriver in the main channel port at Keokuk.24

Nauvoo was a river town, and the active movement of goods and passengers led church leaders to partnership with others in two steamboats operating on the Mississippi, the Nauvoo and the Maid of Iowa. Besides some expectation of profit, the shipowners, had they succeeded, would have helped keep scarce dollars from fleeing the specie-poor city, an economic objective increasingly supported by the First Presidency and the Twelve. Even so, church involvement brought mixed results in meeting these objectives.

The first of the Mormon steamboats was a surplus army riverboat built in Pittsburgh in 1838. Peter Haws, a Canadian convert, purchased the 93-ton Des Moines and two keelboats at public auction in September 1840 and renamed the steamboat the Nauvoo. The 120-foot vessel had been used by the Army Corps of Engineers to survey and clear the St. Louis harbor and Des Moines rapids. Four men cosigned as sureties on an eight-month note for just under five thousand dollars. The partnership included Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith with two prosperous farmers from nearby counties, Henry W. Miller and George Miller (not related), providing the financial guarantee.25

The remodeled and renamed Nauvoo had every reason to succeed as an investment. It hauled freight in the active trade from Galena to St. Louis under the supervision of pilots Benjamin and William Holladay, who were hired because of their claim to experience on the river. But within three months, the pilots wrecked the Nauvoo by running it aground on rocks and sandbanks outside the deep steamer channel. The owners sued the Holladays, who posted bond and left the state (they later won fame as western stagecoach owners). The boat was raised and salvaged for use as a barge, but the owners were left with debts that were not settled for years.26

The second Mormon steamboat, a smaller and newer vessel than the Nauvoo, enjoyed a longer usefulness and fewer legal problems. The sixty-ton Maid of Iowa served as a ferry, excursion boat, and immigrant vessel as well as carrier of trade goods. Two non-Mormon entrepreneurs, Dan Jones, an 1840 Welsh immigrant, and his partner, Levi Moffit, built the side-wheeler in 1842, in Augusta, Iowa, upriver from Nauvoo.27 The owners included the rapidly growing Nauvoo among their stops on the rivers of the upper Mississippi Valley. When they delivered a load of British immigrants to Nauvoo in mid-April 1843, Joseph Smith took an immediate liking to "this little man," Dan Jones. The Prophet's brother William Smith announced, "It is proposed to have this small but good ship make regular runs from Nauvoo to New Orleans and return."28

Jones soon converted to Mormonism and dedicated his energies to furthering church purposes. In May 1843, the church became his partner by purchasing Moffit's half interest in the steamer. Within a year, the church held full title. The steamboat's operators purchased dinnerware, bedding, and other supplies from Joseph Smith's new red brick store. They launched a festive maiden voyage to Quincy and back with invited guests and a brass band. The boat transported Latter-day Saint immigrants from New Orleans or St. Louis to Nauvoo, hauled corn and wheat to feed temple builders, served for pleasure excursions, and at times became a police patrol boat to protect Joseph Smith from arrest. Unlike the Nauvoo, whose fate was a common one for boats on the upper Mississippi, the Maid of Iowa fulfilled its owners' intentions and contributed toward the realization of Nauvoo's economic and religious goals.29

Church leaders assumed one other responsibility relating to use of the river for transportation. Through the first high council, they regulated commercial ferries between Nauvoo and Montrose. The first cross-river commercial operation authorized under church authority was Daniel C. Davis's horse ferry, the Iowa Twins. An Indiana immigrant family described it as "a primitive flatboat propelled by two horses, one on each side, working a treadmill. They [the horses] furnished the power to turn the wheels and propel the boat."30 Officially recognized by the high council at Commerce in October 1839, Davis held a monopoly on the route and operated on rates set by Nauvoo's lawmakers for the mutual benefit of the owner and local citizens. In 1840, the high council gave control of the ferry to the First Presidency, but after city government began functioning, regulations were handled through the municipal rather than the ecclesiastical body.31 Davis regularly advertised his ferry in an attempt to attract Iowa-bound immigrants, especially those who crossed the Illinois River east of Quincy and then sought a nearby Mississippi service. Davis's Iowa Twins met its fate in a river accident: it was lost in an ice jam off the Dundey's Island landing in 1846.32

In 1843, the city council gave Joseph Smith exclusive rights to land passengers along Nauvoo's Mississippi shoreline. Under this license, Dan Jones launched a steam ferry service between Nauvoo and Montrose using the Maid of Iowa. Despite the supposed monopoly given Smith, his friend Davis continued to offer his slower horse-powered service at the same time. To keep that business competitive with the horse ferry at Warsaw, the council posted new rates that imitated those set two years earlier in Warsaw. Nauvoo travelers could avoid paying the established fees only by crossing the shallow river on their own skiffs or rowboats, and many did just that. Under the law, individuals could transport only their own families or neighbors, the latter free of charge.33

Goods arriving in Nauvoo by steamboat were unloaded at one of two landings and then either warehoused temporarily or moved by haulers to the buyer's store. Some freighters used the ferry landing near the unfinished Nauvoo House on Main Street. More of them chose Kimball's landing, the main steamboat wharf near the upper stone house in old Commerce. As traffic increased, the wharves were improved to facilitate the landing of steamboats. Those dreaming of Nauvoo's potential as a commercial emporium expected that a project launched in 1843 to partially dam the Mississippi at Nauvoo would create "one of the best harbors on the Mississippi river, making the whole of our shore accessible at all times to the largest class of boats."34

That venture was not realized, nor were other proposed transportation schemes. Resources to accomplish ambitious improvements were not available before time ran out on the push to build up Nauvoo economically. A canal and a railroad were the dominant projects. The Saints had inherited a long-standing interest in improving access to river transport to support both commerce and travel. In the initial survey, planners projected a waterway down a wider-than-usual Main Street that sloped naturally from north to south. Workmen began digging the canal at the north but soon found themselves blocked by a substantial limestone deposit. Enterprising construction workers soon transformed that blockage into a bonanza a quarry of stone for the temple. But the canal proposal was never realized.35

Another unfulfilled transportation goal was for a railroad connection between Nauvoo and Warsaw, a project intended to solve the problem of getting around the rapids. The Illinois general assembly chartered a company to build the railway in February 1839, with Isaac Galland as one of its directors. The firm graded about twelve miles of roadbed before running out of money. It was one of many such Illinois improvement projects of the era that were never realized.36

Industry, Trades, and Professions

Because of its booming population, Nauvoo did not see itself as a small town. Its demographic dynamism notwithstanding, however, it shared the economic orientation of small-town Jacksonian America. In a nation in transition from traditional cottage industries to a factory system, the small towns necessarily lagged behind. This fact did not discourage Nauvoo's local entrepreneurs. They wanted new industries and manufacturing plants to correct local shortfalls. Nauvoo needed processing industries grist mills to turn grain into meal and flour, and sawmills to transform trees into lumber. The city would further benefit from manufacturing plants to create such products as pottery and textiles. Joseph Smith urged the Saints to "surround the rapids" with factories to limit the import of products and outflow of cash. Promoters imagined locally produced wool and flax feeding the textile mills. These mills and potteries would provide much-needed jobs for experienced English immigrants who searched in vain for such work in Hancock County.37

The lack of certain basic industries struck Orson Hyde as Nauvoo's greatest need. "We have lands, we have houses, and an abundance of provisions" but produce no textiles, he said. Hyde encouraged immigrants from nearby states to bring in herds of sheep, Southerners to bring raw silk and flax seed, women in Nauvoo to teach their daughters how to spin and to weave, and immigrants everywhere to "bring with them all the wool . . . all the domestic flannel; and all the full cloth; common cassimers and satinetts, which they can procure."38

Others of the Twelve who had seen the operations of factories in Europe and in larger American cities envisioned the potential for Nauvoo, and Joseph Smith led the way in the call for industrial development. The Prophet's experience as a merchant in Nauvoo convinced him that the city's economy could be built up not through merchandising but only through manufacturing. John Taylor echoed his leader's enthusiasm for home manufacture at every opportunity. "Our calculation," Taylor said, "is to have the saints manufacture every thing we need in Nauvoo, and all kinds of useful articles to send abroad through the States and bring money here."39

As the Twelve prepared to leave England in April 1841, they summarized the church's plan for building Zion's cornerstone stake through benevolent entrepreneurship:

It will be necessary, in the first place for [British] men of capital to go on first and make large purchases of land, and erect mills, machinery, manufactories, &c., so that the poor who go from this country can find employment. Therefore it is not wisdom for the poor to flock to that place extensively, until the necessary preparations are made. . . . In all the settlements there must be capital and labour united in order to flourish. The brethren will recollect that they are not going to enter upon cities already built up, but are going to "build cities and inhabit them." Building cities cannot be done without means and labour.40

It was an appropriate sequence, except that the missionaries in Great Britain seldom gathered wealthy factory owners into the gospel net. The poor in heart and in means gathered first, despite counsel otherwise.

Community leaders in Nauvoo accurately reflected the need to create employment opportunities for immigrants. Not everyone could farm. From the perspective of those living in Nauvoo and her environs, except for construction, other jobs were scarce. For new immigrants and the unemployed, keeping food on the table was, at times, a real struggle. In their letters from Nauvoo and in later reminiscences, these people described themselves and their neighbors as poor when measured by their earthly possessions. Real prosperity for most of them remained an objective yet to be attained. A few examples will illustrate.

Alfred Cordon and his family arrived in April 1843 aboard the Maid of Iowa with one dollar. The Cordons took shelter in a log cabin with a leaky roof, spent seventy-five cents for a load of wood, and "commenced to barter away our things for something to eat." Cordon worked at ditching and brickmaking, "but the work being very hard and the wages small, I left there." In subsequent jobs, he took his pay in provisions or goods that could be bartered. The family shared a rented room in a brick house with another family for a time and then purchased a half-acre lot and built their own house, buying materials with bartered goods.

The experience of Curtis and Rebecca Bolton was similar. They arrived from New York in the spring of 1845 with fifty dollars, half of which they paid as tithing. The Boltons moved from place to place as renters, finally settling into a plastered room over the old Amos Davis store near the temple. Curtis worked for the church as a temple carpenter, bookkeeper, and clerk. "It was a time of great suffering for me," Bolton said of the summer of 1845, "as I had nothing for my meals but corn bread." Another immigrant, George W. Taggart, confessed in a letter home to his brothers, "I like the place very much, but there is many inconveniences which we will have to undergo in consequence of not having money; but those that have money can live here just as easy as they please. . . . The most of the people are industrious and honest but poor."41

These experiences were common among Nauvoo's residents. The lack of cash was not unusual in the barter economy of the Illinois frontier. The economic downturns of 1837 and 1839 exacerbated difficult conditions for all Americans. Nauvoo's men worked at one job and then another, usually receiving their pay in provisions, sometimes in bricks, store scrip, or not at all. Irene Pomeroy said of her husband, Francis, "He can earn one bushel of wheat or six bushels of corn in a day and we can sell them at the store and buy what we wish." Those most destitute depended upon the bishop or neighbors to provide basic needs or supplemental potatoes, bread, and meat. At times, families survived for months with nothing more than the basic foods of the time: parched corn and pickled pork, bacon, or ham. Men and young men sought work wherever they could find it, often away from Nauvoo. Men scoured the countryside in Hancock and surrounding counties and traveled downriver to St. Louis or upstream as far as Galena. George Taggart informed his family in 1843, "I could raise 5 dollars in the east . . . from my work easier than I can raise 45 cents here."42

The anecdotal evidence of meager living standards does not mean that Nauvoo lacked prosperous residents. A broad cross-section of men succeeded at housing and feeding their families in moderate comfort.43 A few prospered. The resources of thriving merchants, farmers, artisans, and professionals supported local government through taxes on land and buildings. Church leaders tapped these same resources for support of ecclesiastical projects. The revelation calling on the Saints to build a temple invited seven men with means to buy stock in a hotel, the Nauvoo House, envisioned as a place to host visiting dignitaries from around the world.44 Others contributed to Nauvoo's economic stability by sharing their talents and financial resources for the community's betterment. When two church leaders in Adams County asked Joseph Smith for the Lord's counsel in their affairs in early 1841, the Prophet advised them by revelation to "devote all their properties" to the Nauvoo House project so that "the poor of my people may have employment."45

Nauvoo's temple and hotel construction projects did keep many workers busy. But local businessmen envisioned other opportunities for creating jobs and for bringing profits to investors. Part of the attempt to industrialize the city included a joint-stock organization to raise money and manage appropriate business ventures. On February 27, 1841, Governor Thomas Carlin signed into law an act incorporating the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association (NA&MA) in Hancock County, capitalized at $100,000, with stock set at $50 per share. Its thirty-four members included leading business and church leaders of Nauvoo. They had petitioned the state for the action, intending the association to promote all branches of agriculture, husbandry, and manufacturing. Twenty trustees managed the association affairs. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and William Law (the church's First Presidency) were named commissioners.46

The association's founders hoped to develop flour mills and a lumber industry to help feed and house the people of Nauvoo. At that time, to get corn or wheat ground into meal or flour, and for most lumber, residents were taking their business out of town. Old-timer Davison Hibbard's small horse-powered mill two miles below Nauvoo had been torched by a supposed arsonist the previous May.47 The Times and Seasons lamented in December 1841 that one steam mill in Warsaw alone boasted a daily business of fifty dollars just from Nauvoo residents. "It is bad policy to depend upon our neighbors for our home consumptions," the editor said.48

To correct that outflow of cash, early in 1842, association president Joseph Smith wrote to Edward Hunter, a wealthy farmer and mill owner in Pennsylvania, encouraging him to bring a steam engine to Nauvoo and start a flour mill. Hunter agreed to do so. When local entrepreneurs William and Wilson Law heard of this outward reach, they announced plans to build their own steam flour mill and to contract for the production of bricks in Nauvoo. They convinced Hunter to alter his plans and sell them the steam engine he was shipping west. Still anxious to support the association's campaign for home industry, Hunter set up a tool factory instead. The Law brothers invested an estimated fifteen thousand dollars to construct and outfit a large frame building near the foot of Water Street.49 In this complex, they operated both a steam flour mill and a sawmill. In addition to the Hunter and Law enterprises, by the end of 1842 Nauvoo boasted a second steam sawmill, plus Newel Knight's small water-powered grist mill, and Hiram Kimball's and George W. Robinson's iron foundry.50

The first private industrial efforts in Nauvoo complemented an active agricultural economy and construction business. But this was not enough to halt the trade imbalance. Merchants were importing goods and exporting money. Even as he prepared to open his own mercantile store, Joseph Smith encouraged more local manufacturing. "The fewer foreign goods that are consumed among the saints," he wrote, "the better it will be for home manufactories, and the nearer we shall come to the word of the Lord. . . : 'Let all thy garments be plain, and their beauty the beauty of the work of thine own hands.'"51

Nauvoo had the human resources in its British immigrants to make manufacturing work, the city's economic promoters insisted. "Here are men skilled in all the departments of cotton, wool, and silk manufacture, of cutlery, of morocco dressing, glove making, of queens ware and porcelain, of silver and gold ware, lapidaries, sculptors, engravers, &c., &c., &c." Why should raw materials be sent off to be processed and then returned for sale in Nauvoo, they asked. Why were there not processing industries employing the skills of immigrant factory workers, the British converts echoed.52 To support their families, experienced factory workers were finding jobs as farmers or laborers, hiring on as construction workers on the temple, or leaving Nauvoo seeking jobs elsewhere.53 The answer to both questions was the lack of willing investors. Nauvoo's wealthiest residents chose not to sponsor industries yielding exportable surpluses. For them it made good economic sense instead to fund brickmaking, lumber sawing and selling, milling, and merchandising. These businesses met urgent local needs housing and feeding the rapidly expanding population.

As with other plans for moving the city beyond subsistence level, the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association accomplished little towards its goals. After more than a year, officers were still talking about launching their first project, a pottery factory to supply local needs and employ skilled British immigrants. Church leaders stepped forward to encourage action. In a series of public meetings in late June 1842, Joseph Smith and members of the Twelve chastised merchants for failing to "open their hearts and contribute to the poor" by creating industrial jobs for them. The merchants had the surplus cash to do so.54 Brigham Young called for united action and invoked the spirit of consecration to build the temple and support the poor. Acting under the charter's authority to solicit funds and under the religious expectations of the church, Joseph Smith approached a number of men of means in small gatherings. The first to respond were Edward Hunter, Edwin D. Woolley, and Lewis Robbins, who not only agreed to consecrate their mercantile goods to a general fund but delivered goods and money to the Prophet's office. For at least some of the merchants, Smith's invitation might have been a test of loyalty the Prophet returned Woolley's goods.55

That summer the manufacturing association raised to a height of one story the walls of a stone building for a pottery. But legislative talk about repealing Nauvoo's charter dampened investors' interest. In May 1843, with work stalled, the association's president, Sidney Rigdon, defended the enterprise against published criticism. Means, material, and workmen were available, Rigdon said, if only the legislature would quit playing politics with the city's future.56 The legislature saw it otherwise, however, and the pottery building remained unfinished.

While awaiting industrial development that would not become reality, a traditional home industry flourished in Nauvoo in the ages-old shop system. Nearly every craft and profession needed for a city of its size could be found in the maturing city. The trades that supported agriculture and household needs had the greatest basis of support, but the city's economy enjoyed a great variety of talents and products.57

In the spring of 1844, Ellen Douglas estimated the number of shops in Nauvoo at one hundred to two hundred, compared with a mere two or three shops when she arrived from England two years earlier. The only product she couldn't find in the shops were dolls for her daughters.58 Nauvoo had a wide variety of independent artisans skilled in fashioning wood, metal, and textiles into useful products. For example, to clothe a family, residents could buy locally produced hats, gloves, shoes, dresses, coats, and suits. But virtually all cloth and many other clothing items were imported. So were stoves, tools, pots and pans, tubs, and other manufactured iron items. In the preindustrial economy of Nauvoo, a thousand miles from the Atlantic seaboard, immigrants not surprisingly found both textile and iron products more expensive and harder to find than in the eastern United States or in England.59

Although most craftsmen in Nauvoo worked alone as independent entrepreneurs, some banded together for support and mutual benefit. The city's potters were a prime example. When Horace Roberts, an Illinois convert and experienced potter, moved to the city in 1841, Joseph Smith encouraged him to establish a pottery. He did so on his town lot, four blocks east of the temple, but his welcome output could not fully meet a pressing need for supplanting imports with locally produced goods. When the Nauvoo Agriculture and Manufacturing Association failed to complete the large pottery for which it laid the foundation during the summer of 1842, independent shops proliferated, and some potters organized for cooperative efforts.60 The home pottery industry reached its stride during the summer of 1845, when the eight members of the Nauvoo Potters' Association, many of them English immigrants, advertised English-style wares for sale from a pottery a few yards east of the temple on Knight Street.61 Those who preferred Old Connecticut pottery or more common earthenware could visit other potteries in town. Outside Nauvoo, Hancock County boasted of only one pottery in 1840, a one-man operation, so the growth of the industry in Nauvoo contributed significantly to the availability of local wares in the region. By 1845, the Illinois census reported twenty-three potteries employing fifty-six persons in Hancock County.62

The potters and numerous other specialists contributed to Nauvoo's attempts to develop a home industry. Craftsmen kept at least some wealth within the community while employing men and women and helping to provide for the temporal needs of the gathered people. For example, German immigrant George Riser sold his shoe business in Ohio after his conversion and established a shop on Nauvoo's Main Street in 1842. A year later, the twenty-five-year-old entrepreneur expanded his business by hiring four assistants: his brother, John, a shoemaker working in Quincy, and three other experienced shoemakers newly arrived in Nauvoo, two from Pittsburgh and one from England.63

Besides the craftsmen at work in Nauvoo, the city had numerous workers whose skills provided services needed by the residents or visitors from outlying areas. Services included those offered by doctors, midwives, dentists, lawyers, teachers, barbers, and undertakers. Eventually, Nauvoo also had its own part-time artists and a daguerreotypist.

As a booming river town, Nauvoo was outpacing economically its similarly motivated neighbors on the Mississippi. The Mormon city's preindustrial economy was similar to that of nearby Warsaw (a much smaller town than Nauvoo) and Quincy, the commercial center of Adams County. In addition to the direct threat in politics, tension existed because of the aggressiveness of Nauvoo businessmen and the city's as yet unrealized potential for becoming an economic power base. Intense competition existed among operators of mills and ferries in the riverfront settlements of the two counties. As early as 1842, farmers from as far away as one hundred miles relied upon Nauvoo's three grist mills.64 The city's chartered ferry competed with the Warsaw ferry for regional traffic. In addition, merchants in Nauvoo and Warsaw vied for rural customers well beyond city boundaries. Although craftsmen served few customers outside Nauvoo's growing sphere of influence, talk of textile mills, potteries, and other industrial enterprises created an image of a rising regional manufacturing and trading center. Not surprisingly, economic dominance may have been feared by the opponents of Nauvoo's growing political influence, but by the mid-1840s the city's agrarian subsistence economy had not yet become the industrial emporium its promoters envisioned.

From a broader perspective, beyond the concerns of the prospering merchants and millers, ordinary Nauvoo citizens had material interests focused on personal needs food, clothing, and housing. Additionally, most individual Latter-day Saints were investing their meager surplus earnings in building the temple, sustaining the poor, and supporting church leaders. At least a tithe of time and income went toward building the kingdom of God and thus laying up treasures in heaven. It was an expectation of a gathered people, the faithful Latter-day Saints concluded, to endure the temporal challenges of this time and place and await the spiritual prosperity of another. The daughter of a widowed mother of six, immigrants from England in 1841, remembered, "We were very poor and had very little to eat, corn meal being our main food. . . . We did not complain. We were too thankful to be at Nauvoo."65

Banking, Credit, and Nauvoo's Potential

One service missing from Nauvoo and other emerging towns was banking. Nauvoo was founded during a time when banking was volatile nationwide, and no banks operated in the city from which to secure loans.66 Without banks to support business ventures, city entrepreneurs turned for their larger investments to private wealth. Similarly, to meet church financial obligations, including shortfalls on land payments, Joseph Smith often borrowed funds from prosperous Latter-day Saint businessmen or others who had surplus cash.67 Businessmen formed partnerships to accumulate the necessary funds to start a business. From family sources, businessmen obtained loans, investments, and inheritances. Another resource was the sale of property left behind when converts migrated to Nauvoo.

Individuals often depended upon family and personal sources for funds to buy land and build homes. Even without banks, the people of Nauvoo could secure loans, obtain credit, and handle transactions with an informal checking system using personal notes. Merchants provided some banking services by the way they bought and sold on credit. The church tithing office near the temple issued and redeemed notes that served as paychecks for temple construction workers. Sometimes the office made loans.68 If borrowers turned to friends for loans, they usually secured the note with property. For example, a physician and his wife, Samuel and Selina Bennett, borrowed $382.37 from Daniel H. Wells in 1844 by putting up as collateral Samuel's five-hundred-volume collection of medical books, his surgical instruments, and his stock of medicines, along with the couple's most valuable furniture, plus part of their city lot, one thousand feet of pine lumber, and four thousand bricks.69

Obligations to the government, however, were payable only in specie or negotiable scrip. Local tax collectors, including those in Hancock County, often insisted that citizens pay their property taxes in coin. "Husband your bits [pieces of eight, or coins worth 121 pounds, 2 cents]," the agent at Carthage advertised as the due date approached in 1842.70

Because money was scarce, the commercial marketplace allowed buying through credit or by exchanging commodities. Sellers could not conduct business strictly for cash if they wished a steady clientele. Merchants and craftsmen in Nauvoo found collecting on some debts took a constant effort. Most buyers attempted to clear their obligations with regular installment payments in cash or marketable goods.71 Often, the debts were passed on from one person to another in the form of promissory notes, which functioned as a private form of money. Like a check, a note could be cashed only when the issuer accumulated the resources necessary to make good on his promise.

Merchants who found themselves short of cash for their own buying sometimes encouraged "cash only" transactions. For instance, because of a large number of unpaid accounts at his drugstore and general store, C. W. Lyon offered a new shipment of dry goods, groceries, crockery, glass, hardware, medicines, and paints "for ready pay only."72

That "ready pay" requested by Lyon might include specie (gold or silver) or paper money issued by trusted banks. The United States government issued no paper money until 1861. Gold and silver coins were the official means of exchange. The same panic that had swept the Kirtland Safety Society into insolvency had seriously disabled the Illinois State Bank. In 1842, St. Louis merchants were discounting its currency at 55 percent below specie and 40 percent below currency exchanges. Few other banks in Illinois could be trusted.73 "We cannot tell you what bank would be safe a month hence," Joseph Smith advised Edward Hunter. "I would say that gold and silver is the only safe money a man can keep these times; you can sell specie here for more premium than you have to give. . . . The bank you deposit in might fail before you had time to draw out again."74

The fragile condition of the banks in Illinois reflected the state government's own poor credit. Early in 1842, Illinois sold nearly a million dollars worth of bonds in Pennsylvania for fifteen to seventeen cents on the dollar. Two years later, with a debt of fifteen million dollars, the state was negotiating with Eastern and European bond holders for prices of forty-five cents. Two years later still, in December 1846, Governor Thomas Ford could tell the general assembly that the treasury had a positive balance (nine thousand dollars), that state warrants were selling at par, and that gold and silver coins were in good supply in Illinois.75

In financial transactions in an economy based on barter, the medium of exchange consisted of whatever tradeable item, including a worker's services, the two parties could agree on. When Hiram Kimball wanted someone to break up seventy acres of prairie land in 1843, he offered to pay for the job with city or country property. He also offered land for a pair of mules, a set of blacksmith's tools, or a first-rate two-horse wagon. Kimball offered to accept state bank paper money for property or debts due him at fifty cents on the dollar; and he offered to pay cash for untanned calfskins. A Mormon tanner in Zarahemla, Iowa, offered to trade flour for hides and skins needed for his business or to tan hides on shares. Blacksmith Alfred Lambson accepted as pay for his work such items as boots, books, clothing, orders on Hiram Kimball's store, flour, loads of wood, a bedstead, and cash. Lambson paid his rent as a boarder in various homes in 1844 and 1845 with clothing, fish, cucumbers, and wagon repairs and other blacksmithing work.76

During the difficult financial crisis still pinching Americans in 1842, a Nauvoo editor observed, "Our good city continues to go ahead notwithstanding the scarcity of money." And a St. Louis metals jobber, making the best of hard times, caught the eye of potential buyers with a business card reading, "All kinds of Produce taken in exchange,/From a pound of Rags to a Steamboat-load of Buffaloes."77 A willingness to buy and sell through the exchange of goods and services was a way of life in the preindustrial economy of Nauvoo and in cities around the country.

Church leaders had incurred significant debts when they purchased the land upon which the Saints settled in Nauvoo and Iowa. These investments allowed Missouri exiles to begin again while awaiting a compensation for their losses that never came. In the financially difficult 1840s, the obligations to pay off the land acquisitions created no end of trouble for those who had signed their names in an effort to secure a place of refuge for the Saints.

From Isaac Galland, the church had purchased one large parcel and two smaller ones totaling slightly more than fifty-nine acres in the Commerce area for eighteen thousand dollars. On the Iowa side, the purchase of nearly eighteen thousand acres from Galland obligated the church for just under fifty thousand dollars. The terms of the sale allowed small annual payments of cash over twenty years. After concluding the sales, Galland accepted baptism and moved his family back to his native Ohio. Ever the promoter, Galland put his name on an immigrant guide and issued a map of Iowa Territory which extended at that time all the way to the Canadian border. With these publications, he hoped to encourage settlement on other lands he owned in Iowa. After about a year, to hasten the payoff on the church sale, Galland agreed to a land exchange. One by one, settlers on the lands purchased from Galland signed over their Missouri property to him. Through this arrangement, the full obligation of the church was met. Church leaders praised Galland as a benefactor, appointed him to the board of regents of the University of Nauvoo, and invited him to assist the church further as a sales agent and investor in the Nauvoo House.78

An exchange of lands was allowed as well for Latter-day Saints in the East as a means of meeting obligations owing on land at the north end of the Nauvoo peninsula purchased from Horace Hotchkiss, Smith Tuttle, and John Gillet, who formed a New Haven, Connecticut, land syndicate. With that purchase, the church had obligated itself to a fifty-thousand-dollar debt, plus fees and interest. After two years, six thousand dollars in interest was due. Attempts in 1841 to pay this through land exchanges with members in the East who were preparing to move to Nauvoo met with limited success. Isaac Galland was the designated agent for the church in the few transactions that did take place.79

That fall, Joseph Smith learned that Galland had not paid off the notes owing Hotchkiss as intended and had possibly diverted church funds to his own use. Church newspapers went public with the problem. To resolve the matter, the October conference in Nauvoo authorized the Prophet to negotiate a settlement.80 Meanwhile, Galland had settled at Keokuk, where he was promoting his own interests in that city. When the Prophet's entreaties for an accounting brought only polite postponements, the church leader revoked Galland's agency. In February 1842, the two men finally conferred in Nauvoo and apparently reached an understanding. An undated note among Smith's papers records an $8,778 debt owed to the church by Galland. The two remained friends. Even though Galland distanced himself spiritually from the church, he consistently deflected the public scorn against the people whose search for a place of refuge he had assisted.81

In 1841, the Prophet had delegated to the Twelve the business of settling the Saints in the new gathering place. Now, he asked them to handle the land exchanges. This was one solution to the overdue payments owed Horace R. Hotchkiss and his partners for the land in northern Nauvoo. In a general epistle to the Saints living away from Nauvoo, the Twelve urged contributions towards the debt directly or by swapping land. Ignoring the interest that had accrued, they acknowledged as the church's obligation a debt of $53,500.82

Even with this delegation of duty, Joseph Smith, as the church's chief financial officer, was not far removed from the land business. From time to time, he offered explanations to justify church activities. In one such public comment in 1843, he said that when immigrants bought from private landowners, they denied church leaders needed resources. Yes, Smith admitted, he was speculating on church land selling at a profit but the process supported church purposes. Widows received building lots at no cost. Income from sales helped meet loan payments on the tracts. "We have claim on your good feelings for your money, to help the poor," he said, "and the church debts also have their demands to save the credit of the church. . . . Those who purchase church lands and pay for it, this shall be their sacrifice. . . . We have the highest prices, [the] best lands, and do the most good with the money we get."83

Even with this appeal, the obligations were greater than available resources. The Saints building on the Hotchkiss syndicate's land filed their deeds with the county, but, in fact, the syndicate still held title to the land. Because he did not want to foreclose, Hotchkiss offered to resolve the dilemma by charging these buyers a monthly rent. Joseph Smith left the matter with the Twelve. Financially strapped, in a depressed national economy, the optimistic hopes of paying the debt fell far short. The investors in the Hotchkiss syndicate trusted their buyers but failed to realize the anticipated profit on their initial investment.84

At times, personal debts went unpaid or uncollected. For individual debtors, the consequence was a loss of trust in the community. Claimants had several options. A hearing before the bishop's court or the high council was one. An appeal to the civil courts was possible, but attorney's fees made all but the most grievous complaints unworthy of the expense. Debtors prison was not an option; in its first constitution in 1818, Illinois had been among the first in the nation to abolish imprisonment for debt.85

In February 1842, a new federal law for unloading debt became available. In April, Quincy attorney Calvin A. Warren, of the firm of Ralston, Warren, and Wheat, advertised his services as a bankruptcy lawyer. On a visit to Nauvoo, he attracted the interest of a number of community leaders, among them Joseph Smith.86 The Prophet's financial problems with the steamboat Nauvoo precipitated his decision to clear his debts. He and Hyrum were listed with their partners in a default judgment for more than five thousand dollars. Years of losses brought on by constant moves and harassment complicated the Prophet's financial life. In all, he owed $73,066.38, and his assets included less than twenty thousand dollars in notes receivable. Smith declared bankruptcy on April 18, 1842, filing with the assistance of Warren's firm in the district court at Carthage. That firm handled more than a dozen other Mormon bankruptcy cases.87 The matter would have been considered routine had not John C. Bennett charged Joseph Smith with defrauding his creditors. An investigation led to proposals for settlements still unresolved at Joseph Smith's death. Finally, in 1853, the government sold land formerly owned by the church and Smith to satisfy its claim.88

Latter-day Saints were not convinced by Bennett's claim that the bankruptcy issue exposed Joseph Smith as an imposter. For years, they had dismissed newspaper reports insinuating that converts were being duped in a religious scam. "Now father," Helen Soby wrote in 1841, "if you want to know about us or Joe Smith read the Book of Mormon . . . instead of newspapers' statements. All the money that he has had of us is 100 dollars that I lent him, and that has been proffered to me three times and I would not receive it." The bankruptcy law was created to benefit the oppressed, Mary Ann Fullmer informed an unbelieving relative; Joseph Smith's action in seeking relief could not be held against him. Mary Ann's husband had also taken out bankruptcy. John Fullmer said merely, "A bird in hand is worth two in a bush."89

Joseph Smith defended his decision as the only way he could settle uncollectible debts he owed. "I was forced into the measure by having been robbed, mobbed, plundered, and wasted of all my property, time after time, in various places," he explained.90 Some observers could not imagine that Smith lacked means, since as trustee-in-trust for the church he controlled vast assets in land and buildings. But these were not his own. When the Twelve took over management of Nauvoo property sales in 1841, the Prophet prepared an inventory. His personal belongings, said the Twelve, included "his old Charley horse, given him in Kirtland; two pet deer; two old turkeys, and four young ones; the old cow given him by a brother in Missouri, his old Major, dog; his wife, children, and a little household furniture." The Prophet kept his own real estate separate from land registered in his name as trustee-in-trust for the church by filing it in Emma Smith's name. Concerning a debt owed his loyal friend Edward Hunter, Joseph Smith said in November, "If I could pay you . . . I should do it with pleasure, but . . . true wealth is little to be found."91

In the final analysis, declarations of bankruptcy had little positive effect on Nauvoo's overall economy. Clearing away the debts of a few in the community did little to make capital available for new enterprises. At best, it freed financial risk-takers to take risks again.

Nauvoo's failure to prosper caused some to evaluate why the city had not realized its economic potential. One of those was Parley P. Pratt. In a direct plea to church members in September 1844, the energetic apostle laid the city's failure to become a major industrial and agricultural center at the feet of the Saints. The former Campbellite preacher blamed rich and poor alike for their unwillingness to accept the principle of the gathering. His argument was a summary of the expectations under the new economic emphasis in the years after Missouri, yet his reprimand echoed arguments that had explained the failure of the original Zion.

If properly understood, Pratt said, the gathering required an economic commitment. The rich must establish businesses in Nauvoo to employ the poor, and the poor must stay in Nauvoo to work. Some of the well-to-do, he observed, were unwilling to give up their prosperous businesses to buy farms or build workshops in the new gathering place. Even when they emigrated to Nauvoo, they too often divided their wealth among their unbelieving children who remained behind; or, they invested in St. Louis, Chicago, Peoria, or Burlington for better returns on their money. "The poor go unemployed, and are scattered to and fro over the earth, to seek to earn a morsel of bread; while the city of Nauvoo languishes in poverty, the Temple is not built, business is at a stand, and the saints of the Most High are few in number, have but little means, and are persecuted, robbed, killed and destroyed all the day long."

Pratt also blamed those who were without material means for Nauvoo's economic weakness. "Many of the poor," he said,

either stop on the road, or come here and go away again, as they say through poverty or necessity. But if they are not prospered abroad, they excuse themselves because they have no means to settle here; and if they are prospered, then they are doing so well that they think that they had better stay where they can do the best; and they are led on by worldly schemes, and by drunkenness and whoredom, till they care nothing for the Lord, or his saints.

Pratt was equally frustrated by those without means who located in Nauvoo "with a view of being helped to a living, while they pray, and sing, and tattle, and hear and tell news" instead of working. The opportunities for prospering, then, are left to "merchants, lawyers, doctors, mechanics, and others who are not of our faith, and only here in our midst for speculation."

The apostle said that he held this uncomfortable mirror up to the Saints to awaken them to the truth. "Our city is impoverished, and many go hungry and destitute," he lamented. "Our people are scattered and not prepared to defend their freedom and their rights . . . and we are in danger of being scattered and driven." He pleaded with the scattered members to gather, to "be governed by counsel, and seek to employ themselves and each other, and to support and build up in perfect union, according to the plan of heaven." Pratt had high expectations for the City of the Saints. Had the Saints done their duty, he argued, "Nauvoo would now have contained a hundred and fifty thousand souls; with industrious work shops of every description, manufacturing every article for home use and comfort, and supplying the whole western states with every thing useful . . . from a cambrick needle or a pin, up to a steam engine." He imagined another one hundred fifty thousand residents in Hancock and nearby counties working as farmers, stock raisers and wool growers; a state legislature "filled with our wise men, to make just laws; and the executive chair with a man who would have administered them in equity and justice for the benefit and protection of all. Every foot of vacant land would have been cultivated like Eden," he projected.92

But Nauvoo would not become the flourishing economic Eden envisioned by her leaders. As Pratt correctly surmised, the city lacked both the population base and financial resources needed to gain economic dominance in the region. It would take greater resources and more years to accomplish the dream of prosperity, but neither sufficient money nor time would be available. The Nauvoo everyone knew continued to expand because of its need to house a growing population. That need kept many workmen employed. Agriculture remained the mainstay of Nauvoo's economy. Tradesmen and professionals provided some economic stability as they offered their goods and services. Nauvoo's Saints made the best of their situation and rejoiced in their lives as common working people.

"Labor is the manufacturer of wealth," John Taylor declared. "It was ordained of God, as the medium to be used by man to obtain his living." Like Pratt, Taylor was critical of those with means who lorded it over workers and failed to make others happy. "The merchants and great men of the earth must prepare to mourn," he said. When the ways of the worldly Babylon fail, "the kingdom of God [will] rise in holy splendor, upon her ashes, and the people serve God in a perpetual union! . . . Let the world traffic, we must make men better by wisdom, virtue, and industry."93

Ultimately, as Taylor understood, it was the religious values underlying Nauvoo's economy that were important for most of her gathered people. Similarly, despite the privations of subsistence living, and like many of his neighbors, a destitute Newel K. Whitney held to a religious perspective on the question of unrealized personal prosperity. Deeply in debt, he preferred to remain in Nauvoo rather than return to Ohio, even if moving offered the prospect of a faster repayment of his debts. "I say liberty and poverty is preferable to imprisonment and riches or bondage and wealth," he said of the option of leaving his Zion for Babylon.94

The treasures of heaven were a sufficient prosperity for most who gathered to Nauvoo. To a friend in Boston, Orson Spencer wrote of the Saints' dream of a Zion people:

There is not a more contented and cheerful people to be found. . . . You must not marvel if we do not all at once become rich, and build large houses, and enclose productive farms. If riches were our object, we might readily gratify the most ambitious grasp. We possess every facility for being rich; but we long to behold the beauty of the Lord, and enquire in his holy Temple. . . . Our people . . . are prepared to endure all things with the assurance that their reward is great in heaven.95

NotesChapter 7. Economic Expectations

Epigraph: "Editorial Address," T&S 5 (January 1, 1844): 392-93.
