Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 8

Neighbors in Nauvoo

I find as the Saints advance step by step in the principles of righteousness it tends more and more to unite and bring the Saints to act as one man. The Lord has got a great work to do in the earth and that through human instrumentality and this unity being brought about and the temple completed. . . . Please remember us to our old neighbours and acquaintances, uncles, aunts, and cousins. . . . I am anxious for you and all the rest of our family to be here. . . . My desire is that you and I with our families and connections may stand on Mount Zion where there shall be peace and safety. John Bennion to his parents, February 16, 1844

In important ways, Nauvoo resembled the original City of Zion in Missouri. Those similarities went beyond the obvious use of streets laid off in lines straight with the compass. That pattern echoed a penchant in postrevolutionary America for creating boundaries and laying out cities using the orderliness of straight lines. For Latter-day Saints, the methodical arrangements of the urban landscape meant something more. In Zion and her stakes, the Saints sought to achieve oneness, harmony, and order. To eliminate confusion and to shape themselves as a Zion people, they sought to be of one heart and one mind. It was a quest launched early in the Restoration and founded in a full range of scriptural sources and prophetic teachings. The foursquare cities of holiness in which they lived represented the personal order and harmony the Saints sought for in their spiritual lives as a people.1

Beyond their desire for a unity in faith, they wanted to become a Zion people in their relationships with one another, within families, and among neighbors. Yet Nauvoo, as a newly founded city of "one heart and one mind," contained some hearts and minds distracted from the ideal of Zion. The Prophet acknowledged that Nauvoo's gathered people were not yet a clear light to the world. He warned potential immigrants in 1841

to understand that, when they come here they must not expect to find perfection, or that all will be harmony, peace and love; . . . for here there are persons, not only from different States, but from different nations, who, although they feel a great attachment to the cause of truth, have their prejudices of education, and consequently it requires some time before these things can be overcome.2

The assortment of people in Nauvoo's imperfect spiritual community meant rough edges yet to be smoothed.The social world of the city reveals other differences among the population within the church and between the Latter-day Saints and the people of nearby settlements. Nauvoo was not one large centrally orchestrated community but rather housed various self-defined clusters of families and friends, neighbors and fellow citizens. These networks crisscrossed greater Nauvoo to weave a social fabric of many differing threads. In short, within the rhetoric of unity, the Latter-day Saints shared many common objectives in their New Jerusalem. At the same time, they related to one another in selective social groupings, each with its own subset of interests, each interacting in its own way on the urban landscape.

The Urban Landscape

In its physical dimensions, Nauvoo was big enough for all of its intersecting, internal human communities. As surveyed, the original plat before its many additions contained about the same acreage as Missouri's City of Zion. But unlike its Jackson County model, whose 640-acre parcel fit nicely into one square mile, the original shape of Nauvoo reflected both the curve of the river and the boundaries of the four parcels acquired for development. Within the plat, surveyors oriented the streets according to the Jeffersonian foursquare ideal. "The city of Nauvoo is laid out the most beautiful," an English immigrant reported to his father in Staffordshire; "its streets go exactly North and South and East and West, which dividesit into squares of 4 Acres which they call city Lots."3 Because the streets were taken out of the adjacent blocks, the four lots in each block actually measured just under an acre in size.

The more than five hundred lots in the newly platted Nauvoo could be reasonably expected to hold over twenty-five hundred people. But only a month after surveyors filed the original plat, the new city expanded. Ethan Kimball, an Eastern investor, designated more than three hundred acres of his family's holdings as Nauvoo's first addition. Within that annexation, Kimball immediately surveyed and opened for settlement an eighteen-block area divided into seventy-two lots. The remaining land was separated into large numbered lots, some of them later subdivided. In subsequent years, other developers purchased and platted sections within the first Kimball addition or annexed their own subdivisions. The greatest increase came in 1842, when developers opened 412 lots to meet the rapid influx of immigrants. By the close of 1843, the number of platted lots in Nauvoo had grown to 1,430.4 A city of that size could comfortably house more than seven thousand people, yet that would not end Nauvoo's expansion.

A prospective homeowner in Nauvoo could obtain a lot in one of several ways. If arriving immigrants asked Joseph Smith's advice, he encouraged them to buy church land from authorized agents. Such purchases in the original plat helped meet payments on the debt to the Hotchkiss syndicate. The Prophet adjusted the asking price according to a buyer's resources and sometimes gave away lots to widows. Church leaders did not object when individual lot owners resold or subdivided their own lots, a common practice. They did oppose competing real estate developers. Targeted were private Latter-day Saint land agents on the bluff who undercut church prices and pocketed the profits. Their error was in ignoring Joseph Smith's plan for a Zion where the rich gave generously to lift up the poor.

A public reprimand of such developers came during a special conference in August 1841. At that meeting, the First Presidency authorized the Twelve to act as church land agents. Their area of supervision included Nauvoo, Zarahemla (in Iowa), and the proposed settlement of Warren, near Warsaw. Church leaders warned private land dealers that active competition with church agents might lead to a loss of fellowship for anyone rejecting counsel. As the church's new supervising land agent, Brigham Young endorsed the policy as a protection for immigrants against unprincipled speculators. The advice applied specifically to Wilson Law and other opportunistic Latter-day Saints who bought and resold land, mostly on the bluffs, for personal enrichment. The challenge directed at Law created tension in the competitive land market and strained relations between Joseph Smith and the brother of his first counselor.5

While the competition in the market created barriers between land merchants in new and old Nauvoo, other dividing lines did little to upset the people's striving for unity. In March 1841, the first Nauvoo city council created four municipal wards with boundaries almost exactly quartering the city's population. The lines intersected at the northwest corner of the temple block, the geographical and religious center of the city.6 The four wards defined voting districts for the selection of aldermen and councilors in municipal elections. Even though these officers ostensibly represented their constituents in the city council, issues rarely divided the council geographically.7 In their selection of county, state, and national candidates, Nauvoo's populace usually voted overwhelmingly together. That fact reinforced citywide unity but created tensions between Nauvoo and her neighbors in the region.

Similarly, the creation of administrative units for ecclesiastical purposes did not divide Nauvoo socially in any meaningful way. Nauvoo's single stake organization included the entire city and attracted the loyalty of other nearby Latter-day Saints. Nor did administrative subdivisions within the stake challenge this cohesion. At Nauvoo, the church for the first time divided a stake into districts named wards after their municipal counterparts.8 Initially, the wards existed to help the bishops more conveniently identify and meet the needs of the poor. The first conference held in Commerce in October 1839 recognized three ecclesiastical wards: the lower ward along the river, the middle ward, and the upper (bluffs) ward.9 Then, in the spring of 1841, the lines were adjusted to follow the new municipal ward boundaries, and a fourth bishop was appointed.10 The growing population led to a final reconfiguration of ecclesiastical boundaries in December 1842. Again influenced by existing boundaries, the high council adopted lines created in February 1841 by the temple committee. A chairman was already functioning within each of the ten city tithing wards and three adjacent rural tithing wards. It was his duty to organize work parties of men offering their temporal tenth to build the temple. It made sense for the bishops to care for the poor using the same boundaries. Mulholland Street became the axis for the new wards. The wards south of that street were narrow segments running north and south; the northern wards were even narrower strips extending east and west. Additional bishops were appointed by the high council to serve the new ecclesiastical units.11

Even though the bishops generally focused on the temporal needs of their own wards, at times they worked together. For example, in March 1841, Nauvoo's four bishops jointly organized the Aaronic Priesthood as stake quorums of deacons, teachers, and priests. That fall, two of the bishops discussed the needs of Nauvoo's poor before a special conference and then took a collection for their benefit.12 The bishops rarely organized worship meetings, a function handled citywide by general authorities orby the invitation of the owners of large homes.

From the perspective of Nauvoo's residents, the divisions of the city into administrative units for collecting tithing and caring for the poor had little divisive impact on their lives. The boundaries were silent, almost unnoticed organizational conveniences financial districts for important programs of the kingdom of God. Aside from the opportunities it gave members to meet together in a neighbor's home for occasional bad-weather Sabbath meetings and thus to renew and build friendships, the bishop's ward had little effect in defining neighborhoods.

Individual Landscapes

The citizens of other communities in Hancock County and beyond saw Nauvoo as a tight-knit domain, largely because of the perception that the Saints spoke with a single voice in political and spiritual matters.13 Yet, even as the Saints adhered to the community's common religious goals and supported shared political objectives, they held firmly to other loyalties as well. Within Nauvoo, life's affiliations were diverse. Out of practical considerations, the people of the city related to one another as neighbors in groups smaller than the whole. These social linkings were defined by place of origin, family relationships, friendships, informal social interactions, and formal institutional efforts designed to build a cohesive community.

The politicians of Hancock County worried about the voting strength of Nauvoo. The city had fewer voting males per capita than other towns, but Nauvoo was a rapidly growing hub with a steadily increasing number of votes. In a fall 1840 census, the town of Nauvoo listed 2,450 residents, making it the region's largest urban area. Until that time, Quincy City, with a population 2,296, had seen itself as the leading political and economic light of the Hancock-Adams Counties region. That same year, Lee County, Iowa, had 3,295 residents and Chicago reported 4,470. Seventeen months later, in February 1842, a church census of members conducted by the teachers quorum counted 3,564 Latter-day Saints (211 of whom lived outside the city limits). The number was almost evenly distributed among Nauvoo's four wards.14 Springfield, the capital city of Illinois, had about the same population.15 In sheer numbers, greater Nauvoo represented a political potential that concerned her neighbors.

In 1840 and again in 1850, after the Saints had left, Adams County was the most populous of the eighteen counties carved out of the western Illinois military tract. In 1840, Adams County reported more than fourteen thousand residents. In a state census five years later, Hancock County outranked every other county in the state, exceeding Chicago's rapidly growing Cook County by almost nine hundred. Not only was Hancock the most populated county, with 22,559 residents, but Nauvoo accounted for nearly half of that population. With the addition of the rural Latter-day Saints, that proportion made the Saints a huge majority in the county. The presence of an estimated fifteen thousand members in the region more than two-thirds of them in Nauvoo gave the Latter-day Saints a feeling of strength and security and a sense of unity in their majority position. The opposite feeling prevailed among the outnumbered residents of Hancock County. They felt weak, insecure, and threatened in their minority status. The same 1845 census that counted 11,057 Nauvoo residents found only 402 people living in Warsaw and 380 in Carthage. Chicago that year had 12,088 residents, only 1,031 more than Nauvoo.16

These figures demonstrate that the Latter-day Saints were not unreasonable in their expectations that the gathering to Nauvoo might create a major American city. Cities exceeding three thousand were rare in the American West in 1840. The growth of Nauvoo through 1845 placed it behind only Chicago and St. Louis in the region.17 Church leaders and other Nauvoo boosters imagined the unimaginable for their place of refuge. When Parley P. Pratt returned in early 1843 after an absence of three and a half years, he was amazed at the city's growth. Pratt shared the popular hopes for the future. If the Saints continued to gather in earnest, he anticipated, "Nauvoo, in one year would be the largest city in the west in ten years the largest in America, and in fifteen years the largest in the world."18 Visiting journalists shared in the optimistic expectation. Their forecasts did nothing to calm the concerns of Nauvoo's neighbors in western Illinois.

Besides its challenging numbers, Nauvoo differed from its neighbors in the proportion and size of families. In most areas of Illinois, Missouri, and Ohio, and in Iowa Territory in 1840, young men in their twenties outnumbered young women of the same age-group by 20 to 60 percent. For obvious reasons, these regions were attracting young men seeking their fortunes in the New West. In St. Louis, this age-group claimed two men for every woman. In Hancock County, the census takers in 1840 found the young adult populations more nearly equal, with 115 men for every 100 women. Nauvoo itself had an equal number of males and females in almost every age group.19 Similarly, a church census in 1842 counted 102 men for each 100 women. This ratio reflected the proportions in the older, settled counties of the Eastern states more than it resembled Nauvoo's neighboring communities on the frontier. The gathering had transplanted many entire families to the city, where children under five were twice as numerous as in other frontier regions.20 Families, including children, were at the heart of Nauvoo's purposes.

These differences in family makeup seem not to have affected the political discourse that led to tension between Nauvoo and her neighbors. The settled people of western Illinois believed in families and in constitutional guarantees for the free exercise of religion. Except for their criticisms of rumored plural marriage, opponents of Nauvoo's political clout were willing to allow the gathered Saints to pursue their religious objectives as long as theocratic power did not interfere with political and economic life.21

When immigrants to Nauvoo moved from old cities and farms to new ones, they left behind their homelands but did not necessarily come away alone. Many of them traveled with friends and relatives. At Nauvoo, they transplanted old acquaintanceships into new neighborhoods. The larger the community grew with the influx of immigrants, the greater became the potential for internal networking. The small-town unity of the original Nauvoo was gradually overwhelmed by increasing numbers of new immigrants. Even though they were Saints, the newcomers were strangers to the Mormon old-timers. They found friends among other immigrants from their home regions and renewed acquaintances with missionaries who had returned to Nauvoo. Through this process, the gathering of a diverse immigrant population preserved old friendships as subgroups within the larger community.

Latter-day Saints who had gathered from the tier of the Northern United States consistently made up Nauvoo's majority and provided a good share of the city's and the church's leaders. Apparently Joseph Smith felt a special kinship with people from the region of his nativity. "He was easy, free, and sociable with all," a newcomer from Connecticut reported upon arrival. "He said that he rejoiced to see us, being Yankees, for, said he, I was born in the state of Vermont."22 From its start in New England and the Mid-Atlantic states, the church had attracted additional converts in the upper Midwest among recently transplanted Easterners. Together many of this founding core group had shared the troubled years in Ohio and Missouri before heading into Illinois. Converts born in New York and the other Mid-Atlantic states accounted for at least a quarter of the adult population of Nauvoo. Native New Englanders added another 15 to 20 percent and British Canadians perhaps 5 percent. Except for some Ohio natives, few adults claimed birthplaces in the Midwest. Taken together, immigrants from states in the Northeast and the Midwest and from eastern Canada accounted for around half of Nauvoo's adults.23

The experiences of the Ohio-Missouri years reinforced a group cohesiveness founded in shared regional origins. Heber C. Kimball, who had built a log cabin on a five-acre wooded parcel bought from Hiram Kimball in July 1839, with "not a house within half a mile," returned from his mission two years later to find that "the place, wild as it was at that time, is converted into a thickly populated village." He informed Parley Pratt, "Our old friends, who were driven from Missouri, are my neighbours: for instance, the Allreds, Charles Hubbard, Charles Rich, and hundreds of others that I could mention that you know."24 Similar friendship ties based on prior geographical linkages existed in almost every group arriving at Nauvoo. Just as the Kirtland Camp transported almost intact a congregation of Saints from Ohio to Missouri, so immigrant companies from Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and elsewhere preserved established friendship networks by settling together in their new homeland in Nauvoo.

The Saints of Chester County, Pennsylvania, exemplify a regional group that retained old associations in Nauvoo. For some time, they had lived as neighbors. They had cemented their relationships through business arrangements and some intermarriage. The restored gospel brought these neighbors together in the Brandywine branch and sent them off to Nauvoo in two or three companies in 1841 and 1842. Several of Edward Hunter's workmen on his prosperous 550-acre estate at West Nantmeal preceded him as settlers in Nauvoo and built him a house there. The Brandywine Saints retained their friendships, even though many of them found it necessary to spread out over the greater Nauvoo area.25 A group from neighboring Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, bought farms within a mile or so of each other on the prairie east of Nauvoo.26

Less numerous than Northerners in Nauvoo were the Southerners, but they likewise remained aware of their regional origins. They accounted for perhaps 10 to 15 percent of the adult population in the area. Half of these Southerners were natives of Kentucky and Tennessee, with most of the rest from the South Atlantic states.27 A few from the upper South who had migrated to Missouri returned there as missionaries. Their efforts increased the Southern contingent in greater Nauvoo, though it was still a largely invisible minority. Some Southerners who had joined a general regional migration into southern Illinois likewise became Latter-day Saint converts. Some of them remained where they were when they converted, in small clusters around Nauvoo. For example, the Ute Perkins family had moved to Illinois from North Carolina in 1826 before they joined the church. In 1840, their family settlement, known as Perkinsville, was incorporated as Ramus (later Macedonia); the Ramus stake served a broad sweep of the countryside, as far north as La Harpe. Among those absorbed into the Ramus stake were a few dropouts of the Kirtland Camp of 1838 who had stopped first at Springfield and then moved into the area east of Carthage in 1839 as mill operators and farmers along Crooked River. The leader of the Kirtland sick detachment, Joel Hills Johnson, presided over the Crooked Creek branch and the short-lived Ramus stake. Almon W. Babbitt, another Kirtland exile, presided for a season in 1843 in the Macedonia branch. Ramus thus included both a small, preexisting Southern kinship group and a friendship group from Kirtland.28

Southern immigrants built or retained friendship networks to support commonalities based on place of origin in part because they may have found some discrimination against them among the Yankee population in Nauvoo. John H. Henderson's situation reveals one instance of unfortunate bias. Orphaned at thirteen and left to fend for himself, he found sporadic work with farmers outside Nauvoo until someone placed him with a sixty-year-old New England veteran of the War of 1812, who promised to educate the youth. "I soon found that our ways of thinking and talking were quite different," Henderson remembered. "Mine were all of the Southern stamp, while his were of New England. This difference caused him to be continually making fun of my speech and ways." The prejudice extended into the classroom, where some of the students likewise mimicked Henderson's accent. Anxious to make the most of his first chance at an education, Henderson applied himself to his studies. He concluded that he was learning as fast as the others.29

Given the attitudes of the time, the few black residents of Nauvoo likely interacted with one another in a network of their common interests in addition to those shared with other church members. Several black Latter-day Saints lived in the city, and others resided in branches elsewhere. Perhaps the best-known black member was Elijah Abel, who had been ordained an elder and later a seventy during the Kirtland years. A missionary in the late 1830s and again in 1843, Abel worked as a carpenter and undertaker in Nauvoo for three years before relocating to Cincinnati, where he remained active in church affairs. Other black Saints in Nauvoo included Isaac and Jane Manning James, who married in the new city of the Saints, and other members of the Manning family, 1843 immigrants from Connecticut.30

Citizens of Nauvoo shared with most other Americans some attitudes toward blacks and rejected others. Typical was Joseph Smith's disapproval of marriage between the races. As a municipal judge in 1844, he fined two black men "for attempting to marry white women"; however, the Prophet did not hold to the common opinion of the day that blacks were congenitally inferior.31

The British were at least as numerous as the Southerners in Nauvoo. Not all of the forty-eight hundred converts who sailed from Liverpool before 1846 reached Nauvoo or remained there. Perhaps as few as one-fourth of them remained with the church in western Illinois to the end of the Nauvoo period. Some stopped in such way stations as St. Louis, while others left Nauvoo for work or settlement opportunities elsewhere. Even so, Great Britain contributed at least 10 percent of the adults in the Nauvoo area and may have accounted for double that number.32

The British in greater Nauvoo represented two economic groups. The first, represented by a few Englishmen from Herefordshire, were farmers. Because of their occupation, they resembled the typical non-Mormon immigrant to the upper Mississippi Valley who sought land in the fertile prairies of central Illinois. The second and much larger group was made up of Latter-day Saints from such industrial towns as Manchester, Liverpool, and Birmingham, or the Staffordshire Potteries. Drawn from England's poor laboring classes and industrial areas, they wanted jobs in factories, and church leaders tried unsuccessfully to provide such opportunities for them. Some left for work downriver. Others changed occupations.33

The British traveled together to Nauvoo in church-chartered ships and often settled near their own countrymen for mutual comfort. In Hancock County, they kept track of one another and nurtured old friendships. For instance, when John Jones lost his wife, his daughters cared for him in the home of an English friend, John Kay. Later on, Jones married the widow of a former neighbor at Froomes Hill in England.34 Jones found America's classless society a welcome change from his native England. He liked the quest for equality among the Saints and the lack of pomp and ceremony in American customs. "The rich here do not look down with a frown upon those that are poorer than themselves," he wrote home to a married son, "but treat them with familiarity and kindness. Indeed I find myself already at home at America."35

Nauvoo's transplanted farmers from England (and those from southeastern Pennsylvania) opened farms around an area known as the Mound, six miles east of Nauvoo. The families of John and William Benbow, William Kay, and others converted in Staffordshire and Herefordshire by Wilford Woodruff considered themselves neighbors linked by a common tie of origin. The Kays and Benbows often visited one another in their homes, which were three miles apart.36 English immigrants arriving in Nauvoo soon learned of this nearby gathering place in the rural backcountry. George and Mary Bundy reached Nauvoo in May 1843 and spent the summer and winter with the Newmans, whom they had known in the Mosley branch, made up largely of United Brethren converts. When they purchased a small farm the next spring and built a wattle house on it, the Bundys chose a site five miles east of Nauvoo among converts from Gloucestershire and Worcestershire.37

In July 1841, Joseph Smith and John C. Bennett designated Warren, a platted town just south of Warsaw, as a separate settlement place for the arriving British immigrants. Businessmen in Warsaw had invited settlement on the land as early as the fall of 1839. (Another option, 340 acres at Chili, near Hancock County's southern border, was rejected).38 The Twelve soon were assigned to superintend the project. They appointed Willard Richards to live in Warsaw as resident sales agent. But not everyone in Warsaw agreed that having "a Mormon City on our immediate borders" was a good thing. The anti-Mormon press ridiculed the proposal by calling the town "Money-Diggersville" and by raising the old Missouri charge that the Saints were thieves.39

The first boatload of British immigrants to be directed toward Warren arrived in November. Under instructions from the First Presidency, they rented rooms in Warsaw. Almost immediately, the economic effects of the pending settlement of two hundred Latter-day Saints created a standoff. A local miller doubled the price of flour, and when the Saints gathered firewood from the Warren town plot, market prices for dry wood at Warsaw's dock fell twenty-five cents a cord. As winter settled in, tensions escalated. Richards sought counsel from headquarters and then invited the British Saints to move upriver and abandon plans for the ethnic gathering place. Some left immediately by sleigh; others waited for spring.40

In contrast to the difficult reception at Warsaw, the British found their American brothers and sisters in the Nauvoo area willing to welcome and accept them. The desire of the English farmers to withdraw to the countryside beyond Nauvoo created some geographical and social distance from other Saints, but distance did not eliminate all British-American social interaction. British factory workers mixed quickly into Nauvoo society because of the need for jobs wherever they could be found. Nauvoo's Northeastern United States majority were not that far removed from their own British ancestors. Their Yankee patriotism for the new America had turned them against the British government, but it did not exclude from fellowship their converted cousins from the ancient homeland. British immigrant William Clayton was not alone among his countrymen when he considered his arrival in America as coming home.41

Family and Friends

Other residential networks in Nauvoo and nearby Latter-day Saint settlements were defined by extended kinship ties. Relatives often shared common geographical backgrounds as well, but it was the marriages and descendancies that kept these people united as neighbors in Nauvoo. Their decision to join in the gathering meant for many of these families a unity of faith. This created a shared sense of belonging not just to a family but to a larger religious community. Extended families who shared their belief in the new religion helped to strengthen the overall unity of the church.

The family of Joseph Smith Sr. followed the Prophet to Commerce and became permanent settlers in southern Nauvoo. As might be expected of a family that had shared many experiences together, they shared resources, including housing, as necessary. The Prophet's parents and his brothers, except for William, lived as near neighbors in Nauvoo.42 Other Smith relatives clustered in Lee County, Iowa, where the Prophet's uncle John Smith served as stake president and John's nephew Elias Smith was bishop. More distant kin settled in Wisconsin. Emma Smith had relatives in northern Illinois.

Many other family clusterings existed in Nauvoo and in nearby Latter-day Saint settlements. It was not unusual for parents and married children, siblings, in-laws, or even more extended kinship networks to work cooperatively in finding homes and looking after one another when they gathered out of Babylon.43 Even when a woman's husband did not convert, both sometimes moved west. Economic opportunity was a sufficient incentive for him. Other Latter-day Saints left unconverted family members behind and sought new supportive relationships in Nauvoo.

People in Nauvoo maintained ties with their distant family members, if only through correspondence. Though infrequent, the letters were newsy and mostly concerned with family matters.44 Very often missives from Nauvoo to relatives who were not Latter-day Saints contained an invitation to investigate the church and to do so in Nauvoo.45 This anxiousness for the spiritual welfare of parents or siblings reveals a religious longing for a united family.

The pleadings extended as well in reverse. Those who had not joined the Saints tried to convince their gathered relatives to change their minds and return home.46 Such earnest challenges from nonmember kin created a constant but friendly sparring. It pulled against Latter-day Saint unity and succeeded in drawing some members away from their commitment to the gathering.

Meanwhile, in designated gathering places, Latter-day Saints bound together through a shared place of origin or family relationship maintained old ties and established new friendship networks. The term friend at its root a word for "loved ones" was used in nineteenth-century conversation to refer both to cherished relatives and favored colleagues. Friendship among trusted allies strengthened shared values. When these values supported broad community interests, friendships built unity in Nauvoo. When friends shared minority opinions, their influence worked against homogeneity. This, for instance, was the case among the dissenters from Nauvoo's changing theology who set up a reformed church and challenged Joseph Smith's prophetic role.

Friendship played an especially important role in the relationships Joseph Smith enjoyed with others. The Prophet rewarded with enduring friendship those who demonstrated true loyalty. He recorded the names of such friends in his Book of the Law of the Lord, a private diary that also listed financial contributions to the church.47

Within the Prophet's friendship network were family members, private confidants, political compatriots, and benefactors. His closest ties were to those who shared his religious goals. "These love the God that I serve," he wrote; "they love the truths that I promulge; they love those virtuous, and those holy doctrines that I cherish. . . . I love friendship and truth; I love virtue and Law; I love the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, and they are my brethren." Problems in Missouri had stripped him of such early supporters as Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmers. He retained the backing of Newel K. Whitney, the family of Joseph Knight Sr., Porter Rockwell, his own family, and others.48

At Nauvoo, Joseph Smith elevated to greater positions of trust his reliable brother Hyrum. "What a faithful heart you have got," he said of Hyrum. Gradually, he increased reliance on Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, senior members of the Twelve, and through them certain other apostles.49 Within church circles but more distant spiritually were Sidney Rigdon and a few less reliable members of the Twelve, including Joseph's brother William Smith and John E. Page. It was through Rigdon that John C. Bennett, Rigdon's political ally and friend, was introduced into church leadership circles.50 William Marks, a trusted friend of Emma Smith, did not enjoy the same confidence from Joseph but did serve as Nauvoo's stake president.

In secular life, Joseph Smith nurtured friendships in an attempt to influence public opinion, always a fickle and skeptical adversary. Among American journalists enlisted as friends and political supporters were James Gordon Bennett, of the influential New York Herald, and John Wentworth, a Democratic legislator and Chicago publisher. Another prominent New Yorker, attorney and educator James Arlington Bennet, lent his support as well. Nauvoo men of influence befriended by the Prophet included non-Mormon merchants and landowners Amos Davis, Isaac Galland, Hiram Kimball, and Daniel H. Wells. All of these men sooner or later accepted baptism, but their secular accomplishments gave them a prestige in the wider world that was important as an anchor. Smith included them and others like them in civic and educational positions in Nauvoo, where their participation helped legitimize those aspects of the religious community. Some Hancock County politicians likewise joined Joseph Smith's expanding network of friends; Sheriff Jacob Backenstos played the most active role. Certain legislators befriended the Prophet, while Representative (later Senator) Stephen A. Douglas received special attention during the early attempts to win congressional support for redress. Even though the Prophet worked through the established Illinois delegations in Washington, D.C., he had his own emissaries. Chief among them was Elias Higbee, tried and proven true in Missouri, and eulogized by Smith as "a just and good man a great and mighty man."51

Joseph Smith did not forget those who helped him in troubled times. Such personal friends and associates as businessman William Law, clerk William Clayton, constable Dimick B. Huntington, and bishop and militia leader George Miller found a place in the Book of the Law of the Lord for their help when he was in hiding in August 1842.52 Law and Miller were among those whose loyalty waned with time.

Nauvoo's Cultural Community

Individuals and families in Nauvoo enjoyed personal, recreational, and social interaction within the family and with friends. Such involvements supported existing kinship and friendship networks and created new ones. Likewise, dancing, drama, and music contributed to a sense of community in the city by helping to reinforce religious boundaries while offering recreational opportunities.

Dining and dancing were favorite pastimes for Nauvoo's citizens at social events. In intimate social settings, these cultural activities helped to create and bond friendships. Dancing and games were often the final activity in the popular dinner evening for adults or young adults. The Mansion House was a favorite place for dinner parties, but others convened in the Masonic Hall, aboard the Maid of Iowa, and in larger private houses, including Sidney Rigdon's.53 Unlike some religious people of the time, Joseph Smith had no objection to dancing, as long as participants avoided bad company and kept proper hours. At Nauvoo, dancing was more liberally approved than among the Saints in their earlier gathering places.54

The Nauvoo Theater operated on the main floor room of the Masonic Hall.55 Amateur dramatists in Nauvoo offered popular entertainment there, as did an occasional visiting theatrical company. Even before the hall was finished in April 1844, theater was offered in a tent and, in 1843, in the "store chamber" above Joseph Smith's store. Dedication of the Masonic Hall was followed by a series of plays organized by Thomas A. Lyne, a New York actor, and his brother-in-law George J. Adams. Lyne and his wife took many of the leading roles in such plays as Pizarro, or the Death of Rolla, in which Brigham Young played the part of the high priest. Typically, an evening program began with excerpts from Shakespeare, followed by one serious play and a second lighter offering. The Twelve approved of theater only if the actors avoided "corrupt and immodest theatrical exhibitions." They opposed entertainment that brought Saints and sinners together with offerings that demeaned efforts to live a religious life.56

Uplifting theatrical performances and dances supported Nauvoo's moral values and reinforced the city's wholeness as a gathering of covenant people. Not clearly as supportive were the common traveling entertainments offered by phrenologists, hypnotists, and other purveyors of curiosities. Following the pattern of many other cities, municipal law in Nauvoo licensed all shows and exhibitions in an attempt to prevent and to punish infractions of the city's moral harmony.57

Aside from hymn singing and parlor piano playing, Nauvoo residents enjoyed music as spectators. At least three bands functioned: William Pitt's brass band played for public and private gatherings; a dance band with stringed instruments accompanied the quadrille parties; and the Nauvoo Legion Band participated in military events. Most notable of the band performances were those associated with the cornerstone ceremonies at the temple and at Independence Day celebrations.58 If weather hampered outside concerts, they were held in the largest available halls; after January 1845 that was the Music Hall, also called the Concert Hall.59 These performances entertained and, more importantly, rallied citizens to common causes, whether patriotic or religious.

Vocal groups served like purposes. Choirs sang for citywide religious services, while individuals performed in concerts offered regularly in public halls and for social gatherings in homes. Music professor Gustavus Hills applauded the progress of a choral group in late 1841 for its progress in smoothing a choir with varied musical and cultural backgrounds into an orderly whole. These strivings were not unlike the broader challenge of blending disparate peoples into a Zion society. To solve the problem of financial support, musical groups charged entrance fees, and the Nauvoo Music Association offered shares at $2.50 each in its initial capitalization of $1,000 in January 1845.60

Community Education

An opportunity to reinforce common bonds between the Saints and their neighbors existed in the educational system. Residents of Nauvoo shared with other Americans a need to teach the next generation basic skills and to prepare teachers. Yet this commonality was largely ignored in public discussions. In the predominant political discourse of the day, the differences received more attention among neighboring communities than the shared interests of educating the younger generation.

Latter-day Saints brought with them into the church varied experiences with formal education. Some, like Brigham Young and Heber Kimball, had spent very little time in a schoolroom and relied upon their own native intellect and gradual grasp of the skills of literacy. Others, like Sidney Rigdon and Orson Spencer, had enjoyed the luxury of college training. Those with advanced schooling became the teachers and administrators in Nauvoo's formal educational system, besides using their training in the cause of the church.

Whatever their backgrounds in book learning, the Saints accepted the Prophet Joseph Smith's teaching that gaining knowledge, both secular and sacred, was good. They willingly opened their minds to all branches of literary and scientific knowledge.61 And, as encouraged by the published revelations, they applied their learning to church purposes, primarily to the work of proselytizing. Some felt that having a revelator at the head of the church equipped the Saints especially well to discover new scientific truths. The Latter-day Saint philosophy of education encompassed the idea of diligent effort through both secular and spiritual avenues.62

In one of its first legislative acts, the city council created the University of the City of Nauvoo, effective on February 9, 1841, to provide formal educational opportunities for adults. The law named Mayor John C. Bennett as the university chancellor and appointed city councilor William Law as registrar. Twenty-three regents guided policy, among them all four city aldermen and seven members of the city council.63 The council gave the regents responsibility for all education, including the community's common schools, an arrangement rare in America. At the time of its founding, the Nauvoo university was only the fifth institution of higher learning in Illinois; the other four all operated as colleges.64

In the 1840s, American colleges and universities trained doctors, ministers, and teachers. Nauvoo had no use for a trained ministry, and many of the Saints favored self-taught botanic doctors. It is not surprising then that the proposed curriculum reflected a liberal arts offering of most use to prospective teachers. The city council appointed Nauvoo's best-educated men to the university's staff: specialists in mathematics, English literature, languages, church history, and music.65 The school's founders had high ambitions. "We hope to make this institution one of the great lights of the world," Joseph Smith said, "and by and through it, to diffuse that kind of knowledge which will be of practical utility, and for the public good, and also for private and individual happiness."66

Unlike other Illinois colleges, the University of Nauvoo operated without its own buildings. In August 1845, a planning committee announced intentions to begin construction the next season, but vigilante actions weeks later thwarted the effort.67 Not much evidence exists about the university or its class offerings. The regents met from time to time to conduct necessary business. Some students were matriculated and met for classes in existing public buildings or in homes. One professor published a list of textbooks approved for those wishing to train as music teachers.68 An important institution in embryo, Nauvoo's university was outdistanced in effort and commitment by building projects more closely associated with the central mission of the church. Ultimately, higher education among the Saints waited for a more favorable place and situation.

Getting a basic education in Jacksonian America meant for most people gaining a simple mastery of the fundamentals of reading, writing, and arithmetic. To obtain at least that much training for their children, parents chose between public and private schools. Public schools, open to everyone and therefore known as common schools, were funded through local property taxes. With private (subscription) schools the families of the students paid the entire tuition. Private schools dominated early Illinois, and many citizens resisted tax-supported education.69 Both kinds functioned in Nauvoo, but civic leaders reflected a Latter-day Saint preference that all children receive an equally good education.To accomplish this goal, they proposed to bring all schools under the watchful care of a single governing board.

As authorized under the Nauvoo charter, the city council established a common school system. It differed from that of most other area communities in that all boards and wardens (supervisors) were appointed instead of elected. The city council appointed the university board of regents to manage the system. The regents certified teachers, established an approved list of textbooks, and appointed three wardens in each of the four municipal wards of Nauvoo (in three of the wards, the ecclesiastical bishop was one of the wardens). The wardens chose teachers from among those certified, monitored their work, and arranged for schoolrooms (often a rented room in a home, public hall, or commercial building). The teachers collected tuition through a haphazard mixture of county and city funding, subsidized by parents. Pay was meager for teachers, and since most of them taught only a few months out of the year, other jobs supplied part of their income.70

The common schools sponsored under these laws flourished; twenty-seven teachers tapped into the county tax funds available to subsidize their services. Others functioned without tax support. As a non-Mormon in Nauvoo observed in 1843, "There are many Common Schools in Nauvoo, where the germs of greatness are planted," which, if nourished, could reap an abundant harvest "of the good things of intellect."71

Many Nauvoo teachers offered services privately; some taught under both systems in a combination of public and subscription offerings. Private schools depended upon the reputations of the teachers. For instance, James M. Monroe advertised classes in the basics plus "higher mathematics, philosophy, chemistry, Latin, French, Spanish, etc., etc.," and claimed that he had the "concurrence of the Twelve" in opening a school at Brigham Young's home in 1845. Monroe was already teaching the children of Emma Smith and some others at the Mansion House, where he boarded. It was possibly tension between the Youngs and the Smiths that made it necessary for Monroe to start a second school for the children of Brigham Young and others of his quorum. Independent teachers made their own arrangements for rooms, including public schoolrooms and the Music Hall.72

The mixture of common and subscription schools may have complicated the regents' desire for uniformity in the curriculum. In establishing Nauvoo's common schools, they had adopted an exclusive list of texts recommended by chancellor John C. Bennett. They even gave regent Ebenezer Robinson a local editor, bookseller, and stationer exclusive rights to sell the authorized books, obtained from the American Common School Society in New York. In return, Robinson agreed to stop selling the popular Eclectic series of graded texts, books steeped in Calvinistic moralism.73 But other booksellers in Nauvoo soon offered alternate titles, presumably to meet the preferences of private school teachers. In matters of education, Nauvoo's educational community differed within itself on details. Those who favored a greater "concert of action" in classroom texts called the teachers together in September 1843 to rally support for uniformity.74 To what extent they succeeded is not known.

To continue their education and keep abreast of current events, citizens of Nauvoo attended public lectures or read newspapers and books. To develop speaking abilities needed for missionary preaching, men participated in small, informal debate groups. These meetings, or lyceums, began as early as January 1840. Speakers would address three or four topics, religious and secular, each evening, with a limit of thirty minutes for each presentation. Joseph Smith participated regularly as a speaker on religious subjects such as the Godhead, vengeance, the Millennium, and equality or as an umpire to reconcile doctrinal differences. "It was surprising how much good was accomplished in attending a Lyceum one winter," Wandle Mace remembered.75

In 1843, the city's young men formally organized the Nauvoo Lyceum, a local version of a nationwide movement. Some lyceums featured skilled lecturers on popular and educational topics. Others allowed local debaters to discuss such current political, social, and legal issues as capital punishment, education for women, physical evidences of the existence of God, and manners. The gospel-centered missionary lyceums continued as well. Both young men and young women attended the educational lecture schools on topics such as astronomy and history. Participants paid a fee to attend and took exams to measure their educational attainment.76

Like many other American communities, Nauvoo citizens formed lending libraries to support adult education. The libraries filled their shelves by recruiting members and charging fees. The Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute, organized in January 1844, may not have been the first such local effort, but it had the best start, with Benjamin Winchester as head. Funded through an offering of two thousand shares of stock, valued at five dollars each, the institute managed an active circulating library and sponsored regular lectures in space rented from James Ivins on Main Street. Sponsors launched their library with one hundred donated books. They lent them to nonmembers for a small fee. The disruptive events of mid-1844 brought an end to the Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute when several of its key trustees joined in the efforts to discredit Joseph Smith. The apostasies caused the community to distrust the institute. It apparently disbanded that fall.77

Toward the end of the year, a city ordinance authorized a new library, a task entrusted to Nauvoo's fourteen quorums of the seventy. The Seventies Library and Institute Association opened in the newly finished quorum hall. Like the earlier effort, the Seventies' library accepted cash or "books at market value" from stockholders. Nearly one hundred donors immediately contributed books to the church-managed, municipally sanctioned effort.78 A later list of 675 donated books reveals a special interest in religion, history, travel accounts, biography, and schoolbooks.79

Another beginning in Nauvoo that sponsors intended to be both global and grand in scope was that of a museum. During his years in Ohio, Joseph Smith had hosted numerous visitors anxious to see the Egyptian mummies and papyrus. For a time, he authorized an Elder Coe to set up a museum at John Johnson's inn in Kirtland to show the items during certain hours. The Prophet granted his mother, Lucy Mack Smith, that privilege in Quincy, Illinois, in 1839, and she continued to show the Egyptian curiosities in Nauvoo.80

When Addison Pratt left Nauvoo for a mission to the South Seas in the spring of 1843, he delivered to the president's office several specimens of natural history that he had collected years earlier as a whaler. Pratt's treasured "tooth of a whale, coral, bones of an Albatross' wing and skin of a foot, jaw-bone of a porpoise, and tooth of a South Sea seal" became the first, and perhaps only, offerings for the proposed Nauvoo museum. Eighteen months later, the city council gave the librarian of the Seventies Library curatorial authority to collect not just books and maps but sculptures, paintings, and antiquities.81 This expanded role made the Seventy's Institute both a library and a museum. Ever the promoter of Nauvoo's development, John Taylor, editor of the Times and Seasons, encouraged "the Lord's 'Regular Soldiers'" in their missionary service abroad to "gather all the curious things, both natural and artificial, with all the knowledge, inventions, and wonderful specimens of genius that have been gracing the world for almost six thousand years . . . for the best library in the world!"82 Under a municipal mandate, this priesthood brotherhood was prepared to enhance learning by study in a community of faith.

In their efforts to establish a library and museum, as in their educational and cultural activities, citizens of Nauvoo wished to enjoy in their Zion community the praiseworthy things of the society whose general wickedness they deplored. They desired secular learning in addition to religion, but they managed learning under spiritual standards that sifted from the world those facts consistent with faith.

Educational and cultural activities in the city strengthened the sense of community for all residents. Political and ethnic differences mellowed under the influence of a good laugh at the theater or the conviviality of a dinner party. Learning encouraged tolerance and expanded understanding. These endeavors enhanced unity in Nauvoo, as did the neighborhoods defined by geography, blood lines, and place of origin.

Ultimately, bonds of friendship, kinship, and shared experience did not matter as much as covenants of faith. An inner religious conviction of the primacy of prophetic leadership defined the most important community in Nauvoo. Some Latter-day Saints did not unite under the banner of continuing revelation. They remained behind or dropped out along the way when the community of faith moved on with an enlarged understanding of the doctrinal and geographical meaning of Mormonism. For those who rejected this expanded vision, ties to friends, relatives, and a static definition of their newfound faith took precedence over a religious commitment to sacrifice all for the kingdom of God.

NotesChapter 8. Neighbors in Nauvoo

Epigraph: John Bennion, Nauvoo, to his parents in Liverpool, February 16, 1844, Church Archives, spelling and punctuation standardized.
