Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 9

A People of Faith and Destiny

Well, here we are in the famous City of Nauvoo, and under the influence of the cheerful countenance of the Prophet, and the edification of his words of wisdom, which are truly such, notwithstanding what the world say; be assured by one who would by no means wish to misrepresent, but would give the truth in its naked simplicity, this is truth. . . . The power and wisdom of [Joseph Smith] in expounding the scriptures was a feast indeed of fat things. George Alley, April 13, 1843

It is one of the few comforts of the saints in this world, to be settled in peace, and witness the rap[i]d growth of their infant city, as a place of safety and gathering for the last days. For three or four miles upon the river and about the same distance back in the country, Nauvoo presents a city of gardens, ornamented with the dwellings of those who have made a covenant by sacrifice, and are guided by revelation, an exception to all other societies upon the earth. Joseph Smith, October 1, 1842

Nauvoo existed for religious purposes. The city, its houses, its farms and shops, its families and neighborhoods all presumed a greater purpose. It was religion that bound the city's Latter-day Saint residents into a united community. Joseph Smith, in his capacity as a religious teacher of doctrine and conveyor of ordinances, played the central role in the religious experience of the Nauvoo years. Through worship and service, Latter-day Saints sought to bring God into their lives and to bless the lives of others. The sense of religious community was fostered by the presence of general church leaders and by the regular Sunday preaching meetings held in the public groves.

These gatherings, held during good weather, united the Saints through fellowship and instruction and attracted people from beyond Nauvoo. A master teacher, Joseph Smith infused new life into old sacred stories. He taught mostly with reference to the Bible, but he did so by selecting and explaining its messages for his own people and times. The Book of Mormon, another witness of God's dealing with his people in ancient times, likewise offered direct messages for religious seekers of the last days. Of special significance in the creation of a new people of faith was the story of fresh revelation and a living prophet for the latter days.

This story had been unfolding for twenty years. Parts of it had been preserved in print. At Nauvoo, Joseph Smith launched his final retelling of the story of the Restoration for all to read. This effort gave official status to the Saints' awareness of their own role in religious history and of the Prophet's life as a sacred story in its own right. During the Nauvoo years, the Latter-day Saints reaffirmed their belief that individually and as a people they were creating a new sacred history.1

The City of the Prophet

Nauvoo's greatest distinction among the cities of America was its claim to a resident prophet. Church members moved to Nauvoo at his request, upheld him as a religious leader, and trusted his counsel in practical matters. After attending one of the preaching meetings in front of the temple, a visiting journalist from the Chicago area claimed to discover the key to Smith's success as a leader. The Saints followed the Prophet, he wrote, "because, as we say in Illinois, 'they believe in him,' and in his honesty."2 The devotion of members was, indeed, based in large part on their confidence in Joseph Smith and in the message he delivered to them.

Samuel A. Prior, a Methodist minister, traveled by foot sixty miles to learn for himself the key to this following. Hearing Joseph Smith preach at Macedonia melted away the prejudices of numerous written and oral reports and changed the minister's opinion: "Instead of the heads and horns of the beast, and false prophet, I beheld only the appearance of a common man, of tolerable large proportions. . . . He commenced preaching, not from the Book of Mormon, however, but from the Bible." Prior had expected a discourse challenging other sects; instead, the Prophet wanted only to explain his scriptural text.3

Invited to preach that evening to a large and attentive audience at Macedonia, Prior was surprised at the openness of the congregation. Despite their claims to be the "only true church," he reported, the Latter-day Saints denied no one the right to proclaim or live his own beliefs. A Boston convert discovered that the Latter-day Saint view of heaven included "mansions" of various sizes for believers of all kinds:

They believe that every honest man, who acts up to the principle of reflection, and obeys those dictates of conscience that show him wrong from right, will be saved, no matter what his belief whether Turk, Jew or Heathen. . . . The Mormons . . . do not want to ram Joe Smith or revelation down people's throats, without their knowing for themselves: all they want is to obey the words of Christ for the remission of sin. They want to terrify no man into belief.4

Many of Nauvoo's neighbors failed to investigate and thus never learned of the tolerance of members of the city's religious community toward outsiders. What they did understand was the influence of Joseph Smith in Nauvoo. Following his visit, the Reverend Prior deliberately designated Nauvoo "the city of the prophet."5

Conferences and Community

Particularly effective in strengthening common bonds among the Latter-day Saints and in helping to unite them as a religious people in the 1840s was the conference. A general conference of members was convened regularly at Nauvoo. Regional gatherings met at other designated places in the United States and British Isles. Members often gathered from considerable distances to attend these annual or semiannual meetings. Participation helped converts to feel part of a church larger than their own family or small congregation. Because a conference offered an open forum for discussion and polling, it built consensus on issues and support for leaders. Much regular business, including the appointment and reaffirmation of officers, the calling of missionaries, and the airing of grievances against members took place in these gatherings. Delegates from each branch or group of branches reported on the number of members and priesthood holders living in each locality. The business was followed by preaching from local and general church leaders. Sermons often lasted an hour or two. Typically, conferences convened for morning and afternoon sessions, with a mealtime break between. Some continued over two or three days.

An important role of the conferences was to confirm that members supported their leaders, who served only by common consent. When the name of each officer was presented, members with grievances against the officer's conduct of his office could step forward with information for consideration. Thus, at the April 1843 conference in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith told the congregation assembled on the floor of the incomplete temple,

If . . . I have done any thing that ought to injure my character, reputation, or standing; or have dishonored our religion by any means . . . , I am sorry for it, and if you will forgive me, I will endeavor to do so no more. I do not know that I have done any thing of the kind; but if I have, come forward and tell me of it. If any one has any objection to me, I want you to come boldly and frankly, and tell of it; and if not, ever after hold your peace.

A motion to continue President Joseph Smith in his office received a quick second, and with "one vast sea of hands . . . the motion was carried unanimously." Similar reviews were held for the counselors in the First Presidency and members of the Twelve.6

Most voting at conferences was unanimous, or nearly so. Participants called this process an election, because it resembled the nominating and voting process used in civil elections.7 Members by their vote and through the recommendations of leaders considered the cases of unworthy leaders; when appropriate, such men were dropped from office.8 In this way, the sustaining process in quorums and conferences helped curb disharmony and build unity.

Joseph Smith as Prophet-Teacher

Until the temple was available for use, Nauvoo had no meetinghouse. The Saints met for a time beginning in October 1842 on a temporary floor on the temple's main level assembly room,9 and three years later in an enclosed temple. But most large gatherings in Nauvoo assembled during good weather out-of-doors and in bad weather not at all. Preaching took place at designated meeting places in the oak grove on the brow of the hill just west of the temple or, later, at a nearby stand a quarter mile east and a bit north of the unfinished structure.

To supplement the general meetings, small groups congregated in the larger homes for occasional worship services, where singing, prayers, and a sharing of feelings about their newfound faith reaffirmed a common experience for gathered converts. Elders and church leaders often joined in these intimate gatherings to preach. Sometimes a home owner issued the invitation. A ward bishop called other meetings, even though his regular duties at that time did not include presiding over a congregation. The Saints in scattered branches followed a similar pattern of gathering in homes and halls and of taking turns preaching.10

Wherever they lived, preaching meetings contributed to the building of community for Latter-day Saints. Sermons played a central role in unifying them. The message of salvation explained from Nauvoo's makeshift outdoor stand or in sitting rooms and public halls throughout the church reinforced religious values for the Saints and strengthened a shared commitment.11

The highlight of any general gathering in Nauvoo was a discourse by Joseph Smith. The Prophet had begun his religious ministry in 1829 by preaching in the communities near Manchester, New York.12 Although as president of the church he was necessarily involved some in administrative duties, he enjoyed most the role of prophet, seer, and revelator. The Lord had bidden him to speak and write but added, "in temporal labors thou shalt not have strength, for this is not thy calling."13 The Prophet loved to share his religious insights, whether it was with an individual or a crowd. Throughout his life, and especially in Nauvoo, he became well known for his scriptural expositions. He gave priority to the value of revealed truths over scientific learning, celebrated the role of the kingdom of God in bringing souls to Christ, and encouraged his listeners to strive toward a society of peace and love.14

Most listeners were impressed by the clarity of his message. They felt that the Prophet's words rolled forth unlike those of the ministers of other religions.15 "He . . . is ready to talk upon any subject that any one wishes," George W. Taggart wrote to a relative, "and, I assure you, it would make you wonder to hear him talk and see the information which comes out of his mouth, and it is not in big words either, but that which anyone can understand." His teaching won the hearts of his people. People discovered in his words a familiar biblical message enhanced and enlightened by insights they judged straight from God. It was, as George Alley put it, "a feast indeed of fat things."16

His listeners did not credit Smith personally with this understanding; instead, they ascribed his unusual insights to direct revelation. The Latter-day Saints rejected the notion of a trained clergy.17 "If there is any true and correct source of intelligence," said John Taylor, himself once a Methodist lay preacher, "it must be that which proceeds from the Almighty" to the prophets of all ages. For the Latter-day Saints, a living prophet was an essential element of the true church, and Joseph Smith was that prophet.18 "If they have not the oracles of God," Joseph Smith declared, "they are not the people of God."19 Smith warned the Saints against the "danger of philosophizing upon religion." Worldly learning was not the path to religious knowledge, he declared. "The world by wisdom know not God. . . . Without the spirit you cannot know the living God."20

The need to separate sacred wisdom from practical commentary was important to the Saints. The key to identifying spiritual truths was their own witness of the Spirit. Of the Prophet's source of truth, Orson Spencer told an inquiring friend,

In doctrine Mr. Smith is eminently scriptural. I have never known him to deny or depreciate a single truth of the Old and New Testaments. . . . Certainly he does claim to be inspired. He often speaks in the name of the Lord . . . as [he is] moved by the Holy Ghost.21

The Latter-day Saints saw religious truth as a continuing unfolding of knowledge, dependent upon the listener's readiness to hear and God's willingness to teach. "If we improve upon the small things, greater will be given unto us," Brigham Young advised the Saints in 1845 as he made reference to his own right to revealed knowledge to lead the church.22

Most Latter-day Saints were as willing to listen to Brigham Young after 1844 as they had been to Joseph Smith before his death. They had received previous instructions from the Twelve and had been impressed by their doctrines. Said E. H. Davis after a meeting in New York,

'Twould have made the hair stand straight in your heads to have heard Bros Young & Kimball talk and preach on the necessity of gathering to Zion, & building the Temple and Nauvoo house, and being faithful and humble in all things.23

The Saints accepted the idea that the Spirit of God could work through any believer within the faith. Joseph Smith had instructed the elders that "whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, . . . the word of the Lord." All members expected that if they were diligent and faithful, they would gain spiritual knowledge for their own guidance in life and for others within the circle of their spiritual responsibility. Their individual experiences with the gifts of the Spirit helped foster a sense of participation in the spiritual life of the church.24

Despite this universal receptivity to the Spirit, only the church president could speak for the Lord to the whole church. As Joseph Smith taught in 1833, "The fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom."25 His counselors and the Twelve played a supportive role in teaching the church. This hierarchical ranking of messages and message givers prepared the Twelve and their listeners for the transition to new leadership after 1844.

Believers outside Nauvoo, unable to hear their prophet's teachings in person, received the gist of his messages through personal correspondence or by word of mouth from the traveling elders. The Times and Seasons reported Nauvoo conference proceedings and the Millennial Star copied them but neither paper attempted to publish a consistent report of regular Sunday worship services. Some individuals kept private notes of the Prophet's talks, valuable mostly as historical records. Wilford Woodruff, William Clayton, and Willard Richards were especially diligent in recording the spoken word.26

The desire for direct instruction from Joseph Smith became another incentive for the physical gathering as Nauvoo became a center of gospel learning. The Twelve reminded the Saints and prospective missionaries in 1841 that they could know little "of the revelations of heaven, and the order of the kingdom . . . while they are scattered to the four winds."27 The gathered Saints heard firsthand the deeper meaning of the scriptures that Joseph Smith offered in Nauvoo. This gave them an advantage in spiritual convictions over many scattered and less well-informed members.

A solid belief in contemporary revelation convinced the Latter-day Saints of the need for an open canon. They declared that God continually shared new knowledge through his prophet and with spiritually sensitized members. In his own calling as teacher and revelator, the Prophet searched prayerfully for spiritual insight.28 He encouraged all to similarly "seek learning, even by study and also by faith." Ever open to inquiry, he allowed his reading and discussions to raise questions from every source, but for answers, he claimed only one basis: "If we have or can receive a portion of knowledge from God by immediate revelation, by the same source we can receive all knowledge." It was a foundational premise for the Latter-day Saints that God's children became more like their Heavenly Father as they gained spiritual knowledge and lived by that knowledge in righteousness. "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth," the Prophet had explained in a revelation received in Kirtland.29

Joseph Smith learned from his youth to appreciate the Bible as a conduit for receiving God's word. His mother recalled that her son was not inclined to reading, but when it came to religion, he preferred solitary Bible study to church attendance. It was his search for a correct interpretation of holy writ that led him in 1820 to test James's prescription for those without the truth: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God." Joseph's earnest prayers in the family woodlot in rural Manchester Township, New York, opened the heavens and launched his spiritual ministry. After a period of personal preparation, which, he said, included extensive tutoring by heavenly visions and visitors, the Prophet began a life of explaining to others what God had taught him and was still teaching him.30

Throughout his life, Joseph Smith sought to harmonize the truths he understood through revelation with the printed word in the King James Version of the Bible. Soon after organizing the church in 1830, the Lord directed the young church leader to translate the Bible, "and in it all things shall be made known . . . that you may be prepared for things to come." During the next three years, the Prophet was tutored through this process and given understanding in doctrines and things yet ahead. Sidney Rigdon served as principal scribe. Some new insights were noted as emendations to the Bible. Others, most notably the prophecies and visions of Enoch, restored entirely new scriptural messages to the scanty record in Genesis. An understanding of Enoch's Zion, which gave the Prophet an image of the latter-day Zion, was but one product of this steady learning process.31

In Nauvoo, President Smith set about to share more of what he had learned about the original doctrines of Christ in the Bible. Only Matthew 24 and a few excerpts, mostly from Genesis, had been published. In 1840, he sought relief from mundane duties and invited others to provide financial support necessary for him to make final changes to the Bible so that his new translation could be published. As before, interruptions constantly delayed the effort. Although he went through the entire Bible, he published only extracts from the book of Moses at Nauvoo, in January 1843. His death cut short the effort. The Prophet's work on the Bible would await publication in another time. In 1979, the more than six hundred significant changes made in the text became part of the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible.32

Joseph Smith's earliest work of scripture also remains a keystone of the church that he launched. The record in the Book of Mormon of the visit of the resurrected Christ to a people in ancient America gave it stature as a second witness of Christ's ministry on earth. Furthermore, in its clarifying message about such timely issues as the nature of God, the fall and redemption of man, the baptism of children, Christ's atonement, the general resurrection, and punishment, the Book of Mormon served as a purveyor of a clearer and more understandable gospel. It helped many readers resolve pressing religious issues of their own day and decide which Christian church to follow.33

Those unable to obtain a copy of the 1830 printing of five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon in Palmyra, or the Kirtland edition of 1837, eagerly welcomed the 1840 edition of two thousand copies printed in Cincinnati, Ohio, from stereotype plates prepared by Shepard and Stearns.34 The publishers, Ebenezer Robinson and Don Carlos Smith, offered discounts for prepublication orders and placed the delivered books on sale at their Nauvoo print shop in November for $1.25 each.35 That edition, according to the title page, offered a text "carefully revised by the translator." Minor for the most part, these editorial corrections caught transcribing errors between the original and the printer's manuscripts. The Prophet later reprinted the stereotype edition in Nauvoo and offered it for sale in August 1842.36

Meanwhile, in Great Britain, the April 1840 conference in Preston authorized publication of a reprint of the Kirtland edition of 1837, with British spellings. Brigham Young sought bids from every printer in Manchester and Liverpool before selecting John Tompkins of Liverpool to print and bind five thousand copies (the printer actually delivered 4,050 books). Printing was already underway when Young learned of the Nauvoo edition of 1840. Of necessity, editorial changes in the Nauvoo printing were ignored. The Liverpool printing was advertised in placards and mailed to subscribers in February 1841.37

In the book of scripture entitled Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter Day Saints, members of the Nauvoo period had access to more than a hundred of the revelations of Joseph Smith the seer. This collection was assembled in Missouri in 1833 as the Book of Commandments, but publication was thwarted when vigilantes destroyed the print shop. An expanded edition appeared in Kirtland in 1835 under the new title. The Doctrine and Covenants demonstrated the Prophet's continuing influence on Mormon thought. Contained within it were inspired responses to immediate needs, answers to problems and questions, revealed as the Prophet turned to heaven for direction. Along with administrative directives, the 1835 edition included information about the law of consecration, marriage, government, temples, missionary work, the Millennium, personal worthiness, and many other topics.38

A new printing in 1844 with eight new sections again made this volume widely available. Among the new entries were the revelation about the temple in Nauvoo and two epistles on baptism for the dead. John Taylor issued the expanded edition from the Nauvoo Times and Seasons office under church sanction. Brisk sales soon required two more printings, in 1845 and 1846. Meanwhile, Wilford Woodruff issued the first European edition in Liverpool in late 1845.39

Another important scriptural contribution that Joseph Smith received by revelation reached completion in Nauvoo. The book of Abraham had its beginnings in Kirtland, when Michael H. Chandler, a traveling entrepreneur, displayed a collection of mummies recovered from Egyptian tombs. With these four mummified bodies were papyrus scrolls containing hieroglyphic inscriptions. American scholars of the day likely could not read the hieroglyphics, and even though he had studied Greek and Hebrew in Kirtland with Joshua Seixas, Joseph Smith's biblical studies relied more upon supernatural knowledge than earthbound book learning. He said of his work on the reformed Egyptian text of the Book of Mormon, "I translated the record by the gift, and power of God." He did not define the process that yielded an English text of the book of Abraham; however, while first examining some of the characters, he noted, "Truly we can say, the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth."40 In the words of a twentieth-century student of the book of Abraham, "Since it is not known just how Joseph Smith translated, it is reasonable to postulate that, when studying the Egyptian papyrus purchased from Michael Chandler, Joseph Smith sought revelation from the Lord concerning them and received in that process the book of Abraham."41 The product was a much more complete story of Abraham, his visions, and his interactions at the Egyptian court than was available in the Bible.

This new revelation appeared in the Times and Seasons in the spring of 1842, and Eastern newspapers copied parts of it. The book of Abraham expanded the biblical text found in Genesis.42 In it, Joseph Smith revealed a prophet Abraham who understood astronomy, history, premortal life, and the creation story in new ways. Abraham's interaction with his hosts in Egypt took on theological import. His priesthood calling gave Latter-day Saints a new appreciation for their own inheritance from the high priest Melchizedek, from whom Abraham had gained his own authority to act in God's name. The Prophet had spoken earlier of a record of Joseph in Egypt on the papyrus in his possession, but political problems in Nauvoo apparently prevented the restoration of more ancient scripture.43

The messages triggered by the Egyptian sources that Joseph Smith had purchased in Kirtland prompted him to seek a deeper understanding of the meaning of the cosmos and its origins. Some of those insights emerged in other ways, including teachings and ceremonies shared privately in the red brick store and within the enclosure of the temple at Nauvoo.44

Some who doubted supernatural origins for scripture offered Joseph Smith a set of small metal plates in April 1843 to translate. The six brass-like tablets contained what appeared to be hieroglyphic inscriptions. Burial mounds created by Native Americans and their ancestors over generations abounded in the region from the Ohio Valley through western Illinois. It was from one of these ancient sites, near Kinderhook, about seventy miles south of Nauvoo, that the Kinderhook discoverers had, they said, removed this latest ancient record. Their discovery stirred an immediate interest. The Quincy Whig and the Times and Seasons reported the find, and the Nauvoo Neighbor reproduced the plates first in a broadside and then in the newspaper.45

While these strange metallic plates were in Nauvoo for a few days, various residents compared the writing with the Egyptian scrolls in the Prophet's office and wondered if the hieroglyphics resembled the reformed Egyptian on the Book of Mormon plates. Some understood that the writing told of a Jaredite descendant of Noah; others, that the man descended through Ham and an Egyptian Pharaoh.46 The Times and Seasons reported: "Mr. Smith has had those plates; what his opinion concerning them is, we have not yet ascertained. The gentleman who owned them has taken them away." It was rumored in Nauvoo that the Prophet "thought that by the help of revelation he would be able to translate them." He made no translation, however. A man who confessed that he and two others had staged the "discovery" as a joke, said that Joseph Smith "would not agree to translate them until they were sent to the Antiquarian society at Philadelphia, France, and England."47

This request for authentication may have been what prompted the owners to offer them for sale. If the lenders had intended to trick Joseph Smith with their hoax, they failed. According to a later report, the inscriptions were examined by an expert and found not to match any known language. Doubts about the authenticity of the Kinderhook plates surfaced from time to time over the years. Some defended them; others pronounced them fraudulent.48 A plate matching a published image of the 1840s was donated to the Chicago Historical Society in 1920. Physical tests identified this piece as a nineteenth-century bronze alloy engraved with acid. The ancients of this region would have etched their messages on brass. Perhaps the Prophet knew that these interesting but faked antiquities had nothing to offer the church.49

Joseph Smith's contribution to scripture during the Nauvoo years would remain with what became known as the standard works his revisions of the Bible, minor corrections to the Book of Mormon, additions to the Doctrine and Covenants, and the issuance of major components of the Pearl of Great Price.50

Defining and Disseminating Latter-day Saint Belief

Because of their strong dependence upon the scriptures and the words of a living prophet, Latter-day Saints shied away from endorsing a fixed doctrinal statement or creed, as defined in traditional theology. "We have said so much about the creeds and theories of men," one Nauvoo writer observed, "that it may be a query in the minds of some, whether the church of Latter Day Saints, have a creed or not. To satisfy such queries, we would say that we have a creed but not of man. Our only creed is the Bible."51 Although the Bible anchored Latter-day Saint belief, the Book of Mormon and the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants expanded on this base with truths lost by apostasy or previously unrevealed.52 The book of Abraham and parts of the book of Moses added to that doctrinal core.

One reason given by the First Presidency for publishing the Doctrine and Covenants was the need to encourage doctrinal consistency within the church and to correct misunderstandings without. Beyond that, Latter-day Saint leaders allowed theological issues to remain open for discussion, as informed by revelation. Early writers honored anticreedal sentiments in the church by limiting their summaries of church beliefs to basic principles.53

The Doctrine and Covenants represented the church's first effort at standardizing belief and behavior. The volume originally consisted of two parts: a first segment on "Theology," made up of seven doctrinal lectures on faith and on the nature of the Godhead, and a second part, headed "Covenants and Commandments," composed of church regulations and policies as set forth in Joseph Smith's revelations and writings. The church "Articles and Covenants" (D&C 20) and revelations on priesthood (D&C 84 and 107) were given primacy in the second part.54

Under inspiration, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery may have prepared section 20 before April 1830; it was the earliest attempt at a systematic definition of basic beliefs and the duties of officers and members. A conference in June 1830 canonized the document.55 Oliver Cowdery summarized these foundational principles in the first issue of a new church newspaper in Kirtland in October 1834. He began most of the nine points with the declaration, "We believe . . ."56

Soon afterwards, other members of the First Presidency prepared the series of seven doctrinal discourses known as the Lectures on Faith for delivery to prospective missionaries in Kirtland. A collaborative effort by Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and others, the lectures set forth basic doctrinal beliefs on the Godhead and first principles, especially the role of faith in gaining knowledge of God and in gaining salvation and perfection. One of the purposes of these and other components of the Doctrine and Covenants was to prepare men for the ministry and encourage a unity of faith among the Saints.57

These publications for internal use were followed in 1836 by a statement of the church's "principal articles of faith" prepared by John Young. He drew from the Doctrine and Covenants and Cowdery's list to prepare five statements for a book of religious creeds published in Boston. Similar succinct statements were included in tracts published by others.58 Most notably, Parley P. Pratt's writings brought to Latter-day Saint theology a standardization previously unavailable. In 1840, his Late Persecutions gave American readers a list of eighteen "principles and doctrines" of the church. That same year in Scotland, Orson Pratt published for the first time an account of Joseph Smith's first vision, giving this seminal event a place in the story of the church. His tract, An Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions, offered the most complete history of the Latter-day Saints available in Great Britain and a careful "sketch of the faith and doctrine" of the church. Other writers used this publication as a model for their own tracts.59

The publication of materials for members and investigators became an especially focused effort during the second mission of the Twelve in Great Britain. Besides publishing sixty thousand copies of missionary tracts, the Twelve established a church printing operation in Liverpool that supplied books, newspapers, and tracts throughout the British Isles and beyond.60

Some privately published works offered helps to members of the church during the 1840s, especially the doctrinal treatises and concordances prepared by missionary preachers. Parley P. Pratt's A Voice of Warning, published in New York in 1837, offered the church its first book-length explication of doctrine. Members made the volume a best-seller. Benjamin Winchester's pocket-sized scripture concordance in 1842 won the endorsement of Hyrum Smith for its scriptural extracts and summaries "on the most prominent articles of the faith of the Latter Day Saints."61

The effort to codify the gospel for members and explain Mormonism to nonbelievers sparked a growing public interest. The Latter-day Saints became well known in newspapers of the 1830s and early 1840s. Religious publications as well as secular newspapers attempted to explain Joseph Smith and his followers to their readers. In 1842, John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat, invited the Mormon prophet himself to write a history and an explanation of beliefs for a history of New Hampshire being prepared by Wentworth's friend George Barstow. Smith completed the assignment and published his response in the newspaper he edited, Nauvoo's Times and Seasons, but the state history was published without the submitted information.62 The short historical survey concluded with a concise statement of belief and practice. Later entitled the Articles of Faith, these thirteen statements of faith echo themes elaborated in earlier lists, especially section 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants and Orson Pratt's nineteen paragraphs in his Edinburgh sketch. Joseph Smith's concise statements were widely published. Though later writers annotated the list for their own tracts, the Prophet's version survived to become an official declaration canonized in 1880 as part of Latter-day Saint scripture.63

The Articles of Faith (and most of the other lists) reflected what Latter-day Saints believed when they arrived in Nauvoo. Except for Orson Hyde's mention of baptism for the dead in his German tract, these statements of faith focused on core principles. Most of them predated the introduction of some of the church's most distinctive doctrines and practices. "The Latter-day Saints have no creed," Joseph Smith said in 1843, "but [they] are ready to believe all true principles that exist, as they are made manifest from time to time."64 By the time the Saints dispersed from the City of Peace, new revelation enunciating a theology that gave meaning to the temple had expanded the doctrinal basis of their religion.65

Other clues to the religious mind of the Latter-day Saints of Nauvoo can be found in hymns. Carefully selected to represent shared beliefs, the official hymnals serve as an index to central doctrines. Emma Smith and others who selected, adapted, and wrote hymns for the church's Collection of Sacred Hymns in its various editions accomplished the Latter-day Saint desire to sing messages "adapted to their faith and belief in the gospel." Ideally, the singing of hymns by congregations enhances a feeling of mutuality within the community and reinforces the ideal of doctrinal harmony.66

The Kirtland edition of the hymnal, assembled by Emma Smith and William W. Phelps, emphasized the doctrines of the Restoration. As many as forty of the ninety texts were original compositions by Latter-day Saints, mostly Phelps. Many of the hymns sanctified the land as a dwelling place for the Saints and celebrated the building up of Zion.67 The high priests quorum in Nauvoo offered to fund a new volume in 1839. Emma invited poets and others to submit to her "all choice, newly composed, or revised hymns." When it finally appeared in 1841, the Nauvoo edition of Emma Smith's hymnal expanded the content to 304 selections. The additions to this authorized hymnbook indicate a retrenchment from the celebration of restorationist and communal religion among the Latter-day Saints. Emma dropped two of William W. Phelps's corrected Protestant hymns and substituted the originals. She added other grace-oriented hymns that accentuated personal communion with a dying Jesus on the cross. Her revivalist, confessional texts placed less emphasis on the Saints' desire to rejoice in the establishment of Zion.68

Well-worn copies of the Kirtland hymnal and the expanded Nauvoo edition served the needs of the Saints until the exodus. Increasingly seen in Nauvoo was a British hymnal carried across the Atlantic by a flood of immigrants. Published by a committee of the Twelve in July 1840, it was reprinted three times through 1844. The Manchester hymnal added 193 texts to Emma Smith's Kirtland volume, including 44 by Parley P. Pratt. The new hymns stressed the Millennium, the restoration of priesthood authority, and the gathering of Israel from Babylon ideas central to missionary work. In many ways, the British hymnal reflected more current Latter-day Saint teachings than the Protestant themes favored by Emma in her Nauvoo compilation. When new hymnals were published after the exodus, they built on the British edition. That volume reflected the zeal of the early years and events in Nauvoo that defined the doctrinal basis of Latter-day Saint hymnology for the founding generation.69

Everywhere the Latter-day Saints gathered in the nineteenth century, they made use of the printing press to share religious information with members. Of the several church periodicals issued during the Nauvoo years, two played a significant role in defining the meaning of religious community among the Saints. The Times and Seasons in Nauvoo and the Latter-day Saints Millennial Star in Manchester, England, served their respective geographic areas and were publications of record. Both papers regularly included such official information as the minutes of conferences, reports of membership statistics, letters from missionaries, and church histories. Accounts of the Missouri persecutions and Joseph Smith's official church history first appeared in print in these publications.

The Manchester periodical was a house organ for the British church, authorized by a conference and operated by the Twelve and other mission leaders.70 The Times and Seasons functioned a bit more independently. It succeeded the Elders' Journal, a short-lived newspaper first issued in Kirtland and then cut short after two final issues at Far West. The Journal's Missouri proprietors, Ebenezer Robinson and Don Carlos Smith, lost no time in launching their successor paper in Commerce, Illinois, with promises to print doctrinal discussions, historical information, and a full account of the Missouri expulsion. The Times and Seasons appeared in a first, tentative issue in June 1839. Immediate problems delayed further publication until November, when the editors reissued a slightly altered first number and then continued with monthly issues during the next year. After that, the periodical appeared on a twice-monthly schedule but with occasional missed or late issues because of such problems as bad weather, which contributed to paper shortages.71

The print shop functioned for much of its tenure in the damp basement of a building at the corner of Water and Bain streets. It moved to better quarters on Main Street in May 1845. Operated first as a self-sustaining, private business venture, the Times and Seasons was purchased by the church in January 1842. Brigham Young supervised the purchase of the press, type, fixtures, stereotype equipment, and book bindery.72 For the next nine months, Joseph Smith served as editor, with John Taylor assisting. From that point on, the Times and Seasons became, like its English cousin, an official voice for the church.

As reflected in their titles and as reinforced by their content, both journals reflected a continuing Latter-day Saint interest in news of earthquakes, wars, plagues, and other signs of the times a steady reminder of the church's millennialist orientation.73 Doctrinal articles educated the Saints in spiritual matters. Through historical articles generated in Nauvoo and reprinted abroad, the papers reinforced a self-definition of the Latter-day Saints as a biblical people, a community of believers persecuted for their religion. Like earlier church periodicals, both papers published revelations and prophetic writings and translations the Nauvoo Temple revelation, epistles of the First Presidency and the Twelve, the book of Abraham, and reprints from earlier periodicals. The papers offered continuity for church members and a sense of belonging. In short, through their content, they helped define the Nauvoo-era Saints as a people of faith and destiny.74

Nauvoo readers also had access to a general newspaper, initially called the Wasp but later renamed the Nauvoo Neighbor. The named changed to shift the focus from a biting political voice to a friendly outreach to neighbors near and far. These secular newspapers reported news of the day, carried timely features, and subsisted through subscriptions and commercial advertisements. A major objective was to present the Latter-day Saint perspective on local political issues. William Smith edited the weekly Wasp for a year beginning in April 1842. John Taylor managed both the Times and Seasons and the Neighbor after that, with the help of Wilford Woodruff. All of these papers were printed in the same print shop, which also carried on a commercial business printing books, pamphlets, and stationery items.

Religion and the Family

Religious consensus fostered by the church periodicals developed as well through the efforts of priesthood quorums for men and new organizations created in Nauvoo for women, young single adults, and children. These organizations supplemented and directly affected the family, where religious activity for Latter-day Saints found its most important center.

Latter-day Saints brought with them into their newfound religion certain traditional views of the family's central role in religious education and worship. Like their ancestors, the Saints saw the world through a religious frame of reference. They believed in God, sought his mercy, trained their children in righteousness, and lived in expectation of a final judgment and the ultimate triumph of good. The Americans and British who made up most of the membership of the church in the Nauvoo era understood family prayer and Bible study and family-centered Christian living. It was in the traditional family that personal religious duties such as these were taught and practiced.

A prominent example was the Prophet's own New England family. Every morning, Joseph Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith held family religious services that included reading from the Bible, singing, and praying. For private prayers, they had a designated place apart from the house in nearby woods where members of the family could retire when they wished to petition God alone.75 Many other Latter-day Saint families followed similar patterns of personal and family worship born of long experience. Near Payson, Illinois, in 1843, a young sawmill worker experienced personal religion firsthand at the home of his future father-in-law:

The first prayer I ever made before any person was at Father Myers, when I was called upon by Mother Myers to offer up the family prayer. It was a terrible hard task and perhaps what made it worse my future wife was present. When I went to boarding there I had to take my turn in reading a chapter and singing and praying morning and evening. Father Myers is very strict in his family worship.76

In nineteenth-century America, the husband and father presided in the home. This long-standing pattern in western civilization placed upon him certain obligations to support and lead his family. His responsibilities had legal standing and were recognized by the churches, including the Latter-day Saints. In the world's ordering of society, men owned property, voted, governed in the home, and conducted business for the good of the family. In addition, the Latter-day Saint male head of household was expected to preside in love in the family, to join with his wife in teaching religious principles to their children, to conduct family worship, and to represent the family in paying tithes and offerings. When the sick in the family desired a blessing of healing, or children were ready for baptism and confirmation, it came under the hands of the elders, sometimes including ordained fathers.

The official connecting link between the Latter-day Saint family unit and the institutional church was through the father. His first affiliation outside the family was his priesthood quorum. In Joseph Smith's lifetime, all men judged worthy of fellowship in the church could receive a priesthood office. This all-encompassing lay priesthood involved every willing man and gave him a sense of ownership in the church's destiny. Whatever the office conferred upon him, the priesthood holder joined a churchwide body of priests. He shared the ecclesiastical charge to spread the good word and nourish God's gathered children. "There are no big men or little men in the Kingdom of our God," Heber C. Kimball was fond of saying. All were laborers in the vineyard, with differing assignments but one reward for the faithful.77 With broad geographical boundaries and tight collegial ties, priesthood quorums strengthened male unity and patriarchal roles and built support for institutional values and leaders.

Aside from their ecclesiastical roles, the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums contributed significantly toward a united Nauvoo. It was the duty of the presidency of each of the quorums of high priests, seventies, and elders to train, involve, discipline, and assign the members of their quorum in the work of that particular office. Training took place in quorum meetings, held as often as weekly. In them, leaders outlined duties, and leaders and members shared their religious feelings and took turns speaking on gospel topics. To maintain a oneness in faith and fellowship, each quorum attested to the worthiness of its members, heard grievances of one member against another, and excluded from fellowship any whose unworthiness disqualified him. The entire quorum membership usually participated in the disciplinary councils called by the quorum presidency. Because their purpose was to restore members to full fellowship, they tended to leniency if a member confessed his wrongdoing and pledged future loyalty to shared principles. When members transferred from one place to another, they took a letter of introduction to certify their standing in the church and ordination to a specific office in the priesthood.78 This kept unscrupulous intruders out of quorums and ensured an orderly process within a dynamic church.

Fathers of families received help in their domestic duties from the three quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood. In Nauvoo, the priests, teachers, and deacons all adults were organized into citywide quorums by the four bishops during a Sunday meeting on March 21, 1841.79 As set forth by revelation in the "Articles and Covenants" of the church in April 1830, members holding this priesthood made regular visits to the homes to encourage fathers in their family duties. The visiting brethren were also to root out iniquity, including lying, backbiting, and evil speaking among members. They would call upon families, listen to them pray, and teach them their religious responsibilities.80 In their efforts to strengthen families spiritually, the visiting lesser priesthood helped build religious commitment within the church.

Though everyone knew of this specific assignment of the lesser priesthood, the church did not always achieve its objectives consistently. A group of high priests in the Fifth Ward of Nauvoo in December 1844 groused over problems with the youth of certain families in their ward and wondered aloud if the Twelve should perhaps speak publicly to the subject. Some members recognized that it was the duty of the Aaronic Priesthood "to seek out and investigate such cases . . . and not lay the burden on the Twelve." Perhaps, they concluded, Nauvoo's stake president should instruct the priests and teachers to perform their duties.81

Until the spring of 1842, women of the church served others outside the formal church organization. While their husbands functioned in administrative and missionary callings, the women created informal visiting networks among friends. They shared the gospel through personal efforts. For their institutional tie with the church, they relied upon their husbands and fathers.82 Joseph Smith expanded that connection when he organized the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.83

Women meeting together as friends to sew shirts for temple construction workers had decided to organize and to include other friends in the effort. A group assembled in March at the home of Sarah Granger Kimball (Hiram's wife) to formally create a benevolent society like those existing elsewhere in the United States. Eliza R. Snow drafted a constitution to guide the ladies' society in its objectives. Then Joseph Smith intervened to give the benevolent group a religious structure and purpose. The Prophet advised twenty women assembled on March 17 in the council room above his store to discard their written constitution. They should govern themselves after a pattern used by the priesthood, under a council form of government, he said, with a "living constitution." By this he apparently meant that decisions would be made without reference to a set of rules but through deliberations guided by the Holy Spirit. As a self-governing church organization, the women would function under general priesthood direction to avoid inconsistencies within the church. Their own officers would direct and teach them.84

The organizers accepted the Prophet's counsel on structure and method. They elected his wife, Emma Hale Smith, as their president. She chose as counselors Sarah M. Cleveland and Elizabeth Ann Whitney and as secretary Eliza Roxcy Snow. The word benevolent had earned a bad reputation among them because of publicized extravagances in certain Eastern organizations using that title, so they chose the name The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo. The Relief Society assembled an ever-growing membership weekly during the spring of 1842 and then adjourned until fall, when it resumed meetings. By June 1, membership numbered nearly nine hundred women.85 It peaked two years later at more than thirteen hundred. To accommodate this growth, the women of each of Nauvoo's four wards were assigned a certain week each month to meet with the presidency.

By whatever name they called the new organization, one of its central purposes remained benevolence, or charity, or relief of the needs of the poor. The society's first obligation, the Prophet said, was to "provoke the brethren to good works in looking to the wants of the poor searching after objects of charity, and in administering to their wants." The sisters wereasked to coordinate their relief work with the bishops to avoid inefficient duplication. Another role for the Relief Society, Joseph Smith counseled, was public teaching. It was the society president's obligation "to expound the scriptures to all; and to teach the female part of the community." A related assignment was "to assist by correcting the morals and strengthening the virtues of the community, and save the Elders the trouble of rebuking." An English convert, not yet precise in her use of religious terminology, summarized what she heard at the Thursday afternoon meetings. "We receive instructions both temporary and spiritually," she said. To dispense goods to the poor was the Relief Society's temporal responsibility; to practice virtue and preach truth, its spiritual obligations.86

With humanitarian service as its primary objective, the society quickly developed a process for identifying and meeting the needs of the poor. At each group meeting, the assembled sisters reported needs and then volunteered resources to help. Through casual conversation and through organized committees assigned to visit the homes in each neighborhood, the women discovered widows without food, orphans with insufficient clothing, widowers needing bedding, unemployed persons lacking basic amenities, and so on, week after week. To meet these needs, the officers accepted cash and anything else that could be used. The treasurer kept an accounting of donations and expenditures.

While extending help, the sisters paid attention to the feelings as well as the physical needs of individuals. When the widowed Ellen W. Douglas became sick, she was unable to provide clothing for her family, which included sons old enough to hire themselves out to dig fencing ditches on the prairie and work in a saw pit. At first she resisted a suggestion that she apply to the Relief Society for help, but an acquaintance finally persuaded her to allow the sisters to assess her needs. "In a few days," she said, "they brought the wagon and fetched me such a present as I never received before from no place in the world. I suppose the things they sent were worth as much as 30 shillings." The widow also qualified to receive a free one-acre lot in Nauvoo, but she chose instead to rent a house.87

The counselors in the presidency kept close watch over charitable efforts, while the president herself took the greatest interest in a second objective. Emma had been called as a teacher. This special assignment formalized a calling promised in an 1830 revelation to the Prophet that identified her as "an elect lady" called "to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit."88 Emma Smith's Relief Society position gave this elect lady her own role as a leader in spiritual things.

In an April meeting, the Prophet explained the opportunity he had given women by establishing an organization officially connected to the church. He had opened to them, he said, a way to receive knowledge, intelligence, and power from God. That endowment of wisdom and authority would come as women were set apart to preside and teach and as they received temple ordinances. Using the metaphor of opening a door to allow women to move from darkness into light as full participants in church affairs, he said:

This Society is to get instruction through the order which God has established thro' the medium of those appointed to lead and I now turn the key to you in the name of God and this Society shall rejoice and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time this is the beginning of better days to this Society.89

Joseph Smith instructed the women to defend Nauvoo rigorously against actions that would destroy the virtue of the women and of the society. That very year, scandals perpetrated by John C. Bennett had rocked the city. Bennett had published articles and a book charging Joseph Smith and others with introducing a "spiritual wife system" that sanctioned promiscuous sexual relationships. Bennett and a few others had themselves behaved immorally and been excommunicated. Interestingly, just two days before Bennett resigned as mayor of Nauvoo, the city council enacted a strict ordinance against brothels, adultery, and fornication, with fines ranging from five hundred dollars to fifty thousand dollars and up to six months in prison.90

Emma Smith spoke out boldly in several Relief Society gatherings in defense of virtue. To the public, it would seem she was denouncing all relationships outside monogamous marriages, even though she knew of and at times supported her husband's plural marriages. Realistically, however, her public message probably was intended to denounce even the church-sanctioned marriage system with its biblical precedents. Emma vacillated in her support of the revelation. Her assignment to preach virtue, intended by Joseph to unify Nauvoo, instead increased tension between those tentative toward the new teaching and those converted to it. In the spring of 1844, the Relief Society ceased meeting. After Joseph Smith's death, Emma distanced herself from Brigham Young's leadership. The women's organization would be revived, with the Prophet's plural wife Eliza Snow as its leader, long after most Latter-day Saints had established themselves in a new gathering place in the Rocky Mountains.

The notion of community service to those in need spread beyond the women of Nauvoo to other interested groups. In early 1843, efforts were made to organize a Young Gentlemen and Ladies Relief Society of Nauvoo. This benevolent society for single young men and women under age thirty began in late January when Heber C. Kimball offered to address an assemblage of young people concerned about "the loose style of their morals the frivolous manner in which they spent their time and their too frequent attendance at balls, parties, &tc." In subsequent weekly gatherings of what they called the Young People's Meetings, held in larger and larger rooms finally in the room over Joseph Smith's store (that, too, filled to overflowing) Kimball and others counseled and taught the attentive youth. Moral instruction turned to community service when the Prophet complimented the youth for their interest in bettering themselves and "advised them to organize themselves into a society for the relief of the poor." On March 21, the assembled youth adopted a constitution and elected officers to one-year terms. As its first project, the society accepted Smith's challenge to collect funds to build a house for Sutcliffe Maudsley, an artist and a crippled immigrant from England. They agreed to seek out other persons needing assistance.91 Like the women's Relief Society, this instructional and service organization apparently did not survive the Prophet's death. It was likewise reestablished in a slightly different form a quarter century later.

Some Nauvoo Saints later remembered the beginnings of a Sunday School as well. In early June 1844, according to these reminiscences, Joseph Smith suggested the creation of Sabbath classes for children. He designated Stephen Goddard to supervise teachers and invited the children to bring their testaments and hymnbooks for a meeting in the east grove. After two meetings, the disrupting events at Carthage ended the fledgling movement, but it may have been revived for a time the following year for both children and youth.92

The Nauvoo Sunday School was a new initiative for the Latter-day Saints, falling in with the Protestant Sunday School movement launched in Great Britain in 1780. A similar effort in the United States was formalized with the creation of the American Sunday School Union in 1824. For the most part, Latter-day Saint leaders had been comfortable leaving to parents the responsibility for the religious education of their children. An 1831 revelation had specifically charged parents with this duty.93 That emphasis colored John Taylor's comments on the situation in Nauvoo that suggested the need for instructional organizations for youth and children:

To see children break the Sabbath by running about and playing on Sunday; to see them saucy too to persons of riper years; to see them filling up the streets to play upon week days, and to hear them swear and use vulgar language, is a disgrace to their parents; a stigma upon the neighborhood; and a slow poison to themselves, that will eventually corrupt and ruin their reputations, unless cured by virtue and reason.

Thirty years later, Taylor would oversee creation of a Primary Mutual Improvement Association in Utah for the institutional training of children in just such matters. In Nauvoo, he was pleased to report the recent commencement of meetings "of the children and youth, to worship God, and to practice holiness by a recitation of scripture, by singing and by prayer. Such a course," he said, "is praise-worthy." For the continuance of the work, there needed to be a harmony of faith not just among those who first entered the church but between that group of adults and succeeding generations.94

The Defining Influence of Church History

The past as well as the future concerned the people of Nauvoo. A sense of history had pervaded the Latter-day Saint organization right from the day of its formal creation as the Church of Christ on April 6, 1830. On that day, a revelation instructed the church, "Behold, there shall be a record kept among you." A succession of church historians and recorders, beginning with Oliver Cowdery, had kept some records, and clerks had preserved minutes of key meetings. But Joseph Smith desired a history encompassing the spiritual essence of the Restoration.

Not long after his arrival from Missouri, the Prophet revived an effort launched fourteen months earlier in Far West. On June 10, 1839, he engaged his clerk James Mulholland as scribe and set out to dictate his own history. Mulholland's death in November, after writing only fifty-nine pages, left the work to other clerks. Of greatest import was the work of Willard Richards. Before the Prophet's death, Richards completed the record to August 1838 and compiled most of the documents needed to finish the history of the Nauvoo years, which was accomplished by 1856.95

The text begun by Mulholland drew upon an 1838 manuscript prepared by the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon. It set a pattern of compiling the history from existing diaries, letters, minutes, and published sources. Documents of the early years were inserted to help carry the story forward. Those who completed the Prophet's history after his death relied almost exclusively upon the documentary evidence. Under the direction of the First Presidency, they drew from existing diaries as well to create a linking narrative, giving it a first-person voice, a customary practice in nineteenth-century historical writing.96

Essentially, "The History of Joseph Smith" was an eyewitness account following the pattern in scripture of the records of God's dealings with his people. It responded as well to the influences of inquiring outsiders and reflected the millennial worldview of Latter-day Saints. From the details of the events recounted in the history emerged several themes: the story of the Restoration, the history of persecutions, the signs of the times, and evidences of the true church of Jesus Christ.

First, Joseph Smith wished to give an accurate explanation of the personal experiences that had marked the beginning of the Restoration. As a newspaper editor in Nauvoo remarked,

The coming forth of the Book of Mormon, the rise of the church, and the restoration of the Priesthood these three subjects excite more curiosity, create more enquiry, and cause more labor to answer, than any others of our faith.97

The Prophet's firsthand recounting of church beginnings occupied a central role in the early pages of the history. This part of the history was eventually canonized as an official sacred account.

A second element of the history was an account of the tensions between the Latter-day Saints and their neighbors. The Prophet introduced this subject early in his record. As soon as he began sharing the story of his first vision in upstate New York, he said, "a great deal of prejudice" excited "the public mind against me, and create[d] a bitter persecution." The Missouri troubles, the last section prepared before Smith's death, filled numerous pages of the history. Latter-day Saints viewed their mistreatment by others as evidence of being followers of God. Like the persecuted in New Testament time, such suffering helped identify and define God's people.98

A third trademark of the Prophet's history was the inclusion of reports of the signs of the times, both natural occurrences and the commotions among people of the earth. This thread reflected Smith's own literal rendering of the scriptures as well as his upbringing in a rural America steeped in traditional beliefs and Bible learning. John Taylor believed it his duty as editor of the Times and Seasons to chronicle and interpret such events so that his paper would "contain a faithful history of the last days. The poet said, 'Coming events cast their shadow before,' and a discerning man has only to look, to behold!" It might have been this sense of historical mission that influenced Joseph Smith and his associates to flavor his history with foreshadowing evidences.99

Latter-day Saints found another important witness of the last days in the spiritual signs of their restored Christianity. They believed that the history being written about their prophetic movement would become another sacred record scripture for another generation. It was important, therefore, that the record include an account of such spiritual experiences as dreams and visions, healings, prophecies, speaking in tongues, and other spiritual gifts. The pentecostal experience of the early apostles and the prophetic promise of Joel concerning dreams and visions were part of the scriptural record of the past. For Latter-day Saints, their own similar experiences belonged in the historical record of the last days as evidences of the true church.100

In the minds of the Saints, the people of the new covenant echoed the pattern of earlier sacred eras. Time began anew on April 6, 1830, and the years of the new dispensation were counted from that base mark forward.101 "We are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter Day glory," Joseph Smith wrote in 1842:

It is left for us to see, participate in, and help to roll forward the Latter Day glory; 'the dispensation of the fulness of times, when God will gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that are upon the earth,' . . . will be in one, even in Christ. . . . and our name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have manifested; the insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of . . . a work that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the salvation of the human family.102

This sense of mission helps explain why the Prophet put so much emphasis on keeping a record. Preparing the history of the new dispensation held a high priority in his life.103

While Joseph Smith and the historical clerks of Nauvoo worked at compiling the Prophet's history of the church, a few others prepared and published their own histories. For years, Lucy Mack Smith had been retelling privately and before congregations her family's experiences with persecution because of Joseph's teachings. In 1844 and 1845, with the help of two schoolteachers in Nauvoo, she preserved her memories of her son's life, in the context of family history. Orson Pratt published it in 1853 in England.104 A prominent example of a history written by someone outside the church is the Reverend Henry Caswall's travel account, The City of the Mormons, published in London in 1842.105

Many Latter-day Saints kept personal histories in the form of daily summaries or retrospective life histories, or a combination of both. The hundreds of journals and autobiographies commenced or continued during the Nauvoo years attest to the interest in this effort. All participants in the Mormon religious movement, not just its leaders, saw themselves as important cogs in the Lord's machinery of winding down history toward the final end. Many diarists recorded their stories in the language of scripture. All of them recorded events deemed important as witnesses of God's workings in their lives. The effort clearly helped to solidify the Latter-day Saint sense of community.106

Encouragement to keep personal histories appeared directly through admonition and indirectly through the power of example. The editor of the Millennial Star invited "the Elders and officers in the church of Christ in these Last Days, to . . . write a history of their travels and labors . . . and the work of God in our day" like that found in the gospels and acts of the apostles. The church papers regularly published historical narratives. With these histories as exemplary models, readers sensed the importance of keeping records. Scriptural admonitions in the Doctrine and Covenants reinforced the interest.107

Latter-day Saint diarists adopted a pattern that varied little from one writer to another. Typically, after a brief summary of prior events, they began their accounts with the story of their conversion. This spiritual turning point received extensive elaboration in most accounts. The writers defined themselves as seekers after truth, noted their frustrations at being disappointed by other faiths, and rejoiced in finding the message of the restored gospel. In most narratives, conversion meant rejection by family and friends, but the move to Nauvoo or other designated gathering places solved this problem. The story of the migration and of the hardships endured occupied a part of most autobiographies, followed by a simple recital of day-to-day events. The badgering of Joseph Smith by Missouri authorities became part of many personal histories, and the assassinations of the Smith brothers almost always stood out as a significant turning point. Their reactions to these events, which the diarists had not witnessed, added poignancy to their accounts. The Nauvoo portion of their histories ended with the decision once again to move west.

The tone and content of the personal diaries and autobiographies reflected the convictions of these Latter-day Saints writers that they were witnessing the unfolding of a "marvelous work and a wonder" in the last days. Sometimes diarists recorded signs of the times. Often they testified of God's mercy to them or the church at times of sickness, persecution, or challenge. They reflected on the messages of their prophet-teacher. Like the official church historians whose works they echoed, the record-keeping Saints of the latter-days attested to their faith in their religion and their destiny as a people.

NotesChapter 9. A People of Faith and Destiny

Epigraph: George Alley to Joseph Alley III, April 13, 1843, Church Archives; Joseph Smith, "Nauvoo," T&S 3 (October 1, 1842): 936.
