Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 10

The House of the Lord

There is another curiosity, the temple, under which is a baptismal font which stands on twelve oxen as natural as life in which we can be baptised for our dead and become saviors on mount Zion, in which, my dear mother, I have been baptised for . . . my dead friends. Phebe Chase, April 5, 1844

There has been a glorious principle taught that has been revealed from the Lord to the Prophet, of being sealed for eternity to those that have lost their partners, and without this sealing power, no one can claim their bosom friends in another world. . . . Whether it can be done before the Temple of the Lord is finished I cannot tell as yet, but I assure you I am very anxious about it. . . . I know that it is the will of the Lord that every honest-hearted person must be to come here, for there is no other place of salvation for the human family. James Jones, June 10, 1844

To those gathered within a large square formed by the militia of Nauvoo on the brow of the hill overlooking Nauvoo, the religious service about to begin was, as Sidney Rigdon described it, "of no ordinary character, but of peculiar and indescribable interest."1 Very early on April 6, 1841, fourteen companies of the Nauvoo Legion and two adjunct units of the Legion from Iowa Territory assembled for review. As was customary for that time, the participation of a local militia signaled to the public that this was a significant community event. At half-hour intervals through the morning, the discharge of cannon announced the arrival of officers to review the lines of soldiers, beginning with the brigadier generals and working up to Lieutenant General Joseph Smith in full military dress with his guard, staff, and field officers.

All of this was merely prelude to the important event of the day. After the military review, the Legion proceeded to a site at Mulholland and Wells Streets. Short trenches had been excavated at four corners of the intended building to the level of the basement floor, the stone foundation laid, and rough basement walls of unfinished stone raised five feet. A speaker's stand waited at the southeast corner of the site. The militia formed itself into a large square three men deep. Inside this human wall were militia officers, the Legion's band and choir, and horses of the officers and special guests. A curious crowd milled around outside the lines. When all were in readiness, the First Presidency, the architects of the building, and guests made their way to the stand, where the militia displayed a silk American flag presented earlier that morning to the Legion by the women of Nauvoo.

Though the assembled citizens faced an impressive marshaling of soldiers, this was no military proceeding. The Latter-day Saints were about to commence construction of a temple. Twice before, at Kirtland and at Far West, Rigdon had witnessed the laying of cornerstones for a House of the Lord. In his sermon at Far West, he had emphasized the need for the Saints to defend their rights against vigilantes. Now, he celebrated peace, centered his message on the church's religious mission, and proclaimed a muted determination to protect the Saints' constitutional liberties, including the right to the free exercise of religion. The Latter-day Saints, he said, desired "to honor, not the world, but him that is alive and reigns . . . [who] the Saints boast of [as] their King." After inviting another hymn, Rigdon closed with prayer, and the ceremony of placing the cornerstones commenced.2

The architects and crew lowered the southeast cornerstone into place on the foundation wall. Joseph Smith pronounced a benediction upon it, and his counselor offered a comment. After an hour's adjournment, the same procedure was followed at the other three corners, with stake and ward leaders officiating. "We never witnessed a more imposing spectacle . . . , such [a] multitude of people, moving in harmony, in friendship, in dignity, . . . a people of intelligence and virtue, and order," the Prophet's brother Don Carlos observed of the long day's activities.3

Construction of a building for religious assembly, instruction, and ordinances could now formally begin. The commanding limestone structure underway at the physical center of Nauvoo would symbolize as well the city's spiritual focus. In preparing his people to receive the ordinances of the House of the Lord, the Prophet would give new meaning to temples, unfold new doctrines relating to the eternal worlds, and forever change what it meant to be a Latter-day Saint. The temple its doctrinal moorings and covenantal superstructure would further separate the Latter-day Saints from other Christians and make of them a truly distinctive people.

Expanding the Meaning of the Temple

Nearly from the beginning of settlement in what was then called Commerce, the Latter-day Saints recognized the need for a House of the Lord to serve purposes that in later decades would be divided between a meetinghouse or tabernacle and a temple. They could worship in any setting, but the Saints wanted a formal gathering place for instruction, for partaking of the sacrament, for learning from the Lord's living prophet, and for special sacred priesthood ordinances. They had completed just such a place in Kirtland, and the Prophet had planned others in Independence, Far West, and Adam-ondi-Ahman. Nauvoo's dwelling place for the Lord would follow the revealed pattern and expand upon its uses to set a new model for the future.4

In the fall of 1840, the First Presidency paid eleven hundred dollars to Daniel H. Wells for a four-acre site that would command the attention of residents and travelers from all approaches. The October 1840 conference approved Joseph Smith's proposal to build a House of the Lord by appropriating the labor of all willing men every tenth day. The conference appointed a three-member building committee, and within a week a team of stonemasons had opened a temple quarry at the north end of Main Street.5

The much-anticipated structure took on additional meaning when a revelation on January 19, 1841 (D&C 124), gave the temple and a hotel known as the Nauvoo House the Lord's explicit sanction. This revelation was the Prophet's most significant recorded in nearly three years; it expanded the Saints' expectations for the temple, encouraged a renewal of commitment, and made the project of first importance among all church efforts. Digging of the basement began in earnest in mid-February. Foundation stones were laid during March to be ready for the April 6 placement of the cornerstones.6

The revelation contained a special message to those who had been expelled from Missouri. Because of persecution, the Lord lifted from the Saints the commandment to build a temple in Jackson County. This drew their attention away from the "redemption of Zion" and turned it toward the work of building a temple in a place designated in the revelation as "the cornerstone of Zion."7 In addition, it validated a long-standing priority established by revelation in 1834 and reaffirmed that same year as the Prophet urged completion of the Kirtland Temple. Joseph Smith had told the church in Kirtland:

The Lord has commanded us to build a house, in which to receive an endowment, previous to the redemption of Zion; and that Zion could not be redeemed until this takes place. . . . We remind you of these things in the name of the Lord, . . . and ask, did we not instruct you to remember first the house, secondly the cause of Zion, and then the publishing of the word to the nations?8

The Nauvoo revelation fostered a sense of participation among all members of the church by inviting the Saints everywhere to contribute liberally of their means. But when the revelation invited every man to tithe his time one day in ten as a volunteer laborer, the gathering to Nauvoo became an imperative.9 As a further inducement, the revelation restricted baptisms for the dead to the temple, except "in the days of your poverty," when the Saints lacked the resources for a temple. The revelation did allow the redemptive work to continue for a time while the temple was under construction, but only in the temple would the general population of the Saints receive their endowments.10

From a spiritual perspective, the revelation explained with greater clarity and added a new layer of meaning to what it meant to be a Latter-day Saint. Published in 1841 by the Times and Seasons in its June 1 number, and added to the Doctrine and Covenants in the 1844 edition, the revelation promised both a restoration of things lost and the deliverance of things not known at any previous time among God's people. It defined the temple as a place where God could "restore . . . the fulness of the priesthood," to reveal ordinances "kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times." Also identified were other purposes that echoed some of those understood in Kirtland. The House of the Lord in Nauvoo would be a place for

your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles [revelations] in your most holy places wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals.11

Joseph Smith had dedicated the Kirtland Temple in March 1836 as a place of learning and of solemn assemblies, a place where a pentecostal endowment of power could be experienced. It was to be "a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of glory and of God."12 Years earlier, in 1829, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had received an angelic visitor who conferred authority to fulfill Ezekiel's requirement of a Levitical sacrificial offering to the Lord.13 At Kirtland in 1836, some of the elders participated in preparatory ordinances in what was termed an endowment of power.14 In Nauvoo, the Prophet brought together temple-related practices hinted at in both Old and New Testaments but expanded through new revelation.15

The most immediate and widely taught new doctrine authorized the practice of proxy baptisms for persons who had died without baptism by proper priesthood authority. The doctrine unfolded gradually. In 1838, Joseph Smith taught that those who had died without such saving ordinances must hear the gospel in the hereafter before they could be finally judged.16 Two years later, he introduced the idea that an earthly ordinance was required for those who had accepted the doctrine of repentance in the world of departed spirits. He spoke of proxy baptism for the dead first on August 15, 1840, at the funeral of Seymour Brunson, a high councilor,17 and again at the October conference. The following April all three members of the First Presidency discussed the subject. Thereafter, the Prophet elaborated on the idea in sermons and writings two or three times each year, often in response to inquiries.18 While in hiding to avoid arrest, he wrote to the Saints on the topic.19 In his letters and sermons on baptism for the dead, Joseph Smith pointed out that the objective of the doctrine was to offer salvation to all of humankind. This one great union of all of God's righteous children was not just between generations but from one gospel dispensation to another and between this life and the next.20

In the rite of baptism and in the use of the temple font, Joseph Smith described a religious symbolism that further united the living and the dead. The baptismal font, he explained, was placed below ground to remind the Saints of the grave. In both baptism and the resurrection, the corrupt body rises to a new spiritual life.21 The Nauvoo Temple font consisted of a basin supported on the backs of twelve life-sized oxen, a reference to a similar basin, or "molten sea," in Solomon's temple.22 For the Latter-day Saints, the oxen represented Israel's twelve tribes, whose physical and spiritual gathering was being accomplished through missionary preaching and the rite of baptism.23

The records kept of the ordinances were also an important element of this saving power. When Joseph Smith discovered, in the fall of 1842, an inconsistent pattern in the records of proxy baptisms, he explained the recording requirement in scriptural terms and taught that the record itself had legal standing in the next life.24 A recorder should be present, he explained, as a witness who could testify that the event had truly happened. Clerks in each Nauvoo ward and in the outlying branches should submit certified records to the general church recorder. Multiple witnesses must be identified in the minutes, he said, "that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established."25 Joseph Smith taught that the performance of a religious ordinance by proper authority and with a worthy recipient, if properly recorded and witnessed, created "a law on earth and in heaven, and could not be annulled, according to the decrees of the great Jehovah" as set forth in the conferral of apostolic keys to Peter.26

A related meaning devolved from John the Revelator's declaration that in the final accounting the dead would be judged out of the books. Two sets of books were implied here, the Prophet explained: the "books . . . of their works" kept on earth by a temple recorder, and a companion "book of life" kept in heaven by angels. As an indication of the sacredness of the earthly record, it would be deposited in the archives of the temple as a remembrance to the deceased.27

To prevent irregularities in the performance of the new proxy ordinance, the Prophet tried to limit the practice to Nauvoo.28 As questions arose, he issued various regulations. One of these allowed proxies to be immersed only on behalf of relatives whom they had known personally and believed to have been of a mind to accept the restored gospel. For a time, only the church president could grant exceptions to this regulation.29 He soon lifted the restriction and allowed members to give all of their ancestors an opportunity to accept earthly ordinances in the spirit world.30 In 1845, Brigham Young added one other regulation to ensure greater orderliness that men should be baptized for their male ancestors and women for women.31

Those who had found salvation in the restored gospel rejoiced in the prospects of becoming saviors on Mount Zion through proxy baptism for their ancestors. Converts had given up the association of unbelieving living relatives but could look forward to an eternal friendship with honorable deceased ancestors. "Is not this a glorious doctrine?" Vilate Kimball exulted in a letter to her missionary husband. "Surely the Gentiles will mock but we will rejoice in it." By extending the hope of salvation beyond the grave and by affirming a universal requirement for all times and places, Joseph Smith expanded the traditional understanding of Christ's relationship to the people of the world. This concept of universal salvation was a first major step in expanding church doctrine at Nauvoo. It demonstrated that new revelation existed and that essential priesthood authority had been restored both identifiers of the Latter-day Saints as a distinctive religious people.32

In another doctrinal expansion, Joseph Smith unfolded a plan for the progression of God's children beyond this life and into the eternities. Drawing on what he had learned by revelation, he explicated texts from the Bible but relied also upon modern scriptures, including the book of Abraham. One of the Prophet's most comprehensive doctrinal speeches came in a commemorative funeral sermon for an elder in the church named King Follett. Delivered at a church conference in April 1844, the discourse became a touchstone in Latter-day Saint belief.33

In this comprehensive presentation, Joseph Smith summarized revealed doctrines on the origin and destiny of man, the character of God, the nature of creation, and the salvation of deceased ancestors. The discourse envisioned a universe peopled with human beings in various stages of development. Persons on the earth, he taught, had lived in a spirit world as the children of a loving Father and Mother in heaven who provided for them an earth life as a step toward godhood for themselves. That eternal plan was merely a replication of similar experiences on other worlds at other times. Individuals proven by their obedience would be blessed with eternal lives as rulers in the kingdoms of Christ and his Father.34

In Nauvoo, the Prophet expanded upon his vision a decade earlier of our Heavenly Father, the resurrected Christ, and the three degrees of glory. He began more openly teaching of the Godhead in ways different from that commonly understood by other Christians. In an interview in the fall of 1842 with an Illinois minister, Smith said, "We believe in three Gods. There are three personages in Heaven all equal in power and glory, but they are not one God." In a footnote to a reprint of the interview, the Prophet added, "The Father, and the Son are persons of Tabernacle; and the Holy Ghost a spirit."35 Joseph Smith reaffirmed this notion of corporeal gods with glorified bodies in discussions with the Saints at Ramus in 1843. Lucy Mack Smith remembered that the doctrine was known as early as 1829.36 It was discussed in one of the "Lectures on Faith" published in 1835, in which the Father is described as a glorified being with a spiritual body, that is, a resurrected body of flesh and bones, in comparison to the natural bodies of humankind.37 After the King Follett discourse, believing Saints had no doubt that if the veil were rent and they saw God, he would appear "in all the person, image, and very form as a man." And, with this understanding, they felt closer to the Eternal being in whose image they had been created.38

Joseph Smith taught that as eternal beings, men and women have the potential to partake of the divine. Through a gradual perfecting process, he explained, they may move "from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation . . . until [they] arrive at the station of a God." John Taylor added a careful scriptural argument to this explanation in 1845, adding, "Jesus Christ had a father and mother of his Spirit, and a father and mother of his flesh; and so have all of his brethren and sisters [people of the earth]: and that is one reason why he said, 'ye are Gods.'"39

Taken together, the doctrines summarized in the King Follett sermon gave new meanings to the temple. It made clear that the unity so much desired by the Saints for themselves extended across time and through the eternities. Through the promised blessings of the temple, the Saints could be one with relatives, with other righteous people, and with God.40 In one of his last requests for a renewed effort on the temple project, on a blustery late January day in 1844, Joseph Smith said that the Saints could become saviors on Mount Zion and bring the desired unity of a Zion society

by building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. And I would to God that this temple was now done, that we might go into it, and go to work.

The effort of gathering the Saints and building the temple was falling short of Joseph Smith's expectations. Too many Latter-day Saints failed to take seriously the necessity of temple ordinances. Anguished by this lack of dedication, the Prophet said, "The Saints are slow to understand. . . . How many will be able to abide a celestial law, and go through and receive their exaltation, I am unable to say, as many are called, but few are chosen."41

Building the Temple

With all the rigors and distractions of everyday life, it took the Saints of Nauvoo more than five years to erect the House of the Lord on the bluff overlooking the city. From the time of the first announcement in October 1840 until the final dedication in May 1846, they poured countless hours and thousands of dollars in resources into building this imposing religious edifice.

At the outset, Joseph Smith invited several builders, carpenters, and architects to submit proposed designs. He liked none of them except that of William Weeks, a man in his late twenties trained as a builder by his father in New England and apprenticed as an architect and draftsman to his brother in the South.42 Weeks adapted his design before achieving an acceptable rendering of the building. "I have seen in vision the splendid appearance of that building illuminated," the Prophet explained, "and will have it built according to the pattern shown me."43 An early rendering appeared as an illustration on Gustavus Hills's Map of the City of Nauvoo. Weeks soon softened the squareness of the stone tower by redesigning it as an octagon and specifying wood construction. At the same time, he changed the traditional gabled front end to add an expanded attic space.

The general pattern of the Nauvoo Temple resembled that of its smaller predecessor in Kirtland. Both had two main floors rendered as meeting halls with multitiered seating for presiding officers at both ends. Both provided small meeting rooms for quorum leaders. Kirtland had no baptismal font, a feature added in the below-ground level of the Nauvoo Temple. The temple in Nauvoo was to be 128 feet long and 88 feet wide, rising 65 feet above ground with a tower topping off at 165 feet. With nearly fifty thousand square feet of interior space (just over eleven thousand on the main floor), it was three times the size of Kirtland's House of the Lord. Illinois travelers inspecting the finished Nauvoo Temple would have found it about equal in size to the cathedral, the courthouse, or the theater in St. Louis. The footprint of the Illinois Statehouse, completed in 1853 in Springfield, was slightly smaller.44

Latter-day Saint temples reflected the basic architectural styles of existing meetinghouses in England and the United States. Using the visual language of public and religious architecture of the times, the design of the temple communicated to all viewers that its walls defined and enclosed sacred space. In some respects, the outlines of Nauvoo's temple hinted of the ancient House of the Lord in Jerusalem.45 But Latter-day Saint temples incorporated some distinctive features as well. A single pulpit in most churches of the times lifted the minister above his congregation to symbolize his role as God's representative. Joseph Smith lowered the pulpit and added pews to place the emphasis on priesthood quorums. Behind the single pulpit at each end of the main floor hall were four rising pews. He placed the officers of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood at the east end, with the First Presidency seated at the top pew, inscribed with the letters P.H.P (Presidency of the High Priesthood). The presidency of the local stake of Zion sat one tier down, in a pew labeled P.S.Z., and the presidencies of the high priests (P.H.Q.) and the elders (P.E.Q.) sat on the two lower tiers. The Aaronic Priesthood officers had seats behind a pulpit at the hall's west end, from the bishop and his counselors at the top (P.A.P., or Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood), to the presidencies of the priests (P.P.Q.), teachers (P.T.Q.), and deacons quorums (P.D.Q.) below them.46

In Nauvoo, exterior architectural symbolism played an even greater distinguishing role. From a distance, Nauvoo's most important building impressed all who saw it. Closer by, a finely detailed architectural message confronted the viewer. Each of thirty pilasters had decorations that resembled no traditional Greek design. At the base, as directed by the Prophet, Weeks had placed a moon in quarter phase facing downward, with the image of a face carved into the curved edge. Capping each pilaster was a stone carved to resemble the face of a rising sun, with a second stone above it portraying a pair of hands holding trumpets. Above that, around the frieze, five-pointed stars appeared as a final decorative element.

The Prophet and his architect left no explanation for these symbols nor their meaning, but possible religious meanings are suggested by the scriptures and in explanations given for similar decorations used on the Salt Lake Temple. In a revelation in the book of Abraham, published in Nauvoo as the temple iconography was being worked out, God notes that just as the moon is above the earth and the sun above the moon in the heavens, so are the stars above the sun. This describes exactly the vertical placement of these heavenly symbols on the Nauvoo and the Salt Lake Temples. Likewise, the revelation continues, just as one person has a greater degree of glory and light than another, so God is above them all in these eternal qualities. If the symbols represent a religious people's search for truth beyond the horizon of present knowledge, this explanation turns a seeker's attention upward toward God and is tied to the temple's purpose as a house of learning and a house of glory.47

A millennial message can be found in the stones as well. The heavenly spheres remind the observer that God set these bodies in their orbits as guides to the times and seasons. The rising sun with trumpets above it represents God's final judgment at the sounding of the last trump, which will come at the dawning of the millennial day. The star at the top thus symbolizes Christ, who comes forth in judgment as "the bright and morning star."48

A restorationist interpretation is also possible for the sun stone, given that the weather vane of the temple depicted an angel carrying both a trumpet to sound the warning and a book of scripture to declare God's word. Similarly, the sun stone, with "the sun rising just above the clouds," above which appears another stone representing "two hands each holding a trumpet," would then suggest the concept of restoration after a long apostasy.49 This theme is expressed in a popular Latter-day Saint hymn written in 1840:

The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world.50

Whatever their intended meaning or meanings, the astronomical symbols on the Nauvoo Temple certainly were intended to point Latter-day Saints toward the sacred purposes of the House of the Lord and its role in offering salvation to a religious people in the last days.

To superintend Nauvoo's most important building project, church leaders appointed a trusted three-member committee. Reynolds Cahoon, Alpheus Cutler, and Elias Higbee accepted the onerous responsibility of managing men, materials, and money. Cahoon and Cutler, builders by trade who had worked on the Kirtland Temple, supervised construction. Higbee, a church recorder, kept books full time until a temple recorder in the office of the trustee replaced him. After Higbee's death from cholera in June 1843, Hyrum Smith became general overseer.

Securing materials was the committee's first task. Limestone existed in abundance not far north of the temple site. Similar stone had been used for other buildings in Commerce and Nauvoo, so it was an easy decision to open a quarry for the temple. Timber was another matter. Supplies to meet Nauvoo's ravenous appetite for lumber were being purchased at premium prices from as far away as twenty miles. The committee needed large quantities and found them at a reasonable cost in pine forests four hundred miles away in the Black River region of Wisconsin. Men recruited for timber missions in the north country harvested trees and cut them into logs for rafting down the river to Nauvoo. On site, Wandle Mace oversaw all framing inside the stone walls. He built simple cranes of shaped timbers to hoist the stones and timbers into place.51

George Miller headed the committee charged with getting lumber from Wisconsin, assisted by Lyman Wight, Alpheus Cutler, and Peter Haws. Over four winter seasons, 1841-45, forest crews harvested something like 1.5 million board feet of milled lumber and 200,000 shingles, plus hewed timbers, barn boards, and loose logs. One shipment of lumber included 170,000 board feet of sawed lumber (including shingles) which Miller said had been sawed in just two weeks. More than one hundred fifty men, many of them experienced in lumbering, worked in the pineries at various times to produce lumber for the temple and Nauvoo House. They were paid with provisions from a company store and given tithing and temple credit and Nauvoo House stock. The initial party got into production quickly by purchasing an existing Wisconsin operation from Jacob Spaulding, an Adams County, Illinois, mill builder.52 One workman boasted that two saws in the small sawmill could cut ten thousand feet of lumber in twenty-four hours and that plans were to erect two more mills. The committee ultimately operated four sawmills and maintained six logging camps along a forty-mile section of the Black River. They succeeded in harvesting much-needed lumber at a substantial savings to the church.53

In the uncertainty following Joseph Smith's death, many Latter-day Saint workers left the pineries; the following spring, Miller sold the mills back to Spaulding. After that, Miller bought lumber for the temple and Nauvoo House from agents rafting timber down the river past Nauvoo. The temple committee spent nearly four thousand dollars for lumber during the spring of 1845 alone. Samuel Russell, a Latter-day Saint, became a major supplier for the flooring.54

Funding for the temple came from the tithes of members in all parts of the church. The Twelve defined this tithe as "one tenth of all anyone possessed at the commencement of the building, and one-tenth part of all his increase from that time until the completion" of the temple. Members paid with cash, groceries, personal belongings, pledges, land, and labor.55 Cash tithing helped buy building materials and pay part of the salaries of employees. In-kind tithing likewise could be traded for supplies or labor in Nauvoo's barter economy.

In Kirtland, a few sisters had sewn clothes to help temple construction workers; a similar interest surfaced in Nauvoo.56 In addition, women of the church created a special penny fund to buy glass and nails. When unnamed critics challenged this effort, Hyrum Smith defended the organizers, namely, his wife, Mary Fielding Smith, and her sister, Mercy Fielding Thompson. Hyrum promised contributors a first choice of seats in the finished temple's assembly hall. The attempt to encourage each sister to donate a penny every week yielded a thousand participants in Nauvoo, and they sought another thousand in Great Britain. The goal allowed even the poor to contribute toward the objective of fifty cents per person for the year, or a thousand dollars in all.57

Because members understood that their tithing was needed for the temple, many of them contributed directly to the temple committee. Committeeman Elias Higbee kept the records of tithing and donations and workers' time sheets. In December 1841, the First Presidency and the Twelve directed all tithing and additional consecrations to the church trustees, who then allocated needed resources to the temple committee. Joseph Smith served as trustee during his life and was replaced by presiding bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller. The tithes were recorded in the Book of the Law of the Lord, a journal kept for the Prophet by Willard Richards, who was temple recorder, and his assistant, William Clayton. After Clayton became the chief recorder in September 1842, he moved the office from Joseph Smith's store to the committee house near the temple and later into his own new brick office.58

Because of problems with the collection of tithing away from Nauvoo, church leaders certified authorized tithing collection agents. Members had been giving donations for the temple and the Nauvoo House to any missionary who came through, and some of the funds were apparently used for missionary support. The Twelve had been serving as the authorized agents since 1841, but others continued to serve informally as couriers. In April 1843, at Joseph Smith's request, the Twelve were bonded in this assignment, and all other persons specifically excluded.59 This proved not to be a practical measure. After the martyrdom, trustees Whitney and Miller certified and bonded forty-three agents in other parts of the United States.60 Using a similar rationale, one conference in England appointed a treasurer in each branch to receive temple contributions and a general treasurer for the entire conference.61

Tithing paid in goods included not just foodstuffs but livestock, clothing of all kinds, quilts, tablecloths, jewelry, firearms, watches, and other items.62 To support themselves and their families, the hired workmen drew from this stock of goods or received credit slips redeemable at local stores or for books or subscriptions at the church printing office.63 Shift supervisors certified the work completed to credit workers for their labor.64 Merchants who accepted the temple scrip could redeem it for cash or goods or, more commonly, for credit on their own tithing at the temple recorder's office.

At times, provisions were scarce at the temple storeroom. On one occasion, the temple committee sent the stonecutters into nearby branches to preach on tithing; the people responded with wagonloads of goods for the temple. Another time, when the temple recorder ran short of needed meal, flour, and other provisions, he placed an advertisement in the Nauvoo newspaper appealing to members "to consecrate such [items] on their tithing." The recorder complained in 1843 that some local citizens were intercepting goods intended for the temple by offering to labor on the temple in exchange for the provisions.65 Of less direct use to the temple committee were the donations in land and jewelry. It was necessary for the committee to convert these to cash or trade them for usable resources. One cumulative list of donations to the temple included deeds to thirty-five lots in Nauvoo; another showed city lots and farmland in Far West, Missouri.66

The donated time counted as a regular tithing in lieu of cash or goods. The temple committee created this system on February 22, 1841, to meet Joseph Smith's April 6 deadline for the cornerstone ceremony. By the following February, donated time was providing much of the needed labor. The men worked one day in ten as assigned through the special tithing wards created by the committee. The committee appointed an agent in each of the ten city and three country wards to track participation and report the hours worked.67 When a man could not meet his assignment, he would sometimes write out a note for the labor, with a promise to work the tithed day later.68 Latter-day Saint women met in sewing circles to make mittens, socks, and clothing for the workmen. Families boarded single laborers, sometimes by assignment of the temple committee but often voluntarily. Men living away from Nauvoo lent their teams for hauling or sent hay, grain, meat and provisions.69 In one way or another, everyone could help build the temple.

This vast construction project depended mostly upon two sets of trades: first, the stonecutters and stonemasons responsible for the limestone walls, and second, the sawyers, woodworkers, and carpenters who built the interior framework and did the finish work. Contributing as well were other tradesmen, including plasterers, painters, glaziers, and tinsmiths. After quarrymen blasted the limestone out of the quarry and shaped it on site, the masons and their tenders laid up finely finished exterior courses and somewhat rougher interior stones. Similarly, the lumbermen shaped massive framing timbers and the boards needed for the interior wooden shell of the temple, after which the plasterers and fine craftsmen began their decorative work. Occasionally, hundreds of workmen at a time could be found employed on the project. Over the time of construction, the temple committee employed more than fifty men as stonecutters at the quarry, two dozen men to operate the cranes and set the stone walls, and three dozen carpenters. In addition to these employees, at least four men were involved in painting the interiors. Others worked as contract tinsmiths and glaziers. Hundreds more contributed work as tithing laborers.70

From the groundbreaking in the fall of 1840 to the final public dedication on May 1, 1846, progress in constructing the temple did not follow a constant upward path.71 Of most pressing need after the cornerstone laying was to complete the excavation, build the foundation walls, and install a temporary font for proxy baptisms for the dead. During the first summer, as the hewed portion of the basement walls rose, carpenters completed a font of pine tongue-and-groove staves near the east end of the basement level. The basin stood seven feet high and measured twelve feet by sixteen feet. Workers enclosed it in a temporary clapboard building low enough for the timbers of the first story to fit above it. They sunk a well at the east end of the temple thirty feet deep to supply water. Ornamental moldings made by Iowa high councilor Elijah Fordham decorated the font's cap and base. Fordham also carved twelve oxen out of pine plank glued together to project from the paneling around the base. Two weeks after Brigham Young dedicated it on November 8, 1841, the font was opened for use.72

Work on the walls of the first level began late in the spring of 1842. The inexperienced masons sorely needed a skilled master. He appeared in June in the person of English immigrant William N. Player. Under Player's supervision, crews worked steadily with one crane and consistently kept ahead of the stonecutters. By fall, they had the stones up four to twelve feet, sills installed in a few windows, and one course of stones on the base of the columns.73 Construction work lagged during 1842 because of distractions caused by the Bennett excommunication, the Boggs shooting, and attempts to arrest Joseph Smith. On October 30, the Saints crowded onto a temporary plank floor laid through a communitywide effort especially for an open-air Sabbath meeting, the first held in the building. A conference met on the same floor the following April.74

During 1843, construction moved steadily but slowly after the crews fixed runways for the crane. Before winter set in, the stonemasons had arched over the first-floor windows. Brigham Young urged greater effort on the project. As an essential part of the work of the church, he said, "We must build a house, and get an endowment, preach the gospel, warn the people, gather the Saints, build up Zion, finish our work, and be prepared for the coming of Christ." A Nauvoo conference in October pledged to renew exertions in the spring by supplying teams, provisions, iron, steel, blasting powder, and clothing requested by the temple committee.75

At the beginning of 1844, an observer reported, "The Temple has made great progress; and strenuous efforts are now being made in quarrying, hauling, and hewing stone, to place it in a situation that the walls can go up and the building be enclosed by next fall." The Nauvoo House, designed by architect Lucien Woodworth, had not enjoyed such progress during 1843, but foundation stone and brick for the hotel had been prepared and stockpiled. Besides, two sawmills acquired in the Wisconsin pineries were now poised to furnish both buildings with the necessary lumber. A second construction crane erected in March promised a doubling of effort by stonemasons on the temple. The sisters in the La Harpe and Macedonia branches collected funds for a third crane in July. Shortly before the murders of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, masons set the blocks for the circular windows on the upper portion of the first story. After a three-week interruption, work resumed on July 8, even though "the committee had not so much as a bushel of meal nor a pound of flour, nor a pound of meat to feed the hands with."76

With new leaders confirmed in August, the Saints united behind the Twelve on the temple project. By late September, the stonemasons had finished raising the second-story stones and placed the first capital stones. Two months later, all thirty of the sun stones and all but twelve of the trumpet stones were in place. Two accidents with the cranes slowed the work temporarily: In one, a crane toppled while raising a sun stone. The committee dealt with another concern in the fall of 1844. Because of rumors of threats against the project, the committee posted policemen as guards for the lumber and the temple.77

The arrival of two large rafts of Wisconsin lumber early in July, totaling nearly 156,000 board feet, anticipated the work of carpenters inside the temple. To facilitate this work, the committee enclosed a shop in the main floor hall of the temple in December, hired fifteen steady carpenters to prepare the timber for use when the stonework was finished, and added three workers at the temple sawmill.78

After a winter recess, work resumed with energy. Upwards of two hundred masons and carpenters were at work on the temple, pushing it toward completion and beginning a wall around the site. In March, the project recorded its only fatality, a man killed by a falling stone while rocks were being blasted. Later that month, workmen edged the last trumpet stone into place. By the end of April, carpenters had completed framing the second level and were well underway installing floor joists. On Saturday, May 24, 1845, Brigham Young tapped the final piece of stone the capstone into place in a ceremony at the southeast corner. The event featured special band music composed for the occasion. It being the seventh day of the week, Brigham Young dismissed the crews in a symbolic day of rest. In July, one observer noted, "The steeple of the temple is some distance above the roof. . . . We hear the laborers sing and shout as they raise the timbers." When workers added the tinned dome to the top of the tower in August, they celebrated with a watermelon feast on the roof and hoisted a flag.79

As construction neared completion, the building committee sent a special delegate to Chicago to buy glass for the temple. It was only after significant delays that George P. Dykes was able to secure the order at the Michigan Glass Works in Ann Arbor and ship the panes by lake steamer to Chicago and then in wagons overland to Nauvoo. Three yoke of oxen donated as tithing for the temple pulled the precious load.80

With the temple entirely enclosed and the windows in place, Brigham Young held a conference in the first-story hall in October 1845, using temporary floors, pulpits, and seats. At this meeting, he dedicated the building, "thus far completed, as a monument of the saints' liberality, fidelity, and faith."81 The attic floor was already receiving priority. Initially designed for a dozen offices surrounding a large council chamber, the upper level was chosen by Brigham Young in January 1845 for the endowment ceremony. Logistically, this worked better than the original plan of doing the washings and anointings in rooms adjacent to the baptismal font and administering the endowment in the rooms in the half-story above the main floor hall.82 As soon as the roof was on the temple in September, the interior rooms were finished.83 Young dedicated the attic rooms on November 30 so that endowments could begin. Meanwhile, framers hastened their work in the main halls. Beginning in November, they tore up and replaced the temporary floor on the first story, and in late January 1846, they laid the floor in the second-story hall.84 The fine moldings and other finish work on the second level were not completed because of the exodus from Nauvoo.

Rising above the temple to a height of 165 feet above ground was an octagonal wooden tower that added a finishing visual touch to the building. It also afforded visitors who climbed the stairway to the top a commanding view of the city. The architectural design called for a bell in the tower and four clocks. Wilford Woodruff raised money in England for the bell and one of the timepieces. Topping the dome was a prone-angel weathervane. The Nauvoo Tinners' Association invested twenty-four man days making the vane and another nine days on the balls and ornament for the spire. The angel was set in place on the morning of January 30, 1846. Perrigrine Sessions described the wind vane as "an angel in his priestly robes with a Book of Mormon in one hand and a trumpet in the other which is over laid with gold leaf."85

Assembling the furnishings for the temple, especially for the top story, involved the church community in ways that made the building their own. The assembly rooms needed no special furnishings beyond seating and the fabric-covered pulpits. Not so with the priesthood quorum offices and endowment rooms fitted out in the attic level. The quorums were assigned to collect donations for the carpets in their own offices and in the long central hall, or council chamber. They also collected donations to buy olive oil for the anointing ceremony, candles for light, food for temple workers, and paper for the recorder. The men and their wives gathered up mirrors and rugs. Other items were offered but not always accepted because of the generous offering of decorative items.86

The attic chamber was divided with canvas partitions for the various "sacred departments" of the endowment ceremony. Adjacent offices served as dressing rooms and for initiatory ordinances.87 Brigham Young performed eternal marriages, or sealings, in his office in the southeast corner. Little adornment was required in the small creation, telestial, and terrestrial "rooms." The garden room featured a path winding among thirty potted shrubs and flowers and small boxed evergreen trees furnished by local members. The terrestrial room included a veil patterned after the one Joseph Smith had used for the initial endowment in the upper room of his store. The celestial room, the largest of the ordinance spaces at nearly twenty-nine feet square, was decorated like a sitting room, with two large central tables, four sofas, and several chairs. On the walls hung paintings, mirrors, a marble clock, maps of the United States and the world, and nearly two dozen portraits, including depictions of Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, and other leaders and their wives. Members lent the wall hangings, including their portraits; Joseph Smith's oil portrait, retained by Emma, was noticeably absent. Two large world globes sat on a table in front of the arched east window, which spanned more than twenty feet.88 The celestial room thus served both its initial purpose as a council chamber and as a special part of the House of the Lord. Those who decorated the temple made it as pleasant and peaceful a setting as possible for the concluding stage of a long-awaited learning experience for participants.

Ordinances in the Lord's House

As each portion of the temple reached completion, the Saints put it to use. Baptism for the dead was the first of the temple ordinances introduced in Nauvoo. Space for proxy baptisms was the first to be dedicated in the temple, and thus attention of the local members focused initially on that ordinance. They listed the dead known to them, scanned family Bibles, and searched out family members with information. Many Saints in Nauvoo wrote to relatives seeking such data. Some explained the intended use, giving scriptural references; others did not.89

With the names of loved ones in hand, anxious members sought out the elders and underwent the ordinance. The first proxy baptisms took place in the Mississippi River in September 1840. "Some have already been baptised a number of times over," Vilate Kimball noted on October 11, one week after the general conference announcement inviting participation in the practice. "Since this order has been preached here," she informed her husband, Heber C. Kimball, a missionary in England, "the waters have been continually troubled. During conference there were sometimes from eight to ten Elders in the river at a time baptising." Vilate Kimball announced her intent to proceed immediately to be baptized for her mother.90 Like other families who had lost family members, the Prophet's parents rejoiced in a doctrine and practice that gave hope for their son Alvin, who had died in 1823. The Prophet's ailing father encouraged him to be baptized for Alvin immediately.91

For more than a year, the Saints continued to be immersed in the river on behalf of dead relatives. On October 3, 1841, Joseph Smith halted proxy baptisms conducted outside the temple and declared that thereafter the only proper place for this heavenly ordinance on earth was in the subterranean font of the Lord's House.92 Postponing the practice of baptisms for the dead shifted attention to the need to complete the temple. The delay was short. Six weeks later, a temporary wooden font was finished, and baptisms resumed. The privilege of using the font was granted only to those who had helped support temple construction by paying their tithing in full.93 Tithe-paying later became one of the requirements for receiving the endowment.94

Although proxy baptisms represented temple-centered activities between 1840 and 1845, the Saints did not forget the promise that they would receive something for themselves in the House of the Lord their endowments. The Prophet had taught them that the temple existed to bless the living as well as the dead. The 1841 revelation on the temple promised "to restore again that which was lost" (which is followed by a description of baptism for the dead and a mention of anointings and washings, among other things) and "to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world" pertinent to the last days.95 Until the Nauvoo years, most ritual in the church followed general Christian practice. The sacrament with its symbolism of bread and wine existed commonly among Christian churches, as did baptism by water in various forms. Ordinations and confirmations by the laying on of hands as a symbol of conferral of blessings or authority existed in a few other churches.96

In the House of the Lord at Kirtland, the elders preparing for missionary service had received a ritual cleansing and anointing called an endowment. Certain preparations were expected of them: to be morally clean and faithful, to strive for unison and harmony, and to avoid criticizing others. If worthy, they were promised an outpouring of wisdom and knowledge and the ability to overcome weaknesses, heal the faithful, seal up the law, and gather the Saints.97 The minutes of one quorum notes: "Met to proceed with the anointing of the elders of the Most High. . . . The first presidency came and sealed our anointing by prayer and shout of Hosanna."98 A member of the Kirtland High Council reported participating with this council and in a later anointing and endowment in the temple.99

But the endowment meant more than this to those involved. During the Kirtland Temple dedication, a number of participants experienced a feeling like that of a rushing of wind reminiscent of the New Testament report of the Day of Pentecost. As part of this religious euphoria, some of the Saints had spiritual experiences such as speaking in tongues or seeing heavenly beings.100 It was during the week of dedication that Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery witnessed appearances of Jesus, Moses, Elias, and Elijah above the pulpits of the temple and received special priesthood authority from them. These visits, recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 110, had profound influence on the development of Nauvoo's temple theology. Joseph Smith told nine members of the Twelve, "It is calculated to unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot over throw us, nor have any power over us." To prepare for this endowment, he advised,

Be faithful in all things . . . and we must be clean every whit. . . . Do not watch for iniquity in each other. If you do you will not get an endowment, for God will not bestow it on such. . . . You need an endowment brethren in order that you may be prepared and able to overcome all things. . . . The Saints will be gathered out from among them [the nations] and stand in holy places ready to meet the bride groom when he comes.101

From these teachings and his dedicatory prayer upon the completed temple in Kirtland, it was clear that Latter-day Saint temples would be places of sacred ordinances, worship, manifestations, and learning.102

Between the completion of the Kirtland Temple in March 1836 and his death at Nauvoo in June eight years later, the Prophet expanded the meaning of the endowment. He did not explain entirely his own revelatory learning process. Nor did he say what happened or even when it happened to expand his understanding of the "ancient things" and the "hidden things" that the last dispensation would receive. By May 1842, he began to introduce to others that which had been revealed to him an endowment beyond the one shared in the House of the Lord in Ohio.

A published suggestion that a transformation of meaning was underway appeared in the March and May 1842 issues of the Times and Seasons after Joseph Smith took over as editor. In these issues of the church paper, he published the text of the book of Abraham, an autobiographical account of Abraham's experiences in Egypt, together with three facsimiles from Egyptian papyri acquired in Kirtland in 1835. In his explanation to Facsimile No. 2, Joseph Smith said of one cluster of symbols: "[It] contains writing that cannot be revealed unto the world; but is to be had in the Holy Temple of God." As he sought revelation to understand the religious meaning of the Egyptian papyri, it is possible that the Prophet received a revelatory understanding also of the teachings presented as the endowment.103 According to one scholar,

studies of Egyptian temple ritual since the time of Joseph Smith have revealed parallels with Latter-day Saint temple celebrations and doctrine, including a portrayal of the creation and fall of mankind, washings and anointings, and the ultimate return of individuals to God's presence. Moreover, husband, wife, and children are sealed together for eternity, genealogy is taken seriously; people will be judged according to their deeds in this life, and the reward for a just life is to live in the presence of God forever with one's family. It seems unreasonable to suggest that all such parallels occurred by mere chance.104

This explanation satisfies Joseph Smith's revelatory promise of a linking of both "ancient things" and "things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world."105

Joseph Smith first shared these sacred things with others in early May 1842, just as the Times and Seasons completed its publication of the book of Abraham. The Prophet invited to the upper room of his store a small group of friends and there introduced to them a ceremonial washing and anointing broader in its symbolic references than the ordinance used in Kirtland. Beginning in December 1845, scores of worthy Saints in Nauvoo received the endowment. It consisted of the ordinances of washing and anointing, followed by instructions and covenants setting forth a pattern or figurative model for life. The teachings began with a recital of the creation of the earth and its preparation to host life. The story carried the familiar ring of the Genesis account, echoed as well in Joseph Smith's revealed book of Moses and book of Abraham. The disobedience and expulsion of Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden set the stage for an explanation of Christ's atonement for that original transgression and for the sins of the entire human family. Also included was a recital of mankind's tendency to stray from the truth through apostasy and the need for apostolic authority to administer authoritative ordinances and teach true gospel principles. Participants were reminded that in addition to the Savior's redemptive gift they must be obedient to God's commandments to obtain a celestial glory. Within the context of these gospel instructions, the initiates made covenants of personal virtue and benevolence and of commitment to the church. They agreed to devote their talents and means to spread the gospel, to strengthen the church, and to prepare the earth for the return of Jesus Christ.106 Through personal promises to their Heavenly Father made in the Nauvoo Temple, the Saints expanded the meaning of being a covenant people.

Those first endowed on Wednesday and Thursday, May 4-5, 1842, included Joseph Smith and nine other church leaders.107 In a day-long series of instructions "in the principles and order of the priesthood," Joseph and Hyrum Smith administered "washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchisedek Priesthood," outlining what the candidates must do to "come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds." "In this council," Joseph Smith's history notes, "was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days." On the following day, the group met and administered the same sacred ordinances to Joseph and Hyrum Smith.108

Most of this same group and a few others met again in the upper room of President Smith's store more than a year later, on Friday, May 26, 1843. The report of that council says the Prophet gave them "instructions on the Priesthood, the new and everlasting covenant, &c. &c." Specifically, the men were informed about the covenant of celestial marriage.109 In two subsequent meetings, on Sunday and Monday, May 28-29, a reduced group met again with the Prophet to attend to ordinances and to receive instructions "concerning the things of God." On these dates, several couples received the marriage sealing ordinance, among them, on the 28th, Joseph and Emma Smith.110

Those receiving these ordinances remembered the Prophet's concerns. First, he wanted others to receive the ordinances even before the temple was finished. More importantly, he was anxious to authorize the Twelve to administer the blessings to others should his own life be cut short before the temple was ready. During the winter of 1843-44, Joseph Smith conversed with the Twelve regularly about the temple and priesthood ordinances. In late March 1844, after conferring the keys of the sealing ordinances on their quorum president, the Prophet told the Twelve, "I roll the burthen and responsibility of leading this Church off from my shoulders on to yours . . . for the Lord is going to let me rest a while." This and other similar comments convinced the Twelve that they were the proper administrators of the kingdom after the Prophet's death. They held the office next in succession and, when activated by his death, the priesthood authority necessary to administer all the ordinances of exaltation.111

At least twenty couples, including the nine members of the Twelve who had served faithfully together in England, received another temple blessing prior to the Prophet's death. All of the recipients had already received the ordinances of the endowment and marriage for time and eternity, or what Joseph Smith called Abraham's patriarchal priesthood. The keys to this priesthood had been conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple in 1836. They would now receive the crowning ordinance of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood.112 "For any person to have the fullness of that priesthood, he must be a king and priest," Brigham Young told an audience in Philadelphia on August 6. "A person may be anointed king and priest long before he receives his kingdom." In a public sermon in Nauvoo three weeks later, Joseph Smith explained this sacred ordinance that he was about to bestow on a select few before completion of the temple. It was, he said, a promise of kingly powers and of endless lives. It was the confirmation of promises that worthy men could become kings and priests and that women could become queens and priestesses in the eternal worlds. In its administrative aspects, he said, this leadership calling was "a perfect law of Theocracy holding keys of power and blessings . . . to give laws to the people."113

The administration of the endowment to the general adult membership began soon after the completion and dedication of a fully furnished space in the attic council chamber of the Nauvoo Temple. Completion of the temple was a step anxiously anticipated by the Latter-day Saints. "It is a matter here that engages the most of our attention," a resident of nearby Montebello wrote to relatives in New York. "And it will be a great privilege to be at or near Nauvoo."114 The ordinance work began on December 10, 1845, and continued just short of two months, ceasing early on February 7, three days after the exodus began. One by one, groups known as companies entered the temple for the ceremony. By the end of December, one thousand had been endowed. In all, more than five thousand individuals experienced this new sacred rite, clothed in their "white temple robes symbolizing purity and the equality of all persons before God."115 Designated church authorities and their wives, together with others, guided the recipients through the ritual, using a variety of teaching techniques lectures, representations, and symbols. Brigham Young and other members of the Twelve directed the work and personally participated in the various sessions, with the wives of church leaders overseeing the initiatory ordinances for women.116

Invited next into the temple, to fulfill a promise of priority by Joseph Smith, were full-time construction workers. Most of the other endowment companies during December were organized by priesthood quorums and quorum members' wives, certified as worthy by their quorum presidencies. All who entered the temple were expected to be physically, morally, and spiritually clean. The same standards taught in Kirtland were used in Nauvoo. Candidates for the ordinances were expected to bathe before entering the temple and to arrive in a spirit of fasting and prayer.117 Unlike the proxy baptisms for the dead performed in the temple, the endowments administered in Nauvoo pertained only to the living recipient. Not until 1877, in the temple at St. George, Utah, were members permitted to participate as proxies in endowing deceased ancestors.118

Another ordinance introduced to members in the Nauvoo Temple was that of sealing of couples in a marriage lasting beyond the grave and into the eternities. As with the endowment, Joseph Smith introduced this ordinance to a few people in May 1843, performed the marriages, and conveyed the sealing authority to the Twelve. In the Nauvoo Temple, couples previously wed "until death" received this covenant of eternal marriage at an altar in Brigham Young's office adjacent to the celestial room. The marriage altar featured a simple padded ledge of scarlet damask cloth on each side for kneeling and a central riser covered on its sides with white linen. Across the top of the altar, finished with scarlet cloth, the couple faced and joined hands in a token of unity with one another and with God.119

Brigham Young performed the first marriage in the temple on January 1, 1846, uniting in matrimony a temple stonemason's helper, Truman Leonard, and his fiancée, Ortentia White. Between January 7 and February 5, 1846, a few others were newly married, and dozens more expanded their original vows to an eternal commitment. During that same period, authorities performed a few proxy sealings of couples and some sealings of children to parents, both of the living and the dead. The sealing ordinance between parents and children created an eternal family unit linking one generation to another. It was yet another aspect of the Latter-day Saint view of the eternity of the family.120

The sealing ordinances rested upon a doctrinal understanding taught in a limited way by Joseph Smith from the earliest days of the church. At Kirtland, he and other elders performed marriages as would any ordained minister of religion. They used a ceremony prescribed in a statement on marriage adopted by an August 1835 general conference and included in the Doctrine and Covenants published that fall. The statement accepted as valid all existing marriages performed under civil law. In keeping with traditional patterns, the ceremony offered only a "covenant to be each others companions through life."121

At least from the mid-1830s, some Latter-day Saints privately speculated that a marriage under priesthood authority might extend beyond the grave. They understood marriage as a sacramental covenant first instituted in the garden of Eden. Therefore, when their own marriage was "solemnized by the authority of the everlasting priesthood" it was sanctified "after the order of heaven." Joseph Smith concluded one ceremony with the bestowal of "the blessings of Abraham Isaac and Jacob and such other blessings as the Lord put into my heart."122 Despite some limited talk of a marriage union for eternity, the church before settlement in Nauvoo did not administer that promise.

The doctrinal foundations of this religious view of marriage had its foundation in the Prophet's revision of the Bible at Kirtland. A revelation given in February 1831 commanded, "Thou shalt ask, and my scriptures shall be given as I have appointed."123 Within weeks, Joseph Smith began an intensive study of the Bible. Very quickly that effort became a tutorial experience, for as he pondered the scriptures and asked the Lord, new understandings were revealed. It was then that he began to teach the idea of a priesthood-centered marriage covenant, its precedent being the marriage of Adam and Eve performed by God himself.124

In the newly dedicated Kirtland Temple in April 1836, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received a bestowal of keys from heavenly beings, among them the ancient prophets Elias and Elijah. The authority restored by these messengers opened the door to the saving ordinance of baptism and the exalting ordinance of eternal marriage, both received through priesthood authority.125 In Nauvoo, Joseph Smith began to share with the Saints those things he had learned through revelation concerning God's covenant with Abraham and his seed and of Elijah's turning of the hearts of generations. Under the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, both marriage and procreation would continue without end for those worthy of a celestial glory.126

The essence of these teachings was embodied in a revelation that had been unfolding for more than a decade. Components of the revelation were committed to writing on July 12, 1843. The central focus was the principle of eternal marriage. Later published as Doctrine and Covenants 132, the revelation explained that Elijah's key was the same binding power given by Christ to Peter. Among other uses, this authority solemnized marriages with an eternal potential and bound generations together in a perpetual chain of families.127

Of this sealing power, the revelation said: "For I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things . . . that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens." The keys that is, the authority to regulate the use of the sealing power resided with the president of the church. (Joseph Smith conferred these keys on Brigham Young and the other members of the Twelve in late March 1844. Young's latent authority to sanction marriages would become active as the senior member and president of the Twelve only after Joseph Smith's death.)128

The sealing power had other implications beyond that of joining a man and a woman in eternal matrimony and of sealing their children to them. For a time in the 1840s (and again in the 1880s), adult men whose living parents were not members could be sealed to a substitute father under the law of adoption. Three-fourths of the Nauvoo adoptions involved sons who chose an apostle as a substitute parent in order to ensure a worthy lineage for him and his family. Occasionally, a woman was adopted by her husband's adopted father. A revelation to Wilford Woodruff in 1894 ended these sporadic adoptive sealings. Thereafter, natural genealogical lines became the ideal sealing line for all Latter-day Saints. Woodruff and his associates reassured members that most of their ancestors would accept the gospel in the spirit world, and if they did not, adjustments in the sealing line could be resolved in the hereafter.129

As the flood of emigrants ferried their loaded wagons westward across the Mississippi in early February 1846, Brigham Young attempted to bring the administration of ordinances to a halt. Anxious to leave, he announced a cessation of the endowments and sealings. "I walked some distance from the Temple supposing the crowd would disperse," his history records on February 3, "but on returning I found the house filled to overflowing." The work continued for a few days so that hundreds more could receive the promised blessings. On Sunday, the eighth, after the work ended, Young met with the Twelve in the southeast corner room in the upper level. "We knelt around the altar," he explained, "and dedicated the building to the Most High. We asked his blessing upon our intended move to the west; also asked him to enable us some day to finish the Temple, and dedicate it to him, and we would leave it in his hands to do as he pleased; and to preserve the building as a monument to Joseph Smith. We asked the Lord to accept the labours of his servants in this land. We then left the Temple."130

This benediction upon an unfinished temple in Brigham Young's office did not end the effort to complete it. Even as the migration picked up speed, workmen heightened their efforts to perfect their monument to the founding prophet. With a few present on the evening of April 30, Joseph Young pronounced an official dedicatory prayer. The following day, residents paid one dollar to attend a public dedication. Funds thus collected paid the hands employed in the finishing work. Elder Orson Hyde pronounced the prayer.131 In a spirit of jubilant celebration, the Saints concluded the sacred assembly with a ceremonial shout of praise to God, "Hosannah, Hosannah, Hosannah, To God and the Lamb," spoken three times and concluded with a triple "Amen." Based upon the plea "Hosanna," translated "Save now" in Psalm 118, it echoed for the Latter-day Saints the psalmist's praise for the Messiah's gift of salvation.132

Their conversion to the church had given the Latter-day Saints a hope of salvation through Christ. The ordinances of the Nauvoo Temple unmistakably confirmed that hope. The Saints believed that if they endured in righteousness, they now had an assurance that they would enter into the presence of God and enjoy the same relationships with spouses and children that had brought them joy in earth life. Through the ordinances of the restored gospel, they had emphatically defined themselves as a covenant people, a sacred family of families.

NotesChapter 10. The House of the Lord

Epigraph: Phebe Chase, Nauvoo, to her mother, April 5 [1844], Charles Marsh Correspondence, Church Archives; James Jones, near Nauvoo, to Henry Jones (his son, in England), June 10, 1844, Church Archives, spelling standardized.
