Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Part III

Challenges to the City Beautiful: Failed Promises of Peace

The reason why we do not live in peace is because we are not prepared for it. We are tempted and tried, driven, mobbed, and robbed; apostates are in our midst, which causes trouble and vexation of spirit, and it is all to keep down our pride and learn us to honor the God of Jacob in all things and to make us appear what we really are. The gospel turns us inside out and makes manifest every good and every evil way. . . . It is necessary that we should be tried and kicked, and cuffed, and twisted round, that we may learn obedience by the things we suffer. . . . I am glad to see people in trouble when I know that it is for their salvation. . . . I pray that I may . . . act all the time with reference to eternity. . . . Persecution is for our good, and if we have hard things to endure let us round up our shoulders and bear them in the name of the Lord, and not murmur. From an address by John Taylor, July 6, 1845

Chapter 11

Patriots and Prophets

The patriots of this country . . . stood up in defence of their rights, liberty, and freedom; but where are now those principles of freedom? . . . What say ye, ye saints, ye who are exiles in the land of LIBERTY. How came you here? Can you in this land of equal rights return in safety to your possessions in Missouri? No! You are exiles from thence, and there is no power, no voice, no arm to redress your grievances. John Taylor, April 5, 1844

Latter-day Saints during the Nauvoo years held beliefs about government and politics defined by their own Anglo-American orientation and in even more significant ways by their religious worldview. As American citizens, they resonated with the issues of the day. They joined with others in the 1830s and 40s in a heady zealousness for grassroots participation in government. The old political parties of colonial days had faded with independence, and a new generation of patriots rushed to reorder loyalties. Following the election of 1828, the Democratic Party of Andrew Jackson emerged; an opposition party, the Whigs, took shape about 1832. These loose coalitions embodied no clear consensus in political questions. Rather, they represented an emerging redefinition of purposes for a young nation. Voters during these years were divided nearly evenly in national elections. Locally, many of the parties advocated regional issues different from those of the national leaders. In every election, candidates sought earnestly to attract a volatile electorate.1

This was true in western Illinois, where the rapid influx of Latter-day Saints added an urgency to the democratic process of republican representation. Whigs and Democrats alike courted the Latter-day Saint vote. Because of their numbers, the Saints soon exercised a decisive influence in Hancock County. The use of that political influence was one factor creating tension and eventual conflict. Ultimately, circumstances led to the forcibly negotiated removal of the Latter-day Saints from their chosen place of refuge.

Another factor in this tension during the Nauvoo years was the multifaceted relationship of the Latter-day Saints with the United States government and its leaders. Their religious beliefs clearly supported constitutional government and encouraged support for constituted leaders. At the same time, their millennial orientation anticipated a future theocratic government following the Second Coming, and their experiences had taught them to distrust many elected and appointed officials. In attempting to resolve these tensions in their loyalties to God and country, the Latter-day Saints coalesced around their religious priorities. Their opponents saw this as a clear denunciation of the American way and justification for a strident opposition.2

American Government and the Millennial Kingdom

Latter-day Saint patriotism was based on certain fundamental premises about government and those who governed. In both discourse and written revelation, Joseph Smith frequently endorsed the Constitution of the United States. His position emerged during the difficult self-assessment after the expulsion from Jackson County. The Prophet declared by revelation in 1833 that the Lord had "established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men" in order to ensure the moral agency and rights of the people.3 He counseled the Saints to be patient in affliction and to support "the constitutional law of the land." At the same time, the Lord condemned bad law and bad leaders and set forth a precept that became a cardinal principle in Latter-day Saint attitudes toward government:

I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the law also maketh you free. Nevertheless, when the wicked rule the people mourn. Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil.4

It was their attempts to identify "good men and wise men" for office that created problems for the Saints. Inevitably, the candidates who qualified under that rule were Latter-day Saints themselves or citizens so friendly to the church that antagonists classified them as Mormon sympathizers, or in popular parlance, Jack-Mormons.5

The Book of Mormon laid the groundwork for Latter-day Saint beliefs that rulers should be righteous and willing to sustain the right to religious freedom. Joseph Smith's statement of faith in 1838 summarized the Saints' willingness to render unto Caesar all that was due him and to be supportive subjects of kings, presidents, rulers, or magistrates.6 But through their experiences in Missouri and Illinois, many Saints lost faith in government officials at all levels. At the same time, their neighbors questioned the possibility that Mormons could be loyal to both constitutional principles and to an influential religious leader.

Church leaders during the Ohio-Missouri years had tried to define for their neighbors a clear position on political questions. The "Declaration of Belief" canonized by the general conference of August 1835 reaffirmed the common American belief that government is instituted of God to protect citizens' rights. Additionally, the proviso called for the equitable administration of laws by government officers and required the Saints to sustain and uphold the law or suffer legal consequences. It claimed the right for citizens to seek redress for wrongs but only under the provisions of law. One other point remained pertinent during the 1840s. The declaration noted, "We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government, whereby one religious society is fostered and another proscribed in its spiritual privileges."7

Overall, the 1835 statement seemed to place the Latter-day Saints squarely in line with contemporary American feelings. It agreed with Missourians in part on one controversial issue by promising that missionaries would not interfere with slaves. But during the Nauvoo years a broader issue worried American observers of the new Latter-day Saint faith. The Saints believed in an ultimate end to all governments and religious systems. This they expected when Jesus Christ returned in glory to rule as King of kings. Many Latter-day Saints found evidence of the imminent end of secular governments when federal officials refused to help them redeem their properties in Missouri. They found it as well in the failure of U.S. policy to help Native Americans achieve their full human potential.8 Nations were in turmoil and peoples were at war. The great nations of world history, John Taylor wrote, "had in themselves the seeds of destruction, and were destined to decay. We are laying the foundation of a kingdom that shall last forever that shall bloom in time and blossom in eternity."9

These views reflected a common belief in the church that the blooming of Christ's millennial reign would require all earthly organizations to observe His principles of civil peace. According to William W. Phelps, Christ's kingdom would be "the great leveling machine of creeds, constitutions, kingdoms, countries, divisions, notions, notorieties and novelties." Latter-day Saints found the seeds of that leveling in the church established by God through his prophet, Joseph Smith. As Eliza R. Snow wrote in an 1839 letter, "The Lord has commenc'd a work that is destin'd to try the sincerity and the strength, yes, and the legality too, of every Creed and Profession, both political and religious, upon the face of the whole earth."10

For those listening to but not believing in this millennial forecast, these claims created concern. When the Latter-day Saints began to proclaim themselves as the rightful heirs of the paradisiacal earth and their unrepentant neighbors as the wicked who were threatened in scripture with destruction, the "wicked" living nearby saw Latter-day Saint religious claims as a threat to their own rights to life, liberty, and property. Some whom the Saints designated as "gentiles" believed that Joseph Smith had set forth a treasonous plan to overthrow civil government by one means or another and to assume control.

Latter-day Saints believed they should prepare for the Millennium by warning the nations and gathering out the righteous. The revelation to Joseph Smith about the Nauvoo Temple in January 1841 enjoined the church to proclaim the gospel not just to ordinary citizens but also to the monarchs and elected rulers of the world and then to invite them to Zion, to be hosted in comfort at the Nauvoo House. In the spirit of this admonition, Parley P. Pratt drafted and published later that year A Letter to the Queen of England, Touching the Signs of the Times, and the Political Destiny of the World. Declaring "that the world in which we live is on the eve of a revolution . . . on which the fate of all nations is suspended," Pratt interpreted Nebuchadnezzer's dream of the great image (representing the worldly governments) as a prophecy of the destruction of modern nations. "The government of England is one of the toes of this image," he wrote. When a stone "cut out of the mountain without hands" rolls forth to smash the image, he continued, quoting Daniel, "'The Saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever.'" Pratt concluded that this new kingdom would be established over the whole earth only with the personal advent of the Messiah, who would come "with power and great glory." Pratt invited Queen Victoria to hearken to the message and enjoy the blessings of the Lord's new kingdom. If she did not, she would "be overthrown with the wicked, and perish from the earth."11

No record survives of the British monarch's reaction to this religious tract, nor even whether she saw a copy. Some of those who read one of the six thousand copies published in Manchester (or others issued soon afterward in New York) accepted the arguments. Others ignored the proclamation as another radical religious tract or found in it evidence of Mormon political disloyalty. However intended, declarations such as this defined the Mormons in some minds as revolutionaries. Latter-day Saints, however, distinguished between this enduring millennial loyalty and their patriotism and support for constituted government. Yet even though they were not out to destroy governments, their religious message clearly had political implications. As Sidney Rigdon explained it in April 1844,

When God sets up a system of salvation, he sets up a system of government; when I speak of a government I mean what I say; I mean a government that shall rule over temporal and spiritual affairs. . . . The law of God is far more righteous than the laws of the land. . . . The kingdom of God does not interfere with the laws of the land, but keeps itself by its own laws.12

Revelations and millennial beliefs such as this encouraged political isolationism. These ideas fostered both a sincere reverence for the American Constitution and a skepticism toward government and its leaders. Eliza R. Snow celebrated the patriotism and revealed the tension of estrangement in a poem that begins in an expression typical of Latter-day Saint statements about their political heritage:

I love the land with banner spread And waving gloriously The country where our fathers bled To purchase Liberty. Then, after ranging around the world through eleven verses exploring the superstitions and bigotry, the imperialism and mysterious cultures of other peoples, the poet returns, via "Europe's prouder standards," to America:

But O I find no country yet, Like our Columbia dear; And often times, almost, forget I live an exile here.13 This last sentiment, a pointed contradiction to the national pride outlined throughout the poem, reverberated through much of the political discourse among Latter-day Saints during the Nauvoo years. A sense of alienation appeared especially whenever the question of "redeeming Zion" surfaced. The Saints could not easily forget their treasured millennial gathering place in Missouri. As one of them put it in 1842:

Many a time we there did meet; Many a friend we there did greet. Now our friends are scattered from The sacred place they called their home. Still on Zion's flowery plain We all hope to meet again.14

The Missouri Question

Demonstrating their support of legally constituted government, the Latter-day Saints in Missouri had consistently appealed through legal channels. They had done so to redress their loss of property in Zion, to secure release from county jails, and to hold their oppressors responsible for the wrongs committed. The process continued for five years after their removal to Illinois, with sporadic efforts after that.15 Following Sidney Rigdon's lead and encouraged by Joseph Smith, the Saints compiled nearly eight hundred affidavits enumerating their claims. These, together with petitions to Congress in 1843 and 1844, consumed an enormous amount of time and money during Nauvoo's first years.16 This effort demonstrated the intensity of their feeling, both for the principles of government under which they lived, and their feelings of frustration at being denied their promised land in Missouri.17 Justice for themselves and for all others was an important theme in Nauvoo; within a year of its creation, the city had adopted a seal featuring the scales of justice. It was a fitting symbol for Latter-day Saint efforts to redress the wrongs incurred in Missouri and to govern justly in Illinois.18

The initial affidavits sought compensation for the loss of life, health, houses and farms, personal belongings, foodstuffs, and crops destroyed or abandoned in the forced moves in Missouri between 1833 and 1838. Submitted to Congress in 1839-40, this request included bills from 481 individuals against Missouri and a twenty-eight-page memorial signed by Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Elias Higbee. In late October, these men and Orrin P. Rockwell left in a two-horse carriage for Washington, where the Prophet and Higbee met with President Martin Van Buren, Senator John C. Calhoun, and others. Even though President Van Buren sympathized with Mormon sufferings, his desire not to offend the Missouri electorate disappointed the exiled Saints. Joseph Smith reported Van Buren's words: "What can I do? I can do nothing for you! If I do anything, I shall come in contact with the whole state of Missouri."19 The Senate Judiciary Committee considered and rejected the redress petition in March 1840.

Joseph Smith was himself willing to try only once for compensation at the seat of government.20 In 1842, a second delegation went to Washington without him to appeal before the House of Representatives. This party carried a fresh copy of the lengthy 1840 memorial, signed this time by Elias Higbee, John Taylor, and Elias Smith, and dated January 10, 1842. Petitions, letters, and affidavits chronicling the abuses and depredations suffered by at least 229 individuals accompanied the memorial.21 Also submitted for review were three published reports. Two were pamphlets by Latter-day Saint writers explaining the expulsion; the other was one issued by the Missouri General Assembly in 1841.22 Missionaries had flooded the country with these pamphlets and newspaper articles in an attempt to influence public opinion.23 As before, the delegates found congressional committees unwilling to endorse the redress bill.

A final effort in the spring of 1844 consisted of a three-page memorial presented in Washington by Orson Pratt, John E. Page, and Orson Hyde. The delegates offered to accept land outside United States boundaries in Texas, Iowa, or elsewhere if Congress declined to restore the abandoned Missouri property.24 The signatures of 3,419 Nauvoo residents, not all of them Missouri exiles, extended this mass solicitation to a fifty-foot petition. Even this appeal to numbers and the support of such western congressmen as Stephen A. Douglas and John Wentworth failed to convince federal officials that they should, or could, act. In all, the financial claims against Missouri amounted to nearly $2.4 million in more than eight hundred petitions from nearly seven hundred individuals.25

In the individual claims, the petitioners tallied their losses or described their sufferings. For example, in a typical bill of damages, Andrew Moore's September 1839 claim asks for $2,933, itemized to include losses of town lots and farmland, crops, livestock, firearms, and travel expenses. Moore claimed twenty dollars for loss of time in being held under guard unlawfully for six days. Along with many others, he filed for a thousand dollars in damages for being expelled from Missouri "without any just cause or provocation." The petitioners frequently reminded Congress that their claims, though large, fell short of compensating them for their suffering. Lewis Abbot wrote, "I think the State had ought to pay me for my loss $1,500 at least, and for my damage a great sum, as money would not hire me to pass through the same scenes again."26

Though friendly to the Constitution of the United States and its laws, many Latter-day Saints felt rejected by the free nation established through the courage and blood of their ancestors. Patriots had defended their rights, John Taylor told a Nauvoo congregation, but liberty and freedom were denied the Saints in the expulsion from Missouri. They had become "exiles in the land of LIBERTY."27

Ultimately, when the appeals to judges, Congress, the country's president, and the American people yielded unsatisfying responses, the Latter-day Saints left the matter in the hands of God. The report of the Washington delegation to a general conference in April 1840 led the Saints to encourage further legal efforts, but, even then, a resolution anticipated failure. "If all hopes of obtaining satisfaction (for the injuries done us) be entirely blasted," the resolution read, the delegates should "appeal our case to the court of Heaven" for eventual resolution.28

Although they saw themselves as friends of the law, the exiled Latter-day Saints were wary of the way elected officials applied the law. Church members manifested no greater outrage during the Nauvoo years than against those who made four attempts to arrest Joseph Smith in his place of legal refuge in Illinois so they could extradite him to Missouri.29

The first attempts in 1840 and 1841 stemmed from the Prophet's original arrest for treason, murder, and robbery and his incarceration at Liberty Jail in 1838. Missouri's new Democratic governor, Thomas Reynolds, who succeeded Governor Lilburn Boggs in 1840, signed the first extradition order in September of that year. Church officials may have unwittingly invited the action. In their redress appeal to Congress a few months earlier, they had argued that Missouri's failure to seek extradition proved the falsity of the 1838 charges. Illinois governor Thomas Carlin, also a Democrat, invited the Hancock County sheriff to arrest Joseph Smith and five others under the Reynolds order as fugitives from justice. The men were away from Nauvoo at the time, so the sheriff returned the papers to Carlin.30

The following June, Joseph Smith visited Carlin at his home in Quincy. When the Prophet headed home, the governor dispatched Adams County lawmen and a Missouri officer to follow him; they arrested him on June 5 at Bear Creek, twenty-eight miles south of Nauvoo. Smith returned with his escorts to Quincy, obtained a writ of habeas corpus, and agreed to a hearing on the governor's order before circuit court judge Stephen A. Douglas in his regular court at Monmouth three days later. Six attorneys defended the Prophet. They argued that the Missouri indictment had been obtained by fraud, bribery, and duress. Attorney O. H. Browning brought the courtroom to tears in recitals of the sufferings of women and children leaving "their bloody footmarks in the snow" as they fled under the Missouri expulsion order. Douglas declared that the arrest warrant had become invalid when it was returned to Carlin the previous September.31

A third attempt to transport Joseph Smith into Missouri followed an unsuccessful assassination attempt against Missouri's fifty-year-old former governor, Lilburn Boggs. About nine o'clock on the rainy evening of May 6, 1842, as Boggs sat reading the newspaper in his home in Independence, a blast of buckshot from the window hit him in the back of the head. He survived the attack. Citizens initially conjectured that one of his political enemies had instigated the attack. Boggs, a merchant in Independence, had completed a single term as governor in 1840. At the time of the shooting, he was fighting a bitter campaign for a seat in the state senate. Two weeks after the shooting, the Quincy Whig reported an unsubstantiated rumor that in 1841 Joseph Smith had prophesied that Boggs would die a violent death within a year. Certainly the Latter-day Saints held no good feelings for the man they blamed for their Missouri troubles.32 One of them had lamented "that a baser knave, a greater traitor, and a more whole-sale butcher or murder[er] of mankind never went untried, unpunished, and unhung."33

When rumors of the supposed prophecy appeared in public print in Quincy, Joseph Smith published a denial. He joined in the conjecture that Boggs had fallen "by the hand of a political opponent." Carlin nonetheless cautioned Smith that the public accepted the conspiracy theory because of "the repeated statements of a portion of your followers, that the manner of his [Boggs's] death had been revealed to you, and their exultation that it must needs be fulfilled." The governor did not expect any immediate threat of arrest or mob action against the Prophet. If he was pursued, Carlin advised, Smith's only recourse would be to "resort to the first Law of Nature, namely, to defend your own rights."34

Attention turned instead to Porter Rockwell, who had been visiting and working in Jackson County at the time of the Boggs shooting. Rockwell had taken his wife, Luana, to Independence in February to be with her parents until the birth of their fourth child. He worked as a stablehand under an assumed name to protect himself against the persisting hatred against his people. The baby was born in March. Immediately after the May 6 shooting, Rockwell left his wife to follow later and took a boat to St. Louis and from there to Nauvoo, arriving on Saturday, May 14. The following morning, a congregation gathered at the stand and heard Joseph Smith announce the rumored shooting. A writer in the Nauvoo Wasp calling himself "Vortex" responded to the news: "Boggs is undoubtedly killed according to report, but who did the noble deed remains to be found out."35

Shortly after the shooting, John C. Bennett had sounded out Governor Carlin in a brief note to see what his reaction might be to a rumored conspiracy to kidnap Joseph Smith and mob Nauvoo. The governor responded to a similar inquiry from the Prophet with a promise of protection for Nauvoo's citizens.36 Bennett's note said that he was inquiring on behalf of Smith; he may have been testing the waters for his own purposes. Recently removed from his church and civic offices in Nauvoo, Bennett had been discredited in the eyes of the Saints. In letters published in Springfield's Sangamo Journal, he was already busy implicating Rockwell in the shooting. Bennett claimed that Joseph Smith had given Rockwell fifty dollars and a new carriage for the deed. Actually, Rockwell was using a new wagon in a service he had set up to carry steamboat passengers around Nauvoo. The discredited Bennett also shared his inferences with Boggs. If Joseph Smith had not ordered the attack, Bennett believed, Rockwell might have pulled the trigger of his own accord. That prospect, kept alive ever since by the testimony of former church members and controversial writers, remains a question of conjecture.37 If Rockwell was innocent, as the best evidence suggests, his efforts to care for the needs of his pregnant wife had put him in the wrong place at the wrong time.

In July, Bennett turned up in St. Louis, where he again encouraged speculation that Joseph Smith had sponsored the shooting. He asked Governor Reynolds for a new warrant for the Prophet's arrest and promised, "Joe shall be delivered up."38 Prosecutors, meantime, turned their attention toward Nauvoo and Rockwell.

With rumors circulating of a new attempt to kidnap Joseph Smith, the Nauvoo city council responded on July 5 with the first of several ordinances written specifically to protect Smith, who had replaced Bennett as mayor. The new law required the Nauvoo municipal court to review all such cases. Furthermore, the council expanded the authority of the municipal court in connection with writs of habeas corpus to allow it to examine all outside arrest warrants.39 At the urging of Emma Smith and others, Governor Carlin reviewed the ordinance about habeas corpus and, in September, offered his opinion that it exceeded the scope of what was originally intended in Nauvoo's charter. Joseph Smith was entitled to a hearing in circuit court, Carlin informed Emma, "but to claim the right of a hearing before the municipal court of the city of Nauvoo is a burlesque upon the charter itself." Although Carlin's interpretation would ultimately prevail, not everyone agreed with this reading of the charter; many, including the city's own legal counsel, sustained the ordinance passed by the city council as proper.40

In July, Boggs filed an affidavit charging Rockwell with the shooting. Missouri governor Thomas Reynolds approved a request for extradition, and Illinois governor Thomas Carlin acquiesced. The deputy sheriff of Adams County and two assistants arrested Rockwell on August 8 and took Joseph Smith into custody as an accessory before the fact. The prisoners won freedom with a writ of habeas corpus issued by the municipal court of Nauvoo under the new city ordinance. With Hyrum Smith, as vice-mayor, presiding, the city council that afternoon passed another new ordinance. This one authorized the municipal court to discharge arrest warrants that it judged illegal or ill-founded including those issued "through private pique, malicious intent, or religious or other persecution, falsehood or misrepresentation" and to examine those deemed legal, including those issued by other states.41 This law exceeded the powers of the council and the very writ of habeas corpus. Taking no chances with any promised legal protection, Smith went into temporary hiding in Iowa. Rockwell headed east for refuge in Philadelphia. "He is an innocent and a noble boy," the Prophet wrote of his friend and longtime protector, "a fellow-wanderer with myself, an exile from his home. . . . May God Almighty deliver him from the hands of his pursuers."42

The question of the Prophet's guilt dragged on through the fall elections. In consultation with friends, he decided to remain in seclusion in private homes upriver until after the elections. During his exile of two months, Smith kept in touch with church and militia leaders through visitors and letters and even sat for an oil portrait by visiting New York artist David Rogers. Several times Emma visited her husband in company with trusted friends, and Joseph made quiet visits home. At one time, the Prophet seriously contemplated George Miller's invitation to seek refuge for six months at the Wisconsin pineries. He agreed to leave only if he could take Emma and the children. A dream and vision during the night of August 15, he told Emma, had warned him against going without her. "My safety is with you," he confided.43

After Thomas Ford took the oath of office as governor in December 1842, he sought an early solution for the Missouri extradition orders. Ford was a lawyer who had given up his seat on the state supreme court to enter politics. Not surprisingly, he recommended that the extradition order against Joseph Smith and Orrin Rockwell be tested in the state courts in Springfield. Justin Butterfield, United States attorney for Illinois and counsel for the Prophet, had written in October that the writ against Joseph Smith was illegal, because Smith was not in Missouri at the time of the attempted killing and hence could not have fled from Missouri. Butterfield believed that the court in Nauvoo could legally examine the warrant. This opinion convinced Joseph Smith to come out of hiding. It also raised doubts in Ford's mind about the legality of the Missouri request. At a January hearing, Judge Nathaniel Pope threw out the extradition order because of its vagueness and legal inadequacy.44

To celebrate Pope's declaration, the Prophet hosted a dinner party at the Mansion House for twenty-five couples, plus his mother and two boarders, Eliza Snow and Hannah Ells. The Twelve proclaimed a general "day of humiliation, fasting, praise, prayer, and thanksgiving." The bishops in Nauvoo organized assemblies in every ward for the Saints to hear firsthand about the proceedings at Springfield. At the dinner on January 18 (coincidentally, the fifteenth wedding anniversary for Joseph and Emma), the assemblage sang a "Jubilee Song" by Eliza Snow and one of similar title composed by Wilson Law and Willard Richards to pledge Mormon loyalty to a supportive Illinois.45

Even as the friends of the Prophet celebrated the justice of the law and the blessings of God, Joseph Smith shared knowledge of new plans afoot to extradite him to Missouri. The information was contained in a letter written by John C. Bennett to Sidney Rigdon and Orson Pratt. Though he himself had been estranged from the church during the previous year, Pratt wanted nothing to do with Bennett's plan to resurrect the original Missouri charges. He handed the letter to the Prophet. Joseph immediately informed his attorney, J. J. Butterfield, in Springfield, of the plans. The Prophet hoped Governor Ford would not cooperate in the new extradition effort. As it turned out, the arrest did not immediately transpire.46

In mid-June 1843, Joseph left Nauvoo with Emma and the children to visit her sister and her family near Dixon, in Lee County, Illinois. While there, two men masquerading as Latter-day Saint missionaries approached Smith. The men, Joseph H. Reynolds, sheriff of Jackson County, Missouri, and Harmon T. Wilson, a constable from Carthage, arrested Smith without presenting the warrant they carried. Their strategy was to whisk him into Missouri before he could secure legal help. In the scuffle, they severely bruised the Prophet's sides with the butts of their pistols. After the pair threatened Stephen Markham, Markham had the Lee County sheriff arrest Reynolds and Wilson on charges of threatening harm and for falsely imprisoning the Prophet under a void writ.47

Meanwhile, Joseph Smith hired several attorneys, including Cyrus Walker, a candidate for Congress, who agreed to represent him in return for the Prophet's vote in the fall election. The attorneys secured a writ of habeas corpus returnable before Judge John D. Caton at the ninth judicial circuit court at Ottawa, Illinois. On June 24, the party headed north. At Pawpaw Grove, they learned that the judge was away, so they secured a new writ in Dixon valid in the court of Judge Stephen A. Douglas, some 260 miles distant in Quincy. Before heading by stage toward Quincy, the Prophet sent Markham to Nauvoo to dispatch part of the Nauvoo Legion to meet him at Monmouth. As the Prophet's party moved south toward Quincy, Reynolds and Wilson tried to convince them to take a steamboat at Rock River. Friends of Smith had already learned that a group of Missourians were waiting there to spirit him across the river. The two lawmen now feared for their own lives. "We will never go by Nauvoo alive," Reynolds and Wilson complained. As the party neared Nauvoo, sixty men met them, the first of two groups of mounted horsemen from the Nauvoo Legion. A third Mormon posse, aboard the Maid of Iowa, was heading up the Illinois River toward Ottawa, but after getting word of the change in plans, they headed back towards Quincy.48

Joseph Smith now convinced his counsel that Nauvoo was the closest place to hear the writs, and the Prophet's group headed for the Mormon city. As the party proceeded westward, it grew to a hundred men. Just before noon on June 30, with their bridles decorated with wildflowers from the prairie at Big Mound, they met a welcome party a mile east of the temple. Following a tearful reunion with Emma and Hyrum, Joseph mounted his favorite horse, "Old Charley," and as the band played "Hail Columbia," rode into town, with Emma riding at his side and a string of carriages following. Citizens lining the streets shouted a welcome. Legionnaires sounded guns and cannon. Joseph invited Reynolds and Wilson to join a party of fifty friends for dinner at the Mansion House. Afterwards, the two lawmen fled to Carthage, where they petitioned Governor Ford for help in retaking Smith. The municipal court in Nauvoo heard various witnesses and, as anticipated, released the Prophet from his captors. The governor launched a private investigation and then denied Wilson's and Reynolds's request for a posse.49

The success in obtaining Joseph Smith's release reinforced attitudes in Nauvoo against those behind the extradition attempts. On June 30, feeling the strength of his position as a freed man once again, the Prophet stood before a congregation of thousands at the meeting place near the temple to declare his intent. "Before I will be dragged again away among my enemies for trial," he said, "I will spill the last drop of blood in my veins; and I will see all my enemies in hell. To bear it any longer would be a sin, and I will not bear it any longer."50

Speaking as mayor on behalf of the city, Smith denounced anyone who believed that the Nauvoo charter lacked the same authority held by other governments city, state, and national. "I wish you to know and publish that we have all power," he declared.51

The United States gave unto Illinois her constitution and charter, and Illinois gave unto Nauvoo her charters, which have ceded unto us our vested rights and [she] has no right or power to take them from us. All the power there was in Illinois she gave to Nauvoo; and any man that says to the contrary is a fool.52

The municipal court has all the power to issue and determine writs of habeas corpus within the limits of this city that the legislature can confer. This city has all the power that the state courts have, and was given by the same authority the legislature.53

This argument of a hierarchical granting of authority ignored the limitations placed upon Nauvoo's municipal government and courts by the state legislature. Nevertheless, the claim rang true in a pre-Civil War environment. Law was fluid and precedent not yet well established in the new nation. At issue was the right of the Nauvoo court to intervene in cases initiated by authority beyond its own. In campaign statements, the two candidates for Congress, Cyrus Walker and Joseph P. Hoge, agreed that the city court had the power to hear a state case. The judicial-minded Thomas Ford rebuked them for this interpretation and for politicizing the issue in an attempt to win Mormon votes. Yet legal precedent supported the Latter-day Saint view. A number of courts had ruled that municipal courts could issue a writ of habeas corpus in such instances. It was not until 1859 that the U.S. Supreme Court shifted the balance toward federal jurisdiction and limited the power of habeas corpus in federal cases to federal courts.54

John Wentworth's Chicago Democrat offered another perspective on the harassment of General Smith. This action, the paper said, "has made him many friends and created almost universal sympathy. Persecution or oppression always helps the cause of the persecuted or oppressed, whether their cause is right or wrong." The Nauvoo Neighbor reported simply, "Joseph Smith is at Nauvoo in peace, quietly pursuing his own business."55

Part of that business was to secure additional defensive city ordinances as protections against future extradition attempts. Joseph Smith distrusted professors of jurisprudence, as he did professors of religion, but he used the law to serve the ends of the Eternal. Most controversial of the new edicts was the "Extra Ordinance for the Extra Case of Joseph Smith and Others" enacted on December 8, 1843. It authorized the municipal court to try anyone attempting to serve on Smith any writ related to the Missouri problems and imposed a stiff penalty. This ordinance revealed the frustration felt by many in Nauvoo with the seemingly endless legal challenges thrown against their leader. It reflected as well a confidence in the city court's authority that was not shared by Joseph Smith's opponents. Section 17 of the Nauvoo charter, opponents argued, gave the court limited authority, or as it stated, "power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases arising under the ordinances of the City Council."56

A second ordinance passed on December 21 specifically allowed the municipal court to intervene when someone attempted to search or seize property or persons in Nauvoo using legal papers executed outside the jurisdiction of the municipal court of Nauvoo. This law expanded the court's geographical reach beyond the authority given it under the July 5, 1842, habeas corpus ordinance.57 Because of the fuss created by the laws, on February 12, 1844, city officials repealed both of them.58 Even so, the justices in Nauvoo were not deterred from intervening when they deemed it appropriate.59

In response to the legal maneuvering in Nauvoo, a citizens' meeting in Hancock County in September 1843 complained to Governor Ford about the apparent ease with which Smith had won release from extradition charges. He was freed, they noted, by appearing before a court in the city where he served as mayor and chief justice as well as the dominant religious leader. The convention asked Ford to amend or repeal the Nauvoo charter, disarm the Nauvoo Legion, activate a state militia to arrest Joseph Smith, and repeal offending Nauvoo ordinances. The Carthage gathering set up a central corresponding committee with agents in eleven other towns. They urged creation of an independent defense force and pledged to support Missouri's governor in returning Joseph Smith for trial. Governor Ford informed Governor Reynolds that the courts had ended the matter and that he planned no further action.60

When the Hancock County committee persisted, the governor replied on January 29, 1844, that he had no power to intervene in the ways they had requested. He added with irony that intelligent students of the law should know better. "If there is any thing wrong in the Nauvoo charters, or in the mode of administering them," he chided, "you will see that nothing short of legislative or judicial power is capable of enforcing a remedy." Ford had raised the question of repeal with the most recent legislature, but neither political party had been willing to act. It was politics as usual, the governor concluded. Warning against extremism on either side, he cautioned, "my interference will be against those who shall be the first transgressors."61

Both the Warsaw Signal and the Times and Seasons published Ford's reply to the resolutions of the citizens' meeting. Thomas Sharp, speaking for the critics, intimated that Ford had sided with the Mormons. John Taylor, editor of the Nauvoo paper, praised the governor's reply and urged both sides to respond with Christian benevolence. "Wise men ought to have understanding enough to conquer men with kindness," he editorialized. "The Governor has told you what to do: now do it." Taylor concluded that if the unhappy Hancock County citizens would let "reason, liberty, law, light, and philanthropy" guide their actions, the region would enjoy "peace, prosperity, and happiness," and "future generations as well as the present one, will call Governor Ford a peace maker. . . . Our motto then, is, peace with all."62

While the Prophet had been extricating himself from his difficulties, his friend Porter Rockwell faced his own legal challenges. Wearied by his unsuccessful attempts to find employment in the East, Rockwell had returned to St. Louis in March 1843 only to face immediate arrest. Shackled and in leg irons, he was transported by stage to Independence and held for trial. Rockwell succeeded in one short-lived jailbreak in May and then waited for an August hearing, chained in a basement dungeon. The grand jury refused to indict him on the Boggs shooting. Instead, it returned charges of escaping from the jail. With attorney Alexander Doniphan's help, Rockwell's trial before Judge Austin A. King in October won for him a welcome release in December, after nine months in jail. Rockwell paid the attorney fees with a hundred dollars that Joseph Smith had collected from temple construction workers and sent to Independence with Rockwell's mother.

The long confinement left Rockwell gaunt and bearded. After an arduous trek mostly on foot across Missouri, he reached Nauvoo. It was Christmas day. Guards refused him entrance to the Mansion House, where fifty couples were dining and dancing at the invitation of a fully uniformed Lieutenant General Joseph Smith. The general, surprised to learn the intruder's identity, turned the holiday festivities into a celebration of Rockwell's freedom. It was at this reunion, according to some reports, that Joseph supposedly promised his trusted friend safety from all future enemies if he would never again cut his shoulder-length hair.63

A different kind of petition to solve the problems between the Saints and their Missouri detractors surfaced about this time. On December 21, 1843, the city council, aldermen, and mayor joined in an appeal to the United States Congress. Like the earlier petitions for redress, this document reviewed the successive expulsions from various lands in Missouri and proposed a solution to the Latter-day Saint appeal for redress and protection. "If Missouri goes unpunished, others will be greatly encouraged to follow her murderous examples." To prevent such occurrences, the council's memorial proposed enactment of a new ordinance granting to Nauvoo City certain powers similar to those of territories. This authority would be in addition to those held by Nauvoo under the Illinois charter and would remain in effect until Missouri restored the vacated property and paid for damages for all losses. The single apparent purpose for the territorial designation was to extend Nauvoo's ability to protect itself against physical threats "to repel the invasion of mobs, keep the public peace, and protect the innocent from the unhallowed ravages of lawless banditti that escape justice on the western frontier." Under the proposal, the mayor of Nauvoo would be empowered to call upon United States forces to join with the Nauvoo Legion in defending the Saints. The unusual ordinance made it mandatory for the United States Army to comply with such an order. It authorized federal pay for the Nauvoo Legion when it was involved in quelling mobs. It anticipated the possibility that other local militias might turn against the Latter-day Saint community or that vigilantes might masquerade as a militia. It was yet another action by Saints desperate to protect their rights and those of the Prophet Joseph Smith.64

This singular request did not directly propose separation of the city from the state of Illinois nor the creation of a territorial form of government. Its intent was to bring Nauvoo under federal protection by nationalizing its city militia and enhancing its corporate powers. Nauvoo would remain an incorporated city with a municipal form of government. The request argued, in an expansion of standard legal conceptions, that Congress could grant an enhanced authority under its constitutional powers to regulate federal territory and to protect the states against invasion and insurrection. The memorial reasoned that because the Saints in Missouri had lost land purchased from the United States government, Congress had the duty to protect them in their property rights. To accomplish this, the memorial proposed granting to Nauvoo "all the rights, powers, privileges, and immunities belonging to Territories," in addition to the powers of the city charter.65

A similar request drafted for the city council circulated elsewhere in Hancock County. Its proponents reasoned that if Congress could be convinced of widespread local support, perhaps the measure would be adopted. The attempt backfired. Its novel solution to the old Missouri problem merely reinforced perceptions of Nauvoo as an armed camp. It fed the political rhetoric that wrongly defined such militarism not as self-defense but as a threat to the peace of other residents. The anti-Mormon correspondence committees in eight communities met again and elected twenty-nine delegates to a convention in Carthage. These men became the active planners in the events that unfolded in succeeding weeks.66

Church-State Issues and Illinois Elections

During the decade when Nauvoo served as the world headquarters of the Latter-day Saints, the American Midwest was home to a population eager for involvement in politics. The region experienced rapid economic and population growth, with people converging on this cultural crossroads from all corners of the nation and from Europe. As Illinois Democrats consolidated various factions, they gradually came to dominate politics in the Prairie State, with strongholds around Chicago and the southern counties. The less-disciplined and minority Whigs held a narrow belt in central Illinois. The state was a proving ground for national issues, and many local candidates Abraham Lincoln and Stephen A. Douglas among them launched national careers from their politicized home state.67

Preoccupation over the control of patronage and appeals to the immigrant vote dominated political campaigns of the decade. Before the Latter-day Saints arrived in great numbers in Illinois, the state had put Democrat Thomas Carlin into the governor's seat with support from 90 percent of the immigrant vote. Whigs challenged the right of implied citizenship for the alien voters and won their case in the lower courts, but Carlin pushed through new laws in the 1840-41 legislature that gave all adult males the franchise after six months' residence. He added five justices to the state supreme court and appointed Democrats (among them Thomas Ford and Stephen Douglas) to all five new positions. This action ensured support for the new law. The church, initially all American-born but gradually becoming nearly one-fourth British immigrants, benefited from Democratic policy with this development. The Whigs of western Illinois were not pleased.68

In Hancock County, local and state actions quickly redirected party allegiances among the new arrivals. As an Illinois historian later observed, "From first to last the party rivalries of Whigs and Democrats had complicated the problem of the Mormon disorders."69 When the Saints arrived in Illinois, the two parties claimed nearly equal support in Hancock and Adams Counties. In this situation, neither party could win election without claiming at least half the Latter-day Saint votes. Nor could they risk losing traditional support.

Consistent with the 1835 "Declaration of Belief regarding Governments and Laws," church leaders in Illinois retained a party-neutral stance. They swung their support to candidates in one party and then another depending upon who was judged to be a friend of the church in defending its constitutional rights. In Ohio and Missouri, the Saints had supported Democrats. When that party was blamed for the expulsion, it appeared that Whigs offered relief. Quincy Democrats welcomed the exiles, but in the first elections, local Whigs won favor from Latter-day Saint settlers. Adams County Whigs generally retained Mormon support, but in Hancock County, church members gradually reoriented their loyalties to Democratic candidates. This move helped to recast Hancock County politics.

The Whigs sought Latter-day Saint support by playing on the newcomers' memory of their treatment by Democratic elected officials in Missouri. At the same time, they sought the non-Mormon vote by promising to seek repeal of Nauvoo's charter and thus end Joseph Smith's political power. To help weaken their political opposition, Whig candidates defined Illinois Democrats as Jack-Mormons whose friendliness with the Saints worked against the broader good. The Whigs hoped that this position would garner support from anti-Mormons who generally voted the Democratic ticket. The Democrats responded to this anti-Mormon rhetoric with a similar balancing act. Like the Whigs, they courted Mormon votes, counting in their favor the friendly reception the Quincy Democratic Association had given the Saints during the winter exodus from Missouri. At the same time, they tried to win the anti-Mormon vote in both parties with promises to repeal Nauvoo's corporate charter. No wonder Nauvoo voters increasingly ignored party labels and looked within the contending parties for individuals friendly to the Latter-day Saint desire for religious and civil freedom unhampered by harassment.

Joseph Smith's problems with extradition were part of local political debates. Extradition was both an effort from across the state border to settle old legal issues and a partisan attempt in Illinois to sway Hancock County voters in favor of the Whigs. An important force in the Whig use of the extradition issue was the excommunicated John C. Bennett. Whig newspapers helped create a negative image of Latter-day Saint leaders by publishing Bennett's religious exposé in their columns. Whig anti-Mormons hoped to define the church as an ominous threat to civil freedoms. Whig candidates promised that if elected they would solve this "problem" by repealing Nauvoo's charter.

Another argument used to incite anti-Mormon political sentiment accused the Latter-day Saints of fusing church and state. The Saints and their opponents agreed with the constitutional mandate that government should not support one religion over another. The Kirtland declaration agreed precisely with the American practice of voluntary membership and funding for churches. Nauvoo's city fathers showed their tolerance and support for American religious pluralism by legislating equal protection to persons of all religious persuasions.70 British converts in Nauvoo also supported American voluntarism. They had belonged to British reform churches that had rejected the common European pattern of a single, state-supported religion. Beyond the prohibition of an established religion, there persisted in Jacksonian America a feeling that religious bodies should not unduly interfere with the electoral or governing process. Men of the cloth could serve in public office, but when they used their religious influence among their followers to influence civil policy or the selection of officers, it became a matter of concern and raised fears that personal freedoms were being eroded.

The church-state issue emerged at Nauvoo in a number of ways. Most of them centered on the Nauvoo laws protecting Joseph Smith and the supposed ability of the Prophet to sway Latter-day Saint voters toward one candidate or another. If the church leader could put his own men into office, his opponents feared, what would stop him from influencing policy to the disadvantage of the minority? "If the Mormons wish to live in peace they must . . . cease from dictating who shall be our county officers," Thomas Sharp declared. The editor challenged Joseph Smith: "When you shall have ceased to control your people in temporal matters, and confine yourself exclusively to spiritual affairs, then you may talk of peace, but not till then."71 The divisive issues of ecclesiastic influence, real and imagined, surfaced in the Illinois state and local election campaigns of the early 1840s in ways similar to the questions raised about the operation of Nauvoo's municipal government. In both instances, the debate revolved around Joseph Smith's political influence as a religious leader.

In the Illinois elections beginning in 1840, candidates from both parties courted voters in Nauvoo and her satellite communities. With Latter-day Saint voters a majority in Hancock County, the "Mormon question" preempted partisan issues. Political divisions began to fall along the lines of religious affiliation. The Latter-day Saint desire for social unity sustained this realignment. "Political views and party distinctions, never should disturb the harmony of society," John Taylor said in 1844, "and when the whole truth comes before a virtuous people, we are willing to abide the issue." Not only did the Saints vote for the man rather than the party but they disliked partisanship itself because of its "spirit of division and contention."72 Had the Saints divided along individual party preferences, the question might have been resolved. But because they voted together for what they termed the good of the church, local politics in western Illinois was troubled by the presence of a misunderstood but influential religious community.73

The disruption of the old political order began immediately upon the arrival of the exiled Saints from Missouri. In 1839, Joseph Smith reprimanded Lyman Wight for denouncing Democratic anti-Mormonism in Missouri. Wight's criticism seemed to commit the Saints to Whig politics. The Prophet announced a position of political neutrality at the April 1840 conference, saying that "he did not wish to have any political influence, but wished the Saints to use their political franchise to the best of their knowledge." A majority of Latter-day Saints initially favored local Whig candidates. It had been the Whigs in the Illinois congressional delegation who had sponsored their petitions for redress in the Congress and a Democratic president who had declared his inability to help them. On the other hand, Democratic governor Carlin of Illinois had lent the Saints support. Whig state senator Sidney Little guided the Nauvoo charter through to enactment, with the support of Democrat Stephen Douglas, whose majority party ensured the measure's success. The Saints added nearly eight hundred votes to the Illinois electorate in the 1840 and 1841 elections over the 1838 balloting and gave two-thirds of those to the Whigs. The successful Whig congressional candidate John T. Stuart drew 481 of his 1,201 votes in Hancock County from the Nauvoo precinct. He received 70 percent of the county's vote, compared with a near-even split in surrounding counties. "We were distracted by the question of Mormon and Antimormon," a Carthage Whig observed, "or he would probably [have] got more." According to published rumors, Joseph Smith's disgust with Van Buren had turned him toward William Henry Harrison in the 1840 presidential election. In that contest, Latter-day Saint voters dropped one of Harrison's electors Abraham Lincoln because only one could go and Lincoln's name was last on the ballot.74

With the Mormon vote making the difference in Hancock County and with the Saints apparently firmly in the Whig camp, a number of the "old citizens" began worrying about their own political influence. Democrats especially exhibited jealousy over the new Latter-day Saint influence. One of them, William H. Roosevelt, urged his friends to line up behind an anti-Mormon ticket. They did so in a June 1841 citizens' meeting at Warsaw, where delegates were chosen to attend a countywide anti-Mormon convention. Organizers argued that when a religious denomination became a political body, citizens were bound to oppose such a concentration of political power. Not everyone agreed to abandon national party affiliations. As mentioned above, the Whig congressional third district nominee John T. Stuart won his seat in the state legislature with the support of church members. But Whigs opposed the immigrant vote, and many in Nauvoo continued to vote Democratic in the national ticket, particularly after Van Buren's departure from office.75

One Illinois politician most active in courting the Latter-day Saint vote was Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, a twenty-eight-year-old state supreme court justice who sought and won a seat in Congress in 1843. When Douglas visited Nauvoo in the spring of 1841 with Cyrus Walker, a Whig jurist from Macomb, Joseph Smith used the occasion to reinforce his nonpartisanship in politics. In a public gathering, the two visitors praised the citizens of Nauvoo for their industry in building the city. In turn, Smith commended the men in writing for their willingness to determine firsthand the character of the Saints rather than relying on biased gossip. He offered to support as friends those of any party who respected his religious rights and his use of habeas corpus. Douglas had discharged the Prophet in the Monmouth hearing in June 1841, a favor not soon forgotten. Orville H. Browning, soon to be the Whig candidate for the new fifth congressional district, ably represented Smith as an attorney in the case.76

In December, the Prophet spoke out, using his civic voice as Lieutenant General Smith. His published statement reflected the attitude prevalent in Nauvoo:

In the next canvass we shall be influenced by no party consideration . . . ; so the partizans in this county who expect to divide the friends of humanity and equal rights will find themselves mistaken we care not a fig for Whig or Democrat: they are both alike to us; but we shall go for our friends, our TRIED FRIENDS, and the cause of human liberty, which is the cause of God.

The Democrats had nominated Adam W. Snyder for governor in the 1842 campaign and John Moore for lieutenant governor. John C. Bennett claimed close friendship with Moore, as with Douglas, during his years in politics in Springfield. Bennett had applauded them all for supporting enactment of the Nauvoo charter. As chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee that year, Snyder had played a key role. "DOUGLASS is a Master Spirit, and his friends are our friends," General Smith continued. "SNYDER, and MOORE, are his friends they are ours. . . . We will never be justly charged with the sin of ingratitude they have served us, and we will serve them." General Smith explained his vote for Harrison in the previous election similarly as one of friendship. But Harrison, he said, was now dead (he served only a month before dying of pneumonia), and there was no reason to be always governed by his Whig friends.77

The Whig newspaper read this endorsement of the Democratic candidates with chagrin. They pointed out that Joseph Smith's effort to speak as a citizen rather than as a prophet by using his military title could not hide his claim to be a theodemocrat that is, both a believer in the divine rule of God in His church and kingdom and a supporter of democracy in civic life with his all-encompassing prophetic role primary.78 One Whig organ declared, "This is probably the first time that a public manifesto of this sort has been issued by a religious leader of this country. . . . We trust that all parties will see its dangerous tendency, and at once rebuke it." The Quincy Whig echoed the concern, arguing that "Mormons have a right to vote for Snyder and Moore, if they choose," but not "at the dictation of one man" who holds religious authority over them.79

The Whigs, divided by regional factions, had nominated former governor Joseph Duncan, a man previously uncommitted on the Mormon question. Yet, with Whig papers filled with John C. Bennett's lurid attacks on the church, Duncan avoided secular issues and made anti-Mormonism and the repeal of the Nauvoo charter the central issues of his campaign. The Saints, he reasoned, had already declared for his opponent, so he had nothing to lose among that "unimportant" segment of the electorate.80

Democratic gubernatorial candidate Adam Snyder died suddenly in May, and his party found a safe replacement candidate in the person of state supreme court justice Thomas Ford, who, like Duncan, was previously uncommitted on the Mormon question. The forty-two-year-old Ford had distinguished himself as a lawyer and as a court justice. Reared by a twice-widowed schoolteacher in St. Louis and then in Monroe County, Illinois, Ford had been imbued with the values of education and of public service; his eldest half-brother had served as Illinois attorney general.81 The nonpolitical Ford supported repeal or revision of the Nauvoo charter and advocated retirement of the state's heavy public debt. These positions offended Latter-day Saints and party leaders alike, yet he won the election and carried Hancock County 1,174 to 711. Whigs thought that this evidence of a solid Latter-day Saint vote for Ford proved the existence of a secret bargain between Democrats and Mormons, but no evidence exists to question Ford's sincerity in his anti-Mormon campaign. Latter-day Saint Democrats preferred the honest, moderate Democrat and heir to their friend Snyder over his single-issue opponent. The Mormon vote was inconsequential in the statewide election. Ford took office on December 2, 1842.82

While the state at large worried about a new governor, local politicians fought for power in county offices. In Nauvoo, Latter-day Saint candidates seemed at first to sanction the religious polarity emerging in local politics. Editor William Smith began in earnest in the spring of 1842 to spar with anti-Mormon spokesman Thomas Sharp, who had called for an independent candidate to unify county citizens against the Mormon vote. In reaction, a group of Latter-day Saints met on June 1, 1842, and selected a "union" slate. The convention nominated Dr. John F. Charles for state senate and Mark Aldrich of Warsaw and Orson Pratt for the house. For county offices, the candidates were Jacob B. Backenstos for sheriff, Sidney Rigdon for school commissioner, Hiram Kimball for county commissioner, and Daniel H. Wells for coroner. Only Pratt and Rigdon were Latter-day Saints at the time, but the others were friends of the church (Aldrich later joined the Anti-Mormon party).83

Rigdon, an active participant in the union ticket convention, soon withdrew from its sponsorship and stood as an independent candidate for state senate.84 He understood the political language needed to appeal to a mixed audience and to disabuse fears of religious influence. In a region where sovereignty was a state motto, he promised if elected to "bow with true loyalty to the will of the sovereign people." A public servant, he noted, cannot be "the representative of a large district and the servant of a faction in that district at the same time. . . . No man can serve two masters." His statement and that of John Harper, a non-Mormon state legislative candidate from outside Nauvoo, appeared together in the Wasp, where Harper deplored the deterioration of politics to a question of religious qualification. Harper was a farmer campaigning against the higher taxes needed for increased internal improvements. He said that he had happened in on the Carthage anti-Mormon convention and was appalled at the effort to recruit Whigs and Democrats alike under an anti-Mormon banner. He explained, "I believe we are a body politic, and that we should know no man as a religious man; but endeavor to know them as honest and capable men whose interest is with the people." The Mormon position exactly!85 In the end, these nonpartisan efforts failed. William Smith of Nauvoo was elected as a state representative on the Democratic ticket, and Thomas H. Owen, a non-Mormon from Carthage, got the second seat from the district.86

In 1843, the state held special congressional elections to fill offices in four new districts created by redistricting under the 1840 census. Hancock County joined the new sixth district, while Adams County went with the fifth. Because this boundary divided the Whig stronghold in west central Illinois, the Latter-day Saint vote became an issue in both regions. Whigs, who had pledged in 1842 to repeal the Nauvoo charter, debated the repeal issue in the 1842-43 session of the state assembly. Church leaders were astonished at the seriousness of the efforts. Proponents of a move to divide Hancock County approached Joseph Smith over that issue as well, and in January 1843, he announced his intention to withdraw from active involvement in politics. "I think it would be well for politicians to regulate their own affairs," he wrote. "I wish to be let alone, that I may attend strictly to the spiritual welfare of the Church."87

Later that summer, the Prophet's arrest at Dixon on the old Missouri charges brought him back into politics. Reassured by political friends that Governor Ford would not cooperate in a reported extradition effort, Joseph Smith had relaxed his vigil. The arrest under Ford's order came as a surprise. Smith had engaged as counsel Cyrus Walker, the Whig candidate for the sixth congressional district, who happened to be campaigning nearby. In exchange for his legal services, Joseph promised Walker his vote. The Whigs softened their anti-Mormon rhetoric. Was it just because one of their party members had the Prophet's vote? Or did they assume the entire Latter-day Saint vote was theirs? Democratic newspapers saw more to it. They speculated that John C. Bennett had planted Walker near Dixon and arranged the arrest as a ploy to win over the Mormon vote for the Whigs.

As the elections neared, both Walker and his Democratic opponent, Joseph P. Hoge, wooed voters in Nauvoo. Joseph Smith told an Independence Day crowd that his support of Walker was a personal commitment not binding upon them. He explained that the Saints had voted against Duncan because of his virulent anti-Mormon threats and in favor of Ford because of his friendliness. But Ford's recent support of the extradition attempts had caused Smith much trouble and expense, he said. His personal decision to support a Whig candidate was not sufficient reason for church members at large to flee from Ford's party. "With regard to elections," the Prophet explained, "some say we all vote together and vote as I say. But I never tell any man how to vote or who to vote for."88

As the election neared, John Taylor editorialized in the Nauvoo Neighbor (the successor to the Wasp) in favor of Democrat Hoge. The masthead of his paper, Nauvoo's secular voice to the outside world, heralded the motto "The Saints' Singularity is Union, Liberty, Charity." While claiming no right to dictate politics beyond the Mormon community, those within it understood that union meant not just doctrinal consistency among a gathered people but concord in political precepts as well.89 On August 5, two days before the vote, Hyrum Smith endorsed Hoge in the name of the Lord. The Prophet once again found it necessary to explain his own position. Repeating his stand of noninterference in personal decisions, he said again that his support for Walker was an individual commitment:

I have not come to tell you to vote this way, that way, or the other. . . . The Lord has not given me Revelation concerning politics. I have not asked the Lord for it. I am a third party [and] stand independent and alone. . . .Brother Hiram tells me this morning that he has had a testimony that it will be better for this people to vote for [H]oge; and I never knew Hiram say he ever had a revelation and it failed. . . . (Let God speak and all men hold their peace).

The Prophet reaffirmed his friendship for Governor Ford, despite an error "of the head and not of the heart" in granting the writ.90 This clear endorsement of ecclesiastical insight had its impact. On election day, the Saints in Nauvoo voted the Democratic ticket as a united community, guided by revelation. Their vote helped send Hoge to Congress.

These and subsequent elections solidified support among Latter-day Saints for the Democratic Party in Illinois. Looking back upon this development, which meant the effective end of Whig power in Mormon country, Thomas Ford reflected, "From this time forth, the Whigs generally, and a part of the Democrats, determined upon driving the Mormons out of the state; and everything connected with the Mormons became political. To this circumstance in part, is to be attributed the extreme difficulty ever afterwards of doing anything effectually in relation to the Mormon and anti-Mormon parties, by the executive government."91

The Latter-day Saint effort to protect their rights through block voting for their political friends so alienated the opposition that the division created the very problem the Saints had hoped to prevent. The citizens of western Illinois reacted against what they saw as untenable political and religious threats. In a religion that merged earthly and heavenly kingdoms, all attempts to publicly separate them failed, and the Saints themselves shared in both the causes and the consequences of that failure.92

NotesPart III. Challenges to the City Beautiful

Epigraph: John Taylor, discourse, July 6, 1845, in T&S 6 (January 20, 1846): 1100-1101.

NotesChapter 11. Patriots and Prophets

Epigraph: T&S 5 (July 15, 1844): 578 (HC 6:294).
