Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 12

A Renewed Search for Refuge

It is the best policy, both of Missouri and Illinois, to let them alone; for if they are drove farther west, they may set up an independent government, under which they can worship the Almighty as may suit their taste. Indeed, I would recommend to the Prophet to pull up stakes and take possession of the Oregon territory in his own right, and establish an independent empire. In one hundred years from this time, no nation on earth could conquer such a people. James Arlington Bennet, October 16, 1841

As to politics I care but little about the Presidential chair. I would not give half as much for the office as I would for the one I now hold. But as the world have used power of government to oppress and persecute us it is right for us to use it for the protection of our rights. . . . If I should be [elected] I would not say that your cause is just and I could not do any thing for you. Joseph Smith, March 7, 1844

A central objective of the Latter-day Saints during the Nauvoo years was to establish a refuge in western Illinois and eastern Iowa against the storm of controversy that had surrounded them in northwestern Missouri. Expelled from the lands they had intended to possess as an inheritance, they found a new place of peace along the Mississippi. For a short season, they left behind the issues that had emerged from religious and political misunderstanding and the resulting wall of alienation between competing societies. Then, as the spirit of benevolence toward the refugees wore off, similar tensions resurfaced in western Illinois. Political opponents struggling to maintain influence colored public opinion against the Nauvoo community through the partisan press. Businessmen watched with apprehension as the city's economic influence spread. Even attempts to share common values across political and religious boundaries through the fraternal brotherhood of Freemasonry led to misunderstandings and distrust.

Many of the misgivings between the Saints and their detractors centered in divergent attitudes toward Joseph Smith. Those outside the church misunderstood his prophetic calling. From their own secular perspective, they saw him only as a man of influence in the militia, city government, and economy of Nauvoo. In contrast, the Saints looked at him as a religious leader a wise counselor, an inspired teacher, a prophet of God. Such trust led a recent convert to pledge in 1842 "that she would go to the Rocky Mountains if Joseph said so."1 It happened that the Prophet was at that very time considering options for additional gathering places besides Nauvoo, including a refuge in the Rockies. Although Joseph Smith anticipated a geographical broadening of activities for the church, he was still trying through legal channels to recover abandoned property in Missouri. Close to his heart was the desire to do all he could to protect the God-given rights of all of his Heavenly Father's children.

By 1843, the Prophet had given a good deal of personal attention to the matter of righting wrongs against the Latter-day Saints. He had returned from a visit with President Martin Van Buren in 1840 discouraged that any public official in the United States, from the president on down, really had the will to defend a persecuted people's constitutional rights. As appeals for redress of the Missouri outrages failed, one after another, Joseph Smith concluded that only a righteous people acting in unison could achieve that goal of preserving constitutional guarantees. "We are republicans," he told an assembly in Nauvoo, "and we wish to have the people rule; but they must rule in righteousness. . . . I will have the voice of the people which is republican and as likely to be the voice of God."2 On another occasion in the early 1840s, he spoke prophetically of things yet in the future:

Our cry from the first has been for peace and we will continue pleading like the widow at the feet of the unjust judge, but we may plead at the feet of magistrates and at the feet of judges, at the feet of governors and at the feet of senators, and at the feet of Presidents for eight years [and] it will be of no avail. We shall find no favor in any of the courts of this government. . . .

We shall build the Zion of the Lord in peace until the servants of that Lord shall begin to lay the foundation of a watch tower3 and then . . . the enemy shall come as a thief in the night and scatter the servants abroad. . . . They will wake up the nations of the whole earth. Even this nation will be on the very verge of crumbling to pieces and tumbling to the ground, and when the constitution is upon the brink of ruin this people will be the staff up[on] which the nation shall lean and they shall bear the constitution away from the very verge of destruction.

These comments, reported by Martha Jane Knowlton Coray, go on to predict apostasy within the church with increased hatred directed toward the Prophet himself: "There are those now before me who will more furiously pursue me . . . and be more blood thirsty upon my track than ever were the Missouri mobbers."4

Until the end of his life, Joseph Smith continued to seek refuge for his people in whatever ways seemed likely to achieve his objective of softening attitudes toward the Latter-day Saints and resolving their grievances. He would encourage friendship among strangers within the Masonic fraternity, continue to plan for alternate gathering places, and even allow his name to be placed in contention as a candidate for the presidency of the United States.

Public Opposition and Misunderstandings

The concentration of Latter-day Saints and their devotion to Joseph Smith defined for outside observers the central issues of what came to be known as the Mormon question. Politicians in Hancock County feared Joseph Smith's political influence. The old settlers lived in a society of individuals who represented diverse backgrounds, religions, and political leanings. In contrast, the Latter-day Saints believed in divine guidance through a prophet. They accepted his counsel in all aspects of their lives. From a perspective outside the church, the cohesive Latter-day Saint community seemed closed and clannish, dominated by a charismatic leader who used his religious position to influence elections. Nauvoo's growth made the old settlers the new minority in Hancock County. They saw only one way to reverse the trend: challenge Joseph Smith's dominant political influence as a threat to American individualism and democracy.

The inability of the religious and secular communities of Hancock County to find a compatible middle ground led eventually to a repeat of the Missouri experience. Neither side intended that consequence at first. A St. Louis editor explained the dilemma:

It has always been and always will be the case that when a set of people come into a country and undertake to array themselves as a peculiar people, that very course of conduct arrayed the community against them. We do not desire to see any further outbreaks with the Mormons, and greatly prefer that they and the citizens who are their neighbors might live in peace.5

Much of the public opposition to the Latter-day Saints in western Illinois grew out of the rhetoric created by politicians and the political press. In attempting to shape voting patterns and realign loyalties, partisan opponents created a negative image of the Saints. The Anti-Mormon Party hoped that by defining the Saints as an undesirable group under the control of a religious despot, they could win votes from persons of all political persuasions. They attempted to isolate the Saints politically and even proposed geographical separation. Ultimately, the anti-Mormon campaign revolved around the question of whether a gathered people could live among others not of their faith who needed to interact with them in a common arena.

The leading anti-Mormon spokesperson was Thomas Sharp, editor of the Warsaw Signal from November 1840 to December 1842 and again beginning in February 1844.6 The Pennsylvania-born lawyer, age twenty-two when he arrived in Warsaw, proclaimed for his newspaper a nonpartisan stance but with Whig leanings. On the Mormon question, he pledged neutrality in doctrinal matters but promised "to oppose the concentration of political power in a religious body, or in the hands of a few individuals."7 Despite his pledge to avoid religious issues, Sharp soon began ridiculing Joseph Smith's translating ability and characterizing the Saints as fanatics or dupes. He further demeaned the Prophet's religious intentions by charging him with blasphemy, hypocrisy, and militarism in the name of religion.8 By echoing the charges of John C. Bennett and other excommunicated Mormons, the Warsaw newspaper became, in effect, a voice for opponents both outside and inside the church. Its editor echoed the parallel objectives of the two opposition groups those working to eliminate Joseph Smith's political influence and those challenging his ecclesiastical leadership.

In their political rhetoric, the anti-Mormons challenged Joseph Smith's so-called authoritarian rule in Nauvoo. They vowed to abolish it and targeted repeal of the city charter as the means to do so. American citizens remembered with deep feeling the still-recent war of independence. Their parents and grandparents had fought to end the abuse of political authority. The anti-Mormon press echoed these anti-authoritarian arguments in their attack on the Latter-day Saints.9

Thomas Sharp launched his campaign in January 1841 after he read a First Presidency proclamation encouraging all of the Saints to move to the Nauvoo area. The Mormon gathering, Sharp contended, was a political threat to Hancock County: "What may be the result it is impossible to divine, . . . but now that their members are concentrating they begin to assume, at least in this state, a political and moral importance possessed by no other denomination." The editor argued that through the call to gather, church leaders were using moral power for political ends.10

With this introduction, the campaign against Latter-day Saint political dominance revived at each annual election and continued as an undercurrent in between. It reached a climax in the early months of 1844, when Sharp repeatedly claimed that Joseph Smith was misusing political power, both as mayor and as a justice in Nauvoo.11 Sharp contended that the authority of Nauvoo's charter was being applied in ways not found in other chartered Illinois cities. He echoed the old Missouri charges of lawlessness among the Latter-day Saints, including acts of theft and counterfeiting. Additionally, he attempted to create an image of the Saints as gullible religionists misled by scheming leaders. "The Mormons have control of our elections," he wrote, "and while they see proper to obey the dictates of one man in political matters, what necessity is there for old citizens going to the polls? . . . Is it possible that [with] this state of things . . . there can be peace?"12 His aggressiveness in these journalistic challenges to Nauvoo's political legitimacy and dominance reflected the frustration of a minority political party unable to win any county elections after 1841.13

The Anti-Mormon Party had a term to describe Hancock County residents friendly to the Latter-day Saints. According to Sharp, who often used the term, they "are called Jack Mormons, because like the Jackass in the fable, although covered with the skin of a lion, the length of their ears discloses their real character."14 These allies of the Mormon attempt to ensure liberty and rights for all preferred to call themselves "law-and-order" citizens.

Because of the way newspapers borrowed from one another's reports, Sharp's influence extended beyond Hancock County.15 Other nearby Whig papers echoed the Signal's political arguments. Reports copied verbatim in St. Louis newspapers spread across the United States and into Great Britain. One unnamed Englishman, confused by competing arguments, sailed to Nauvoo to find the truth for himself. He concluded that the Latter-day Saints were a sincere, religious people who had been wronged in Missouri. "Let the Mormons alone," he advised Illinois citizens:

Let them be protected; let their rights and privileges be preserved unto them sacred, and they will soon become a great and a mighty people, and the governor who received them from the lawless Missourians will be held in everlasting remembrance.16

Illinois elected a new governor just as discussions over Nauvoo's city charter intensified. Anti-Mormons had seen to it that their proposal to repeal the charter received frequent serious attention. They were able to galvanize support for repeal from both gubernatorial candidates because of widespread dissatisfaction with governments in chartered Illinois cities. In a lengthy December 1842 inaugural address, Governor Thomas Ford briefly mentioned these efforts and promised to support amendments to make chartered cities closer in authority to incorporated towns.17

The governor's comments set off a reaction centered on Nauvoo. One representative proposed the outright repeal of the Nauvoo charter; others argued for the undoing of charters in all Illinois cities. Representative William Smith, the Prophet's brother, turned this last approach to the Saints' favor, noting that the Nauvoo charter granted no greater powers than did the charters of five other cities. After many delays, a House vote was called. A majority of the Whigs sided with Democrats in a 6 to 43 tally to defeat repeal. The state Senate voted 22 to 13 to table a similar repeal measure. Springfield's State Register commended Smith and his colleagues for their success but urged amendments to the controversial charter. Legislators were not in the mood to ignore the question. Wading through knee-deep mud to get to the capitol building helped them understand why Springfield residents wanted to repeal their own city's charter on grounds that it allowed officials to mismanage local affairs. The House took the Register's suggestion and repealed portions of the Nauvoo charter on a 58 to 33 vote. Democrats in the Senate wanted to save the Mormon vote for the upcoming United States congressional race. By a single vote, they preserved the charter intact. Nauvoo's political voice, William Smith's Nauvoo Wasp, exulted that the legislature lacked the authority to repeal the city's charter, claiming that it had been granted "in perpetual succession." This phrase from the charter remained at the heart of later Latter-day Saint defenses of their protective self-government.18

The same legislative session considered another approach to easing political tensions in western Illinois. Opponents of the Mormon majority wanted to carve out a new county from southern Hancock and northern Adams Counties. That would leave Latter-day Saints free to dominate northern Hancock County. The plan required the Saints south of Warsaw in the Lima, Morley's Settlement, Green Plains, and Bear Creek areas to sell their farms. Advocates argued that separate counties would allow the secular community of the old settlers and the religious community of the Latter-day Saints to govern themselves in isolation. On February 3, the House Committee on Counties approved the creation of Marquette County. The House had the partisan votes to pass the measure; the Senate did not, and the measure failed.19

The repeal attempt surfaced again in 1844. This time Sharp shifted the issue to the misuse of municipal powers. The Nauvoo city council had just repealed two controversial laws one to protect Joseph Smith from arrest and seizure and another limiting the search and seizure of property and persons in Nauvoo.20 This action did not silence critics, but it did weaken their support. Efforts to dissolve Nauvoo's government would be revived again after Joseph Smith's death.

To win public backing for their attempt to cancel Nauvoo's charter, opponents attempted to discredit Latter-day Saints as a lawless people. Many in Hancock County believed these claims. The Warsaw newspaper encouraged old settlers in the countryside to report trends in support of its claim that theft had increased steadily since the Mormons arrived. A resident at St. Mary's described the people of Nauvoo as "nothing but a pack of robbers and murderers, thieves, liars, and counterfeiters. . . . We gentiles are almost afraid to go any ways near that way for fear of our lives. . . . This is a fine country if it was not for these latter-day brethren."21

Order was difficult to maintain in the new frontiers of settlement. Illinois in this period attracted thousands of hardworking homesteaders. Farmers, merchants, tradesmen, and various other honest workers contributed to the state's growth, but the fluidity of the frontier encouraged fly-by-night hustlers as well. The constant river traffic pushed a transient traveling public in and out of river ports and with them an underclass working outside the law. Nauvoo's weekly paper joined other Illinois newspapers in denouncing these lawbreakers, among them professional gamblers known as blacklegs. In his memoirs, Thomas Ford remembered that in some regions, dishonest residents packed juries and presented perjured witnesses to avoid conviction for their crimes. In all parts of northern Illinois, he said, there were "organized bands of rogues, engaged in murders, robberies, horse-stealing, and in making and passing counterfeit money."22

Ford was convinced that charges of lawlessness against the Latter-day Saints were exaggerated or fabricated. But Nauvoo was not without its problems, and the city's leaders acknowledged that transient outsiders weren't the only ones guilty of crime in the city. Law officers in Nauvoo dealt regularly with petty theft and instances of juvenile pranks. More serious were charges carried over from Missouri days that accused the church of sanctioning theft as a religious principle "one of the mysteries which the initiated only are acquainted with." The Missourians had misunderstood Mormon longings for a millennial world in which they would "inherit the earth." When the branch at Ramus excommunicated three men for larceny in December 1841, the Twelve issued a formal denouncement of thievery. Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith published similar statements denying reports of secretly sanctioned bands of robbers sent out to take property from Gentiles. To set the record straight, the Twelve recited church regulations from the Doctrine and Covenants against stealing. Because the Saints themselves had lost horses, cattle, and other property to gangs of roving robbers, the Twelve announced the creation of a city police force to protect property and enforce the law. Guilty Latter-day Saints, they added, "will be cut off from the church and handed over to the law of the land."23

Seventeen months after these firm denouncements, Hyrum Smith warned that some church members had become involved in groups reminiscent of the Gadianton robbers of the Book of Mormon. When Joseph Smith pleaded in the Wasp for help in exposing such activities, one man confessed his involvement to the Prophet's brother. "He revealed to me," Hyrum said

that there is a band of men . . . who are bound together by secret oaths, obligations, and penalties to keep the secret; and they hold that it is right to steal from any one who does not belong to the church, provided they consecrate two-thirds of it to the building of the Temple. They are also making bogus money. . . . I wish to warn you all not to be duped by such men, for they are the Gadianters of the last days.24

Those who thus confessed to such crimes faced justice through the civil courts.

The city fathers in Nauvoo established laws typical of the times to discourage abuses, and they set up police and a court system to handle problems. The statutes covered broad principles and specific problems to ensure the orderly society desired in all stable American communities. Some of the first ordinances passed by the city council supported the constitutional rights of religious freedom, peaceable assembly, and free discussion. The council issued business licenses to legitimize commerce and eliminate scams. Of particular concern in Nauvoo's competitive commercial environment was the regulation of wharfs and ferries. Laws governed the handling of vagrants and public nuisances. The city council frowned upon drunkenness, banned the sale of liquor-by-the-drink, and carefully regulated the social and medicinal use of spirituous liquors. Lawmakers outlawed brothels and licensed rooming houses. They regulated hawkers, peddlers, public shows, and exhibitions. Citizens could be fined for letting unruly dogs harass residents or livestock, but harmless dogs could roam at will, as could cows, calves, sheep, and goats. (Residents generally fenced in their gardens and crops against wandering livestock.) The city established minimum ages for marrying boys at seventeen and girls at fourteen, with their parents' consent (thresholds typical for the times).25

With these and other efforts to ensure domestic tranquility, it could not be said of Nauvoo that it was lawless or that it tolerated lawlessness. Opponents of Nauvoo's political strength sought to influence public opinion by dwelling upon exceptions to the general rule of law and order in the City of Peace.

Less was said in the anti-Mormon press about fears of the growing economic influence of Latter-day Saint businessmen, who competed with their neighbors for local markets. Nauvoo's potential for becoming a regional economic center especially challenged the Warsaw economy. Both towns served the river trade, and both offered shippers and travelers such services as firewood for steam engines and board and room for overnight guests. It was difficult in a nation built on economic competition to politicize this process; perhaps for that reason little was said openly of Nauvoo's emerging economy and its potential for overshadowing Warsaw. The most public issue was the confrontation over the proposed Latter-day Saint town of Warren, but merchants and millers in Warsaw noticed the effects when rural farmers shifted their trade toward Nauvoo.

One economic issue that did feed political debates was currency. Opponents of Joseph Smith's influence highlighted reports of counterfeiting in Nauvoo and charged the prophet-mayor with full responsibility. In addition, they criticized the issuance of legitimate paper money. As mayor, Smith shared accountability with the city council for issuing city scrip. City fathers had hoped to protect immigrants from worthless paper money and to stimulate business. Chicago also issued city scrip to help in depressed times. Because some citizens could not spot counterfeit paper money, and because many merchants refused city money, in March 1843 the city quit issuing new scrip and set stiff fines for counterfeiting. Existing notes remained valid for private debts, but the city accepted only gold and silver. These actions did not end the controversy, so in February 1844, the city dropped its hard currency requirement and invalidated all city scrip. To demonstrate his compliance, Joseph Smith burned eighty-one dollars' worth of his own paper money.26

More common than paper money, coins of various denominations and origins circulated freely in American society, including among the Saints in Illinois. The diversity of accepted coinage in circulation made counterfeiting easier. Counterfeiters stamped out coins from cheap metal and then coated them with a thin layer of silver or gold. Thomas Sharp wrongly accused Joseph Smith of being responsible for all bogus coins circulating in Hancock County.27 Sharp argued that the same Nauvoo ordinances that had protected Smith from outside legal harassment protected lawlessness. "The Nauvoo Bogus factories are in full blast, judging from the quantity of base and counterfeit coin in the city," Sharp charged. "Since the Mormons have learned they are safe as regards punishment by our laws, they seem bold in talking about their bogus operations."28

The actual counterfeiters sometimes claimed church sanction for their efforts, and some of them were Latter-day Saints. Sharp ferreted out examples in Warsaw in 1842 and in St. Louis two years later. In another instance, Hyrum Smith publicly denounced two boarders at his house for stealing and for making bogus money. The two tried to justify themselves by saying they had targeted only non-Mormons and were contributing generously to the church. Following their discovery, the men left Nauvoo for St. Louis. Nauvoo's March 1843 currency law set stiff penalties for bogus makers: dollar-for-dollar fines for the counterfeit money offered or passed, plus imprisonment at hard labor for up to fourteen years.29

With all the public discussion of the Mormon question, it is no wonder that individuals without independent knowledge of life in Nauvoo formed negative opinions of the community. The national press, reflecting the reports of hostile local editors, created a negative image of the Latter-day Saints believed by many readers. Offsetting this pattern were a few favorable critiques. One businessman visiting Nauvoo in May 1844 challenged the image created in the public press:

I came here expecting to see an idle, indolent, brawling, intemperate and licentious people: I found them on the contrary, industrious, enterprizing, orderly, temperate and chaste. I expected to see them superstitious, bigoted, fanatical and blind followers of a blinded prophet: I found them free from superstition, liberal, enthusiastic only in their desires to ameliorate the condition of mankind and convert them to the truth, and venerating their prophet to be sure, but no more than intelligent men should do, who [were] acquainted with his enlightened views, comprehensive knowledge and extended benevolence.

The businessman, who signed himself "Hospes," found a city of a few expensive homes dotting a landscape of well-kept cottages. "It is indeed a beautiful place," he wrote, "and viewed from the river makes a most splendid appearance." Hospes found no grogshops, no loafers or beggars, no drunkenness, and no evidence of the immorality alleged by John C. Bennett. He could not decide whether he was more impressed by the residents' "untiring zeal in the cause of their religion, or their determined perseverance in making the 'wilderness a fruitful field,' and building up a 'resting place where none can molest them and none can make them afraid.'"30 This report, while exaggerated in its absoluteness and suspect for its anonymity, was a welcome respite for a community seeking to be accepted and left alone to pursue their religious quest.

The Political Fallout of Freemasonry

Besides the problems created by hostile newspapers, Nauvoo's people had other social difficulties with political consequences. One of these was their involvement in Freemasonry. Accepted as an opportunity for expanding friendship networks, participation in Masonic activities led to unfortunate difficulties with other Illinois Masons. The fraternity's acceptance in America had undergone a challenge during the 1830s fueled by William Morgan's 1826 exposé of Masonic rituals in New York. His book polarized American attitudes and nurtured an anti-Masonic political movement. A decade later, when the Latter-day Saints moved out of Missouri, the furor had quieted. Masonic lodges in Illinois were rebuilding themselves, with lodges at Quincy and Springfield leading out.31

Among the Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo and across the river in Lee County, Iowa, opinion on the anti-Masonic issue varied. Some had earlier affiliated with lodges and remained supporters of Freemasonry. Most prominent of these was Hyrum Smith, who had joined the Mount Moriah Lodge at Palmyra, New York. Others with Masonic experience included John C. Bennett, John Smith (the Prophet's uncle), Heber C. Kimball, Newel K. Whitney, George Miller, and Lucius N. Scovil.32

A few Latter-day Saints had actively contested the movement, including William W. Phelps, who had published opposition newspapers in New York and helped form the state's anti-Masonic political party. Martin Harris, who did not join the Saints in Nauvoo, had been a member of an anti-Masonic vigilance committee in Palmyra. Other opponents were George W. Harris, expelled from the Batavia Lodge in New York for renouncing the fraternity, and Ebenezer Robinson, who became editor and publisher of the Times and Seasons.33

Two Illinois leaders during the period of Masonic rejuvenation in the 1840s played a central role in expanding Latter-day Saint involvement in Masonry. One of these was James Adams, probate judge in Sangamon County and a Latter-day Saint convert.34 The other was Abraham Jonas, a Kentucky transplant who headed the Columbus Lodge. Joseph Smith befriended Adams during a stopover in Springfield while en route to Washington, D.C.35 This friend of the church helped secure the Nauvoo charter, served as a trustee of the University of Nauvoo,36 and became half-owner of the Maid of Iowa.37 Appointed probate judge in Hancock County, Adams died of cholera in August 1843 just before a planned move to Nauvoo.38

With the encouragement of James Adams, in June 1841 Lucius N. Scovil and other Freemasons in Nauvoo submitted a request for a lodge. Proponents sought a required endorsement from the Bodley Lodge at Quincy, Illinois, the state's oldest group and the closest to Nauvoo. When Bodley's members declined,39 Abraham Jonas and his Columbus Lodge brethren stepped forward as sponsors.40

Joseph Smith was not directly involved in these requests but was well acquainted with the organization. He had grown up with Freemasons in his family and community and had lived through the anti-Masonic fury in New York. Through his Masonic friends, he would have understood that Freemasonry held values cherished by religious persons of every faith.41 Through ethical and moral obligations, Freemasonry aspired toward a universal brotherhood, justice, learning, and character development. Abraham Jonas, a Jew who spoke out against all religious persecution, emphasized Freemasonry's role "as a universal and social platform, upon which all good men . . . may meet on a ground of equality and brotherhood, irrespective of diversity and peculiarity of religious and political opinions."42

Some Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo who embraced Freemasonry and also participated in the temple endowment wondered about the relationship between the two ceremonies. An understanding of Masonic beginnings was one approach; however, historians of Freemasonry disagree about the origins of the Masonic order and its ritual. Organized Freemasonry likely began in medieval England, where craftsmen in the building trades organized guilds (later called lodges) to further their economic aims. By 1717, the order was essentially an educational self-improvement and benevolent association for men. The guilds used symbolism from their work as stonemasons. Over time, they adapted rituals and other ideas from Christianity and esoteric fraternities. Illinois Masons in the 1840s were among those who traced Freemasonry's past this way. Some adherents used this amalgam of ideas to claim a mythical origin with Solomon's temple, or even as far back as Adam.43

Latter-day Saints accepted the temple ceremony as a revelation from God to the Prophet Joseph Smith, who held the keys to the last gospel dispensation. The Lord had promised a restoration of "things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times." In addition, the Prophet taught in 1840 that all of the sacred ordinances and priesthood duties of past dispensations would again be present on the earth, "bringing to pass the restoration spoken of by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets."44

The Prophet told Benjamin F. Johnson that "freemasonry, as at present, is the apostate endowment, as sectarian religion is the apostate religion." Latter-day Saints came to believe that ancient priesthood rituals first revealed to Adam and to successive Old Testament prophets had been dispersed widely, with portions imperfectly preserved among ancient Egyptians, Coptic Christians, Freemasons, and Israelites, and in the liturgies of Christian churches. Participants in these groups often wore special clothing and used symbolic gestures and dramatizations along with specific instructions and covenants dealing with creation and stages of life.45

The nineteenth-century makeup, teachings, and objectives of Freemasonry differed substantially from the Latter-day Saint endowment. Beyond a few actions and words, which the two groups interpreted differently, resemblances were few. Imperfectly preserved in Freemasonry were an emphasis on morality, service, sacrifice, and consecration. As a fraternal society, Freemasonry looked to earthbound personal improvements through mutual pledges to others and promotions to ranks determined by grading and voting by fellow Masons. The endowment is distinctive in its emphasis on God-given priesthood authority, covenants tied to eternal blessings through Jesus Christ, and acknowledgment of the battle between good and evil. Only in the endowment are women full participants. Because of its focus on the eternities, the endowment is family oriented and offers opportunity for proxy ordinances for the dead. The Lord restored the ancient endowment in its purity for use in Latter-day Saint temples for its intended religious purposes of preparing God's children for eternal life.46

John C. Bennett first raised the question of parallels in his ill-informed exposé, but concern over the issue in the two quite different ceremonies was not a pressing issue in Nauvoo. For Heber C. Kimball and others, historical dispersion explained occasional resemblances between Freemasonry and "the real thing." Said Kimball, "There is a similarity of Priesthood in Masonry. Brother Joseph says Masonry was taken from Priesthood, but has become degenerated." Joseph Fielding agreed with this explanation. For him, it was beneficial to participate in Masonry because it fostered a brotherhood that could be perfected through the priesthood endowment. Latter-day Saints who listened to the Prophet's doctrinal expositions, studied the Bible for themselves, and absorbed the teachings contained in the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and book of Abraham found much more to enhance their appreciation of the endowment in these religious sources than in Freemasonry.47

Whatever the social opportunities in Freemasonry for the Saints in Nauvoo, it was the politician Abraham Jonas, not Joseph Smith, who had the better reasons to want a lodge there. The Prophet might have hoped for increased tolerance in the broader community because certification as a Mason vouched for a person's general moral character. Yet even with the need for influential friends outside the church, the Prophet could achieve his religious objectives without Freemasonry. Jonas, on the other hand, needed an expanded network of friends to accomplish his personal political objectives.48

One of those ambitions was a movement in 1840 to relocate the Adams County seat from Quincy to the more centrally located Columbus. Voters liked the idea, and Jonas launched his own newspaper, the Columbus Advocate, to strengthen support. In August 1841, citizens of Adams County approved the relocation proposal. A supportive voter in Columbus reported, "There was a great many people out, but the election was carried on very civilly."49 Despite the electorate's approval, the county commission took no action.50 Instead, they asked the legislature to create a new Marquette County in the eastern third of Adams County, with Columbus as its seat. The new county appeared on some Illinois maps, but because lawmakers had passed no enabling decree, it could not be organized.51

Defeated in his attempt to direct political opportunities home to Columbus, Jonas next reached out to a growing Latter-day Saint population to win friends in his bid for a seat in the state legislature. The request for a lodge in Nauvoo was already under consideration. Among its opponents were members of the Bodley Lodge at Quincy, whose members had opposed relocation of the county seat. Not only did this lodge oppose Jonas but it sought to embarrass him in his efforts to encourage Freemasonry in Nauvoo. In their own ways, and contrary to Masonic policy, Jonas and Masons in Quincy politicized Freemasonry by taking opposite positions on the Mormon question.52

Abraham Jonas ignored the application from Nauvoo at the annual meeting of the Grand Lodge. Instead, he exercised his right to act unilaterally, and on October 15, 1841, created a temporary lodge of Ancient York Masons and appointed its leaders. The lodge's initial membership of thirty-three was about the same number as in the lodges at Quincy and Springfield but larger than the state's other three active lodges in Jacksonville, Columbus, and Decatur. Eighteen master Masons met on December 29 to begin the work of the Nauvoo Lodge, U.D. (Under Dispensation a temporary status without charter). The new lodge accepted for consideration membership petitions from forty-one applicants, including Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon of the First Presidency and five members of the Twelve.53

Grand Master Abraham Jonas installed the Nauvoo Lodge at a meeting held in Hyrum Smith's office in Nauvoo on March 15, 1842. He authorized the new officers to move Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon through the three steps of the Blue Lodge ceremony "as speedily as the case will admit," without the usual twenty-eight-day waiting period for each step. This was an unusual but allowable procedure that made them master Masons.54 Upon his return to Columbus, Jonas published a report written to demonstrate his friendship toward his new colleagues. He denounced those who would persecute the Latter-day Saints. He praised the residents of Nauvoo as "a peaceable and law-abiding people." Jonas signed the piece only as "An Observer," but Mormon readers understood. They rewarded his friendly words with their votes and helped elect him in August to a single term in the state legislature.55 Joseph Smith encouraged his friend in his various public endeavors. "Success to freedom and peace," he wrote.56

Meanwhile, the Nauvoo Lodge met regularly to accept and move forward new members. By October 1842, the lodge counted 253 members. Both the pace of elevation and the number of candidates being accepted worried neighboring Masons. Even with the addition of six new Illinois lodges during 1842, the total of Masonic members in all lodges outside Nauvoo numbered only 227.57 Two additional units were formed in Nauvoo in 1843. They were named for Jonas's fraternal and political associates, Jonathan Nye, a past grand master of Vermont, and Dr. Meredith Helm, of Springfield, who succeeded Jonas as grand master of Illinois. Western Illinois Freemasons had reason to believe that Latter-day Saint men, who already dominated Hancock County elections, would soon control the fraternal association as well.58

Across the river in Iowa, a territory without a Grand Lodge, James Adams organized the Rising Sun Lodge at Montrose in August 1842. Within two months, the lodge had built a new blockhouse hall and won a charter from the Illinois Grand Lodge. Grand Master Meredith Helm authorized a second group at Keokuk, the Mormon-dominated Eagle Lodge. It was created in January 1843 by past Grand Master Jonathan Nye. With a total membership in the two states that eventually reached about fourteen hundred, Latter-day Saints soon controlled five Masonic lodges and were in a position to influence elections in the governing Illinois Grand Lodge.59

In a spirit of fraternal brotherhood, the Freemasons in Nauvoo invited colleagues at Quincy and Columbus to join in celebrating a Masonic holiday, St. John's Day, on June 27 and to participate in cornerstone ceremonies for a Masonic Hall planned for the three Nauvoo lodges. A building committee headed by Lucius N. Scovil had purchased a church-owned lot next to Scovil's bakery at a cost of twelve hundred dollars. More than one hundred members of the Nauvoo Lodge were joined by forty-three visiting Masons for the ceremonies. Hyrum Smith, worshipful master of the lodge, laid the cornerstone and hosted a dinner.60

The Bodley Lodge declined the invitation, citing lack of travel funds and complaining that Masonry in Nauvoo had been politicized and mixed with religion. Lodge members charged that Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon had been raised to master Mason improperly and for popular appeal and that Nauvoo's lodge membership increased faster than Masonic procedures allowed.61

These charges came forward during tense times for the church. It was during May 1843 that the wounding of former Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs led the Quincy newspaper to implicate Joseph Smith. That same month John C. Bennett resigned as Nauvoo's mayor and stood before Nauvoo's Masonic leaders in a tearful plea for forgiveness for his adulterous activities. Bennett denied hearsay that he had been expelled from the Pickaway Lodge in Ohio. Evidence in the Ohio lodge records later proved him correct.62 Bennett left Nauvoo and retaliated with charges against the Nauvoo Lodge.63

An Illinois Grand Lodge meeting in October 1842 determined that the infractions listed by Bennett and the Bodely Lodge were minor technicalities and that the records of the lodge were the best kept in the state. As newly elected Grand Master Meredith Helm put it, the problems in Nauvoo were "matters of the head not the heart" caused by inexperience in managing Masonic business.64

But Illinois Masons who saw themselves being quickly outnumbered listened to proposals from members of the Bodley Lodge who wanted to disband the five Mormon-dominated units. Helm posed the critical question before the annual meeting of the Illinois Masons in October 1843. Did they want to yield control to Latter-day Saints?65 They did not. With Nauvoo's supporters no longer in high places and through a complex web of interpersonal ambitions and conflicting goals the state organization suspended the charter of the Rising Sun Lodge and revoked the temporary dispensations given to the Nauvoo, Helm, Nye, and Keokuk (Eagle) lodges.66

The rejected units continued their activities informally for a time. In April 1844, more than 328 lodge members and 51 visitors attended dedication ceremonies for the elaborately furnished Nauvoo Masonic Hall. Six months later, the Illinois Grand Lodge permanently withdrew fellowship from all Latter-day Saint Masons as individuals. At the same time, these leaders condemned the assassination of Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith as a "source of shame to the commonwealth." On April 10, 1845, Brigham Young urged Lucius Scovil to suspend all Masonic activities in Nauvoo. Only a few more meetings were held prior to the western exodus.67

The broadened involvement of Latter-day Saints in Freemasonry had failed to yield either a spirit of unity within the brotherhood or lasting political advantage to any of its supporters. The anti-Mormon feeling in western Illinois and the politicization of its ranks by the organization's own members, rather than wrongdoing by the Nauvoo lodges, was the real cause of the simmering conflict within the fraternity.

Identifying a New Place of Refuge

For several years, Joseph Smith and his associates had been quietly exploring geographical solutions to the political tensions fueled by Nauvoo's growing population. They redoubled their efforts during 1842 and 1843. New pressures to relocate were prompted by Joseph Smith's arrest on the Missouri extradition writ, the expelled John C. Bennett's public disclosures about plural marriage, and growing political unrest.68

Any discussion of a gathering place necessarily included consideration of the status of Missouri's Zion. Millennial expectations led some Saints to consider Nauvoo a temporary way station en route to a soon-to-be redeemed Zion in Jackson County. Joseph Smith's authorizing the sale of Missouri lands in 1839 and seeking compensation for losses should have signaled an end to hopes for an immediate redemption of the Center Place. New revelations confirmed that in the long view Nauvoo did not replace Zion; instead, it operated as a cornerstone to Zion, a stake. Members were increasingly reminded that the Lord expected many stakes in every corner of America with Nauvoo just the first of many supplements to the original Missouri gathering place.69

For many years, the Prophet had anticipated the removal of at least some Latter-day Saints to a place of refuge in the American Far West. These plans grew out of missions among Native Americans, people the Latter-day Saints called "Lamanites," "the sons of Lemuel," or "the remnants of Jacob." From the early 1830s, the Saints had talked of establishing Zion among the remnants of Book of Mormon peoples between the Mississippi and the Rocky Mountains. This western territory was the "wilderness," where they believed the Indians expelled by the United States government from their lands in the East would blossom as a rose under the influence of the restored gospel.70

Because of misunderstandings in Missouri over the Indian mission, planning for a place of refuge among the Indians continued under the careful protection of confidentiality. In the early 1840s, Joseph Smith sent out several unannounced Indian proselytizing missionaries to prepare the way for a refuge in the West.71 During the last two years of his life, with the dual objective of converting Indians and protecting Latter-day Saints from persecution, the Prophet emphasized what came to be known as the Great Western Measure. He first dismantled all stakes outside the Nauvoo region in 1843 to concentrate energies on completing the temple. In April 1844, he promised that as soon as the temple was finished, the Saints could begin the long-range goal of filling up North and South America with Zion communities. Nauvoo would be the centrally located temple city to serve all those gathering places. Quietly during these years, Smith discussed confidential plans with trusted associates for exploring sites outside the United States as gathering places for the Saints and the remnants of Jacob.

Interest in the New West filled American newspapers in the 1840s and overlapped into public print and discourse in Nauvoo. American expansionists coveted the Mexican regions of Texas, New Mexico, and upper California and the contested British territory of Oregon. The press in Nauvoo followed with interest the tangled Oregon treaty negotiations between the United States and Great Britain from 1842 through 1846.72 As early as 1842, the Wasp published an article about California and the route leading to it. Even the religiously oriented Times and Seasons was not without news about the American West.73

The frontiers beyond the borders of the twenty-six states piqued the interest of all Americans in an age of migration and expansion. Supporters argued that the United States was destined to occupy the West to enlarge the horizons of democracy. Latter-day Saints also saw the West as a place of freedom especially as refuge from their own lost constitutional rights. As they fled from persecution and formed a righteous union with displaced Native Americans, the Saints would leave behind a country seen by many of them as ripe for God's judgment.

Joseph Smith's first step was to gather information about the West and to continue efforts to establish a base of friendship among Native Americans, in part through missionary visits. In May 1840, Jonathan Dunham set out for the Missouri River to meet with Indian chiefs near Fort Leavenworth, just upriver from Independence. Dunham, who identified himself as a Lamanite, had preached among Eastern Indians in the late 1830s. His missions aimed to help fulfill a Book of Mormon promise that its message would be shared with the descendants of pre-Columbian peoples of the Americas. After a few weeks in the western Indian Territory, Dunham returned to Nauvoo on his way east. At Kirtland, he stirred up concern among the Saints with talk of pending divine judgments upon the wicked in the United States. The Saints would find a place of safety, he said, "away towards the Rocky mountains."74

During the summer of 1842, plans for a Rocky Mountain refuge became known by some outside the leadership circles. In their intended place of refuge, one outsider noted, the Saints would "become a powerful people" in a society built upon harmony and faith. This contemporary written report reinforces the reminiscent accounts of other residents of Nauvoo who attested to similar knowledge of a plan at this early date for a colony in Mexican upper California.75

The following summer Dunham made another excursion into Indian country. This time, a six-week journey took him to the Missouri River settlements of the Pottawatomies near modern Omaha. The Indians sent a delegation back to Nauvoo with Dunham to seek a protective alliance. Lacking the authority of an Indian agent and recognizing the illegality of such a venture, the Prophet declined.76

Further discussions of the Great Western Measure resumed on February 20, 1844. In conversations with seven available members of the Twelve and a growing group of consultants over the next several days,77 Joseph Smith invited his friends to select a company to "investigate the locations of California and Oregon and find a good location where we can remove after the Temple is completed and build a city in a day and have a government of our own." The Prophet hoped this government in the West would protect the Saints against threats to life and religious practice.78

In a concluding discussion of the Oregon and California Exploring Expedition on the twenty-third of February, the council considered a route to encircle the Far West. From Independence, the explorers would follow the Santa Fe and Old Spanish Trails to the Pacific seaboard, travel up the coast to Fort Vancouver at the head of the Willamette Valley, and head eastward along the Oregon Trail. "Send twenty-five men. Let them preach the Gospel wherever they go," Joseph said.

Let that man go that can raise $500, a good horse and mule, a double barrel gun, one-barrel rifle, and the other smooth bore, a saddle and bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie-knife, and a good sabre. . . . I want every man that goes to be a king and a priest [i.e., endowed]. When he gets on the mountains he may want to talk with his God.

Within days, the Prophet had twenty volunteers ready to search out a new home for the Saints. Among the first to volunteer was Jonathan Dunham. As reported by Wilford Woodruff, Joseph Smith prophesied "that within five years we should be rid of our old enemies whether they were Apostates or of the world and wished us to record it that when it comes to pass we need not say we had forgotten the saying."79

On March 10, Joseph Smith met with a few church leaders to consider written proposals from Lyman Wight, George Miller, and others in the Wisconsin lumber camps delivered to Nauvoo by Miller. The lumbermen wanted to accompany several bands of friendly Indians at Black River Falls in a migration to the west Texas plains. Wight believed that these and other displaced tribes all the way from Green Bay to the Mexican Gulf were ready for conversion. Smith and his associates talked all afternoon and into the evening and then invited others to join a special committee or council the next morning. The twenty-three invitees accepted three related responsibilities. First, they would consider the Texas settlement proposal. Second, they would revisit attempts to gain compensation for Missouri property losses and prevent future harm. Finally, they would "secure a resting place in the mountains, or some uninhabited region, where we can enjoy the liberty of conscience guaranteed to us by the Constitution."80

The council formally organized on March 11 soon grew to a select body of about fifty trusted church and community leaders. Their combined practical experience was used to advise church leaders in temporal affairs. Known generally as the Council of Fifty, the group had other names used by its members, including the Special Council, the General Council, the Grand Council, the Kingdom of God, the Council of the Kingdom, and the Living Constitution. To protect itself against a misreading of its confidential discussions, this hand-picked body selected by church leaders operated out of public view.81

The creation of the Council of Fifty in 1844 as an advisory committee under the jurisdiction of the First Presidency and Twelve left Joseph Smith in his ecclesiastical role as president and prophet of the church. The spiritual focus of the church was on making ordinances of salvation available to all. Involvement in civil affairs thereafter sometimes involved the council, which was organized under a monarchical pattern with Joseph Smith as standing chairman over a cabinet of ministers. The council's civic role included interactions with states and nations to achieve the church's political and social objectives. The council looked forward to the time when a perfect government would exist on the earth, with the Lord reigning as king. In a simple way, the earthly political council symbolized that future, heaven-directed civil Kingdom of God on earth.82

In an 1842 editorial, not long after he received a revelation on the council's name and purpose, Joseph Smith explained both current and projected expectations of this advisory body. Moses, he said, had received God's word and shared it with Aaron,

who taught the people in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs; they were both one; there was no distinction; so will it be when the purposes of God shall be accomplished; when 'the Lord shall be king over the whole earth' and 'Jerusalem his throne.' . . . As God governed Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as families, and the children of Israel as a nation, so we, as a church, must be under his guidance if we are prospered, preserved, and sustained . . . and he alone must be our protector and safeguard, spiritually and temporally, or we fall.83

Two unresolved issues were the first assignments given to the Council of Fifty the failure to gain compensation for property losses in Missouri and the growing tensions over the gathering to Nauvoo. Answers for both were gravitating toward one solution: to disperse many of the Saints living in western Illinois to gathering places in Texas, Oregon, upper California, Wisconsin, or elsewhere perhaps to several locations.84 Many politicians and newspaper editors throughout the region were suggesting this same resolution. The Louisville Journal suggested somewhat sarcastically early in 1844 that to find peace the Saints must go beyond the Rockies, to the Oregon Territory, where they could help secure the territory for the United States by defeating the British trappers and subduing the Indians. Soon after organizing the Council of Fifty, the Prophet confidentially informed Governor Ford that he intended to defuse political tensions in Hancock County by relocating a large number of the Saints to a new place of refuge.85

The first question for consideration was the Wisconsin plan for establishing a Mormon-Indian settlement in the tablelands of the independent Republic of Texas. Acting quickly, the Council of the Kingdom sent Lucien Woodworth to negotiate with the republic's president, Sam Houston, for a major Latter-day Saint gathering place. Woodworth reported back in May with a preliminary agreement; it needed only the approval of the republic's congress. Texas had land available and was seeking colonists to reinforce its borders. The Saints would occupy a large, uninhabited region between the Nueces River and the Rio Grande. Even as the Latter-day Saint body reviewed Woodworth's report, a letter from Orson Hyde, the Council's delegate to Washington, was on its way to Nauvoo, warning of the risks against becoming a buffer state between a quarrelling Texas and Mexico. The colonizing proposal died with the Prophet's murder in June, and Brigham Young refused pleas from Woodworth and Miller to revive it.86

Redress and the 1844 Presidential Campaign

The Council of Fifty had been organized in part "for the purpose of consulting on the best manner of obtaining redress of grievances from our enemies." Already the petitions of 1839-40 and 1842 had failed to win federal compensation for the financial losses of the expulsion from Missouri. Joseph Smith's response to his futile visit with President Van Buren in 1840 had been to proclaim the government fallen and in need of redemption. It cannot "stand as it now is," Orson Pratt heard him say, "but will come so near desolation as to stand as it were by a single hair." The government's survival would require missionaries to gather a righteous army of Saints to America's promised land. "And this is the redemption of Zion when the saints shall have redeemed the government and reinstated it in all its purity and glory."87

Others continued the effort that Joseph Smith had personally set aside as futile. Four months before the Council of Fifty received the assignment, a flurry of political appeals brought similarly discouraging results. A public meeting in Nauvoo in November 1843 considered a memorial giving Congress two options: "Either redress our grievances or shield us from harm in our efforts to regain our lost property, which we fairly purchased from the General Government." The march of Zion's Camp to Missouri in 1834 had anticipated state government protection or assistance. This new proposal sought federal military escorts to shield a return to Zion if political options failed.88

Nauvoo's best minds set about pushing for a legislative solution first. Recognizing the need for broad public support, Joseph Smith set the example with an appeal to the "Green Mountain Boys" of his native Vermont, asking that they "by all honorable means help to bring Missouri to the bar of justice." When William W. Phelps read the eloquent appeal aloud to a November 29 meeting in Nauvoo, it elicited an impassioned response and was ordered printed for broader circulation. Several Missouri exiles vowed never again to restrain the Saints under such conditions but to allow them to fight back. Joseph Smith had expressed similar sentiments five months earlier. Now, frustrated by the states' rights argument used by federal officials, the Prophet encouraged others to implore their home states for support.89 The resulting written appeals typically asked friends to lobby with congressional delegates for passage of the Mormon reparation bill. One correspondent declared:

We believe that government has the power, amply and adequately to redress us. We expect it. We have the most inalienable right to expect it. . . . We intend to test the efficacy of the government to the core. . . . We can never forget the injuries done us in Missouri. They are ever present to our minds.90

Replies from the appeals were few and unsupportive. Not many people in the era of Jacksonian democracy expected the national government to involve itself in local matters; it was created to tend to the general welfare. Vermont's spokesmen answered in February 1844 with an attack on Joseph Smith's patriotism and his sincerity as a religious leader. They advised expulsion of the Saints and execution of their leader.91

The Prophet had endured the latest Missouri extradition challenges in June 1843, and then in early December, Missouri agents kidnapped two other Latter-day Saints, Daniel Avery and his son, Philander.92 A public meeting on December 7 petitioned Governor Ford for help. "Grant us peace," the citizens implored, "for we will have it." Without waiting for an answer, the city council passed its own law to protect Joseph Smith from further arrest.93 With the events of recent months fresh in mind, the municipal body suggested another way to protect against mob attack. It was in this context that on December 21, the city council sought territorial powers for the city and authority for Nauvoo's mayor to command United States Army troops.94 Like the others, this appeal to Congress failed. So did the spring 1844 submission of five thousand signatures on a fifty-foot scroll reiterating a plea for Washington's legislative support.

The frustration behind the winter talk by a few exiled Missouri Saints anxious to redeem their land by any means necessary soon subsided. New hope surfaced as the ice broke on the Mississippi and the river began rising in a sure sign of spring's arrival. In early March, Joseph Smith addressed "A Friendly Hint to Missouri," not to the state's officials, whom he had written off as corrupt, but to her people. He called for a grassroots effort "to petition your legislature to pay the damage the Saints have sustained in your State . . . or to restore them to their rights." Additionally, he invited Missourians to revise or repeal laws abhorrent to republican principles.95 Despite the Prophet's hope that an enlightened populace would speak up for citizens' rights, this entreaty also failed to bring action favorable to the Latter-day Saints.

Church leaders next enlisted the help of their special council for public affairs to plan proposals for protecting the Saints against extralegal action while they sought a new place of refuge. On March 31, 1844, Joseph Smith signed a memorial to Congress (and a similar request to President John Tyler) drafted by Willard Richards on behalf of the Council of Fifty. Like the city council's December 1843 appeal for expanded military authority, the emphasis in this memorial was upon military protection. This time, however, the mayor wanted congressional sanction to raise an independent army of one hundred thousand men. Its declared purpose: to protect American emigrants heading for Oregon and Texas and to support American territorial expansion. Texas had declared its independence from Mexico in 1836 and was seeking annexation to the United States; New Mexico and upper California remained under Mexican dominion. Oregon pioneers had organized a provisional government in 1843, even as the first large overland migration began. The Saints were offering their support for America's westward expansion.

Under the proposed legislation, Joseph Smith would be a commissioned officer in the United States Army, yet his troops would be totally unaffiliated with any government. The memorial explicitly forbade the army from entering land governed by other nations and from violating treaties with other nations. If followed, this would mean limiting the army to Oregon Territory and the Oregon Trail through unorganized Indian Territory.

The "Ordinance for the Protection of the Citizens of the United States Emigrating to the Territories, and for the Extension of the Principles of Universal Liberty" sought to prevent foreign control of the contested territories to open Oregon, upper California, New Mexico, and Texas to American settlers. The memorial promised as well new exploration and business. It supported the arts and sciences by proposing the collection of antiquities. In this last point, the memorial echoed the purposes of such government explorers as John C. Frémont, whose report of his first exploring expedition had been excerpted in the Nauvoo Neighbor in 1843.96

Orson Hyde carried the memorials to Washington, D.C., where he and Orson Pratt met with the Illinois delegation in late April. The congressmen were all "Oregon men" but feared that sending American troops there would upset the joint occupancy treaty with England, which Congress had refused to vacate. Hyde's insistence that the troops would all be volunteers and the army independent did not reassure them. Senator James Semple worried that the Nauvoo plan might imply an exclusive right for the Latter-day Saints to emigrate to Oregon. Hyde explained that the Saints only wished to shield themselves against armed clashes with Missourians along the way. "When we get into Oregon," said Hyde,

we will protect ourselves and all others who wish our protection. And after subduing a new country . . . we believe that the generosity of our government . . . will allow us a grant or territory of land, which will be both honorable to them and satisfactory to us.97

The Illinois lawmakers reaffirmed the Latter-day Saint right to emigrate to Oregon but told Hyde that a new law "would not prevent wicked men from shooting you down as they did in Missouri." In a private consultation with the two Latter-day Saints the following day, Senator Stephen A. Douglas encouraged them to move ahead without authorization. Within five years, he predicted, they would have their own independent Oregon commonwealth or a territorial government. He displayed a new map of Oregon and a report of Frémont's explorations along the Platte River as far as the Wind River Mountains and offered to mail a copy of the report to the Prophet.98

The deliberations left Hyde pessimistic. He judged Congress unwilling to act on principle, willing only to protect their own reelection. That evening he spent a cordial hour with President Tyler, a man Hyde described as "a very plain, homespun, familiar, farmer-like man."99 Tyler said nothing to change Hyde's assessment. "Congress," Hyde wrote home,

will pass no act in relation to Texas or Oregon at present. She is afraid of England, afraid of Mexico, afraid the Presidential election will be twisted by it. The members all appear like unskillful players at checkers afraid to move, for they see not which way to move advantageously.

He advised the Prophet to move quickly to claim desired land for settlement. "The most of the settlers in Oregon and Texas are our old enemies, the mobocrats of Missouri," he said. "If the Saints possess the kingdom I think they will have to take it; and the sooner it is done the more easily it is accomplished. Your superior wisdom must determine whether to go to Oregon, to Texas, or to remain within these United States" and send out missionaries to build up churches. He cautioned against expecting any government assistance. "Oregon is becoming a popular question: the fever of emigration begins to rage. If the Mormons become the early majority, others will not come; if the Mormons do not become the early majority, the others will not allow us to come."100 Hyde outlined a proposed seventeen-hundred-mile route from Nauvoo to Oregon's Umpqua and Klamath Valleys. Except for the trail beyond South Pass, it became the route followed by those who would leave Nauvoo in 1846.101

Democrat John Wentworth of Chicago attempted on May 25, 1844, to read the revised military ordinance before the House of Representatives. He was interrupted as soon as congressmen realized the memorial dealt with the Oregon question. Efforts by Wentworth to suspend the rules to move the bill directly to a committee of the whole failed on a 79 to 86 vote, and Joseph Smith's patriotic military memorial received no further attention in the nation's capital.102

Those who considered the failed military strategy understood it was more than just an offer to protect American interests and westward-marching American emigrants. The Army of the West was especially a plan to protect Latter-day Saint emigrants from their old antagonists. The request was evidence of plans to expand the gathering to new places of refuge in the disputed territories of Texas or Oregon or in Mexican upper California, identified vaguely in the proposal as "other lands contiguous to this nation."103 The possibility of a sanctuary in Texas was one of the issues that had led to the creation of the advisory Council of Fifty in March 1844.

While awaiting news about western expansion from Washington, the Prophet disclosed a new direction for Latter-day Saint gathering places. In a revelation announced at the April 1844 conference, he provided answers to Hyde's questions of western settlement options even before Hyde had written them. For all who wondered, the Prophet clarified the definition of the geographical Zion. Even if the Saints could not yet redeem their Center Place in Missouri, they would expand their settlement options on the promised land. That land included the whole of the western hemisphere, the entire continent of North and South America:

I have . . . a great, grand, and glorious revelation. . . . I will give you the first principles. . . . The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. . . .

I have received instructions from the Lord that from henceforth wherever the Elders of Israel shall build up churches and branches unto the Lord throughout the States, there shall be a stake of Zion. In the great cities, as Boston, New York, &c., there shall be stakes.104

The Prophet set a condition for the development of these new gathering places. The elders must first receive the temple ordinances as preparation for creating new stakes. The Nauvoo Temple ("the mountain of the Lord . . . in the center of the land") would remain the place for proxy ordinance work for the dead, he said. Members could either move to Nauvoo or visit the temple from other stakes when they wanted to do that work for themselves or their dead.105

Brigham Young and Hyrum Smith applauded the Prophet's public announcement with enthusiasm. For Young, the proclamation solved two pressing issues the anti-Mormon opposition to a regional gathering place and the desire of some Latter-day Saints to stay put in their own home states. "It was a perfect sweepstakes," Young declared. "It is a perfect knock-down to the devil's kingdom." Hyrum Smith, who had recently dismantled existing stakes, emphasized the need to complete the temple before authorizing new units. Even with the Saints in the United States remaining at home, he noted, the overseas gathering would continue. "North and South America are the symbols of the wings. The gathering from the old countries will always be to headquarters. . . . We will try and convert the nations into one solid union." The Prophet had said that his revelation dealt with "economy in the church." He was using the word in its theological sense, referring to the ecclesiastical administration of the world during a particular dispensation. Now, he had proclaimed, the church's divine destiny was to fill up North and South America with stakes.106 This settled an ongoing discussion, he said, "in relation to Zion where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is."107

To accomplish this far-reaching mission, Zion's people would need to live in a spirit of unity. The Council of Fifty had already announced its plans for accomplishing that objective. As a follow-up to the unsuccessful petitions for redress, the council had decided on a new political initiative to save the United States Constitution from the corrupt men who had failed to protect the Saints in their rights. Even as friendly appeals were going to Missouri and requests for a western army were headed east, the council launched a far-reaching effort to resolve the Mormon question and prepare a nation for its divine destiny as an incubator for an expanded Zion.

Once again, the strategy anticipated a grassroots appeal to American citizens. This time, rather than requesting legislative relief, Nauvoo's political advisors sought executive action. "Who shall be our next President?" the church paper had asked in October 1843, in a commentary on the forthcoming presidential election. The answer came four months later: Lieutenant General Joseph Smith. "If I ever get into the presidential chair," the Prophet responded to the small group that first nominated him, "I will protect the people in their rights and liberties."108 Hyrum echoed that objective in his conference talk the following April:

We engage in the election the same as in any other principle: you are to vote for good men. . . . Choose the good and refuse the evil. Men of false principles have preyed upon us like wolves upon helpless lambs. . . . Let every man use his liberties according to the Constitution. . . . We want a President of the U.S., not a party President, but a President of the whole people; for a party President disfranchises the opposite party. Have a President who will maintain every man in his rights.109

The Saints offered their own unity candidate to lead the nation only after dismissing as unacceptable the candidates of the two major parties. To learn how those men might deal with the Missouri redress issue, in November 1843 Joseph Smith wrote to John C. Calhoun, a no-party man, and Henry Clay, a Whig. Also receiving letters were Democrats Martin Van Buren; Van Buren's vice-president, Richard M. Johnson; and Lewis Cass. Only Calhoun and Clay replied. Calhoun, a states' rights sectionalist from South Carolina, pledged a nonpartisan stance but restated his earlier conclusion that the limited powers of the federal government gave it no jurisdiction in the Missouri case.110 The Whigs had already rejected John Tyler, the sitting president and a half-hearted Whig. They were encouraging former senator Henry Clay of Kentucky to make a third run for the presidency. Clay offered sympathy to the Saints for their "sufferings under injustice" and agreed that they "ought to enjoy the security and protection of the Constitution and the laws." But, he wrote in November 1843, "should I be a candidate, I can enter into no engagements, make no promises, give no pledge to any particular portion of the people of the United States."111 On another occasion, Clay had suggested removal to Oregon as the way to set things right.112 Martin Van Buren expected to become the standard-bearer for the Democrats after a term out of office (the convention later chose the little-known James K. Polk). The former president presented an easy decision for Nauvoo's leaders. They believed that it was morally untenable to vote for a man who had rejected their appeal for help in resolving the Missouri difficulties.

After examining the options, political strategists in Nauvoo had concluded that prospective candidates were ignoring the central issue. Where was a candidate who was willing to protect constitutional guarantees?113 This expectation was part of the church's 1835 "Declaration of Belief regarding Governments and Laws in General."114 The Saints had now exhausted the avenues of legal appeal prescribed by revelation.115 To regain and secure their civil rights, planners accepted the only remaining option short of leaving the matter to God: they would attempt to install in the White House a man "who has both the disposition and moral fortitude to administer justice."116 The elders of the church promised to step forward and help Lieutenant General Smith rescue the Constitution, whose very survival was threatened by elected officials unwilling to enforce it. At issue was the constitutional guarantee of federal protection against "domestic violence" and the "temporal salvation of the union."117

To accomplish this objective, organizers of the National Union Party needed broad national support. William W. Phelps, a frequent writer and political consultant for Joseph Smith, helped the independent candidate draft a consolidated position paper. Its purpose was to bring together various opinions and their proponents from all American political parties and to appeal to citizens at large. As a platform, General Smith's Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States addressed most of the issues that had captivated the nation since Andrew Jackson's party marched into Washington in 1828: increased political democracy, government corruption, economic problems, prison reform, care of the mentally ill, temperance, and education. From Jackson's inaugural speech, the document proudly quoted his patriotic endorsement of a government "administered for the good of the people, and . . . regulated by their will" to protect "the rights of person and property, liberty of conscience, and of the press."118 These were principles that motivated Joseph Smith in his decision to stand as a candidate.

Most important for Smith, his union platform championed intervention by the president of the United States when local governments failed to protect citizens in their civil rights. This was a direct challenge to the states' rights argument of Van Buren and many others (an issue resolved finally through the Fourteenth Amendment after the Civil War). In economic questions, General Smith's Views followed Whig conservatism by proposing reduced taxes and a downsized Congress. The economic plank echoed Henry Clay's "American System," a conservative plan to expand the economy through a tax-generating tariff and a self-sustaining, government-owned national bank. The Views supported prison reforms that would incarcerate only those guilty of capital crimes. Other felons would work off their sentences on highways or public works projects. In foreign affairs, General Smith supported the Democratic call for the annexation of Texas, Oregon, and any other region whose people petitioned for inclusion in the union.119

On the controversial question of slavery, the Prophet's platform sided with the Liberty Party's denunciation of slaveholding but added provisions for a fair compensation of slave owners. For many years, church leaders had justified slavery as a constitutionally protected property right. Along with most other Christians in America, they found New Testament support for the practice. The Saints had condemned both the inhumane mistreatment of slaves and the proposals of strident abolitionists for infringing on property rights.120 But beginning in 1842, the more open antislavery views of such advisors as Willard Richards and (for a time) John C. Bennett influenced public statements by church leaders toward a definite antislavery position. That stance came out clearly in candidate Smith's Views, which proposed a six-year plan to eliminate slavery through federal compensation.121

Initially, according to his backers, Joseph Smith declined to place his name in the ring as a presidential candidate. Willard Richards, who claimed the honor of being "the first to urge his nomination," said that Smith "very reluctantly acquiesced, . . . [and then] only to support a favorite maxim 'the people must govern.'" This sense of trust in the voice of the people was rooted in Mormon experience and scripture.122 The Prophet had expressed his willingness as early as February 1843 to lend his personal influence in political affairs: "From henceforth," he told temple construction crews, "I will maintain all the influence I can get. In relation to politics, I will speak as a man; but in relation to religion I will speak in authority."123 Rather than a religious crusade, he said, his candidacy was the action of a private citizen to contribute to the national welfare. That contribution, he said, would be to guarantee religious and civil rights to all American citizens by "maintaining the laws and Constitution of the United States."124

Willard Richards, John M. Bernhisel, Brigham Young, William W. Phelps, and other supporters insisted they had every confidence in their candidate's political potential for shoring up a weakened Constitution. While admitting that prejudice against him existed and would need correcting, they proclaimed, in Willard Richards's words, "General Smith is the greatest statesman of the 19th century. Then why should not the nation secure to themselves his superior talents?" They had a plan founded on principles of religious and civic freedom to get him elected by bringing about "a union of all honest men."125 After the April conference in Nauvoo, Richards noted, "our Elders will go forth by hundreds or thousands and search the land, preaching religion and politics; and if God goes with them, who can withstand their influence?" The sweep of campaign rhetoric, he believed, would move "with the rush of a whirlwind, so peaceful, so gentle, that it will not be felt by the nation till the battle is won."126

Many newspapers in western Illinois responded to news of Joseph Smith's candidacy with cautious optimism. The Springfield Register praised General Smith for his forthright endorsement of Whig planks supporting a United States bank and a protective tariff. Smith "ought to be regarded as the real Whig candidate for President," the paper said, "until Mr. Clay can so far recover from his shuffling and dodging as to declare his sentiments like a man." The Iowa Democrat reprinted a Times and Seasons article praising Smith's candidacy and the quality of his aides. The Democrat tentatively concluded that the team had a favorable chance at getting their candidate elected. The Quincy Herald chided the Quincy Whig, the New York Tribune, and other papers for publishing articles critical of the Saints. The Times and Seasons actively solicited favorable letters from supporters outside the church to endorse Smith's qualifications as a unity candidate, "a 'Western man with American principles'" whose election would make him "the President, not over a clique or a party, but the President over the whole people of the United States."127

After agreeing to run, General Smith joined in the wave of optimism about his chances for winning the election. "The Whigs are striving for a king under the garb of Democracy," he said of Clay's candidacy. "There is oratory enough in the Church to carry me into the Presidential chair the first slide." The campaign-missionary force would carry a two-headed message of religion and politics into every state. The delegates would, Smith said, "electioneer and make stump speeches, advocate the 'Mormon' religion, [the] purity of elections, and call upon the people to stand by the law and put down mobocracy."128

In April, the conference recruited 244 volunteer campaign missionaries; another ninety-four joined the campaign later. Organized into groups of two to forty-seven, they were assigned to twenty-six states and Wisconsin Territory and to contact free blacks. Two weeks later, the Twelve designated two-day general conferences to extend from May through mid-September, beginning in Quincy, Illinois, and to conclude with a nine-day event at Washington, D.C. The missionaries were instructed to preach the gospel, print and share General Smith's Views with all who would listen, and recruit electors willing to support their candidate. In a public meeting on April 23, campaign managers speculated that they could attract as many as five hundred thousand voters. Both major candidates in the 1840 election had received more than a million votes each, but the field of six prospects in mid-1844 had not yet been thinned to Polk and Clay.129

Those who went forth as campaigners probably did as much to strengthen the existing church as they did to garner votes for their candidates. The regional conferences included a good deal of preaching and some sharing of political tenets from General Smith's Views. Not all attempts to deliver their messages to the general populace went well for the campaigners, however. They found very few people interested in the restored gospel, but they reported many listeners receiving the political views favorably. In some locations, they were denied permission to rent halls and were pelted with old tobacco chews and other filth. In Chicago, Jacob Terry presented Joseph Smith's platform to workmen gathered at a lakeside wharf. "I commenced reading," he said. "They tore the document to pieces. I called for the marshall of the city but only received more abuse."130

In Nauvoo on May 17, the nascent organization now calling itself the National Reform Party held its first state convention. Delegates nominated their candidate and selected Sidney Rigdon, listed as a resident of Pennsylvania, as vice-presidential candidate. Rigdon had agreed to serve after James Arlington Bennet of New York was found ineligible because of his Irish birth and Solomon Copeland of Tennessee declined. The short-lived campaign to save the Constitution from corrupt politicians was underway.131

With the Prophet's encouragement, the Twelve joined in the campaign. If refuge could not be found in one state or another, perhaps a place of peace could be created encompassing an entire nation. On his campaign visit to the nation's capital, Heber C. Kimball was surprised that the city seemed so small, a place of only thirty thousand residents. Yet one feature attracted his attention. "The President's house is as large as the Temple or larger," he wrote, "built of hued stone that is surrounded with a large park decorated with trees of all kinds and flowers. I want to see our Prophet here in the chair of states, then we will come and see him. It looks like a paradise."132

At the same time, as Kimball realized, the Twelve were planning for an escape route beyond the United States. Characteristically, in these efforts the Latter-day Saint religious world view with its millennial overtones brought the spiritual and temporal into one. "The government belongs to God," Brigham Young told the April 1844 conference.

No man can draw the dividing line between the government of God and the government of the children of men. You can't touch the Gospel without infringing upon the common avocations of men. They may have helps and governments in the Church, but it is all one at last.133

A month later, Joseph Smith lamented the injustices wreaked by imperfect politicians and deficient governments. His immediate hope was to ensure constitutional rights for everyone. Long term, he awaited the ultimate refuge, the reign of justice of the Prince of Peace. The Prophet wrote, "I pray God, who hath given our fathers a promise of a perfect government in the last days, to purify the hearts of the people and hasten the welcome day."134

NotesChapter 12. A Renewed Search for Refuge

Epigraph: James Arlington Bennet, New York Herald, October 16, 1841 (HC 5:171); Joseph Smith, sermon, reported in Woodruff, Journals, 2:358, March 7, 1844 (Smith, Words, 326; compare February 8, Words, 320).
