Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 13

Foes Within: The Church of the Seceders

We would wish the Saints to understand that, when they come here they must not expect to find perfection, or that all will be harmony, peace, and love; . . . for here there are persons . . . who, although they feel a great attachment to the cause of truth, have their prejudices of education, and consequently it requires some time before these things can be overcome. Again, there are many that creep in unawares, and endeavor to sow discord, strife, and animosity in our midst, and by so doing, bring evil upon the Saints. These things we have to bear with. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Hyrum Smith, January 15, 1841

The Latter-day Saints in the Nauvoo era sought for a harmonious community. They wanted to replace partisanship and factionalism by agreeing on political candidates who would serve their common needs. At the same time, they sought unity on social and religious issues a shared wisdom on how best to live and thus win God's favor. In all of these realms, they sought a oneness of heart among themselves, much like the early Christians of the New Testament and the righteous peoples of the Book of Mormon.1

Within the church could be found members along a wide spectrum of belief, behavior, and commitment. The creation of a people of promise took personal effort and time by those striving to follow in Christ's way and by those called to teach and guide the religious society. In Nauvoo, the First Presidency counseled patience in the perfection of the human soul and advised, "Let those who come up to this place be determined to keep the commandments of God, and not be discouraged" by the weaknesses of others.2

One way to eliminate spiritual disunity was to withdraw fellowship from unrepentant sinners. On the other hand, to those who confessed and pledged to live a new life, church councils and leaders offered another chance through the healing power of the Savior. Parallel actions were available to deal with political, economic, and social disharmony. Withdrawing support was the ultimate judgment when cooperation and consultation failed. Following the apostasy and persecution in Kirtland and Missouri, the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired writings from Liberty Jail had enjoined members to use long-suffering, gentleness, and charity towards both friends and foes. His counsel encouraged Latter-day Saints during the Nauvoo years to exercise patience, to forgive the repentant sinner until seven times seventy, and to strive for consonance in all aspects of life.3

During the difficult years between 1842 and 1844, several Nauvoo residents struck such a strident tone of dissonance in their private and public behavior that decision makers could no longer tolerate the threat to harmony and righteousness in the gathered community. The temporal and spiritual unity of the Saints and the purity of the church was ensured in these instances only when the offending branch was cut off.4 Of Nauvoo's prominent citizens, John C. Bennett fell first, followed by others who challenged Joseph Smith's leadership. Among those who became the Prophet's foes within the church were William and Wilson Law, Chauncey L. and Francis M. Higbee, Robert D. Foster, and Charles Ivins. Though given every opportunity to leave the church privately and quietly, the dissidents turned instead against their ecclesiastical judges. They rejected the Prophet's teachings and held to ideas taught in Kirtland and canonized there in an early edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Many became public antagonists after their excommunications. Bennett fed the political effort; others organized an opposition newspaper and a reformed church. The hostility of these dissidents dismantled efforts by exiled Latter-day Saints to resolve property issues with old antagonists in Missouri. The apostates disrupted a sense of community in Illinois and challenged the oneness felt by most Latter-day Saints in their religious convictions. Ultimately, the open resistance of these few led to the legal crisis that ended in the murders of Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith. Within and without, the actions of the apostates challenged for a time the church's quest for sacred and secular unity.5

Reactions to Plural Marriage

At the heart of the internal challenge were a few dissidents who rejected the Prophet's teachings on the nature of the Godhead and of mankind's eternal potential. They saw an opportunity to challenge Joseph Smith's power in the church and community by disclosing the privately authorized doctrine and practice of plural marriage, one aspect of the revelation on eternal marriage. These apostates knew of the Lord's strict requirements of virtue as a qualification for eternal marriage. Those same obligations of establishing a committed relationship between husband and wife existed for plural marriages. Many of these individuals had been denied the sealing blessings because of immoral behavior. Having disqualified themselves through sin, they turned against the Lord's spokesman and His church.

Latter-day Saints were grounded in the traditional pattern a couple committed to each other after the example given by the Lord for Adam and Eve. The standard of one man and one wife was reinforced in the Book of Mormon when some men began straying into sin. Through pride and selfishness brought on when they began to seek worldly wealth, they began "to excuse themselves in committing whoredoms, because of the things which were written concerning David, and Solomon his son." Through His prophet, the Lord reminded them that only under His direction and for His purposes would plural marriage be sanctioned. "For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things."6

Joseph Smith's puzzlement over biblical references prompted him to seek understanding from the Lord. While working on what has become known as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (JST), he pondered the meaning of the Old Testament marriage practices described in Genesis. He also sought to better understand the Savior's comments to Sadducees that marriages contracted in this life without proper authority ended at death. Early in 1831, the Prophet asked the Lord for knowledge and was told how the marriage relationship could become eternal through sacred covenants made in this life.7 The revelation defined as well the exceptional conditions under which the Lord might direct a man to marry and care for an additional living wife. Joseph Smith was told that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had married additional wives in righteousness under the Lord's law of eternal increase, and so had David, Solomon, Moses, and many others. They were married by "prophets who had the keys of this power." David lost his exaltation, the Lord explained, "in the case of Uriah and his wife."8

After receiving his first clear understanding of these divine principles in 1831, the Prophet shared them with only a few in Ohio and Missouri. He told some in Kirtland that the marriage relationship could continue beyond the grave. The key was authority. Religious marriage ceremonies performed under divine sanction, he said, were more authentic and enduring than secular marriages. In Missouri during July 1831, the Prophet first explained what he had learned about plural marriage to a few associates. At some future time, he said, the Lord might direct marriages similar to those practiced in righteousness by the ancient patriarchs.9 One of those told of the teaching was Orson Pratt, who would be called in 1835 to the Quorum of the Twelve. "In the fore part of the year 1832," Pratt said, "Joseph told individuals, then in the church, that he had inquired of the Lord concerning the principle of plurality of wives, and he received for [an] answer that the principle of taking more wives than one is a true principle, but the time had not yet come for it to be practised."10

Although plural marriages were not approved initially for others, evidence suggests that before his incarceration at Liberty, Missouri, the Prophet accepted the Lord's direction and took his own first hesitant step as a signal of his obedience. His first plural wife was Fannie Alger. Her uncle Levi Hancock, an Ohio builder and furniture maker, performed the marriage, probably in 1835 when Fannie was nineteen, by repeating back words spoken by the Prophet.11 Reports of the Prophet taking a second plural wife while living in Far West in 1838 cannot be proved by the limited surviving evidence. It seems more likely that Joseph Smith did not take additional plural wives until the Lord commanded it in Nauvoo.12

Even the Prophet's hints of future possibilities created such tension that he shared little more with associates in Ohio and Missouri. In Kirtland, Oliver Cowdery knew of the revelation on marriage but was denied permission to take a plural wife. He proceeded anyway and engaged in an illicit relationship. As Joseph F. Smith later explained it, the Second Elder "abused the confidence imposed in him, and brought reproach upon himself, and thereby upon the church by 'running before he was sent,' and 'taking liberties without license,' so to speak."13 About this time, Oliver Cowdery helped counter speculation in Kirtland about plural marriage. In August 1835, he encouraged a general assembly there to adopt William W. Phelps's "Article on Marriage," which declared monogamy the only authorized Latter-day Saint marriage practice. This document, included in early editions of the Doctrine and Covenants, also defended the right of Latter-day Saint priesthood holders to perform marriages under the authority of civil law at a time when Ohio officials were denying them that right.14

According to a number of recollections, Joseph Smith postponed his own first involvement in plural marriage until commanded to do so by an angel. In a conversation with Lorenzo Snow in 1843, the Prophet spoke openly of the trial he had faced "in overcoming the repugnance of his feelings. . . . He knew the voice of God he knew the commandment of the Almighty to him was to go forward to set the example, and establish Celestial plural marriage." Joseph told Mary Lightner that "the angel came to me three times between the year of '34 and '42 and said I was to obey that principle or he would slay me." Joseph Smith's marriage to Fanny Alger in 1835 may have been a response to that first visit.15 It was probably on the third visit that the angel brandished a sword. Threatened with the loss of his priesthood and death if he failed to act, he then expanded his own involvement and, as commanded, established the practice among others in the church.16

Joseph's second plural marriage took place under an elm tree in Nauvoo on the evening of April 5, 1841. Joseph Bates Noble performed the marriage of his wife's sister, Louisa Beaman, to the Prophet. The twenty-six-year-old bride was the first of twenty-eight women married to Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, some as connubial wives, others sealed to him only for eternity. Most of these marriages took place in 1842 and 1843. After his death, other women were sealed to the Prophet at their request, a practice later prohibited.17 From the marriages consummated, family traditions identify three to five children born to Joseph Smith's plural wives. Because the Prophet's paternity was not openly acknowledged at the time, proof of the relationship for most of them is unclear.18

Soon after the Quorum of the Twelve returned from Great Britain in 1841, the apostles heard the new doctrine directly from the Prophet. Brigham Young remembered his reaction to the law of Abraham. "It was the first time in my life that I had desired the grave, and I could hardly get over it for a long time," he recalled. Young was the first of the Twelve to take a plural wife, in June 1842, followed soon afterward by Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards.19 Others joined the limited marriage group one by one as invited to do so. Between January 1842, when Theodore Turley became the second polygamist in Nauvoo, and June 1844, more than two dozen of Joseph's confidants received sealing blessings with their first wives and then married additional wives.20 The doctrine and practice of plural marriage were not publicly announced until 1852 in Utah, when, at Brigham Young's request, Orson Pratt preached the first public sermon on the subject. Plural marriage was prohibited by revelation in 1890. The First Presidency reminded the Saints a number of years later that plural marriage was not a condition for receiving celestial glory.21

All who eventually accepted the part of the revelation concerning plurality of wives did so only after intense personal struggles. Most resolved their concerns through a spiritual witness. They accepted participation as a religious duty that included the obligation of caring for a family under the strict covenants of the doctrine revealed by God.22 Joseph Smith understood the difficulty with which others reconciled their feelings. He shared his newfound knowledge with those he felt were prepared to understand it. Wilford Woodruff heard the Prophet tell the Saints in Yelrome in May 1843, "It is not wisdom that we should have all knowledge at once presented before us but that we should have a little, then we can comprehend it." When they were ready, he would teach the Saints as he had been taught, "line upon line, precept upon precept."23

In Nauvoo, the Prophet first explained the blessings of eternal marriage. If the Latter-day Saint elders were to be heirs of Abraham, he said, they must gather out righteous Israel from the nations and they should raise up an honorable posterity for the Lord. The assurance of an eternal increase was a blessing reserved ultimately for couples sealed by God's power and otherwise worthy of the highest degree of the highest heaven.24 For Joseph Smith and his followers, the celestial order of marriage erased the line between time and eternity and created a bit of heaven on earth. The potential of an eternal partnership was taught in various settings, both public and private, and the Saints anticipated the opportunity to participate in the temple sealing ceremony.25

As Joseph Smith spoke of the Lord's covenant with Abraham to close associates, he introduced the secondary concept of the divinely sanctioned practices of Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and Solomon, who "did none other things than that which they were commanded." In July 1843, he dictated the revelation on marriage to make it available in written form. Hyrum Smith was present. William Clayton recorded the words and made a copy for security. The document included the answers Joseph Smith received in the 1830s concerning his questions about the ancient patriarchs, plus guidance on more recent inquiries concerning adultery. Joseph had more to share, but this first, long installment included the Lord's guidance for Emma, and that was the immediate need.26

With Joseph present, Emma's mild-mannered brother-in-law Hyrum read the answers to her. According to Clayton, Emma "said she did not believe a word of it and appeared very rebellious." Emma saw to it that the paper was destroyed.27 She already knew of some of Joseph's marriages to other women; the Lord encouraged her to "receive all those that have been given unto my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure before me." The revelation reasoned that if a man had "ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot commit adultery, for they belong to him, and they are given unto him [of the Lord]; therefore is he justified." If Emma did not remain with Joseph, accept the law, and grant Joseph additional wives, it said, "she then becomes the transgressor."28

Over the years, Emma was at times supportive of her husband's plural marriage relationships; often she was not. She had rejected the principle in the 1830s. With others in Nauvoo, she challenged his public allusions to the doctrine in sermons.29 Like all who learned of the revelation, Emma remained hesitant because of its challenge to her traditional upbringing. In the spring of 1843, she sanctioned Joseph's marriage to the orphaned teenagers Emily and Eliza Partridge but withdrew her support when the girls moved into the Mansion House. The 1843 revelation answered Joseph's question about his own moral standing before the Lord and offered Emma the same relief from guilt, if she would accept it.30

Because Sidney Rigdon and William Law rejected plural marriage as inconsistent with previously revealed doctrine, these counselors in the First Presidency did not receive the covenants of eternal marriage. Nor did John C. Bennett, an assistant president, who distorted his limited knowledge of the doctrine to justify immoral behavior. He was excommunicated for his promiscuity. Initially hesitant, Hyrum Smith, serving as both an assistant president and church patriarch, accepted the doctrine through his own prayerful searching and after talking with Brigham Young.31 Those in church leadership councils who remained nonparticipants did so for various reasons, including opposition to the doctrine, absence from Nauvoo, Joseph Smith's judgment of them as unworthy, and general disaffection.

Some opponents of the church later claimed that because plural marriage was not publicly acknowledged until 1852, the doctrine had originated with Brigham Young. Historical evidence clearly demonstrates that Joseph Smith authorized plural marriages during the Nauvoo period. Among the thirty men who received plural wives before June 1844 were eight members of the Quorum of the Twelve, whose witness confirmed the early origin of the doctrine and practice. After the martyrdom, two other apostles married plural wives. Only John E. Page and Lyman Wight did not participate. In the Nauvoo Temple early in 1846, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball each married twenty-one wives, a number of them not connubial. At this time, Brigham Young was married to nine of Joseph Smith's widows, and Heber Kimball took responsibility for eight others. According to one tentative calculation, during the Prophet's lifetime, 114 women were sealed to 30 men. For the entire Nauvoo period, 153 men received 587 plural wives. Most of those men took only one or two additional wives. The typical plural family included three wives, but the range was from two to eleven. Notable exceptions were Joseph Smith with twenty-nine marriages and Heber C. Kimball with thirty-eight. Brigham Young left Nauvoo with seventeen wives (another two dozen or so had been sealed to him for eternity but were never part of his earthly household).32

A few of those introduced to plural marriage endured a more severe test of their faith. For example, Joseph Smith approached Heber C. Kimball and asked him for Vilate as an eternal companion. After much soul-searching, fasting, and prayer, Heber finally agreed. He was then told that the request was an Abrahamic test of his willingness to submit his will to the Lord's and that the sacrifice of his wife would not be required. The Prophet then sealed Vilate to her husband. John Taylor similarly passed this test when the Prophet inquired about securing Leonora as his own celestial wife. In some instances, the invitation moved beyond a theoretical proposal. In these few cases, about which little is known, the woman's husband was not a church member or was a Latter-day Saint who agreed to allow his wife to be sealed for eternity to Joseph Smith. This ordinance ensured the woman a marriage that would be valid in the resurrection no matter what became of her temporary, civil agreement. For some, it may have seemed the only way to gain that sacred promise.33

As the circle of knowledge about plural marriage expanded, word of its practice circulated in Nauvoo and beyond. The wives of the Twelve spoke of it to one another, and plural wives often shared the teaching with their families. Plural marriage was illegal under Illinois antibigamy laws adopted in 1833 and reaffirmed later.34 Nor was it a doctrine or practice lawful for the church as a whole. Whispered rumors among neighbors caused no immediate problems, but when stories appeared in print or plural marriage was preached by indiscreet elders, church leaders faced a difficult challenge because of the need to protect the confidentiality of the practice and yet avoid misunderstanding, misuse, and criticism.35

The most difficult of the disclosures to manage began after the excommunication of John C. Bennett for adultery on May 11, 1842. Bennett had filled major roles of public trust in Nauvoo. Within a few weeks, he lost all of them. He resigned as mayor and was released as assistant president to the First Presidency, discharged in disgrace by the Nauvoo Legion, expelled from the Masonic Lodge, and dropped as chancellor of the city university.36

After his fall from grace, Bennett saw an opportunity to serve his own interests and took it. Rumors about plural marriage, counterfeiting, militarism, theft, and murder had been circulating against the Saints. As a former insider, he believed he could convince the public that he spoke with knowledge on these issues. In fact, he had created a counterfeit of the true coin; his debauchery had lost him his membership in the church. Bennett told his own skewed version of his life in letters published first in Springfield and copied in newspapers elsewhere. Then, he promoted his ideas in a fourteen-stop speaking tour reaching from St. Louis to New York and Boston, then to Chicago and back to St. Louis. Immediately afterward, his book History of the Saints appeared, weaving a tale of sexual promiscuity in Nauvoo through what he called "spiritual wifery." This term had been used by some communitarian groups in the 1830s to mean Christian plural marriages. A few Latter-day Saint women called themselves spiritual wives. But for Bennett's application it meant adultery an illicit sexual relationship only.37 What he said in his exposé attracted attention nationally because it seemed to confirm the worst of the anti-Mormon charges. Locally, it fed the political opposition. As did other Latter-day Saints, Parley Pratt found Bennett's exposé "beneath contempt. . . . His object was vengeance on those who exposed his iniquity." Pratt predicted it would have no lasting effect on the church.38

To counteract this influence, in June 1842 the Prophet published his own explanation of Bennett's fall from favor and sent out missionaries to explain the church's position. For nearly two years, Joseph Smith had kept confidential information labeling Bennett as "an imposter and base adulterer." Soon after arriving alone in Nauvoo in 1840, Bennett had begun courting a young woman. About this time, a letter from Springfield cautioned Nauvoo leaders that Bennett had abandoned a wife and children in Ohio. When confronted, he dropped his new fiancée but took a new approach. "He went to some of the females in the city, who knew nothing of him but as an honorable man, and began to teach them that promiscuous intercourse between the sexes, was a doctrine believed in by the Latter-Day Saints, and that there was no harm in it." Bennett persuaded the women that the Prophet and others sanctioned and practiced his doctrine of "spiritual wifery."39

In mid-1841, church investigators in Pittsburgh and Ohio confirmed that Bennett was still married and that his reputation was one of disrepute in many of the twenty or more places he had lived. When presented with evidence, Bennett acknowledged its veracity, but embarrassed by the disclosure, he soon attempted suicide with a dose of poison. His adulterous affairs continued until he was confronted with witnesses the following spring. After a private hearing, he signed a statement certifying that the Prophet had taught nothing contrary to gospel principles and had not sanctioned "illegal illicit intercourse with females." This admission separated Bennett's fraudulent and immoral actions from the authentic marriage practice.40

In an interview before the city council, Bennett reaffirmed his loyalty to the church, vouched for the Prophet's character, and asked to be restored to full fellowship. Councilmen feared that Bennett's excommunication might make of him another Sampson Avard an open opponent of church leaders. Indeed, Bennett left Nauvoo and immediately published his self-serving exposé. Joseph Smith informed Governor Thomas Ford of Bennett's past and encouraged Nauvoo citizens to defend the church against the twisted claims.41 Reports circulated that Bennett was plotting with Missourians for Joseph Smith's destruction. The Prophet posted a regular city night watch from the Nauvoo Legion as protection. One Nauvoo observer noted, "Joseph knew his enemies, and appreciated his friends."42

For too long and despite early cautions, Joseph Smith had counted the talented John C. Bennett as a friend. In March 1841, in a letter from Ohio, George Miller said of Bennett:

He has the vanity to believe he is the smartest man in the nation; and if he cannot at once be placed at the head of the heap, he soon seeks a situation; he is always ready to fall in with whatever is popular; by the use of his recommendations he has been able to push himself into places and situations entirely beyond his abilities.

"In fine," Miller concluded, "he is an imposter, and unworthy of the confidence of all good men."

Bennett's baptism the previous August at the hands of Joseph Smith was likely taken as evidence of Bennett's complete rejection of past sins. A revelation soon afterward cautioned him to accept counsel and continue in good works both admonitions he later violated. For more than a year, he accomplished many good things for the cause at Nauvoo, but, as Miller predicted, the little general had again sought out a situation that placed him "at the head of the heap" where he found himself in "places and situations entirely beyond his abilities." The appearance of greatness eventually proved hollow.43 Bennett set out to discredit the church and to encourage the arrest of Joseph Smith on charges of sponsoring the attempted murder of former Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs. "If Joe is innocent," Bennett wrote in July 1842, "let him be acquitted; but if he is guilty, let his life atone for it."44

Bennett was involved as well in the difficulties that Sarah and Orson Pratt had with plural marriage. Bennett approached Sarah while her husband served his apostolic mission in England and explained his perverted doctrine of spiritual wives. If no one knew of the illicit liaison, it was right, he told her. Sarah's response was one of confusion, and she withdrew from involvement with the church. When Orson Pratt returned to Nauvoo and heard from her of Bennett's overtures, he, too, raised questions about Joseph Smith and the church. When a mass meeting of about a thousand Nauvoo men in July 1842 sustained a resolution commending the Prophet as "a good, moral, virtuous, peaceable and patriotic man," Pratt cast one of half a dozen negative votes. He explained his reservations to the meeting; Joseph Smith spoke in response; and then Pratt spoke again at length. A month later, a committee of the Twelve excommunicated Pratt. This action convinced John C. Bennett that Pratt was on his side. Friends feared that because of the disappointment he felt, the distraught Pratt would take his own life. Only when Pratt heard privately the Prophet's own explanation of the divine origins of plural marriage did Orson begin to sort things out. After much prayerful contemplation, he accepted the teaching. Ten years later, he offered the first public defense of plural marriage at a conference in Salt Lake City. Sarah, on the other hand, never seemed able to reconcile herself to the doctrine.45

After Bennett published his account of life in Nauvoo, he went on the lecture circuit in the Eastern states. In some locations, the elders paid the twenty-five-cent admission fee to confront Bennett, hoping to correct his distortions and to influence local newspaper reports. Bennett made extravagant claims for church doctrine and called for the total extermination of the Saints.46 At a lecture in the Second Congressional Church in New York City in August, Robert D. Foster spoke out against Bennett's claims of Mormon thievery, seduction, murder, blasphemy, and theocratic rule.47 In Baltimore, Benjamin Winchester's public denunciation convinced the local editor of the falsity of Bennett's claims. "We do not think that the Mormons should be made objects either of ridicule or persecution," the Maryland editor concluded. Freeman Nickerson, a church member in Boston, described Bennett as "godfather to all the lies that ever has be[e]n written that he could collect since the Church arose with all that he could invent." Nickerson had yet to hear of anyone in Boston paying the price of eighty-seven and a half cents for the book; he said that Bennett's preaching had put only a temporary damper on the faith of members and investigators.48

Taking no chances, editors in Nauvoo published some of the Eastern reports and responded to Bennett's charges. From the fall of 1842 through the following spring, the Times and Seasons published four comments on Latter-day Saint beliefs concerning marriage. As editor, Joseph Smith first published an extract from the 1835 statement on marriage from the Doctrine and Covenants. It acknowledged the validity of all marriages contracted before baptism into the church and declared "that one man should have one wife; and one woman, but one husband, except in case of death, when either is at liberty to marry again."49

During this time, Udney Hay Jacob published two chapters from a proposed book, The Peace Maker; or, The Doctrines of the Millennium. The excerpts defended plural marriage and divorce as biblically sanctioned. Even though Jacob was not yet a Latter-day Saint (he was baptized in 1843), he understood much about the sealing power and its relationship to the teachings on eternal marriage. This pamphlet offered an early glimpse at explanations that nineteenth-century church leaders would share in Utah. The author later claimed that he intended the essay as a defense of the Saints against public misunderstandings.50

With all of the confusion created by Bennett's claims and Jacob's pamphlet, many in Nauvoo sought clarification about the supposed practice that rumor would not let die. At a high council meeting on August 12, 1843, Dunbar Wilson wanted to know what was behind talk of a plurality of wives. Members of the Twelve were already party to the confidential knowledge. The high council was next in ecclesiastical priority in Nauvoo. Hyrum Smith responded with candor. He retrieved his copy of the July revelation from his home across the street and read it to the assemblage. Joseph was at home ill. After learning that an authentic revelation on plural marriage existed, the high council became divided in its loyalty. Thomas Grover and some councilors accepted it at face value. Others did not. William Law, the Prophet's second counselor, had believed Bennett's exaggerated claims of immoral behavior and was already a staunch opponent of anything resembling the teaching about spiritual wives. Siding with him were William Marks, the fifty-one-year-old Nauvoo stake president, and high council members Austin A. Cowles and Leonard Soby.51

In the succeeding months, others learned of the revelation. Ebenezer and Angeline Robinson heard about it from Hyrum Smith, who taught it to them and expected they would comply, but the Robinsons resisted.52 Many problems surfaced because of misunderstandings and misappropriation of the principle. After the high council cleared one man of charges of seduction in November 1843, Joseph Smith told those present

that the Church had not received any permission from me to commit fornication, adultery, or any corrupt action; but my every word and action has been to the contrary. If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God.

The Prophet counseled that the John C. Bennett case should have been "sufficient to show the fallacy of such a course of conduct."53

Many members of the church found it necessary to sort out for themselves the conflicting claims about whether plural marriage did or did not exist within the church. Mostly, they accepted the church's explanations, supported by the statement on marriage, that the practice was not authorized within the church (which it was not for the general membership). They concluded rightly that the so-called spiritual wife system was a fabrication by the adulterous Bennett. "He is a polished scoundrel," one Nauvoo church member wrote.54 After investigating Bennett's accusations, a convert challenged readers of the Boston Bee to learn something of Mormon beliefs before they condemned them: "No sect have a greater reverence for the laws of matrimony, . . . and we do what others do not, practice what we preach."55 Those few trusted Saints who were taught by the Prophet and who embraced the revealed truth accepted the sacred obligation to keep the practice of plural marriage confidential. They understood that that which was being condemned from the pulpit was adultery and that which had been sanctioned privately by revelation was a virtuous practice exercised under priesthood authority.56

The early months of 1844 saw an increase in public discussion of the doctrine of spiritual wives. Among the claims stirring gossip in Nauvoo was the Warsaw Signal's publication of a thirteen-stanza poem that bitingly satirized the private practice of plural marriage.57 Missionaries and presiding elders away from Nauvoo weren't certain what or whom to believe. Some of them concluded that plural marriage was one of the mysteries of the kingdom and began to expound upon it from the scriptures. In Michigan, one local elder found himself out of the church for doing so. In China Creek, Hancock County, in March 1844, others were claiming "that a man having a certain priesthood, may have as many wives as he pleases, and that [that] doctrine is taught" in Nauvoo. The claim contained enough specific departures from the truth to make a public denial plausible. "There is no such doctrine taught here; neither is there any such thing practised here," Hyrum Smith responded, adding that anyone teaching such doctrine would be subject to a high council hearing. He advised the elders to keep to first principles. "Let the matter of the grand councils of heaven, and the making of gods, worlds, and devils entirely alone," he urged. Those subjects were to be broached only "when God commands men to teach such principles." Hyrum acknowledged a hierarchy of privilege in knowing such things. "The mysteries of God are not given to all men," he said,

and unto those to whom they are given they are placed under restrictions to impart only such as God will command them; and the residue is to be kept in a faithful breast, otherwise he will be brought under condemnation. By this God will prove his faithful servants, who will be called and numbered with the chosen.

Such restricted doctrine, he assured the Saints, was not necessary for a celestial reward; obedience to the principles of faith, repentance and baptism, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost would do. To enjoy the additional blessings of eternal increase, those worthy of the celestial kingdom must enter into "the new and everlasting covenant of marriage."58

This message was repeated a month later in an unsigned editorial in the Times and Seasons. Its author, probably editor John Taylor, warned members abroad against Bennett's spiritual wife system and cautioned them not to believe reports that immoral conduct was sanctioned by the church. Unfortunately, he said, some men had received ordinations unworthily. In their high-mindedness and pride, they had preached degenerate principles, preying upon the credulity of the humble and meek. "There are other men who are corrupt and sensual, and who teach corrupt principles for the sake of gratifying their sensual appetites, at the expense and ruin of virtue and innocence. Such men ought to be avoided as pests to society." Anyone teaching contrary to scripture, he said, should be set down as an imposter and excommunicated.59

The circulating rumors stirred little concern among those practicing the true form of plural marriage with the approval of Joseph Smith, for their personal spiritual convictions gave them inner peace. The women who had been converted to the doctrine quietly shared with one another their faith in the divine origin of the principle and its positive influence in their lives. Looking back at her Nauvoo searchings, Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney remembered that when she and her husband, Newel K. Whitney, first heard of the teachings of plural marriage, they "pondered upon them continually, and our prayers were unceasing that the Lord would grant us some special manifestation concerning this new and strange doctrine." They received an answer, she wrote, "and were convinced in our own minds that God heard and approved our prayers and intercedings before Him. Our hearts were comforted."60

Actions of the Apostates

As questions about plural marriage surfaced publicly here and there, the issue became part of a larger set of challenges that began to polarize those in the church who knew about the private teachings. During the year after Hyrum Smith shared the new revelation with the high council, its members and others who were brought into the inner circle took their stand on the issue. Some remained loyal to Joseph Smith. Others rejected his revelations on temple doctrines, including celestial marriage and plurality of wives. Some of those disillusioned ones joined an active religious opposition movement that was reinforced by existing personal and economic tensions in Nauvoo. Others, including stake president William Marks, remained in the shadows for a time.

Centrifugal movements were not unknown to Joseph Smith. Disagreements over doctrine, policy, or administrative roles in Kirtland and Far West had spun prominent associates out of the church.61 Typically, they had sought to "purify the church" by rejecting Joseph Smith and certain new doctrines or practices while holding fast to established ones. In Kirtland, disaffected members met under the "Old Standard" to preserve a "pure" Church of Christ, and some of them plotted to kill the Prophet. Apostasy similarly affected church leaders in Missouri. By mid-1838, Frederick G. Williams of the First Presidency, the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, four members of the Twelve, and some of the First Quorum of the Seventy had left the church. Brigham Young defined the claims of the small band of Nauvoo reformers as "the same old story over again 'The doctrine is right, but Joseph is a fallen prophet.'" Joseph Fielding agreed with this sentiment and reflected, "I feel grieved that at this time of the greatest light and the greatest glory and honor, men of so much knowledge and understanding should cut themselves off."62

One of the most prominent leaders in the Nauvoo secessionist movement was William Law, second counselor in the First Presidency. The Irish-born entrepreneur became increasingly upset with Joseph Smith over economic as well as religious matters. At a personal level, Law took offense when the Prophet openly promoted church building lots on the flats in preference to Law's privately offered lots on the bluff. Institutionally, the counselor disliked his leader's impressive political and financial influence. Law preferred a more democratic and individual approach to public and economic affairs. Of greatest import to his faith, he disagreed with the emerging temple theology, including the eternal potential of human beings and the doctrine of plural marriage.63

During the Bennett scandal, Law had defended the Prophet against accusations of plural marriage. After the disclosure in the high council meeting, Law and his wife, Jane, read together Hyrum Smith's copy of the marriage revelation. They then confronted the Prophet, who defended its divine origin. William Law labeled the new revelation of the devil and pleaded with the Prophet to abandon the teaching. Joseph Smith responded that he could not withdraw the new commandment without bringing God's condemnation upon himself and the church. Emma Smith was a close friend of the Laws and of William and Rosannah Marks. This group of friends concurred in their opposition. Because the Prophet was convinced that Law had committed adultery, he refused to seal William and Jane when they requested it. In January 1844, he dropped his counselor from the First Presidency. The Laws were excommunicated in mid-April. Ten days later, William Law joined with others to form a short-lived separatist church.64

Excommunicated along with Law in April and among his supporters in the opposition movement were Robert D. Foster, Wilson Law, and Howard Smith (of Scott County, Illinois). All were cut off "for unchristianlike conduct."65 A land developer like Law, Foster had his own real estate problems. He was charged with selling lots behind the temple that he had purchased on contract from Daniel H. Wells but not paid for.66 Wilson Law was a partner with his brother in the milling business, a brigadier general in the Nauvoo Legion, and a former city councilor.67 In May, the high council cut off James Blakesley, Francis M. Higbee, Charles Ivins, and Austin Cowles for apostasy.68 The secessionists attracted both sincere opponents of plural marriage and opportunists. Among this last group was newcomer Joseph H. Jackson, who had been spurned in his attempts to marry Hyrum Smith's oldest daughter, Lovina. Jackson had then sworn to murder the entire Smith family.69 Jackson claimed after the fact that he had attempted to infiltrate Nauvoo society in order to expose its inner workings. He had won the sympathy of the Prophet in 1842 by claiming to be destitute, thus gaining a job as a real estate clerk in Joseph Smith's office.70

The desperate men most opposed to Joseph Smith met regularly in secret meetings to plot a strategy. Among those invited to assist in the effort were some who disliked what they heard. These uncomfortable recruits reported to church leaders about Jackson's murderous plan and who the conspirators were. The informants heard many charges of activities supposedly sanctioned by Joseph Smith, most of them familiar from the Missouri days. One said that the conspirators signed an oath to do all in their power to destroy Joseph Smith and his faithful followers.71

The sparring with Robert D. Foster was an ongoing problem. In April, the Prophet told a congregation from the stand near the temple that conspirators were present. Foster complained that he was being harassed but refused to reveal his true feelings about Smith.72 Two weeks later at the mayor's office, Foster's brother, Charles A., drew a pistol and threatened to kill the Prophet. Robert Foster falsely accused Smith of sharing in the spoils of a gang of supposed Nauvoo Danites and of attempting to recruit him to kill former governor Lilburn Boggs. This accusation prompted Brigham Young to denounce Foster from the stand at the Sunday morning service on April 28. As with other dissenters, Foster was soon excommunicated from the church, dishonorably discharged from his post in the Nauvoo Legion, and dropped from other civic posts.73

On the afternoon of April 28, the excommunicants met at Wilson Law's home near the sawmill to organize what one report called the "Reformed Mormon Church." The group appointed William Law as their leader. Refusing to be termed a prophet, he accepted the title of president. He appointed his brother Wilson (who was soon replaced by James Blakesley) and Austin A. Cowles as counselors, Robert D. Foster and Francis M. Higbee as apostles, and Keokuk hotel owner Charles Ivins as bishop, with a Dr. Green and John Scott Sr. as counselors. Eight of the organizers volunteered to canvass families in the city for additional members.74

The new church defined positions on both temporal and spiritual "Mormonism." The political stance of the reformers appealed to anti-Mormons seeking to weaken Joseph Smith's influence. They repudiated the mingling of church influence in civic life and pledged support for the repeal of the Nauvoo charter. To reinforce this notion, they spread reports that Joseph Smith and his followers were being made kings and queens in secret ceremonies. The mention of royalty reinforced the fears of citizens who were proud of having cast off rule by English kings.75

Law and his followers centered their religious challenge on two doctrines the gathering and plural marriage. They claimed that the doctrine of what they called "gathering in haste, and by sacrifice" was contrary to the will of God. In 1841, the First Presidency had invited the Saints to "make a sacrifice of their time, their talents, and their property, for the prosperity of the kingdom, . . . bid adieu to their homes . . . and unite with us . . . and share in the tribulation, that they may ultimately share in the glory and triumph."76 The dissidents challenged this invitation as well as Joseph Smith's 1843 designation of Greater Nauvoo as the sole gathering place in order to complete the temple more quickly. Instead, they wanted to allow scattered stakes. (Their challenge ignored the Prophet's April 1844 announcement of an eventual continental expansion.)

The more volatile issue was Joseph Smith's private sanctioning of plural marriage and his public discourses on doctrines related to the temple. The little group of dissenters denounced Smith as a fallen prophet and pledged themselves to accept what they termed the religion of the Latter-day Saints as originally taught by Joseph Smith from the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Commandments. This was their way of rejecting the newly revealed temple theology with its ordinances and practices as well as the controversial practice of plural marriage. In response, Joseph Smith labeled his opponents false prophets.77

The two sides had reached a standoff. The protesters, Robert Foster said, had forever severed their bond of loyalty with the Prophet. "We are united in virtue and truth," he wrote, "and we set hell at defiance and all her agents." The Times and Seasons expressed a lack of concern: "One or two disaffected individuals have made an attempt to spread dissension," the editor wrote, "but it is like a tale that is nearly told, and will soon be forgotten. . . . By their fruits ye shall know them."78

The founders of the secessionist church soon offered public preaching sessions at William Law's home. On Sunday, May 12, a large crowd listened to sermons by Law and Blakesley. Some of the organizers wrote confidential letters to friends in the East slandering Joseph Smith in an attempt to win support for their movement.79 Word of the claims of the dissenters spread locally as well. An observer in La Harpe informed his Latter-day Saint neighbors that because of the enmity manifested between the two parties, "Nauvoo would be too hot for them both but they would not believe it."80

Hoping to further discredit the Prophet and to force his resignation as church president, the reformers charged him publicly with immoral conduct. On May 6, Francis M. Higbee filed a plea in the circuit court at Carthage claiming that in 1842 Joseph Smith had seduced or attempted to seduce Nancy Rigdon. Higbee said that Smith's actions interfered with his own courtship of Sidney Rigdon's daughter. The Nauvoo Municipal Court took jurisdiction and dismissed the petition after nine witnesses convinced the justices that Higbee was a disreputable and immoral character intent only on a malicious prosecution.81

A second charge, filed by William Law, claimed that the Prophet had committed adultery with Maria Lawrence (one of Joseph's plural wives). Sidney Rigdon talked with Law on behalf of the Prophet, but the disaffected former counselor would not be reconciled. Law set forth his terms: "If they wanted peace," he wrote in his journal on May 13,

they could have it on the following conditions, That Joseph Smith would acknowledge publicly that he had taught and practiced the doctrine of the plurality of wives, that he brought a revelation supporting the doctrine, and that he should own the whole system (revelation and all) to be from Hell.

In effect, Law was asking Smith to admit failure in his prophetic calling. Instead, the Prophet charged Law with perjury and slander.82

Also during May, on the advice of several friends, Joseph Smith decided to resolve indictments against him of perjury and polygamy. They had been issued by a Carthage grand jury on the witness of Joseph H. Jackson, Robert D. Foster, and William Law. On the morning of May 27, the Prophet mounted his horse "Joe Duncan" named as a rebuke of a political nemesis and, with a dozen supporters, rode up past the temple and on to Carthage. Several of his accusers saw him leave. Taking another route, they reached the county seat ahead of him. The judge in the case postponed the hearing so that the prosecution could call witnesses. Meanwhile, the Foster brothers confided to Joseph Smith and other members of his party that the litigation was merely a ruse to get Joseph and Hyrum out of Nauvoo so they could be killed. Joseph H. Jackson was seen loading his pistols and overheard swearing he would carry out the threat. The Prophet's party hurried back to Nauvoo, arriving after an absence of thirteen hours. They would return to Carthage within the month for another, final, court appearance.83

The Nauvoo Expositor Case

That second trip was precipitated by charges of riot and treason filed in response to a challenge over freedom of the press.84 On May 7, 1844, the Nauvoo seceders established a printing shop on the north side of Mulholland Street in the block just east of the temple. Three days later, on a surplus press purchased in Adams County from Abraham Jonas, they issued a prospectus for a weekly newspaper, the Nauvoo Expositor. The new owners wasted little time. On Friday, June 7, they published one thousand copies of the first and only issue of the Nauvoo Expositor. They delivered half the issues to the post office for mailing to subscribers and newspaper editors.85

Geographically as well as philosophically, the Expositor represented a view from the bluff. The newspaper's writers claimed that Joseph Smith was deceiving the Saints by regulating prices and limiting competition when he encouraged immigrants to buy building lots only from the trustee-in-trust. Ostensibly a political paper advocating a Whig platform, the sheet supported repeal of the Nauvoo city charter and opposed "all political revelations and unconstitutional ordinances." Given this agenda, the Warsaw Signal predicted, the Expositor would lead to "the 'Decline and Fall of Mormonism.'"86

But more inflammatory were the Expositor's religious arguments. The seceders hoped to convince Latter-day Saint readers that Joseph Smith had perverted the restored gospel and fallen from grace by introducing heretical doctrines. The paper's editors knew that the plural marriage doctrine had been taught privately; they had an advantage over most readers. William and Jane Law and Austin Cowles testified that they had heard William Smith read the revelation. "We intend to tell the whole tale," the newspaper exulted.87

Many in Nauvoo had heard the King Follett funeral discourse on mankind's eternal potential at the April conference. When the seceders challenged the doctrine, Joseph Smith preached at length on the subject again in mid-June to defend its consistency with scripture. In contrast, for two years members had heard condemnation of the counterfeit spiritual wifery. Not knowing of the true practice of plural marriage, many Latter-day Saints concluded that the Expositor's claims were yet another ill-founded exposé like that of the disgraced John C. Bennett. One reader scanned the first issue and concluded, "They printed all the lies that the Devil could think of and some that he could not think of."88

Because the Expositor's sponsors had lost their church membership, they were beyond further reprimand from priesthood councils. The only recourse open to those offended by the sheet lay with civil government. With alderman George W. Harris presiding, the city council heard evidence and considered options in lengthy sessions on Saturday, June 8, and again the following Monday. The hearing mixed doctrinal discussions with denunciations of personal character and reviews of civil law and political mischief. Ultimately, the council acted as a legislative body to create law and as a judicial court to review constitutional principles and precedent and to pronounce judgment. In effect, the deliberations resembled a New England-style town meeting convened to protect the community from heresy. The publishers were censured for preaching false doctrine, breaking God's commandments, and libeling church and civic leaders. They were condemned as conspirators against all that mattered most in Nauvoo's gathered community.89

On the question of the marriage revelation read to the high council, Hyrum Smith castigated Austin Cowles's published explanation. The Prophet added that William Law's explanation had transformed "the truth of God . . . into a lie." Without divulging its contents, Hyrum suggested that the "revelation was in answer to a question concerning things which transpired in former days." Similarly, Joseph Smith reminded the council that his public sermon was only "showing the order in ancient days." On that part of the revelation dealing with the eternal marriage covenant, he spoke at length. That information, he said, had come in answer to a prayer about marriage in the resurrection: "'Man in this life must marry in view of eternity, otherwise they must remain as angels, or be single in heaven,' which was the doctrine of the revelation." The Prophet defended the right of "a man to have a wife on the earth while he has one in heaven, according to the keys of the Holy Priesthood."90

The council quickly moved on. It spent much of Friday hearing testimony against the character and activities of Expositor publishers Wilson Law and Robert D. Foster and conspirator Joseph H. Jackson but did not neglect the other seceders. Witnesses and council members persuasively accused these men of oppressing the poor (through high land prices), of being involved in counterfeiting, theft, seduction, and adultery, and of conspiring to kidnap, seduce, and murder.91

Convinced of the publishers' crimes and sins, councilmen then soundly castigated the newspaper itself as a public nuisance. They cited the respected English legal authority Blackstone who held "'that a libellous print or paper, affecting a private individual, may be destroyed.'" Because the city had no ordinance on libel, on June 10 the council passed one on the authority of the charter's provision "to declare what shall be a nuisance, and to prevent and remove the same." Then, after concluding that the Expositor was, in fact, a public nuisance and guilty of publishing libel, the council ordered it "removed without delay." Councilman Benjamin Warrington cast the only dissenting vote. An old settler "who did not belong to any church or any party," he favored a substantial fine. A nuisance declaration, he felt, should come as a last resort. After the vote, Joseph Smith, as mayor, directed the city marshal to destroy the printing press, scatter the type in the street, and burn all remaining copies of the newspaper and its advertising handbills. The decision, he said, was necessary to protect both civil and religious institutions in the city. With a force from the Nauvoo Legion standing by as a backup, Marshal John P. Greene and members of the city police completed the task of interdiction before six that evening.92

It was not the first time a printing press had been destroyed in America by someone offended by an editor, nor would it be the last. Under common law in the United States, public officials could remove or destroy ("abate") a nuisance if lesser means failed. Obviously, in such instances it was a local matter to decide what behavior was considered injurious to public welfare.93 The Saints had seen one of their own presses destroyed in July 1833 in Jackson County, Missouri. A citizens committee there had appealed to "the law of nature" and "the law of self-preservation" to rid themselves of what they termed an unwanted intrusion. In a similar challenge to unwanted ideas at Alton, Illinois, in 1837, extralegal regulators stormed a warehouse where abolitionist Elijah Lovejoy was storing a press and fatally wounded the Presbyterian minister. Lovejoy's death stirred a national firestorm of protest. Illinois citizens did not want such an incident repeated.94 Although it was based on the actions of a legally constituted municipal government, the Expositor incident touched off a similar reaction in Nauvoo and the surrounding region.

After assessing the damage wreaked by Greene's posse, the publishers dispatched Charles A. Foster to Warsaw. Consistent with its policy, the Signal published a report sympathetic to the seceders' viewpoint. To support a claim that the posse had committed riot, it emphasized images of violence. Foster reported that he and Francis M. Higbee had tried to prevent the marshal's party of more than two hundred armed men from entering their property. "They paid no regard to our commands, but marched up the [outside] stairs, broke open the door, entered the office, and demolished the Press." The men, he said, arrived

armed and equipped with muskets, swords, pistols, bowie-knives, sledge-hammers, etc. . . . They tumbled the press and materials into the street and set fire to them, and demolished the machinery with a sledge-hammer, and injured the building very materially. We made no resistance; but looked on and felt revenge, but leave it to the public, to avenge this climax of insult and injury.

Sidney Rigdon's report to Governor Ford offered a much less inflammatory description: "The city marshal, in obedience to [the city council's] order, went and removed the press and destroyed it. This was done without tumult or disorder."95

The owners sought reparation for the damage in a series of legal actions. First, Francis M. Higbee filed a warrant in district court at Carthage charging city officials with inciting a riot (a reference to the posse) in destroying the press. On June 12, an officer arrested Joseph Smith and other city officials and attempted to convey them to Carthage for trial. The indicted men appealed to Nauvoo's municipal court, which released them. On June 17, the councilors faced a second riot charge, filed by W. G. Ware. This time, the defendants argued that the orderly execution of a municipal order could not be considered a riot. Justice Daniel H. Wells heard this case and discharged the city officials. In a third legal effort, William and Wilson Law failed in their attempt to get an indictment in Springfield against the municipal court for its part in trying the habeas corpus petitions. "They have sworn revenge," Vilate Kimball wrote of the dissenters, "and no doubt they will have it."96

The Warsaw Signal published the owners' explanation of the Expositor case and the Nauvoo Neighbor's defense of the city council's actions. Rumors circulated of threatened retribution against the two Nauvoo newspapers and their editors. Editors across the state and in major cities nationally picked up the story. Many expressed concern over the controversy created by the destruction of the Expositor.97

In a special issue, the Nauvoo Neighbor jumped to the defense of the city council. It reinforced the evidence used against the censured publishers and supported the council's decision. At the same time, it responded to political and doctrinal charges raised by the Expositor.98 The Neighbor ridiculed the schismatic leaders (two Fosters, two Higbees, two Laws, and Ivins) as the "seven sons of Sceva" ineffectual exorcists in Acts 19:11-16 who met an almost laughable end. It charged them with counterfeiting and other crimes. The paper cited chapter and verse to prove that the centralized gathering of the Saints was scriptural and that the present was, in fact, "a day of sacrifice." The Neighbor paid particular attention to what it termed the publishers' "libels and slanderous articles upon the citizens and city council." To defend the city council's actions, the paper cited Nauvoo's charter and reviewed the legal opinions of Blackstone. Incorporated cities, the article said, held "reserved rights" like those granted states by the Constitution. Adding precedent to law, the writer claimed that "it is a common occurrence for city corporations to remove scurrilous prints." In Nauvoo, said the author, such actions would prevent Missouri-style mobbings. A patriotic conclusion echoed similar calls for redress of the Missouri wrongs:

In the name of freemen, and in the name of God, we beseech all men, who have the spirit of honor in them, to cease from persecuting us collectively or individually. Let us enjoy our religion, rights, and peace, like the rest of mankind: why start pressure to destroy rights and privileges, and bring upon us mobs to plunder and murder? We ask no more than what belongs to us The rights of Americans.99

The Call to Arms

Reactions in area newspapers were only part of a broader discussion of the Expositor case. In speeches throughout western Illinois, the Expositor's publishers denounced the Prophet and his influence.100 At Warsaw and Carthage on June 11, indignation meetings convened to oppose Nauvoo's interference with the constitutional guarantee of a free press. The next day concerned citizens met again at Warsaw and at Green Plains. People resolved to exterminate the Latter-day Saints or to expel them by armed force.101 When a Latter-day Saint living in Warsaw refused to take up arms against his own people, several men threatened to cut his throat and then expelled him at bayonet point. From Adams County, a non-Mormon wrote to his mother of an unusual excitement:

Nothing else is talked of or thought at the present men marching to and from head quarters and what is to be the consequence God only knows. One thing is certain that if the Mormons do not behave themselves better they will be driven out of the country as the people are determined not to bear with them much longer.102

The destruction of the Expositor and reports that a similar fate awaited his own newspaper caused Warsaw's critical editor Thomas Sharp to declare: "It is sufficient! War and extermination is inevitable! Citizens arise one and all!!! . . . We have no time for comment: every man will make his own. Let it be made with powder and ball!!!!" On the thirteenth, a countywide mass meeting at Carthage adopted the Warsaw proposal to drive the Saints from outlying settlements into Nauvoo. The old citizens resolved to exterminate the entire Latter-day Saint population if they did not surrender the prophet-mayor and his associates. A woman visiting in Carthage wrote to her husband in Warsaw, "You have no idea what is passing here now, to see men preparing for battle to fight with blood hounds; but I hope there will be so large an Army as to intimidate that 'bandit horde' [in Nauvoo] so there will be no blood shed." In Nauvoo, Mayor Joseph Smith urged citizens to help him maintain "the public peace and common quiet" of the city to eliminate any justification for an invasion.103

Because of the hotly debated Expositor question and talk of vigilante action, Governor Thomas Ford feared the outbreak of a civil war in Hancock County. A confidential letter from Sidney Rigdon on June 14 asked for his help in dispersing "a great assemblage at Carthage threatening violence" against Nauvoo's citizens. Two days later, Joseph Smith urged thousands of assembled brethren "to keep cool, and prepare their arms for defense of the city." A general meeting that evening appointed delegates to visit all parts of the county to calm the citizens by explaining the city council's actions. The Prophet urged Ford to hear the council's reasoning personally in Nauvoo. In his capacity as lieutenant general of the Nauvoo Legion, Joseph Smith ordered militia units in outlying settlements to prepare to defend their communities or Nauvoo.104 Several men at Ramus offered immediate aid. They headed off across the water-logged prairie, many without shoes or boots. During the all-night march to Nauvoo, they were challenged by unidentified troops flying two red flags. The weary volunteers reached Nauvoo safely and were boarded in a large unfinished brick house.105

The frantic reactions raised concerns. H. H. Bliss, a friendly non-Mormon at La Harpe observed:

We never expected to see . . . our old neighbours shouldering their guns to go in defense of Smith, thereby showing a disposition to kill any or all of us if Smith gave them orders. . . . By this time Smith had collected his followers at Nauvoo to the amount of some thousands ready as some of them said "to wade in blood up to their shoulder" in defense of their Prophet.

Actually, in his position as lieutenant general, Smith assigned the militia to support the city marshal in maintaining the peace. On the eighteenth, he declared martial law. "By this time," Bliss explained, "we Gentiles here had formed ourselves into a Military Company for the protection of our place."106

To be certain that he had the support of Nauvoo's citizens in a climate of increasing divisiveness, the Prophet secured pledges of loyalty from the city council and the Nauvoo Legion.107 On June 18, he assembled the militia in the street outside the Mansion House, and then, in full uniform, Lieutenant General Smith climbed atop the nearby frame of a barbershop and inn being built for Porter Rockwell. William W. Phelps read the Warsaw convention's call for the extermination of church leaders and the expulsion of the Saints.108 General Smith encouraged the men to arm themselves to defend their constitutional rights and their families. He directed them to take only defensive action and asked, "Will you all stand by me to the death, and sustain at the peril of our lives, the laws of our country?" He repeated the question three times. Each time, the soldiers shouted "Aye!" Smith then raised his sword skyward:

I call God and angels to witness that I have unsheathed my sword with a firm and unalterable determination that this people shall have their legal rights, and be protected from mob violence, or my blood shall be spilt upon the ground like water. . . .

. . . You are a good people; therefore I love you with all my heart. . . . You have stood by me in the hour of trouble, and I am willing to sacrifice my life for your preservation.109

Martial law restricted movements in Nauvoo. Pickets guarded all roads leading out of the city, all streets and alleys in the city, and key points along the river. A St. Louis newspaper imagined that the action was forcing the seceders to flee for their lives: "Several hundred Mormons, most of them hostile to the Prophet, have left Nauvoo with their property. Jo[seph Smith] had laid an interdict on further emigration." The same paper later editorialized, "At Nauvoo, a bayonet bristles at every assailable point! Boats are not permitted to tarry, nor strangers permitted to land. The Mormon force under arms is estimated at between 2000 and 3000 men."110 Another St. Louis paper reported that Expositor publisher Francis M. Higbee had fled Nauvoo on June 11 in disguise to avoid reprisal. The Nauvoo Neighbor countered that the departing schismatics had left Nauvoo "as a matter of their own choice. 'The wicked flee when no man pursueth.'"111 Robert D. Foster informed Joseph Smith that the dissenters would leave freely, but only after they had sold their property. Many of them were, in fact, rapidly selling out.112

Fearing an armed confrontation, and with mail service interrupted by bad roads, high water, and mob threats, the Prophet planned to send an express rider overland to the Illinois River or down the Mississippi to St. Louis with letters to each of the Twelve. On Thursday, June 20, he wrote the letters, urging the apostles and missionaries to return quietly but immediately to Nauvoo. After further consideration, and with prospects bright for a negotiated settlement, Joseph decided on Saturday not to send any of the letters.113

That same day, Mayor/General Smith halted the inspection of travelers but advised the pickets to maintain vigilance. The Nauvoo Legion continued its parade ground reviews. Officers dug entrenchments and set up encampments. Scouts explored the back country east of the city, plotted a defense, and considered how to feed a city under siege. An unusually wet spring had washed out many bridges and left roads nearly impassable. Willard Richards wrote to James Arlington Bennet in New York, inviting him to gather volunteers for Nauvoo's defense. The Saints were ready to fight for their liberties, said Richards. If necessary, they would bring about "the second birth of our nation's freedom" by establishing a "'separate and independent empire'" "that glorious 'vision in the west'" that Bennet had been encouraging as a solution to the Mormon question. To the militia, General Smith "gave orders that a standard be prepared for the nations."114

With both sides arming themselves and recruiting new militia volunteers,115 Ford traveled to the county seat to seek a peaceful solution. An assembly of Carthage citizens pledged to support his effort to resolve the Expositor issue in the courts.116 On Friday, June 21, the governor wrote to Nauvoo, asking city officials to explain their actions. Joseph Smith immediately sent political advisors John M. Bernhisel and John Taylor with documents and another plea for a personal investigation by the governor in Nauvoo.117 "Our troubles are invariably brought upon us by falsehoods and mis-representations by designing men," the Prophet wrote. "We have ever held ourselves amenable to the law; and, for myself, sir, I am ever ready to conform to and support the laws and Constitution, even at the expense of my life."118

Several of the Prophet's opponents were on hand in Carthage when Taylor and Bernhisel presented their explanation of the Expositor affair. Ford listened to both sides and carefully studied the Prophet's letter and the accompanying affidavits. In a lengthy written response, the governor drew from his own experience on the state supreme court as he evaluated the concerns of the seceders. Ford denounced the destruction of the Expositor as an outrage on the laws and a restriction upon the liberties of free citizens. He cited technical errors in the conduct of the hearing and added that the existence of libel in a newspaper was no reason to destroy it. The city council had committed four separate violations of law, he argued. First, the council had breached the constitutional protection of a free press, and they had conducted unreasonable searches and seizures of the publishers' property. They should have allowed due process of law through a jury trial. Second, although the council had operated within its legislative powers in defining a public nuisance, they should have left to the courts a determination of guilt. "The Constitution abhors and will not tolerate the union of legislative and judicial power," Ford said. Third, under its charter, he said, Nauvoo's municipal court could deal only with city laws. It could not discharge the warrants filed against the city council in a district court at Carthage. Finally, the governor said, the city council failed to prove that "a newspaper charged to be scurrilous and libelous may be legally abated or removed as a nuisance." Ford said the accused men must allow a court to decide the issue. Any posse organized from the militia in Hancock County to enforce compliance, Ford warned, might quickly become a mob and destroy the fragile peace.119 Vilate Kimball reflected concern in Nauvoo that Ford had sided with Law and Foster; she considered the governor's response "a saucy letter."120

Nauvoo's delegates left Carthage at five that afternoon with a state escort. Joseph Smith was already planning how best to defend Nauvoo against an attack. He told associates that the city would be safe if he and Hyrum fled. Rather than appear in Carthage for trial, the brothers and Willard Richards would seek refuge in the West. If the people of Nauvoo went about their business as normal, he said, they would be protected. According to Reynolds Cahoon, it was around nine when Hyrum came out of the Mansion House and declared, "A company of men are seeking to kill my brother Joseph, and the Lord has warned him to flee to the Rocky Mountains to save his life." The Prophet invited Porter Rockwell to accompany the refugees "on a short journey" and asked two others to escort his and Hyrum's families on the Maid of Iowa to Portsmouth, Ohio, to await further word. The Smiths and Richards headed for the riverbank to meet Rockwell.121

When Taylor and Bernhisel reached Nauvoo, they searched for Joseph Smith. Even though the hour was late, Smith wanted to consider and respond to Governor Ford's letter. He sent Rockwell home and returned himself to the Mansion, where Willard Richards, Hyrum Smith, William W. Phelps, William Marks, and others assembled with the delegates in an upper council room. Earlier in the year, the church newspaper had endorsed Ford's plea for a reasoned resolution of political differences in the county. An editorial in February had declared,

Should reason, liberty, law, light, and philanthropy now guide the destinies of Hancock county, . . . there can be no doubt that peace, prosperity, and happiness will prevail, and that future generations as well as the present one, will call Governor Ford a peace maker. . . . Our motto then, is, peace with all.122

But those who reviewed Ford's response to the immediate emergency were not pleased with the governor's judgment. According to John Taylor, "It became a serious question as to the course we should pursue. Various projects were discussed, but nothing definitely decided upon for some time." Wearied from his arduous travels, Taylor left the meeting after two "legal and high-minded gentlemen," newly arrived on the evening steamship, requested an interview with the Prophet. One of them was a son of John C. Calhoun. These men advised the Prophet to appeal to Washington for help.123

After further lengthy deliberations, Joseph Smith formally rejected the governor's invitation to appear in Carthage. The Prophet had faced unfair judges in Missouri, had been fleeing from vexatious lawsuits for years, and feared for his life. In a letter written at midnight by one of his clerks, he agreed to face another magistrate but not in Carthage. As for the legality of the city council's action, he repeated the legal arguments behind the decision. He had declared martial law for self-protection, he added, and not to injure anyone. Joseph Smith said that the city council would correct any demonstrated wrongs and would welcome a review by the state supreme court. Acting upon their own best judgment, the council believed that their search and seizure had been reasonable, and that they had not mixed legislative and judicial power. The mayor cited several instances in which police in New York, Boston, and in Ohio had destroyed scurrilous publications. The destruction of "a little property," he said of the Expositor, was preferable to the "loss of character by libel and the loss of life by mobocratic prints."124

An appearance before a Carthage judge, the Prophet said, would only repeat the sham trial in Richmond, Missouri, where witnesses were jailed or not allowed to testify. "We dare not come," he said.

Writs, we are assured, are issued against us in various parts of the country. For what? To drag us from place to place, from court to court, across the creeks and prairies, till some bloodthirsty villain could find his opportunity to shoot us. . . . Sir, we dare not come, for our lives would be in danger, and we are guilty of no crime.125

The Prophet concluded his letter with a plan of action. Upon the advice of certain "legal and high-minded gentlemen from abroad" who had arrived that night, delegates from Nauvoo would appeal once again to Washington. Why? The case involved an act of treason by one state against another (Missouri against Illinois) and by Missouri against Joseph Smith. "We shall leave the city forthwith to lay the facts before the General Government." The Nauvoo Legion had been disbanded as requested by the governor, Joseph Smith reported, and now Ford should act "to cause our helpless women and children to be protected from mob violence. . . . Disperse the mob, and secure to us our constitutional privileges, that our lives may not be endangered when on trial."126

The two Smith brothers and Richards picked up Porter Rockwell at his lodgings. The four men walked to the riverbank to find a boat, but the Prophet had unresolved concerns. Despite what he had told Ford, he wondered for a time about the value of another personal visit to Washington. He sent for W. W. Phelps and asked him to leave on Sunday's second steamboat for Cincinnati, there to prepare petitions to President Tyler and the Congress.127 Smith instructed Phelps to invite Emma and Mary Smith and the children of the two families to accompany him. Leery of Governor Ford's plea to appear in Carthage for trial, Joseph and Hyrum Smith would go into hiding for their own safety. To protect the church from further misunderstandings, the Prophet also summoned William Clayton. Protect the records of the Council of Fifty, he advised. Clayton decided to preserve the confidential minutes by burying them.128 It was two o'clock, Sunday morning, June 23, before Joseph and his three companions pushed off toward Montrose. The borrowed boat leaked profusely. Rockwell rowed while the others used their boots and shoes to bail water and keep themselves afloat.129

The refugees reached the Iowa shore at daybreak. Finding no one home at their intended destination, they located another Latter-day Saint in the Montrose area willing to board them. Meanwhile, Rockwell returned to Nauvoo for horses. He carried with him a letter for Emma, written from Joseph's secret hiding place, simply called "Safety." Joseph counseled Emma on how to find the means during his absence to support their family. The letter reflected the Prophet's concern: "Do not despair," he wrote. "If God ever opens a door that is possible for me I will see you again. I do not know where I shall go, or what I shall do, but shall if possible endeavor to get to the city of Washington."130

Rockwell found Joseph's family and friends uncertain about his decision to flee. Some in Nauvoo felt Joseph's absence would jeopardize their safety; others agreed that his departure would be a protection both for him and the city. A posse had arrived in Nauvoo early that morning to arrest Mayor Smith. Word spread that Governor Ford had vowed to bring the mayor to trial even if he had to dispatch troops to hunt him down like a fugitive. Ford's messengers repeated the governor's guarantee of a trial safe from vigilantes. Hiram Kimball, Reynolds Cahoon, and Emma's nephew, Lorenzo D. Wasson, left for the Iowa hideout. They delivered the message from the posse and discussed the concerns over Joseph's decision: Nauvoo's opponents had threatened to destroy the city if he did not submit to a trial. The Saints feared a repeat of the Missouri mobbings. "Some were tried almost to death to think Joseph should leave them in the hour of danger," Vilate Kimball noted a few days later. "Hundreds have left the city since the fuss commenced. Most of the merchants on the hill have left. I have not felt frightened." Like Vilate, Hyrum remained confident in the legal process and in the governor's pledge. In contrast, the Prophet doubted the governor's ability to fulfill his promise. Hyrum's counsel eventually prevailed.131

At his home in Nauvoo, John Taylor awoke to news that the Smiths had crossed the river. He packed up the stereotype plates for the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants at the printing office and crossed to Montrose, headed for upper Canada. When he found the Smiths and learned of their decision to return to Nauvoo, he reluctantly altered his own plans and returned to his home. At two o'clock that afternoon on the Iowa riverbank, Joseph and Hyrum cosigned another letter to Ford. Encouraged by the governor's assurance of protection but still concerned, the Prophet told Ford that he had hesitated to stand trial for one reason "on account of assassins, and the reason I have to fear deathly consequences from their hands." Because the governor had reportedly subdued antagonists in Carthage, Nauvoo's mayor would comply with the governor's request: "I now offer to come to you at Carthage on the morrow," Joseph wrote, "as early as shall be convenient for your posse to escort us into headquarters, provided we can have a fair trial, not be abused nor have my witnesses abused, and have all things done in due form of law." At half past five, the party crossed the river and dispersed to their homes.132 At Nauvoo, they found other members of the city council packing their belongings for a possible hasty departure.133The letter penned on the riverbank reached the governor by courier about nine that night. At first, Ford seemed willing to comply with Joseph's request for an escort. The governor's attitude changed when Wilson Law, Joseph H. Jackson, and their attorney argued against his plans. They convinced Ford that an escort would grant to Smith honors not accorded other citizens. The governor sent word to Nauvoo requiring those charged to appear at ten the next morning. It was the only way, he repeated, to prevent mobs from sacking Nauvoo. Joseph Smith received this request about four on Monday morning, June 24. He invited the city council and witnesses to prepare for the trip to Carthage. By half past six, the entourage had assembled on the flats.134

The company that headed for Carthage that morning included all eighteen under indictment, their attorney James W. Woods of Burlington, and perhaps a dozen others, including the Prophet's clerk, Willard Richards, and supporters Dan Jones and Henry G. Sherwood.135 The party paused at the unfinished temple. From the edge of the bluffs, astride his pacer, Joseph looked admiringly at Nauvoo. He pondered what he had attempted to accomplish for his followers in this city of refuge. "This is the loveliest place and the best people under the heavens," he said. "Little do they know the trials that await them."136

It was half a day's travel on horseback to Carthage. Just before ten o'clock and four miles short of their destination, the party met a company of about sixty mounted militia from McDonough County under Captain James Dunn. The soldiers carried orders from Ford to collect the state arms from the Nauvoo Legion to calm fears in Carthage. Ford hoped to quiet both sides and avoid civil war. Those plotting Joseph's murder had encouraged the order. They hoped to prevent an expected spontaneous act of revenge. Acting in his military office, Joseph Smith immediately countersigned the governor's order. Then he and a dozen of his party returned to Nauvoo to ensure compliance. The state-appointed McDonough County militia agreed to accompany them. By this turn of events, Joseph Smith would enter the county seat that night under military escort.137

By sundown, the arms issued to the Nauvoo Legion in 1841 had been deposited in the Masonic Hall. The men responded reluctantly, fearing that the loss of their rifles would only encourage an attack. Surrendered were three cannons and about two hundred forty small arms. Anti-Mormons would claim that the Latter-day Saints controlled thirty state cannon and between five hundred and six hundred small arms. Captain Dunn and his quartermaster told the assembled Nauvoo officers that their compliance would ensure peace, and they pledged protection.138 The militia had retained and hidden away their personal arms.139

The mood in Nauvoo was somber. For Henry Sherwood, the frank admission of the Prophet's fears rang in his ears: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter," Joseph had confided en route to Carthage,

but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man, and my blood shall cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall be said of me, "He was murdered in cold blood!"

Back in Nauvoo, Joseph repeated this sentiment to several others. Within days, they would recall it with a new understanding. Twice Joseph returned to his family at the Mansion House for another farewell. Mary Fielding Smith's brother found Hyrum "in better spirits by far than when he left. He told me," said Joseph Fielding, "that all things would go well."140

From the Smith home, the company rode up Main Street on horseback and in wagons. They waved goodbye to the state militia and local guard at the Masonic Hall and headed once more along the road to Carthage. At his farm, the Prophet turned his head for several last looks at the prosperous layout. To those who commented on the attention he was giving the place, Joseph said, "If some of you had got such a farm and knew you would not see it any more, you would want to take a good look at it for the last time." Just beyond the farm, the entourage met A. C. Hodge, returning from Carthage. His message, delivered privately to Hyrum, included Hodge's own summarizing advice: "Do not go another foot, for they say they will kill you, if you go to Carthage." A minister's reading of the mood of the community, Hodge reported, was certain death for Joseph and Hyrum. The proprietor of the Hamilton Hotel had pointed out the source of potential trouble. "Hodge," he had said, pointing to the Carthage Greys, "there are the boys that will settle you Mormons." Farther along, the Prophet and his traveling companions stopped to eat, and the governor's detachment caught up with them, hauling the state arms. With this escort, the company rode the final four miles to Carthage. It was well into the night when they passed the public square, where some of the Carthage Greys and a few other troops from the area had camped. Here, the citizen solders shouted obscenities and threatened "to shoot the damned Mormons." The raucous welcome aroused Governor Ford, now settled at the inn. He leaned out the window of his quarters and promised that he would cause Joseph Smith to pass before the troops the next morning if they would quietly return to their quarters. The troops responded, "Hurrah for Tom Ford," and obeyed his order.141

The Nauvoo party also put up for the night at the Hamilton Hotel. It was midnight. Inside the hotel, some of the defendants discovered that several apostates, too, were staying at Carthage's best inn. John A. Hicks confessed freely to Cyrus Wheelock that he and others, including William and Wilson Law, Chauncey and Francis M. Higbee, Robert D. and Charles A. Foster, and Joseph H. Jackson, had one intent. Whatever the outcome of the trial, they would shed Joseph's blood. Jackson spoke openly of the plan. Wheelock sought out Ford and shared this threatening talk with him. While acknowledging "that a great deal of hatred existed against" the prisoners, the governor treated the threats with indifference. "They were no more than the bluster which might have been expected," he wrote in a later reflection. Ford would not give up his hope that the Expositor case would be settled through legal process. Jackson's boast remained with Wheelock. The apostate had said, "You will find me a true prophet in this respect."142

NotesChapter 13. Foes Within: The Church of the Seceders

Epigraph: "A Proclamation to the Saints Scattered Abroad," T&S 2 (January 15, 1841): 276-77 (HC 4:272-73).
