Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 14

"Joseph and Hyrum Are Dead"

Now Zion mourns she mourns an earthly head: The Prophet and the Patriarch are dead! The blackest deed that men or devils know Since Calv'ry's scene, has laid the brothers low! One in their life, and one in death they prov'd How strong their friendship how they truly lov'd; True to their mission, until death, they stood, Then seal'd their testimony with their blood. Ye Saints! be still, and know that God is just With steadfast purpose in his promise trust; Girded with sackcloth, own his mighty hand, And wait his judgments on this guilty land! Eliza R. Snow, July 1, 1844

The events at Carthage, Illinois, during the last week of June 1844 would have a profound effect on the history of Nauvoo's gathered people from that time forward. The murders of Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum by a mob with painted faces has forever etched itself in the memory of the Latter-day Saints. The deaths of the Prophet and Patriarch ended one era in the church's history and opened another. Within the church, the deaths of the two revered and respected leaders created a vacuum difficult to fill. Questions over succession to the prophetic office created divisions that have not yet healed. As Eliza Snow, one of the Prophet's plural wives, so tellingly wrote, Zion mourned both the loss of its earthly head and its faith in justice under civil law. To some Saints, it bolstered their questions of America's position toward the church and increased their skepticism about access to the freedoms their ancestors had defended. The disappointments suffered in seeking redress for the losses suffered in Missouri were born afresh when the musket balls of boastful assassins cut short the due process of law promised in a court chamber in Hancock County.

Deliberations at Carthage

Both sides in the Expositor case had committed themselves to pursue the issue through the courts, even though neither side expected satisfactory results. The mayor and city council of Nauvoo distrusted certain men who wore the robes of justice at Carthage. They expected to see witnesses detained and juries packed such was their memory of similar trials in Missouri and their perception of the purposes of their accusers. The mayor, at least, feared for his own life that justice would be cut short through assassination. The owners of the destroyed newspaper sought payment for their losses and more. For the Anti-Mormon Party, court hearings offered a pretext to remove two men from their place of safety in Nauvoo to a place where a lynch mob could mete out popular justice.

Those plotting Joseph Smith's death anticipated his release on the riot charge in the appearance before a court at Carthage on Tuesday, June 25, 1844. In their view, dismissal of the charge would release them from their promise to support Ford's efforts to resolve grievances through the courts and would free them to enact vigilante justice. Eight hours before Nauvoo city officials presented themselves for the hearing on the charge of riot, Constable David Bettisworth served warrants against Joseph and Hyrum Smith on charges of treason. These warrants stemmed from the activation of the Nauvoo Legion on the nineteenth.1 The plotters bragged privately that if the treason charges did not succeed, they had eighteen others ready. An informant, just before the four o'clock hearing, reported having heard that the Laws, the Higbees, and Foster "had said that there was nothing against these men; the law could not reach them but powder and ball would, and they should not go out of Carthage alive." As events of the next three days at Carthage would illustrate, the Prophet's enemies had designed a careful legal ruse to hide their widely rumored murderous intentions.2

The charge of treason did not cause much immediate concern when it was delivered around eight o'clock on the morning of the original hearing. Two hours later, Joseph and Hyrum joined Governor Ford for a carefully organized appearance before the McDonough and Carthage troops. With Brigadier General Miner R. Deming between them, the two church leaders walked within a protective square formed by a company of the Greys. Others in the party followed behind the three or mixed among the crowd watching for trouble. The appearance met Monday night's promise to the McDonough troops. Having never met Joseph Smith, they did not know what he looked like. But certain Carthage soldiers took offense when Ford used military titles to introduce the Smiths. Witnesses remembered that "some of the officers threw up their hats, drew their swords, and said they would introduce themselves to the damned Mormons in a different style." The governor calmed the soldiers with a mild reprimand and hurried the church leaders safely back to their hotel room. Deming posted a guard to maintain quiet among the Greys.3

Rumors circulating during the day echoed the unsettled mood in western Illinois. One report said that troops from Warsaw were gathering uninvited at Carthage. Another claimed that the apostates had organized a party to plunder Nauvoo. The governor wished to prevent disruptions of the legal process. With the Prophet's endorsement, Governor Ford ordered Captain Singleton of Brown County to march a company of sixty men from McDonough County to Nauvoo to help the city police should disorder break out. Ford authorized Singleton to mobilize the privately armed Nauvoo Legion, if necessary, to protect the city from outside incursion.4

The encounter with the Carthage Greys and persistent rumors of armed conflict set the mood for the four o'clock appearance of fifteen of the men charged with riot. For safety, the hearing was conducted at the hotel with a guard of men with bayonets fixed.5 The prosecution immediately called for a postponement. The defense wanted to proceed; they acknowledged the role of the mayor and the city council in ordering the destruction of the press and offered to post bail. After further discussion, Justice Robert F. Smith bound the case over for a Saturday hearing. He asked a rather high bond of five hundred dollars for each defendant, but friends of the accused offered their property as security to help meet the requirement. Most of the freed councilmen left the county seat soon afterward for Nauvoo.6

After supper that evening, Joseph and Hyrum Smith were served an arrest warrant on the charge of treason. The mittimus from Justice Robert Smith claimed that the pair had appeared for trial but that it had been postponed when Francis M. Higbee and others failed to appear as witnesses. In fact, the hearing earlier in the day had concluded without consideration of the charge. Clearly, the order was issued on false grounds. The Prophet's attorneys sought Ford's advice. Though sympathetic, the governor could see no way an executive could interfere in the judicial process. Let the legal process take its course, he counseled. Ford expressed willingness, if asked, to post a guard at the jail. John Taylor likewise asked Ford to intervene but received the same response. Apparently, Justice Robert Smith also consulted the governor, who advised him to call out the Carthage Greys to execute the arrest order. Because the justice served as captain of the militia, he thus ordered compliance to his own judicial ruling. He posted a guard of twenty men at the hotel door under Captain James Dunn. Meantime, Justice Smith assured the Prophet's attorneys that he had issued the mittimus only to create a reason for placing the Smiths under protective custody in the jail.7

It wasn't long before Dunn and his guard escorted Joseph and Hyrum from Hamilton's hotel to the jail. A few friends and counsel accompanied them. Stephen Markham and Dan Jones joined the procession. Markham carried a large hickory cane that he had nicknamed "the rascal-beater." Jones had his own smaller black hickory club. The two used the sticks against a few drunken men who broke through the ranks. Jailer George W. Stigall put his prisoners upstairs in the iron-barred cell reserved for criminals. Later, he moved them downstairs into the less-secure debtor's room. It was furnished with a bench, some blankets, and a "night bucket." After some "pleasant conversation about 'the secret of godliness,'" the ten men scattered themselves around the floor and slept until six o'clock the next morning.8

As dawn broke on the twenty-sixth, the jailer provided breakfast for the men and relocated them to his own upstairs bedroom, furnished with a bed, mattresses for children in the family, a writing table and chairs, a chest, and perhaps a wardrobe. Curtains hung at the windows, which were open for ventilation. Joseph Smith was anxious about legal developments at Carthage. He suggested that his attorneys, H. T. Reid of Fort Madison and James W. Woods of Burlington, seek a change of venue to Quincy.9 Meanwhile, he sent a messenger to Knoxville to ask Judge Jesse B. Thomas of the circuit court to hear a request for a writ of habeas corpus. Thomas had given friendly but informal advice during the Expositor and perjury hearings. This time, Thomas declined for lack of jurisdiction in the treason charge.10 Even though Smith trusted his legal counsel, he seemed nervous about their ability to handle all aspects of the case. His opponents had engaged five men to present their position. Joseph had only two attorneys from a single legal partnership. The Prophet sent for Latter-day Saint attorney Almon W. Babbitt, who had helped at the perjury hearing in May, but Babbitt had already hired on to help the opposition. Even so, threatened with his life by residents of Carthage, Babbitt hurried off to Macedonia. Friends of the Prophet were likewise harassed out of town during that day and the next.11

Besides his legal advisers, Joseph's other security lay with Governor Thomas Ford. The governor remained at Carthage to oversee a solution to the crisis through the law. After several failed attempts by the Prophet to gain an interview, the two finally met in the jailer's upstairs bedroom at mid-morning. During a forty-five minute conversation, Joseph Smith defended the legality of the city council's actions against the Expositor and his issuance of martial law. A preventive measure, Smith said, could not be considered treason against the state if its intent was self-defense. Ford seemed to agree that the Saints had acted according to their best judgment. He reaffirmed his opinion that the destruction of the press was wrong. The Prophet recalled the long months of imprisonment that the Missouri judges had imposed on him without fair trial and without the benefit of witnesses. He did not want to repeat that experience. In response, the legalistic-minded Ford defended constitutional process and once again pledged protection. If his McDonough troops marched with him to Nauvoo on Thursday, the governor said, he would probably take the prisoners along to ensure their safety. The conversation ended shortly after ten with Smith's offer to pay for the loss of the press. He did not want the owners to suffer financial loss, he said, but neither did he want a libelous paper published in Nauvoo.12

The prisoners spent the rest of the morning biding their time, an outward calm belying inner tension. The Prophet's scribe, Willard Richards, kept busy taking dictation. John Taylor sang to entertain the men. Joseph Smith recalled a dream about the fall of William and Wilson Law and another dream about trying to save a steamboat in a storm. The men interacted with the guards posted from Captain Dunn's McDonough troops to protect them from harm and to prevent their escape. Some of the guards became so convinced of the prisoners' innocence that they were relieved of duty. Frank Worrell supervised the new guards posted from the Carthage Greys.13

During the afternoon, attorneys for the two sides jockeyed for control over the charge of treason. Counsel for the prisoners resisted a call for a hearing, but at half past three the issue was resolved. Justice Robert Smith sent Constable David Bettisworth back to the jail with a company of the Greys to serve as escort. Even with this guard, the prisoners feared the consequences of a march to the courthouse, so the Greys formed a hollow square for protection. The Prophet surprised the gathering crowd by locking arms with one of the bystanders for safety en route to the four o'clock hearing.14

At the courthouse, defense attorneys H. T. Reid and James W. Woods sought for an examination on the charges as soon as witnesses could be brought from Nauvoo, which would require adjournment for at least a day. The justice set the next phase of the hearing for noon on the twenty-seventh and remanded the prisoners to the county jail. Joseph and Hyrum were now legally incarcerated. The jailer confined them in the iron cage until a note from Ford half an hour later invited Stigall to return them to the more comfortable bedroom.15

The prisoners did not hear anything more about the governor's planned march to Nauvoo until around eight that night. At that time, Woods and Reid brought word that Ford and his advisers had decided he should take all but fifty or sixty of the assembled militia with him the following morning. The prisoners would remain behind, but the governor promised to handpick a guard for the jail. Justice Robert Smith had postponed Thursday's trial until Saturday, the twenty-ninth. After the attorneys left, the prisoners and their five companions prepared for the night. John Taylor led them in prayer. Hyrum Smith turned to the Book of Mormon for consolation. More confident than his brother of their eventual release, he selected accounts telling of the release from prison of other servants of God. This discussion piqued the interest of the guards at the door, so Joseph explained early events of the Restoration.

It was late when the men retired. Joseph and Hyrum were given the only bed in the room. Taylor, John S. Fullmer, Stephen Markham, and Dan Jones lay side by side on mattresses on the wood floor. A gunshot nearby prompted Joseph to find a spot on the floor between Jones and Fullmer. Fullmer remembered the quiet conversation between them. "I would to God that I could preach to the Saints in Nauvoo once more," he remembered Joseph saying. Fullmer tried to cheer the Prophet. Richards kept writing until his last candle burned out and left the room dark. Then he took the place on the bed vacated by the Prophet. The room quieted again. Joseph whispered a question to Jones, "Are you afraid to die?" Jones, like Fullmer, tried to disabuse Joseph of his foreboding. According to Jones, around midnight would-be assassins crept up the stairway but lost their courage when Joseph Smith shouted through the door and invited them in his "prophet's voice" to carry out their mission of death.16

The Murders at Carthage

Reports early on Thursday, June 27, did nothing to reassure Joseph Smith that the legal process would continue uninterrupted. In a letter to Emma dictated that morning, he encouraged the Saints to remain calm and to follow Ford's directions when the governor spoke to them. "There is no danger of any extermination order," he told Emma. "Should there be a mutiny among the troops (which we do not anticipate, excitement is abating) a part will remain loyal and stand for the defense of the state and our rights." If attacked, he said, it would be his duty to defend himself, but he anticipated "the last extreme" would not arrive. Taking up the pen himself, Joseph added a postscript: "Dear Emma," he wrote,

I am very much resigned to my lot, knowing I am justified, and have done the best that could be done. Give my love to the children and all my friends . . . ; and as for treason, I know that I have not committed any, and they cannot prove anything of the kind, so you need not have any fears that anything can happen to us on that account.17

The penalty for treason was death by hanging.

Joseph had not forgotten the reports of previous days threats that his life would end not with a rope around his neck but with bullet wounds in his flesh. Shortly before dictating his message to Emma, he had heard Dan Jones's reaffirmation of a plot against his life. Jones, venturing out of the jail to investigate the disturbance during the night, met Frank Worrell, head of the guard at the jail. According to Jones, Worrell had gloated, "'I can prophesy better than Old Joe, for neither he nor his brother, nor anyone who will remain with them will see the sun set today.'" Jones reported the conversation first to the Prophet and next, at his direction, to the governor. Ford discounted the threats as idle harassment. Jones then challenged Ford to place a friendlier guard. The prisoners are master Masons, Jones said, "'and as such I demand of you protection of their lives.'" Ford, too, had affiliated with the Masons and knew very well his fraternal obligation to protect a fellow member but persisted in his opinion. When the guards prevented Jones from reentering the jail, he lingered out of sight to watch developments.18

Those most active in the Carthage anti-Mormon effort, like the leaders of the movement in Warsaw, sought support from neighbors and friends. They organized a mass meeting at Carthage on June 27. The topic: how to prevent Joseph Smith from being elected president of the United States. If he failed in 1844, some had said, he would certainly succeed four years later, because his widely circulated Views on Government had attracted much favorable attention. A cooperative effort by Missouri and Illinois to kill him, they surmised, would be tolerated and go unpunished. The meeting claimed delegates from every state except three. It resembled in minor ways a political convention, a sampling of national opinion. More important, acting as a popular court, it passed judgment against two men considered enemies to the peace of the local community.19

To accompany Ford to Nauvoo, upwards of fourteen hundred troops had assembled in Carthage and another three hundred near the "shanties" of an abandoned speculator's town in the Warsaw-Green Plains area. The smaller group was led by Colonel Levi Williams, a farmer from Green Plains. The group planned to meet the governor at Golden's Point, six miles southeast of Nauvoo.20 Among the troops congregating in Carthage from Schuyler County were a few Latter-day Saints who had answered the governor's call out of duty. Recognizing the awkwardness of the situation, their leaders somewhat sarcastically put the men first in the ranks. The Latter-day Saint soldiers kept together with a few trusted neighbors and experienced only occasional harassment from their fellow militiamen.21

The governor's plans shifted during the morning. After consulting with militia officers, he decided against leading a military escort to Nauvoo. The governor had learned that some of these troops wanted to destroy the city. Hoping to prevent civil war, Ford disbanded both the forces gathered at Carthage and the Warsaw militia heading for Golden's Point. The Warsaw troops, anxious to sack Nauvoo, were disappointed with the dismissal. Thomas Sharp rallied about eighty of them to form a group of regulators. Accepting as their mission the assassination of Joseph Smith, they headed for Carthage.22

Meantime, news had reached the prisoners that Ford had cancelled his trip to Nauvoo. A short time later, word reached them that Governor Ford intended to go to Nauvoo but without the militia. Joseph dictated a postscript to his letter to Emma:

P.S. 20 minutes to 10. I just learn that the Governor is about to disband his troops, all but a guard to protect us and the peace, and come himself to Nauvoo and deliver a speech to the people. This is right as I suppose.23

Ford encouraged the dismissed militiamen in both groups to return to their homes and farms. Most of them left before noon, but a few in Carthage waited until the governor departed for Nauvoo and then joined the Warsaw posse to carry out the murderous decision sanctioned by the mass meeting. Ford posted a watch from McDonough County half a mile out on the Carthage-Warsaw road. The county jail sat on the outskirts of Carthage in that direction.24 Ford ordered the Carthage Greys camped on the public square to continue a guard at the jail. The Carthage Riflemen, a militia company, also remained on alert. By mid-morning, the governor and Captain Dunn's Union Dragoons were headed west toward Nauvoo in a light rain. The long ride left Ford uneasy. He sent a messenger back to Captain Robert Smith, reminding the guards of his expectations for the prisoners' safety.25

Joseph Smith was sending out his own messenger. He dispatched Dan Jones to Quincy seeking yet another attorney, O. H. Browning, for Saturday's hearing. As he left the jail, Jones was threatened by men who feared Joseph was inviting the Nauvoo Legion to storm the jail and rescue him. Jones rode off and joined Ford's convoy, barely missing the Warsaw regulators, who were waiting behind a ridge on the prairie for the governor's departure.26

The arrival of the governor at Nauvoo attracted a crowd. Residents gathered quickly near the Mansion House to hear Ford speak. He repeated what he had told Joseph Smith, that the destruction of the Expositor had been an unwise action and that the heavily armed Nauvoo Legion posed a threat to the peace of the region thus the need to disarm it. Prejudice was real, he acknowledged, but the Saints could do much to disabuse public opinion. "You ought to be praying Saints, not military Saints," he said. The governor warned against any physical harm to the Expositor's owners. Ford accepted dinner but turned down an invitation to spend the night at the Mansion House. His party left Nauvoo around 6:30 p.m., followed shortly afterward by Captain Singleton's police supplement. The governor's entourage marched at full width up Main Street with a show of military flourish. From the Mansion House to Lyon's Drug, near the Masonic Hall, the troops demonstrated their passes, guards, cuts, and thrusts to impress the residents. Those who heard the speech and saw the military show of Ford's well-disciplined troops reacted with indignation over the governor's criticism of Joseph Smith for imposing martial law.27

Just before the governor's departure for Nauvoo, Cyrus Wheelock had challenged Ford in a meeting at Hamilton's inn. "'These men [the prisoners] . . . are safe as regards the law,'" Wheelock told him, "'but they are not safe from the hands of traitors, and midnight assassins who thirst for their blood.'" The governor admitted that he felt himself caught in a dilemma. Nevertheless, he trusted the militia's agreement to sustain his pledge of safety and a fair trial. Disappointed by the conversation, Wheelock slipped a revolver into a side pocket of his raincoat and, with an entry pass signed by the governor, entered the jail without being searched. Upstairs, he quietly slipped the gun into Joseph Smith's pocket. The Prophet pulled it out, examined it, and kept it. Joseph handed to Hyrum a single-barrel pistol given to him earlier by John S. Fullmer and asked Wheelock to secure additional pistols for use in defending the jail.28

The prisoners and their friends busied themselves with preparations for the trial and for their own self-defense in the event of an armed attack. Richards wrote out a list of witnesses for the trial, which Joseph and Hyrum audited. Joseph instructed Wheelock to carry the list to Nauvoo and to ensure that the Saints observed Ford's counsel to remain calm. The men sent greetings to their families. Leaving the jail with Wheelock was John S. Fullmer, dispatched to help in locating witnesses for Saturday's hearing. Chief counsel James W. Woods left with them. In a parting assessment of the situation of the prisoners, Joseph reaffirmed his trust in an eventual era of peace for the Saints.29 Wheelock remembered the conversation:

Said Joseph, "Our lives have already become jeopardized by revealing the wicked and bloodthirsty purposes of our enemies; and for the future we must cease to do so. All we have said about them is truth, but it is not always wise to relate all the truth. Even Jesus, the Son of God, had to refrain from doing so, and had to restrain His feelings many times for the safety of Himself and His followers, and had to conceal the righteous purposes of His heart in relation to many things pertaining to His Father's kingdom. . . . So it is with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; we have the revelation of Jesus, and the knowledge within us is sufficient to organize a righteous government upon the earth, and to give universal peace to all mankind, if they would receive it, but we lack the physical strength . . . to defend our principles, and we have of necessity to be afflicted, persecuted and smitten, and to bear it patiently until Jacob is of age, then he will take care of himself."30

Joseph was in a reflective mood, as he had been six years earlier during his long confinement at Liberty. He related a dream of the previous night and applied it to his current situation. In the dream, he had defended his neglected farm outside Kirtland against a company of angry men who then ordered him to leave it, which he did. Apparently, for Joseph the farm represented the church. His departure from the farm represented his death, not a selfish abandonment of the religious mission for which he and Hyrum were about to give their lives. The two prophesied of the church's eventual worldwide triumph.31

Shortly after one o'clock that afternoon, Stigall announced dinner. Taylor and Markham joined the jailer and his family in the kitchen below. The Smiths and Richards ate in the upper room. Richards complained of illness, and Markham, who had a pass from the governor, left for medicine. The Greys blocked his return, hoisted him onto his horse, and forced him out of town at bayonet point. This act escalated their confidence. The prisoners upstairs noticed an increase in boasting. Just before a changing of the guard at four, John Taylor honored Hyrum Smith's request to sing a folk-hymn. Recently introduced in Nauvoo, "The Stranger and His Friend" tells of a man who offers food, water, clothing, and medical assistance to a stranger. Upon last of all finding the stranger illegally jailed, the friend discovers that the recipient of his good will is the Savior in disguise. The sixth stanza directly reflected the melancholy mood at Carthage:

In pris'n I saw him next, condemned To meet a traitor's doom at morn; My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked, if I for him would die; The flesh was weak, my blood ran chill, But the free spirit cried, "I will!"

A bit later, again by Hyrum's request, Taylor sang the ballad a second time. Hyrum then read extracts from Josephus.32

A guard of six or eight men kept watch in three-hour shifts at the sandstone prison. Joseph struck up a conversation with some of them, once again defending his innocence against the charges of his opponents. At five o'clock, Stigall returned to the jail from an excursion and reported Markham's expulsion from Carthage. At the jailer's urging, his wards agreed to move to a safer location, in the iron cell, after supper. The quiet of the jail was about to be challenged.33

That afternoon, just beyond the northwest limits of Carthage, a group of vigilantes from the disbanded Warsaw militia had assembled with others privy to their plans. About two hundred in number, they acted not as militiamen but as independent citizens seeking to settle the Mormon question outside the law. Many of them had walked the muddy road from Warsaw behind an old wagon carrying a barrel of whiskey. Unlike some others, they had not been thwarted by a washed-out bridge that forced a half-mile detour. Others were stragglers from the dismissed militia companies or Nauvoo dissenters.34

The mob intended to accomplish the objectives urged upon them by Thomas Sharp's newspaper editorials of the past weeks, the boasted threats of Joseph Jackson and other Mormon apostates, and the Carthage mass meeting. Representing Nauvoo's external and internal opponents as chief spokesmen were Jackson and Sharp. Captain Mark Aldrich, Sharp's colleague on the Warsaw correspondence committee,35 plotted military logistics. With the governor away in Nauvoo, with posted guards from the Carthage Greys willing to cooperate, and with two targeted Latter-day Saint leaders resting in the jailer's upstairs bedroom, the opportunity for action had arrived.36

The men masked their identities by darkening their faces with a deep brown or black coloring.37 They listened to the strategy of their self-appointed leaders. Then they moved quietly in single file through the woods and toward town, "shielding themselves from view by skulking along a rail fence." Two youths posted atop the courthouse with a telescope first spotted what they thought might be a militia unit from Nauvoo. They passed the word to the Carthage Greys and the Carthage Riflemen, who were camped on the square about seven hundred yards from the jail. Officers organized the men into formation and marched them double-time toward the jail. Before the militia could get there, the vigilantes circled around and approached from the north, split ranks, surrounded the building, subdued the cooperative guards, and entered the jail, their firearms ready for the attack.38

In a letter written a few days later, one of the arriving Greys summarized the event as he understood it:

When the mob came up in front of the Jail our guard challenged them. The mob demanded the prisoners. They were told that if they did not retire the guard would fire on them. The mob raised a shout and commenced jumping over the low fence in front of the Jail when our guard fired on them. The guard were immediately overpowered and the Mob rushed into the Jail and did their work. The Guard were not hurt except some bruises. . . . The mob all had their faces blacked. When we were marching to the Jail about 150 yards from the jail we saw Jo[seph Smith] come to the window and turn back and in about a second or two afterwards he came to the window and tumbled out. He was shot several times and a bayonet run through him after he fell. From all the information I can get the mob were about 250 strong, the forces left to guard the prisoners about 60 or 65 strong.39

William Daniels, who accompanied the Warsaw vigilantes, agreed that Joseph was shot after he was on the ground. (More reliable evidence suggests otherwise.) A distorted version of his testimony published by Lyman Littlefield says that a young man approached the body with a bowie knife, intending to sever the Prophet's head, and that a bright flash of light stunned the man. Littlefield's exaggerations quickly entered popular discourse. Daniels maintained at the trial of the accused murderers that he had seen a flash like lighting but that the young man held only a flute.40

Other nearby witnesses reported seeing one of the regulators turn Joseph Smith's body, lean it up against the curb of the well, and announce, "Well, boys, he's dead!" The men then scattered toward the woods. One of the young watchmen, William R. Hamilton, son of the innkeeper, passed his hand over the Prophet's forehead, raised an arm, and confirmed that indeed Joseph Smith was dead. Hamilton looked inside the jail and saw Hyrum's body on the floor in a pool of blood, plaster dislodged from the ceiling onto his face. As he left, young Hamilton heard but ignored noises in the cell room; he ran to the inn to inform his parents of the murders.41

Willard Richards and John Taylor, who were inside the jail, provided another perspective on the murders.42 The prisoners had first heard shouting, next a demand for surrender, and then the discharge of three or four firearms. The guards had fired wads over the head of the rushing attackers to cover their collusion.43 Richards, the only man in the room still wearing his coat on that warm afternoon, parted the curtain at the south window. From this vantage point, fifteen or twenty feet above the ground, he could see that the mob had entered the lot and were surrounding the building. Pushing aside the guards, a number of the vigilantes entered the jail. At the top of the stairs and to the right, the hardwood door to the prisoners' quarters had been slammed shut, but the latch would not hold, despite prior efforts to repair it.44 Now, only the weight of the six-foot-plus frame of Joseph Smith and his companions restrained the determined mob. Joseph, in shirtsleeves, had retrieved the six-shooter from his coat. Hyrum held the single-shot pistol. Taylor had Markham's large hickory cane in one hand, while Richards reached for Taylor's cane.45

From the bottom of the stairway, the attackers sent a volley of musket balls upward against the door of the prison chamber straight ahead of them. Apparently, they did not know that the iron cages inside were empty. Then, as the men advanced up the stairs to the landing, one of them fired at the keyhole of the sleeping-room door. The ball startled the prisoners as it passed between them. Hyrum pressed against the door with his left shoulder, his head bent. Almost instantly, a second ball punched through the door panel. Hyrum received the ball just left of his nose. The ball exited through his throat and grazed his breast. Blood soaked his vest and shirt. Knowing his wound was fatal, he stumbled across the room and, turning toward the door, fell backwards to the floor, exclaiming, "I am a dead man!"46

Joseph moved toward his fallen brother with a brief exclamation of sorrow. Then he returned to a position of safety against the wall and discharged his six-shooter into the entry through a now-open door. Shots fired from the hallway hit Hyrum's body or peppered the floor around it. One ball punctured his right thigh; another entered his left leg just below the knee. Other shots hit the ceiling of the room above his head.

Joseph reached around the door casing and discharged his six-shooter. Three or four of the barrels misfired. He wounded some of the attackers but now had no remaining firepower. Taylor, close behind the Prophet, had been using Markham's "rascal-beater" to knock against the muskets and bayonets thrusting into the room. Richards waited behind Taylor, beyond striking distance. Without any way to shoot back, and certain death threatening from the landing, Taylor suddenly dashed toward the east window, intending to jump. A ball from the landing behind him struck Taylor in the left thigh, grazed the bone, and pushed within half an inch of the other side. He collapsed on the wide sill, denting the back of his vest pocket watch. The force shattered the glass cover of the timepiece against his ribs and pushed the internal gear pins against the enamel face, popping out a small segment later mistakenly identified as a bullet hole.47

Tumbling into the room, Taylor sprawled momentarily on the floor. As he crawled toward the nearby bed, one ball hit his left forearm, lodging in the wrist, and another struck the bone just below his left knee. Richards had moved to the door behind the Prophet to parry the thrusting muskets with his cane, but the volleys continued to target Taylor. Several shots from the landing hit around the wounded Taylor; one ball tore the flesh from his left hip and splattered blood on the wall and floor.

Some of the mob outside the doorway reached their guns around the corner, shooting left-handedly toward the two men in the corner behind the door. The Prophet and his clerk were armed with only a spent six-shooter and the walking cane. Further efforts at defense seemed futile. Dropping his pistol on the floor by the doorway, Joseph Smith ran across the room. Straddling the sill of the east window and with one leg dangling outside, Joseph reached out and lifted his hands in the Masonic signal of distress. Willard Richards heard the Prophet's last words, "O Lord, my God!"48 A ball from the door pierced Smith's right hip and exited through the lower body. A shot from outside entered his right chest and exited below the shoulder blade; another hit under the heart. A fourth shot may have hit the right collarbone.49 Joseph fell to the ground, landing on his left side. He died within moments, while trying to sit up against the well.50

Richards was now the lone unscathed prisoner, a nick on his left earlobe the only wound. The men on the stairs and landing withdrew when someone outside shouted that Joseph had leaped from the window. The immediate threat to his own life abated, Richards peered momentarily out the window at the lifeless body of Joseph Smith. He saw dozens of men surrounding the body and others approaching from the entrance they had just vacated. Richards expected them to return, seeking him. He ran out of the room, ignoring for the moment Taylor's plea, "Take me along." Discovering the doors to the cells in the prison room unbarred, he returned to Taylor and dragged him into the dungeon. Laying him on the straw-covered floor, Richards covered his friend with a straw tick and stood behind the closed door, awaiting his fate. He heard footsteps on the stairs. They entered the sleeping room and then returned down the stairway.51 From behind the door, Richards heard shouts that ended the attack: "The Mormons are coming!" The cry scattered the assemblage.52 The regulators fled into the woods from which they had emerged minutes earlier.

Taylor's smashed patent lever watch would in later years become a revered symbol of both the tragedy of the murders of Joseph and Hyrum Smith and the miracle of the nonfatal wounding of an apostle who would, thirty-three years later, head the church. The watch had stopped at the instant of its impact against the sill: 5 o'clock, 16 minutes, and 26 seconds.53

Aftermath of the Tragedy

Governor Ford first learned of the murders when he and his entourage were about three miles outside Nauvoo on the way back to Carthage. There he intercepted the westward-bound constable David Bettisworth and George D. Grant, a Latter-day Saint who lived just east of Carthage. Ford and his military advisers feared an armed uprising among the Saints. They convinced the two men to accompany them back to Carthage, where they intended to secure all public documents and evacuate the inhabitants. They left Grant at his home; he waited until they were out of sight and then headed again for Nauvoo on horseback. In Carthage, meantime, Willard Richards received help from the innkeeper in moving John Taylor and the bodies of the two martyrs to the Hamilton Hotel. At the first opportunity, Richards penned a short message to be sent to Nauvoo. He addressed it to Governor Ford, General Dunham, Colonel Markham, and Emma Smith:

CARTHAGE JAIL, 8:05 o'clock, p.m., June 27th, 1844.

Joseph and Hyrum are dead. Taylor wounded, not very badly. I am well. Our guard was forced, as we believe, by a band of Missourians from 100 to 200. The job was done in an instant, and the party fled towards Nauvoo instantly. This is as I believe it. The citizens here are afraid of the Mormons attacking them. I promise them no!

Taylor cosigned the note to reassure his wife, Leonora, that his wounds were not life-threatening. Richards added a postscript informing readers that Carthage citizens had promised protection against further injury. The jailer obtained the help of Dr. Thomas L. Barnes and others to dress John Taylor's wounds and conduct a coroner's inquest.54 About this time, Samuel H. Smith, who had journeyed from his brother William's inn at Plymouth, joined Richards and Taylor.55

Around midnight, Ford arrived at the county seat with his party, followed within the hour by Singleton's troops. At Ford's urging, the three Latter-day Saints signed another communication for the Saints, this one addressed to Emma Smith and Major General Dunham. The Mansion House was assumed to be the official point for dispersing news. In this 159-word letter, Richards, its author, repeated the messages of the earlier, shorter communication, not knowing which would be delivered first. "Joseph and Hyrum are dead," he affirmed. "We will prepare to move the bodies as soon as possible. . . . Mr. Taylor's wounds are dressed and not serious. I am sound." He said that the governor had promised a full inquiry and had ordered troops to help defend Nauvoo from a possible attack from Missouri mobbers. (Richards still assumed that the murderers were from Missouri, as earlier rumors had indicated.) Once again, Richards noted that he had promised Carthage citizens that the Saints would not wreak vengeance. "Be still, be patient," he counseled. Ford appended his own short postscript, advising that in the event of an anti-Mormon military assault on Nauvoo, "Defend yourselves until protection can be furnished [if] necessary," he wrote.56

While the governor's aides helped wash the bodies of the two murder victims,57 Ford met with citizens gathered at the public square. It was an hour after midnight. He encouraged the people to leave town; many had already fled, leaving windows open and doors ajar. He worried that residents of Nauvoo would burn Carthage. Ford's words heightened anxiety and hurried the dispersal of all but a handful of the remaining citizens. The governor and his escort joined the exodus in a hasty departure southward. Eighteen miles down the muddy road and several hours later, they reached Augusta, where they deposited county records out of reach of the expected attack from Nauvoo. Ford took breakfast and continued on to Columbus and then to Quincy.58

Richards had entrusted his first announcement of the murders to Dr. Barnes, who asked two relatives from the Carthage militia to deliver it.59 Fearing for their own safety if they bore the bad news to Nauvoo, the pair sought out Latter-day Saint farmer Arza Adams north of Carthage. With Benjamin Leyland as guide, Adams headed for Nauvoo around midnight by way of a back route. A dozen men had congregated at the Mansion House, having already heard early reports. News came from boys tending cows several miles out from Nauvoo on the La Harpe Road. Three men in a carriage headed for Appanoose had passed them in a hurry late Thursday evening, slowing only to shout, "Dig a grave for Joe and Hy Smith, for they are dead." The boys identified the driver as Dr. Robert Foster and the man who shouted as one of the Law brothers.60 When Adams delivered Willard Richards's note just after sunrise, the concerns of Nauvoo's residents became a sudden reality. The Prophet and Patriarch were dead! Word spread rapidly from house to house. "It was a solemn time," Adams noted. "Many a rosy cheek was wet with tears, both men and women." The impossible news brought a solemn grief to the city, punctuated only here and there with a call for vengeance.61

Word of the assassinations spread quickly to Latter-day Saints in outlying settlements. A resident at Macedonia remembered, "When the awful tidings reached us the people wept aloud. One could hear the sobs and crying from every quarter." The reaction was similar elsewhere. The Saints received the word with sorrow, pored over newspaper accounts when they came, and wrote to far-flung relatives with

the sad and dreadful intelligence. . . . They had voluntarily given themselves up to trial upon the Governor['s request] with the people giving their words of honor that they should be protected from all violence (but they are dead). They died Martyrs in a religious persecution.62

At Carthage, the bodies had been prepared for transport in rough oak boxes, each loaded into its own wagon and covered with brush against the sun. A pair of white horses pulled Joseph's wagon. Governor Ford had ordered a guard, and General Deming provided eight soldiers. Willard Richards took responsibility for the arrangements. Innkeeper Artois Hamilton drove his wagon, while the victims' brother Samuel H. Smith drove the other. The wagons covered the twenty miles between the two towns slowly. Around three o'clock an organized group from Nauvoo met the cortege a mile east of the temple on Mulholland Street. Under the direction of the city marshal, a procession accompanied the bodies to the Mansion House. The city council led the solemn train, accompanied by Joseph Smith's militia staff, Major General Jonathan Dunham and his staff, acting Brigadier General Hosea Stout and his staff, other commanders and officers of the Legion, the martial band, and a crowd estimated at several thousand. The people hungered for an explanation and for direction. Filling the streets near the Mansion House, they listened to Willard Richards, William W. Phelps, the attorneys Woods and Reid, and Stephen Markham all of whom had witnessed firsthand the legal efforts or the murders at Carthage. The men spoke from atop the framed building where just ten days earlier the Prophet had lifted his sword to commit the Nauvoo Legion to a vow of self-defense.63

In his remarks, Richards emphasized his pledge to Ford that the Saints would conduct themselves peacefully. According to Wandle Mace, "He pled for them to be quiet, with the earnestness of a hungry man begging for bread, to trust in the law for redress, and when that failed, to call upon God to avenge us of our wrongs." Richards urged, "Brethren, think, think, and think again before you act." The politically astute apostle then called for a vote of support. The congregated Saints spoke with one voice in sustaining his proposition for peace and then dispersed with the announcement of a viewing of the bodies the following morning.64

As evening closed in upon Nauvoo, neighbors talked among themselves of the dramatic event at Carthage. An uneasiness pervaded the city. Rumors circulated that the dissenters had targeted nine other men for death.65 Some "expected the mob would come into the city that night to kill the rest of the Saints," Sarah Leavitt remembered.

There was orders for every man to arm himself and prepare to defend the city. The moon shone uncommonly bright, as we could see quite a distance. . . . They had guards out in every direction; they had a drum that could be heard a number of miles.66

With the doors of the Mansion House closed behind them, Emma's friend William Marks, president of the Nauvoo stake, supervised as William Huntington Sr. and his son Dimick washed the bodies and stopped the bullet wounds with cotton soaked in camphor. The blood-stained clothing was set aside for Zina Jacobs to wash.67 George Cannon carefully took impressions from the faces from which to make death masks.68 The attendants dressed each body in all-white clothing: shirt and pants, stockings, neckerchief, and shroud. Then, they stood aside while the family viewed the bodies, laid out side by side in their coffins set upon tables in the dining room.69 "Such a house of mourning as was that I never before beheld," Almira Mack Covey noted.

There was the aged Mother, the wives, the children, the brother and sisters, the more distant relatives. . . . a dry eye I did not behold. . . . It was enough to rend the heart of a stone to behold two Prophets of the Lord laid prostrate by those who were once their friends.

During the moonlit evening, close friends likewise viewed the remains and comforted the bereaved family.70

For the public viewing, the bodies were placed in coffins lined with white cambric. A square of glass mounted in a lid attached with brass hinges to the coffins served as a window through which the faces of the dead Prophet and Patriarch could be seen. Their bodies were covered with black velvet held taut with brass nails. The coffins were placed in outer boxes in the main floor parlor.71 The rough oak boxes used to transport the bodies from Carthage were set aside, later to be cut up and fashioned into memorial canes for close friends.72

From eight on Saturday morning until five that afternoon, a procession of thousands passed in at the west front door to view their martyred Prophet and Patriarch and moved out again through a door on the north. They came from Nauvoo and from surrounding settlements, from Quincy, Burlington, and elsewhere. "Every heart is filled with sorrow, and the very streets of Nauvoo seem to mourn," Vilate Kimball wrote to her missionary husband in Boston. "Where it will end the Lord only knows." In Nauvoo, work stopped on the temple, and shopkeepers latched their doors. At Carthage, Justice Robert F. Smith quietly disregarded the trial he had scheduled for that day to consider charges of treason.73

The viewing concluded, thousands assembled at the preaching ground below the temple, where William W. Phelps pronounced the funeral sermon. He mourned the deaths of two good men in a failure of justice. He lamented the loss of freedom "to the popular will of mobocracy in this boasted . . . realm of liberty" but welcomed the future day of heavenly retribution. With these words, Phelps touched themes familiar to the Saints, including those brought forward in their appeals for redress for lost properties in Missouri. Phelps defended the character of the maligned prophet, extolled his accomplishments, and assured his listeners that the onward course of the church would continue but not without challenge. Phelps later reconstructed his message:

Governor Ford said, when Moses rose up in Egypt with a new religion, against what the priests were then practicing, there was a mighty stir among the people, and all Israel had to leave; and so when Jesus came among the Jews with a new religion, they crucified him, and can the Mormons hope for anything less from our "higher order of society" in these "free" United States? Can Mr. Smith . . . hope to pass the scrutiny of public opinion without encountering the same destiny that has attended all new religions? . . . "the trial must come."74

At the Mansion House, meanwhile, the coffins were removed from the outer boxes and locked in a northeast bedroom. A bag of sand in each end of the outer boxes gave them sufficient weight to convince onlookers that the bodies were inside. These precautions were taken in response to reports that plotters had threatened to take the bodies.75 With the box lids nailed shut, William Huntington and a few assistants drove the outer boxes in a horse-drawn hearse to the graveyard, past the preaching grounds where Phelps was speaking. The boxes were lowered into graves with the usual ceremonies. Around midnight, ten men one of them leading the way with a musket moved the coffins containing the bodies out of the Mansion House and across Water Street to a secret burial place in the basement of the unfinished Nauvoo House. Rain helped obscure the hiding place. "After the brethren were buried," one of the Prophet's plural wives recorded, "we had an awful thunder storm and lightning, so the mob did not come as they intended."76 The bodies remained hidden until fall, when Emma had them reburied in a small outbuilding toward the river from the Homestead. This final resting place remained a closely held secret. "We supposed they were buried," one resident of Nauvoo wrote in 1845, "but I know not where. The sepulchre [near the temple] was prepared for them but as yet they are not interred in there."77

The grief of the Smith family over the murders of Joseph and Hyrum expanded with the deaths of two additional family members. The Prophet's younger brother Samuel, suffering from what he described to his mother as "a dreadful distress in my side ever since I was chased by the mob," died of bilious fever at the end of July. The following spring William Smith's wife, Caroline, died of a lingering case of dropsy, "brought on by her exposures in Missouri," Lucy Smith concluded, "so that she was what might be termed an indirect martyr to the cause of Christ, which makes the sum of martyrs in our family no less than six in number." Mother Smith reflected, "I had reared six sons to manhood, and of them all, one only [William] remained."78

Newspapers around the United States reported the assassinations at Carthage by copying reports from Quincy, St. Louis, or points east. Early reports were confused, but eventually more accurate information became available.79 The papers responded to news of the death of Joseph Smith and his brother with editorial dismay. Just as Nauvoo's citizens had bemoaned the loss of liberty, editors in major cities denounced the vigilante action as a threat to American principles. "The spirit of lawlessness and violence . . . must be put down must be subdued, or we maybid farewell to freedom of opinion and of speech," the New Bedford (Massachussetts) Morning Register declared.80

Many newspapers agreed with Latter-day Saints that the murders at Carthage were a disgrace not just to Illinois but to the entire nation. Violent actions of this sort had been reported in many other places in the country. Riots had resulted too frequently when law-abiding citizens took the law into their own hands to halt what they termed uncontrollable individuals or movements. Editors bemoaned this trend of spreading lawlessness even more than the singular event in Hancock County. They expressed no liking for Joseph Smith or the Latter-day Saints and sometimes judged the Prophet worthy of the punishment even while they deplored the way he died. For them, the incident at Carthage merely furnished yet another sorry witness of the nation's turn to violence.81

While editors may have agreed that the judgment was justified, they reminded readers that "trial and conviction should [have] preceded sentence and execution."82 Both Governor Ford and Thomas Sharp acknowledged the popularity of this sentiment. "Most well informed persons condemn in the most unqualified manner the mode in which the Smiths were put to death," Ford wrote, "but nine out of every ten . . . [express] their pleasure that they are dead."83

Within Illinois, some papers justified the mob's actions as the last resort when the law failed to bring Joseph Smith to justice through the courts. But many of the editors agreed with their colleagues throughout the nation that the vigilante action brought shame upon Illinois. Nauvoo's associate editor William W. Phelps immortalized the idea in his poem, "Praise to the Man," and John Taylor affirmed that the innocent blood shed at Carthage had both stained "the banner of liberty" and offered "a witness to the truth of the everlasting gospel that all the world cannot impeach."84

Only in Hancock County, among those most openly opposed to Joseph Smith as a civil, military, and religious leader, did the press and some people celebrate his death. At Warsaw, citizens cheered and threw their hats into the air. Two Latter-day Saint families in the town moved away because of harassment. Fearing retribution from Nauvoo, some residents of Warsaw who had participated in the mob crossed the river into Missouri.85 Thomas Sharp, whose Warsaw Signal had invited the murders, defended the people's right to take the law into their own hands. Sharp's first report claimed that the Smiths had been killed by the guards when Nauvoo's militia rushed the jail in attempt to free the prisoners.86 Within weeks, Sharp was claiming that public opinion was shifting in favor of his anti-Mormon stance, and he published letters of support. Joining him in justifying the murders was George T. M. Davis, editor of the Alton Telegraph Review and mayor of the community just north of St. Louis.87 Some individuals who had been convinced by the anti-Mormon press that corruption flourished and illegal political power prevailed in Nauvoo concluded, "So you see there is an end to two of perhaps the worst men that has ever lived on the land."88 One of the vigilantes inscribed on his powder horn: "Warsaw Regulators / The end of the Poly[g]amist Joseph Smith kilt at Carthage June 27, 1844."89

In contrast, Church newspapers mourned the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum with black-line editions. The papers echoed their own twin themes grief over the loss of the two church leaders and dismay at the actions of the perpetrators. Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo laid these actions at the feet of the state of Illinois. These ideas were repeated in news reports, editorials, tributes, a funeral sermon, personal letters, and in a lengthy poem by Eliza R. Snow, published on the final page of the Times and Seasons. Her eulogy began:

Ye heav'ns attend! Let all the earth give ear! Let Gods and seraphs, men and angels hear The worlds on high the universe shall know What awful scenes are acted here below! Had nature's self a heart, her heart would bleed; For never, since the Son of God was slain Has blood so noble,90 flow'd from human vein As that which now, on God for vengeance calls From "freedom's ground" from Carthage prison walls! Oh! Illinois! thy soil has drank the blood Of Prophets martyr'd for the truth of God. Once lov'd America! what can atone For the pure blood of innocence, thou'st sown? Were all thy streams in teary torrents shed To mourn the fate of those illustrious dead; How vain the tribute, for the noblest worth That grac'd thy surface, O degraded Earth!91

This was the first of nine poetic tributes to the martyrs published in the two Nauvoo papers over the next year. Of varying literary quality, they expressed the grief of the Saints and memorialized, especially, the murdered prophet. Those most remembered in later years were a poem by W. W. Phelps, "Praise to the Man," and two by John Taylor, "The Seer" and "O Give Me Back My Prophet Dear."92

With the help of William W. Phelps, Nauvoo's Times and Seasons remade half of its June 15 issue and put a July 1 date on it. The paper was already delayed because of the disruptions of that week and editor John Taylor's absence in Carthage. The black-line edition was headlined "Awful assassination of JOSEPH AND HYRUM SMITH! The pledged faith of the State of Illinois stained with innocent blood by a Mob!" Willard Richards wrote the lead article, a recital of the events at Carthage down through the public meeting at Nauvoo on the sorrowful afternoon of June 28. Richards's concluding refrain like the sentiments in Eliza Snow's poem would be echoed in numerous retellings in letters sent from Nauvoo to relatives and friends elsewhere. "Thus perishes the hope of law," he wrote.

Thus vanishes the plighted faith of the state; thus the blood of innocence stains the constituted authorities of the United States, and thus have two among the most noble martyrs since the slaughter of Abel, sealed the truth of their divine mission, by being shot by a Mob for their religion!93

The church paper published statements by the attorneys H. T. Reid and James W. Woods and an editorial offering consolation and calling for faithfulness to the gospel and patience as unresolved problems of justice and church leadership were worked out. The editorial was written by W. W. Phelps and cosigned by Willard Richards and John Taylor. Also in the special issue was Governor Ford's statement to the people of Illinois, which included his plans for investigating the murders and steps he had taken to calm the immediate concerns in Carthage and Nauvoo. Ford felt no regret at the military precautions he had taken to prevent "the recent disgraceful affair at Carthage." He had placed a disarmed Nauvoo Legion under state control and had received the pledge of militias assembled at Carthage to protect the Smiths.94

Around the ninth of July, Latter-day Saints living outside Illinois first heard of the murders, often from local newspapers. The first inclination of the Saints was to distrust these reports. "I was not willing to believe it, for it was too much to bear," Heber C. Kimball wrote from the East. Yet, the Saints steeled themselves for the inevitable confirmation.95 They waited for arrival of the Nauvoo newspapers or reliable messengers bearing "the mournful but authenticated intelligence." When the papers and letters arrived after another week or so, the Saints picked up immediately on the double message. As Louisa Follet put it, "A great man has fallen to stain with blood the free born rights of this great republic."96

Ford took immediate steps after the murders to secure the peace in Hancock and surrounding counties. His dismissal of the militias assembled at Carthage had been his way of preventing a mutiny of the troops if he led them, as previously promised, to Nauvoo. When he reached Quincy, Ford ordered the commanders of militia in ten nearby counties to enlist volunteers and outfit themselves with arms and supplies sufficient for a twelve-day campaign.97 The force would stand ready if needed to oppose either the Saints or their enemies. He hoped to prevent one citizens' army attacking another. "I think present circumstances warrant the precaution of having competent force at my disposal in readiness to march at a moment's warning," he wrote. Ford dispatched Colonel Hart Fellows and Captain Abraham Jonas to Nauvoo and then to Warsaw to gather information on the mood of the people in those two opposition camps. Responding to a common fear, he charged the men to watch for people from Missouri and Iowa who might be gathering to join in an unprovoked attack on Nauvoo.98

At Nauvoo, Ford's delegates addressed a public meeting on the afternoon of July 1 at the stand east of the temple. They won a hearty "amen" from the crowd in support of the governor's efforts. Earlier in the day, the Nauvoo city council passed a series of five resolutions pledging to sustain the law and to denounce any tendency to seek private revenge on the assassins. The council urged Ford to disarm all other militias in the state as a further step toward peace. The councilmen pledged to restrain Nauvoo's citizens and to support Ford's efforts to ensure a lawful settlement of outstanding issues. "We are happy to say," the church paper reported, "that all appears to be peace at Nauvoo."99

It was an anxious peace at best. Uneasiness over the possibility of a violent response from Nauvoo on the one hand or the attempted extermination of the Latter-day Saints on the other continued for weeks. Most residents who had fled from Carthage and nearby farms returned gradually to their homes, some only after being reassured by their Latter-day Saint neighbors that retribution was not planned.100 In some parts of the county, old citizens moved away, intending never to return.101 Some believed that a reward had been offered in Nauvoo for the destruction of the Warsaw Signal and the murder of its editor.102 A riverboat captain approaching Nauvoo loaded a howitzer, uncertain of what to expect.103 Ford bemoaned the Saints' having established the Nauvoo Legion as such a strong defensive force. It created suspicion, he said, and prompted opponents to rally their own forces.104

The Latter-day Saints were likewise fearful; they expected further persecution. After what had happened at Carthage, they believed the bold assertions of certain antagonists. From Iowa, a law-and-order resident reported, "The mob say they [will] drive the Mormons from that state [Illinois] and burn Nauvoo to ashes."105 Northeast of Nauvoo, a Latter-day Saint farmer recalled, "Our minds were in a constant tension expecting the mob to come and destroy all our labor."106 At Columbus and in some other towns, old residents forcibly disarmed the few Saints living among them. The action seemed to ease tensions. Leading citizens at Columbus soon accepted the improbability "that a few 'Mormons' was agoing to overrun the state of Illinois . . . while the 'Mormons' themselves were scattered with their families throughout the entire State."107

At Warsaw and Quincy, Thomas Sharp rallied support for his claims that the Saints were mustering to attack Warsaw.108 According to reports received in Nauvoo, the Warsaw militia was drilling and demanding expulsion of the Latter-day Saints at Lima. Not willing to depend on any local militia in western Illinois to ensure the peace, Ford asked Colonel S. W. Kearny to station some of the federal troops under his command in St. Louis temporarily in Hancock County. Kearney ignored the request.109 On July 25, Ford challenged Illinois vigilantes to cease military activities and to learn to live in peace. Thomas Sharp denied charges of Warsaw military action as fabrications devised in Nauvoo. He claimed that theft and militarism existed at Nauvoo and urged the governor to ferret them out. The verbal sparring between the editor and the governor continued throughout the fall and winter. Sharp continued to depict Ford as a patsy of church leaders and said that the Saints themselves had been humbugged by the distorted rumors originated by others. Ford did his best to remain neutral. His goals were to ensure justice in the trial of the accused murderers and prevent further civil strife.110

Meanwhile, as instructed by the governor, the men of Nauvoo forgot their own offensive wishes and prepared instead to defend the city against threatened attack. Ford commended the Saints for their restraint. It was "much better than the opposite party," he noted.111 The spirit of moderation in Nauvoo prompted George Alley to write on July 27, "We hope for the best, and prepare for the worst, not meaning to be the aggressors, nor the vanquished, but by the help of an omnipotent arm to retain our rights." Though frustrated by the failure of legal redress, two weeks later Alley echoed the opinion of the majority at Nauvoo when he wrote, "Justice will not always sleep; . . . we Mormons are perfectly willing to let the matter remain with . . . the great Jehovah. And let the guilty feed on the remorse of conscience."112

Attempts at Justice

The immediate aftermath of the tragedy at Carthage left unresolved two questions that the assassinations had precipitated. The first, a need to identify a new prophet and a new patriarch to continue the work of the Restoration, was a matter to be determined by the Latter-day Saints. They did so by placing Brigham Young and the Quorum of the Twelve at the helm in a special conference early in August. Taking longer was the second question, that of civil justice for those charged with the destruction of the Expositor and those involved in the killings at Carthage. Nauvoo's leaders had trusted in the judicial system to resolve the dispute between city officials and the owners of the destroyed newspaper. Now that the owners of the newspaper and political opponents of Nauvoo had taken the law into their own hands to carry out two murders, would the law bring them to justice? Would the murderers be hailed as popular heroes for their actions in ridding society of a threat to the peace of Hancock County? Or would a trial identify them as criminals guilty of taking innocent lives? These conflicting views of the Smiths' deaths would gain a hearing at Carthage nearly a year after the event.

In the Warsaw Signal, Thomas Sharp, one of the accused murderers, ridiculed Governor Ford for mishandling the situation in Carthage and for ignoring threats against the life of Joseph Smith. Sharp's effort to prove Ford's "utter inadequacy to the occasion" was intended not so much to criticize him for the murders as to foster mistrust of the Democratic governor and thereby undercut support for legal action against the murderers. Ford understood that prejudice existed in Illinois against the Saints and that his actions had been misunderstood by some on all sides.113 Between February and April 1845, anti-Mormon papers in Warsaw and Alton published a series of six letters signed "Hancock" that were probably written by Thomas Sharp. The letters criticized Ford's December 1844 explanation to the legislature of the Hancock County troubles. They raised familiar anti-Mormon issues the practice of plural marriage, sanctioned stealing from non-Mormons, and military alliances with Indians. "Hancock" said that Parley P. Pratt's call for political unity in the New York Prophet early in 1845 was evidence that political Mormonism sought to destroy the freedom of others and dominate the government of the United States through a living constitution of twelve men. The critic argued that Governor Ford's unwillingness to believe any of these assertions had weakened his ability to recognize the enormity of the Mormon threat in Illinois and thus biased him in favor of the Latter-day Saints.114

Ford's Whig opponents applauded these arguments and joined in criticizing the governor. Latter-day Saint spokesmen chided Ford for the failure of military protection and justice at Carthage. Editor John Taylor was particularly frustrated with the failure of legal process "in a land of boasted liberty," and he doubted that a fair jury could be assembled anywhere in Hancock County.115

Those accused of planning and participating in the murders were men of varying motives and backgrounds. Whether giving voice to political rhetoric or religious dissention, all agreed that Joseph Smith's death would benefit the broader community. Men of prominence, accomplishment, and ability had joined both opposition camps the anti-Mormon political party and the reformed church. They ignored legal remedies and appealed to a higher law popular sovereignty.116 No doubt some acted as opportunists, but motives cannot be discerned with accuracy in every instance, and much of their explanation appeared after the fact as justification and defense. Many others in western Illinois denounced the substitution of violence for the civil process no matter what the reason.

As Governor Ford orchestrated preparations for the arrest and trial of the Carthage assassins, various individuals compiled lists naming participants in the murders. The two survivors of the attack, Willard Richards and John Taylor, recognized some of those who fired on them from the landing in the jail and named others. Richards's tally of sixteen participants and several supporters included the Laws, the Fosters, the Higbees, and Jackson.117 William M. Daniels, a witness outside the jail, identified ten others, most of them residents of Warsaw.118 Sheriff Jacob Backenstos listed all twenty-eight permanent members of the Carthage Greys as parties to the massacre. He said that a militia company twice that size from Green Plains and three companies of sixty each from Warsaw joined in the conspiracy. The sheriff identified as active participants sixty men from Warsaw, Green Plains, Quincy, Carthage, Augusta, St. Mary's, Fountain Green, and Pontoosuc, and a few unnamed individuals who left the area after the murders. According to Backenstos, the accused included seven lawyers, seven farmers, four merchants, three tavern keepers, three doctors, two "land sharks," six with "no business," and one (Major Calvin A. Warren) "a damned villain."119 Governor Ford believed that justice would best be served by charging only the leaders of the vigilantes. His counsel eventually prevailed.120

As newly elected county officials took steps to organize a grand jury in early September 1844, both sides in the issue watched for extralegal retribution. Supporters of the regulators feared vengeance from Nauvoo's militia. Latter-day Saints alerted Governor Ford when they heard that the Warsaw militia was planning a multicounty drill, or "Grand Military Encampment," in late September. According to a Carthage resident who wanted no part of it, "The people talk of a wolf hunt. They say that [thousands] . . . will meet at Warsaw and pass through the timbers and prairies in this county forming a circle, and at last all meet at the Temple at Nauvoo. You may judge what the object is. The Mormons are fearful of the event, and no wonder." The organizers denied such reports, claiming that only three hundred troops would assemble for a routine drill.121

Despite criticism from his Whig detractors, Ford ignored the Warsaw disclaimer and assembled his own private force to end the harassment. He also needed help in arresting the accused murderers. He requested 2,500 volunteers from nine counties. Only a fraction of that number responded.122 The governor placed a prominent Whig, Brigadier General John J. Hardin, in charge of his volunteers and in late September followed them to Nauvoo. Two groups from Quincy swelled the militia to about 470 men. The Warsaw organizers cancelled their encampment. Some accused assassins fled across the river to Churchville, Missouri.123

At Nauvoo, the governor's militia camped on a vacant lot on the flats while he met with local officials. Ford presented Brigham Young with a commission as lieutenant general of the Nauvoo Legion and Charles C. Rich as major general. The following day, the Legion marched in review to acquaint Hardin with their numbers and their skills. Thinly armed and inexperienced, they made a poor showing. Hardin tested the mettle of the state troops by giving a false alarm. In the ensuing confusion, a volunteer cadet from Springfield was accidentally wounded. The governor and his troops left that afternoon for Warsaw, camping for the night in the woods three miles downriver from Nauvoo.124

With the possibility of a "wolf hunt" resolved, Ford concentrated on arresting the individuals accused of killing Joseph and Hyrum Smith. On September 22, he sent an agent to Nauvoo, Warsaw, and other points to gather evidence for the trial. Information from eyewitnesses and others was used to issue writs against Levi Williams, Thomas C. Sharp, William Law, Robert D. Foster, Charles A. Foster, Joseph H. Jackson, and the guards on duty at the jail, including their commander, Franklin A. Worrell. Learning that the men he sought had fled, Ford planned a secret midnight expedition into Missouri to capture them. But one of the militia officers in on the planning, E. D. Baker, a prominent Whig attorney, quietly made the trip himself during the day on September 30 to bargain with the fugitives. Upset by the private negotiations, Ford was nevertheless obligated to accept the compromise agreed to by Williams, Sharp, and Jackson. The trio agreed to appear before Judge Jesse B. Thomas Jr. at Quincy. The state promised a reasonable bail and a trial postponed until May 1845. After further negotiations with Judge Thomas, the defendants waived their right to a preliminary hearing and executed a bond of two thousand dollars to secure their appearance in court. Whig papers scorned the governor for his foolish "treaty" with the fugitives. In fact, he had done his best under difficult conditions to vindicate the state for his broken promises at Carthage and to bring the accused to trial.125

As the trial date approached, detractors once again raised questions about Latter-day Saint intentions. A commentary in the Nauvoo Neighbor created the opportunity. The writer, presumably editor John Taylor, challenged as illegal the repeal of the city charter. Noting that governments grant artificial rights, he argued that individuals also enjoy natural rights independent of earthly governments. "Every man is above the law and can act as he pleases if he does not interfere with his neighbor's right," he wrote. "This is clearly taught in the great foundation of all law, the ten commandments. Human law, the artificial contrivance of intellect, is not binding upon any honest man. . . . Laws are for transgressors." The State Register in Springfield took this statement to mean the Saints were justifying lawlessness. The newspaper raised concerns that the Saints would overrun Carthage during the circuit court session to force a conviction of the accused murderers of Joseph Smith.126

To quiet these misunderstandings, Brigham Young convened his political advisers, the Council of Fifty. The assemblage encouraged moderation but put Nauvoo's militia on alert and authorized letters of explanation to the governor and Hancock County's United States congressman. The council issued a public statement distancing the church from the Neighbor's editorial and pledged a patient waiting for justice. The Neighbor published the council's reassurance that the Saints were a law-abiding people. It also printed a letter from "Americus" that echoed the position of the Fifty. Though the residents of Nauvoo had no wish to resist the law, the letter said, they would be ready to oppose any conspiracy against the Saints. If the Saints were to adopt a political motto, the Neighbor editorialized, "let it be a dove bearing a fruitful olive bough, as a token of peace on earth."127 These efforts to explain Latter-day Saint intentions reassured many, but a negative public attitude toward them prevailed.

In late May, Brigham Young informed Parley P. Pratt, "The trial of the murderers is now in progress, but there is every reason to suppose they will be acquitted." This widely held expectation among the Saints was exactly the conclusion reached by a jury of the circuit court in Carthage.128 Those actually brought to trial for the murder of Joseph Smith included six prominent leaders of the vigilantes: Thomas Sharp, Colonel Levi Williams, land agent Mark Aldrich, state senator Jacob C. Davis, and Warsaw militia captain William N. Grover. After more than a week of testimony, the jury accepted the defense argument that no one individual could be held responsible for deaths accomplished to satisfy the will of the people. The prosecutors failed to appear for a separate June 24 trial for those accused in the murder of Hyrum Smith.129

Many of the Latter-day Saints expected the trial of Joseph Smith's accused assassins to set off another round of harassment. They were pleased that things remained peaceful, even if, as one man put it, "the court has turned out to be a perfect mob court. . . . after advancing all the testimony necessary to convict men, the jury brought in . . . [a] verdict not guilty."130

Those who were charged with the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith and judged by their peers not guilty of murder resumed their lives. Nauvoo's political opponents continued their anti-Mormon efforts until the Saints left Illinois. Then, despite legends to the contrary, they lived out their lives as respected citizens with successful careers in their communities. Likewise, many of the seceders from the church found other ways to make contributions to society and to other religious efforts.131

The trial of the accused murderers attracted much more attention in Hancock County than the eventual hearings on riot charges against the city council and police. The Nauvoo municipal officers charged with inciting riot had been released by Daniel H. Wells in the justice's court at Nauvoo on June 17, 1844, and again by Robert F. Smith, a justice in Carthage, on June 25. The defendants posted a bond after Smith remanded the case to the next session of the Hancock County circuit court.132 In October, the Nauvoo city council paid $725 to compensate the Expositor owners for the destruction of the press.133

The Nauvoo policemen believed to have been most prominently involved in destroying the Expositor press stood trial in Carthage on October 23, 1845. Security was high for the trial. Dozens of former Nauvoo Legion soldiers camped around the town to prevent violence against the defendants and witnesses. Brigham Young arrived with a guard of sixteen well-armed and mounted horsemen. Other witnesses likewise retained bodyguards. This was "a much more prudent and sensible way of securing safety than fighting," a visiting land agent quipped. Sheriff Jacob Backenstos doubted that the court of Judge Purple would give a fair hearing. The judge instructed the jury to find the defendants guilty if it could be shown that they had participated in the suppression. But when the key witness could not distinguish between pairs of policemen with the same surname, the jury dismissed the case with a verdict of not guilty. A correspondent for the Warsaw Signal complained that Mormons, many of them from Nauvoo, made up most of the jury.134

If the trial of the murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith had looked like a miscarriage of justice to the Saints, so to opponents of the church this trial likewise seemed a farce. Both sides now had evidence sufficient to themselves that for their own grievances, at least, justice could not be obtained in Hancock County.

NotesChapter 14. "Joseph and Hyrum Are Dead"

Epigraph: T&S 5 (July 1, 1844): 575.
