Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 15

"Who Shall Lead the Church?"

We all felt as though the powers of darkness had overcome, and that the Lord had forsaken His People. Our Prophet and Patriarch were gone! Who now is to lead the Saints? In fact we mourned "as one mourneth for his only son." Yet after all the anguish of our hearts and deep mourning of our souls a spirit seemed to whisper "All is well. . . ." So we felt to trust in God. Warren Foote, 1844

Most Latter-day Saints had not anticipated the need to adjust so suddenly to a leader other than Joseph Smith. Not yet thirty-nine when he died, physically robust and vital, the Prophet had inspired and attracted people with revelations and teachings for fifteen years. But now he was dead, as was his brother, who might have stood in his place. Hyrum Smith, forty-four when he died with his brother at Carthage, had been patriarch to the church for nearly four years and assistant president almost as long. In the latter office, Hyrum held two powers essential to the office of president. First, he had been appointed a prophet, seer, and revelator. In this calling, he acted in concert with the Prophet and other members of the First Presidency in announcing revelation to the whole church. Hyrum also shared with his brother the authority to administer in the ordinances that would be offered to the Saints in the Nauvoo Temple. "If Hyrum had lived," Brigham Young noted, "he would not have stood between Joseph and the Twelve but he would have stood for Joseph. Did Joseph ordain any man to take his place? He did. Who was it? It was Hyrum, but Hyrum fell a martyr before Joseph did."1

With the Prophet and the Patriarch gone, important vacancies in the church needed to be filled. The office of president set expectations not easily met, for Joseph Smith had been not only president but prophet, honored by the Lord's call "to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work." "You cannot fill the office of a prophet, seer and revelator," Brigham Young told the Saints. "God must do this."2 As for Hyrum's calling as assistant president, a new president could select another if he wished. The office of patriarch to the church, on the other hand, had been designated for patrilineal descent and was given to William Smith in 1845.3

Some outside observers believed that without Joseph Smith The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would not last. The editor of the New York Herald declared on July 8, "The death of the modern Mahomet will seal the fate of Mormonism. They cannot get another Joe Smith. The holy city must tumble into ruins, and the 'latter day saints' have indeed come to the latter day." Although some echoed this pessimism, other journalists saw different possibilities. Even the Herald editor amended his first opinion. The murders might actually strengthen the church, he suggested. The Prophet and the Patriarch would "be regarded as martyrs to their faith." The latter proved to be the more accurate assessment. That same day, Willard Richards and John Taylor used a popular phrase to summarize their feelings about the effect of the death of the Prophet and the Patriarch: "'The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church.'"4

Preparing for Succession

Reflecting on what Joseph Smith had said to them, many of his close associates at Nauvoo realized that their young leader had anticipated his own death. Even the Lord's promise in 1843 that Joseph would see the Second Coming if he lived to age eighty-five implied no promise that the Prophet would live until 1890.5 Rather, for a number of years, the Prophet had talked of a foreshortened life under a specific timetable. When faced with vicious challenges from apostates at Kirtland in 1838, he told a council of priesthood leaders, "'I shall see you again, let what will happen, for I have a promise of life five years, and they cannot kill me until that time is expired.'" That fall, in Far West, Missouri, when Joseph and Hyrum were carried off in a wagon to prison, their mother felt inspired that her sons would not be harmed: "'And, in less than four years, Joseph shall speak before the judges and great men of the land . . . and in five years from this time he will have power over all his enemies.'" The Prophet reported a confirmation from the Lord while in the jail at Liberty that his life would not be shortened prematurely by his enemies. After the martyrdom, Lucy Smith concluded that God's promise of protection had expired. "I then thought upon the promise which I had received in Missouri, that in five years Joseph should have power over all his enemies. The time had elapsed and the promise was fulfilled." Furthermore, her dying husband's last blessing upon their prophet-son in September 1840 had promised, "'You shall even live to finish your work.'"6Many Latter-day Saints embraced the idea that Joseph Smith had fulfilled his mission, that the Prophet and the Patriarch had died at Carthage for a greater purpose. Indirectly, this affirmation helped church members believe that the Lord would provide a new leader. "Perhaps it is all right," William Appleby reflected upon hearing of the murders. "It was necessary for them to seal their Mission with their own blood. . . . But if they have killed the Prophet and Patriarch, they cannot kill Mormonism or the Church. Its course is onward."7

Those who accepted Joseph Smith as a divine spokesman as translator, revelator, seer, and prophet saw his gifts as singular. They knew also that other leaders had been sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators. Worthy elders taught by the Spirit, and members shared in gifts of the Spirit, including the gift of revelation. The Saints could exercise the gift for themselves and for others within their circle of responsibility. Yet only a designated leader could speak in the name of the Lord for the entire church.8 The question in 1844 was who had been chosen of God to lead the church, to hold the keys to all the spiritual gifts and ordinances.

Within Latter-day Saint congregations, certain related principles governed the appointment of church officers at all levels. Two of them were summarized in the Articles of Faith in 1842, stating "that a man must be called of God, by prophecy" and that he must receive an outward conferral of power "by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority." Between the inspired nomination and the authoritative ordination, a third condition had to be met. According to an 1830 revelation on church government, the candidate's name must be presented to church members for their concurrence.9

In the process of creating a church organization, Joseph Smith identified two callings with the additional qualification of lineage. The presiding bishop could receive the office either as a literal descendant of Aaron or as a high priest in the Melchizedek Priesthood. Nauvoo's bishops were drawn from the high priests quorum. The same revelation said that the office of patriarch to the church "was confirmed to be handed down from father to son." Patriarchs to the church were to be designated by revelation and ordained by the apostles. Hyrum Smith had succeeded to the office of patriarch in September 1840 after his father's death and was officially ordained the following January. Both offices for which lineage was a factor required that candidates be worthy and that they be appointed and ordained by those in authority and with the common consent of the members.10 Neither presiding bishops nor church patriarchs were given responsibility or authority that would prepare them to succeed to the office of president of the church.11

Over the years, under the directives given him by revelation in 1831, Joseph Smith had designated replacements for his own position. The office or person he named changed as the ecclesiastical organization unfolded or as circumstances changed. Each new designation generally superseded an older action. Sometimes it added other possibilities to a hierarchical line of succession. In hindsight, we can see a clear pattern emerging with each new instruction or action. In Nauvoo, additional authority associated with the temple changed the requirements for serving as president of the church. Before his death, the Prophet prepared Hyrum Smith and the faithful members of the Twelve as successors. He gave them keys and authority needed to function in the office of president, which were to be activated through established procedures only upon his removal or death.12

After Joseph Smith's martyrdom, the Twelve, who had been given the priesthood keys necessary to govern the church, accepted the responsibility now placed upon them. The latent keys which Brigham Young held as president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles became active. President Young explained the situation to a conference in Nauvoo in August. The Saints accepted his proposition, and with the personal spiritual witness that many of them received, they sustained the Twelve as the governing body of the church, with Brigham Young as its head. This action set in place principles of succession that would guide future transitions.13

Not everyone knew of the counsel, ordinances, and conferral of authority that the Twelve had received from Joseph Smith. Some who stepped forward as alternate claimants drew upon earlier provisions or found their own ways to appeal to followers. Only James J. Strang professed new revelation in an appeal to direct, divine authority. William Smith asserted a right through lineage for the Prophet's eldest son, Joseph III.14 Sidney Rigdon and a few others turned to the Doctrine and Covenants, where they sought specific counsel on succession. In these modern scriptures, they found reminders as well that all authorized callings come by revelation, congregational acceptance, and ordination. Many would-be leaders accepted the right of the Twelve to lead but opposed their desire to sustain and continue the Prophet's new revelations and practices of the Nauvoo era.15

Discussion of a successor for Joseph Smith had first appeared during the last months of 1830 in response to two concerns. Certain church members in Kirtland were offering revelations in competition with Joseph Smith. Concurrently, Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon wondered if they might not have roles to play in guiding the new church. Revelations in April had designated Oliver Cowdery as second elder. With the Prophet, he held the apostleship and responsibilities over the whole church, including missionary duties for the world, which would later be given to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.16

Three revelations established the Prophet's exclusive right to speak to the entire church in the Lord's name. In the first, the Lord told Oliver Cowdery that only Joseph Smith could receive commandments and revelations for this church, "for he receiveth them even as Moses." Cowdery was given the role of an Aaron, called to teach the Prophet's words to the people.17 The concept of a prophet and his spokesman, here applied to Joseph Smith as first elder and Oliver Cowdery as second elder, later defined the relationship between Joseph Smith as president and his counselors in the First Presidency.

A second revelation, addressed to Sidney Rigdon, a former Campbellite preacher, called Rigdon as a scribe and informed him that the Lord had prepared him for a greater work yet to come. As for Joseph Smith's calling as presiding elder, the Lord said, "I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, . . . if he abide in me, and if not, another will I plant in his stead. Wherefore, watch over him that his faith fail not."18 This revelation assured the Saints that the Lord would not leave them without a leader.

In February 1831, the third revelation reaffirmed Joseph Smith's appointment as the sole revelator to the church and gave him power to identify his own successor. It said, "None else shall be appointed unto this gift [revelation for the church] except it be through him [Joseph]; for if it be taken from him he shall not have power except to appoint another in his stead." That mandate to confer essential authorities on others was restated in an 1833 revelation reminding the Prophet that "through you shall the oracles be given to another, yea even unto the church."19 With this direction from the Lord, the Prophet made certain that the keys of the kingdom reserved only for the president were shared with others to ensure continuity after he was gone. Two years later, the Lord affirmed that the Prophet's calling as the head of the final dispensation had implications beyond mortality: "The keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come."20

With the organization of the First Presidency early in 1832, Oliver Cowdery, who was living at the time in Missouri, ceased temporarily to function in his office. Sidney Rigdon and Jesse Gause were called as counselors, but Gause became disaffected and was replaced by Frederick G. Williams. A revelation in March 1833 made the new counselors "equal with [the President] in holding the keys of this last kingdom."21 Despite this shared authority, Joseph Smith remained first among the "three Presiding High Priests" who formed "a quorum of the Presidency of the Church." All bore the title president, but the Prophet ranked first in the presidency, just as he had been first elder in the earlier paired-leadership council. The 1835 revelation said, "The duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church."22 This revelation implied a continuation of the role of the counselors as Aaronlike spokesmen for the prophet but gave the counselors a latent authority to act in the president's absence when the two of them agreed as one.

After a visit to Missouri, where he organized a high council, Joseph Smith returned to Ohio and in early December 1834 expanded the First Presidency by calling three members of the Kirtland high council to the presiding quorum. For a time, all five counselors were referred to as assistant presidents. Oliver Cowdery, again available to serve, resumed service as an assistant president and by virtue of his previous ordination was given priority over counselors Rigdon and Williams. They were designated second and third assistant presidents. The next day, the Prophet called Hyrum Smith and Joseph Smith Sr. as the fourth and fifth assistants in the council of the First Presidency. The duties of an assistant president, Oliver Cowdery noted at the time, were "to assist in presiding over the whole Church, and to officiate in the absence of the President, according to his rank and appointment, . . . also to act as 'Spokesman.'"23The arrangements for succession from 1830 to 1834 emphasized the role of the second elder, later known as the assistant president. Through this special calling, Oliver Cowdery and later Hyrum Smith held the latent keys needed to act following the death of the president. But with the creation of the high councils in 1834, the Lord introduced another concept of succession that would relate to the Council of the Twelve Apostles when they were organized a year later as a unique traveling high council.

Joseph Smith presided over the headquarters high council organized in February at Kirtland. He did so "according to the dignity of his office [as President of the church]." This standing council served as the court of appeals for temporary councils of high priests organized to deal with difficulties outside the seat of church government or other organized stakes.24 In July, the Prophet organized a second standing high council, this one in Clay County, Missouri. Some presumed that this council in the land of Zion would have precedence over the council in Kirtland, a stake to Zion. On the contrary, when David Whitmer was called as president of the Missouri high council, he was sustained "as President, head and leader in Zion (in the absence of br. Joseph Smith jr.)." The ordination authorized Whitmer to preside in Missouri but retained for Joseph Smith the right of presidency if he were to locate at the Center Place. The Prophet explained in 1838 that Whitmer had been ordained "to be a leader, or a prophet to this Church, which (ordination) was on conditions that he (J. Smith jr) did not live to God himself." Although this explanation suggested that the president of the high council in Zion might succeed Joseph Smith, Whitmer apostatized and thus disqualified himself. He was excommunicated in 1838.25

Oliver Cowdery's service in the First Presidency also ended with his excommunication the same year. The ranking assistant president had been alienated from the Prophet because of such issues as consecration and plural marriage. Cowdery's disaffection resulted first in a reassignment. In 1837, he was appointed as an assistant counselor, a ranking below the first and second counselors. His excommunication the following year removed him, along with Whitmer, from the list of available successors.26

The two channels of succession set in place during the first years of the church were fully operative at the time of Joseph Smith's death. Both Hyrum Smith, as assistant president, and Brigham Young, as president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, held the latent keys of presidency. The Lord reassured the Prophet at Liberty Jail in 1839 that he would live to finish his work. Perhaps because of this comfort, Joseph did not again become actively concerned over presidential succession until 1841. In that year, he began in earnest to prepare both the assistant president and the president of the Twelve as possible successors.

The first step was to fill the office of assistant president. After January 24, 1841, the Prophet's brother Hyrum exercised the authority previously held by Oliver Cowdery as assistant president, including the apostleship. At the same time, Hyrum received his formal ordination to succeed his father in the office of patriarch to the Church. For the previous three and one-half years, he had served as assistant counselor and then as second counselor to Joseph. According to the authorizing revelation, Hyrum became "a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph; that he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph; and that he shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph."27

This appointment, like that given earlier to Oliver Cowdery, gave Hyrum Smith administrative precedence over the counselors in the First Presidency and established his right to stand for his brother as president. The revelation also gave to Hyrum authority not held by Cowdery, which was the right to receive revelation for the church. At the same time, however, the first and second counselors were appointed prophets, seers, and revelators to share with Joseph Smith the right "to receive the oracles for the whole church." Rigdon was ordained to that calling in June 1841. Although the counselors clearly shared in the administrative and revelatory authority, none of this preempted Joseph Smith's priority as revelator to the church and as the only one who could exercise all priesthood keys.28

In a comment more than two years later, the Prophet may have been suggesting to the church that Hyrum was the one the Lord had prepared as his successor. As assistant president, Hyrum Smith already carried a great share of the administrative load of the First Presidency. His calling as a prophet, seer, and revelator suggested a greater role as teacher. Those and other implications came from a sermon delivered on Sunday afternoon, July 16, 1843. Joseph Smith announced "that Hyrum held the office of prophet to the church by birthright and he was going to have a reformation and the saints must regard Hyrum for he has authority."29

This statement raised two questions. First, was the prophetic office a right of lineage? The only publicly acknowledged birthright calling held by Hyrum at the time was that of patriarch to the church.30 If Joseph Smith meant to suggest a similar right to the prophetic office, no record survives of further explanation. The question of patrilineal inheritance disappeared until after the martyrdom.

The second question got people talking. Was Joseph Smith intending to resign his own office as prophet in favor of his brother? After a week of puzzlement on the part of the Saints, the Prophet commented briefly in a speech on July 23. First, he noted that the spirit of prophecy was shared by many in the church. Several in the presiding councils had been sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators (including his brother Hyrum). They, too, could teach the Saints by the spirit of revelation. In both talks, the Prophet's comments suggest that he was looking to the eternities. He spoke of the covenant of eternal marriage and of priesthood government in the kingdom of God. He was clearly preparing the church to receive the temple ordinances. It may be that he also anticipated the time when he would move on to a mission beyond the veil. A few months earlier, he had administered endowments and sealings to selected couples. To provide for a succession of authority, he had conferred upon Hyrum and members of the Twelve in latent form the keys of administering the ordinances.31

Hyrum was prepared to function if that responsibility fell to him. Qualified as well was the president of a high council with responsibilities over the whole church and a commission as special witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith had organized the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1835. Known as the "twelve traveling councilors" or "Traveling Presiding High Council," this group differed in two ways from the high councils previously created. Geographically, they operated outside the designated gathering places known as stakes; ecclesiastically, they were called to be the church's Twelve Apostles. It was their duty to open the nations to the preaching of the gospel, "to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations." At first, "all nations" meant those areas outside organized stakes, that is, where there was no standing high council. Except for being authorized to ordain patriarchs in all large branches of the church, the Twelve at that time held no authority over the stakes.32

An important priesthood revelation in 1835 established what became a line of succession through the hierarchical relationships it defined for the various quorums and councils. In their priesthood office, the quorum of the First Presidency as the Presidency of the High Priesthood held the "right to officiate in all the offices in the church," in both the Melchizedek and the Aaronic Priesthood. The president of the High Priesthood presided over the entire church.33 The Twelve Apostles served "under the direction of the Presidency of the Church" and the Seventy acted "under the direction of the Twelve." The revelation gave the traveling council (the Twelve) a position above that of the standing high councils in Zion and her stakes. Joseph Smith confirmed this in January 1836 when the question was raised by the Twelve. "Their authority . . . is next to the present Presidency," he said, "and . . . the Twelve are not subject to any other than the first Presidency."34

During the Nauvoo years, Joseph Smith expanded the administrative role of the Twelve as a presiding council in two ways. First, in 1841, he increased their authority within the stakes. Restricted for a time from traveling as apostolic witnesses in the world, the Twelve became, as it were, associates of the First Presidency in regulating the affairs of the whole church but with specific assignments within the gathered stakes. The Twelve accepted responsibilities in the headquarters stake that previously had been reserved to the First Presidency and to the stake president and his council.35

The second enlargement involved an expansion of the priesthood role of the Twelve. The Prophet gave them "the keys of the kingdom" in a sense beyond the apostolic and revelatory powers they already held. In Kirtland, the "keys of the kingdom" had reference to apostolic authority, "the Twelve being sent out, holding the keys, to open the door by the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ."36 In a priesthood sense, at Kirtland the president, the associate president, and the Twelve held apostolic keys. At Nauvoo, all of them eventually shared, in addition, the Melchizedek Priesthood keys of administering the sealing ordinances, including those of proxy baptism, endowment, and eternal marriage.

Joseph Smith gave to the Twelve (and some others) the endowment so that they could preserve the knowledge after his own death or removal. To the Twelve in March 1844, he entrusted the keys to authorize the administration of those ordinances to others. To Brigham Young, he gave the keys of the sealing power. Joseph and his assistant president Hyrum Smith held all of those keys as well, but counselors Sidney Rigdon and William Law did not.37 "I don't know what it is," Joseph told the Twelve,

but the Lord bids me to hasten and give you your endowment before the temple is finished. . . . Now if they kill me you have got all the keys, and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others . . . ; and now says he on your shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people rest, for the Lord is going to let me rest a while.38

When the question of succession arose three months later, the Twelve knew that they had received ecclesiastical and priesthood priority over the counselors in the First Presidency and over all other church priesthoods and offices except those held by the president and assistant president. Because they understood the nature of this authority, which included the power to act in the office of the First Presidency and to reorganize that body, the Twelve stepped forward to lead the church in 1844. Along with the issue of revelator to the church, it was the issue of the keys of priesthood authority reposing with the Twelve that mattered. And the most important for the continuity of the expanded doctrine and practices introduced in Nauvoo were the keys associated with the promised blessings of the temple.39

Appointing a Successor

At the time of Joseph Smith's death, most of the Twelve were on a preaching and campaigning mission in the East. On June 27, only John Taylor and Willard Richards, both at Carthage, were nearby. Within two weeks, Parley P. Pratt had joined them in Nauvoo.40 Other apostles would soon arrive to resolve pressing questions about succession.

Even though Sidney Rigdon still held the position of first counselor at the time of the martyrdom, he had moved his family to his native Pittsburgh to reestablish residence as the vice-presidential candidate on Joseph Smith's union ticket. During much of the Nauvoo period, illness, diffidence to duty, and the Prophet's growing distrust of him had limited Rigdon's ability to serve. The Prophet's able spokesman had been a reluctant resident of Nauvoo, anxious since 1841 to seek a place of refuge away from the appointed stake, even though enjoined by the Prophet not to do so. Rigdon had declared his unwillingness to follow the Prophet's revelations if they inconvenienced him personally. At the October 1843 conference, the Prophet attempted to release Rigdon and move Amasa Lyman into the spot, but with behind-the-scenes support from Hyrum Smith and William Marks, an impassioned plea from Rigdon won the congregation's sympathy and sustaining vote.41

William Law, second counselor in the First Presidency since 1841, had been excommunicated for rebellion on April 18, 1844, and not replaced. Amasa Lyman had served as an additional counselor in the First Presidency since about February 1843, when Orson Pratt was reinstated into the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. In August 1844, the Twelve welcomed Lyman back into the quorum. The Prophet's uncle John Smith had served as an assistant counselor beginning in 1837. He was not reappointed after the martyrdom but remained a stake president in Macedonia.42

The president of the stake high council at Nauvoo, William Marks, was seated with the First Presidency at the April 1844 conference in the place of William Law, who was excommunicated two weeks later. Whether this signaled the possibility that Marks would replace Law is not certain, because no action was taken at the conference nor later. During the early months of 1838, there had been indications of future leadership roles for the former member of the Kirtland high council, and he became stake president in Nauvoo the following year. It is certain that in 1844 the Prophet did not see Marks as a successor.43

After the martyrdom, Marks did step forward with the first proposal to fill one aspect of the void in leadership. On Friday afternoon, July 12, he invited the presidents of the priesthood quorums in Nauvoo to appoint a trustee under civil law to manage church financial affairs. No organization could be without such a legal officer for long, and Emma Smith was anxious to resolve her personal finances. Willard Richards of the Twelve and Bishop Newel K. Whitney pressed for more time. At the Sunday preaching meeting, Richards proposed that the need could wait until other members of the Twelve returned. His schedule prevailed.44

Some wanted to invite the Council of Fifty to reorganize the church. Willard Richards, George A. Smith, and John Taylor conferred at Taylor's home and then told proponents George Miller and Alexander Badlam that the secular general council existed to seek redress of grievances and "to devise means to find and locate in some place where we could live in peace; and that the organization of the church belonged to the priesthood alone." Only a day earlier Richards had revealed his position that the Twelve held the authority to act in the office of president. He signed the licenses of two newly ordained elders: "Twelve Apostles, President."45

While available church leaders discussed the process for filling the offices of president and patriarch, some members and their neighbors wondered aloud about the possible candidates. James Blakesley, a member living in Rock Island County, Illinois, summarized the speculation:

The church is left without an earthly head, unless the promise of the Lord shall be fulfilled, which saith, that if he removed Joseph, he would appoint another in his stead. But as this has not yet been done, what is the church to do? Now sir, if I have been correctly informed, some of the members of the church at Nauvoo, want Stephen Markham for their head, and others Sidney Rigdon, and others President Marks, and others Little Joseph, and others B. Young, and some others P. P. Pratt, and if they can all have their choice, we shall soon have a multiplicity of churchs of Latter Day Saints.46

Sidney Rigdon heard the news of the martyrdom in Pittsburgh. He headed immediately for Nauvoo. Members of the Twelve assembled in Boston had written him, urging Elder Rigdon to participate in a joint consideration of the leadership question.47 Rigdon arrived on Saturday, August 3, ahead of the group returning from Boston. He agreed to meet the following morning with those of the Twelve already in Nauvoo but failed to keep the appointment. At the regular ten o'clock Sunday preaching meeting at the grove, Rigdon offered a suggestion similar to that of William Marks selection of a guardian (a president and trustee) to "build the church up to Joseph." Rigdon offered himself as that guardian. He cited neither precedent nor his position in the First Presidency to justify his claims but turned instead to scripture and modern revelation. Ancient prophets had foretold the present situation, he said. In addition, Rigdon claimed a personal revelation calling for "a guardian through whom Joseph will speak to the people . . . as a god to this dispensation, . . . as Moses was to the children of Israel."48

The ambitious orator described impending judgments, including a destructive global warfare in which he would personally lead a militant church to a triumphant victory over the nations of Babylon. He boasted "that he expected to walk into the palace of Queen Victoria and lead her out by the nose."49 Parley Pratt later said of this message: "Elder Rigdon . . . said nothing about building the Temple, the city, feeding the poor, etc. We heard a great deal about the Mount of Olives Brook Kedron Queen Victoria great battles, etc. . . . We want to build up Nauvoo, never mind Gog and Magog."50

Rigdon had served as first counselor since March 1833 and was familiar with the original shared authority given the counselors in the 1833 revelation. He may not have understood that the Twelve had received additional sealing keys and authorities. They had received all temple ordinances; Rigdon had received only a partial endowment. Learning of the special conference proposed by Willard Richards, Rigdon asked Marks, as stake president, to convene a conference for August 6. Instead, at the Sunday afternoon preaching service on August 4, Marks set the date for Thursday, August 8. When high councilor Thomas Grover requested even more time for delegates to examine Rigdon's new revelation, Marks resisted. Rigdon was anxious to learn if the Saints at Nauvoo would accept his offer, Marks said; if not, Rigdon expected to find thousands of members in other branches who would receive him as their guardian.51

Talk in Nauvoo after Rigdon's impassioned plea included concern over his sense of urgency. Charles C. Rich, a counselor to Marks, worried that if the church did not wait for the rest of the Twelve to return, Rigdon might take unfair advantage of the situation and confuse the Saints into a premature decision. On Monday after dinner, Rigdon met with four members of the Twelve. Joining them were Amasa Lyman, who had arrived in Nauvoo July 31, and Bishop Newel K. Whitney. It was election day in Hancock County. Rigdon argued that without an acting head of the church to give counsel, the Saints would scatter their votes for the legislative and county candidates. The assembled council disagreed. A citizens' meeting at the grove the previous Friday had reached a consensus upon candidates friendly to the Saints.52

During the evening of Tuesday, August 6, the steamer St. Croix from Galena docked near the upper stone house at Nauvoo. Aboard were Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, and Wilford Woodruff. They were delighted to be reunited with their families, yet to Woodruff "a deep gloom seemed to rest over the city of Nauvoo." Their arrival brought to eight the number of the Quorum of the Twelve in Nauvoo. Still absent on missions were Elders Orson Hyde, William Smith, John E. Page, and Lyman Wight. "The Brethern ware over joyed to see us come home," Brigham Young observed, "for they ware like Children with out a Father, and they felt so, you may be sure." The following morning, the Twelve met for a joyous reunion at the home of John Taylor, still recovering from his wounds.53

That same afternoon at four, Nauvoo's high council and all the high priests in the city joined the Twelve and Sidney Rigdon at the Seventies Hall. Rigdon explained the revelation he had received at Pittsburgh on the day of the martyrdom. It was a continuation of a vision published in the Doctrine and Covenants, he said, presumably the 1832 vision of the three heavenly glories that Rigdon shared with Joseph Smith. What the Lord wanted now, Rigdon said, was for Joseph's longtime spokesman to govern the church, receive revelations, and continue the Prophet's work.54 Minutes of the meeting captured Rigdon's explanation:

Joseph sustains the same relationship to this church as he has always done. No man can be the successor of Joseph. The kingdom is to be built up to Jesus Christ through Joseph; there must be revelation still. The martyred Prophet is still the head of this church; every quorum should stand as you stood in your washings and consecrations. I have been consecrated a spokesman to Joseph, and I was commanded to speak for him. The church is not disorganized though our head is gone.

Rigdon acknowledged that some would reject his revelation: "The people can please themselves whether they accept me or not."55

For the assembled church leaders, much of Rigdon's explanation rang true to the revelations and to their own feelings about Joseph Smith's unique role. The Twelve would soon declare to the church their intention

to build up the kingdom upon the foundation that the prophet Joseph has laid, who still holds the keys of this last dispensation, and will hold them to all eternity, as a king and priest unto the most high God. . . .

Let no man presume for a moment that his place will be filled by another; for remember he stands in his own place, and always will; and the Twelve Apostles of this dispensation stand in their own place and always will, both in time and in eternity, to minister, preside, and regulate the affairs of the whole church.56

Reflecting on his experience overseeing the work of the church in the British Isles, Brigham Young said, "I would like, were it my privilege, to take my valise and travel and preach till we had a people gathered who would be true . . . ; yet, whatever duty God places upon me, in his strength I intend to fulfill it." Not wanting to be presumptuous in what he saw as his duty as president of the Twelve nor as forthright as Rigdon in asserting a revelatory right to lead, Young demurred: "I do not care who leads the church, even though it were Ann Lee; but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject." He called for a special conference so that the people might consider the question.57

Young expressed one other concern during the leadership meeting. Joseph and Hyrum had been killed through the combined efforts of internal apostates and outside political opponents. Would those same murderers seek to kill the Twelve or other leaders? The senior apostle was ready to give his life, if necessary.58 With that possibility in mind, he wanted to ensure the continuity of certain keys and authorities held only by the First Presidency and Twelve:

We shall ordain others and give the fulness of the priesthood, so that if we are killed the fulness of the priesthood may remain. Joseph conferred upon our heads all the keys and powers belonging to the Apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away, and no man or set of men can get between Joseph and the Twelve in this world or in the world to come. How often has Joseph said to the Twelve, "I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests."59

Rigdon had challenged the Twelve to take the place assigned to them when they received their washings and consecrations in the Kirtland Temple. But when Brigham Young spoke of the fulness of the priesthood, he meant the keys introduced in Nauvoo, including the keys of administering the covenants of the endowment and eternal marriage. Rigdon did not hold them. The Twelve felt the entire burden of responsibility on their shoulders to carry forth the kingdom as they and few others understood it.60

The meeting requested by Rigdon began at ten o'clock on Thursday, August 8, before a large crowd. Standing in a wagon about two rods in front of the preaching stand to get out of the wind, Rigdon expounded his proposal. He wanted a guardian appointed who would carry the titles of president and trustee. An experienced preacher, Rigdon occupied an hour and a half in unfolding his position. When Rigdon concluded, Brigham Young announced a special church conference at two o'clock. The congregation gathered again, with the quorums organized for a solemn assembly. Except for the convalescing John Taylor and those absent from Nauvoo, the members of the Twelve sat on the stand beside their quorum president.

Brigham Young spoke for his quorum, urging the congregation against the selection of a single leader. "You cannot fill the office of a prophet, seer and revelator: God must do this," he said. Even if a prophet were chosen, he added, only the Twelve had the authority to ordain him. The senior apostle felt impressed that the people would be happier with what he called a shepherd than with a guardian or president or leader. Rigdon's authority, he said, had ended with the death of the Prophet. Choosing him as the head would divide the church. "I will ask," he said,

who has stood next to Joseph and Hyrum? I have, and I will stand next to him. We have a head, and that head is the Apostleship. . . . Brother Rigdon was at his side not above. No man has a right to counsel the Twelve but Joseph Smith. Think of these things. You cannot appoint a prophet; but if you let the Twelve remain and act in their place, the keys of the kingdom are with them and they can manage the affairs of the church and direct all things aright.

Young suggested that the vacancy in the office of patriarch to the Church ought to be filled by a member of Joseph Smith's family and that the duties of trustee-in-trust should be given back to the bishops, who had responsibility for temporal affairs. Joseph Smith took that over, he added, only because the bishops failed in their duty.61

Brigham Young next invited Amasa Lyman to share his feelings about his unfulfilled appointment as a counselor to the First Presidency. Lyman acknowledged that he had no claim to precedence over the Twelve. The people's salvation depended upon union, he said, but they must unite for the right behind the Twelve. Rigdon was given another opportunity to express himself, but he deferred to his old friend William W. Phelps. Phelps encouraged the congregation "to submit with deference to the authorities of the church." "If you want to do right," he concluded, "uphold the Twelve. . . . Do your duty and you will be endowed. I will sustain the Twelve as long as I have breath."62

It was soon time for the vote to be called. Brigham Young summarized the issues. Agreeing with Rigdon on procedure, he emphasized that each member should vote his or her independent mind and support only the propositions they could fully sustain with their actions in the days to come. Young proposed that Sidney Rigdon be sustained as a leader, guide, or spokesman. Rigdon interrupted the motion. He wished the other question taken first, namely, "Does the church want, and is it their only desire to sustain the Twelve as the First Presidency of this people?" Rather than polling each quorum one by one the practice in a Latter-day Saint assembly of this type Young chose instead to offer the motion to the entire congregation quorums and unordained members alike. Would they sustain the Twelve? The congregation showed overwhelming support.63

Brigham Young's long discussion of succession options had touched the hearts of the assembled crowd. The president of the Quorum of the Twelve "gave the saints his views of what the Lord wanted," a summary of his talk noted. "Here are the 'Twelve,' appointed by the finger of God, who hold the keys of the priesthood, and the authority to set in order and regulate the church in all the world." It was as if the Prophet Joseph Smith himself was counseling them. In his autobiography, William C. Staines recalled the spiritual witness that had motivated the swell of support:

Brigham Young said: "I will tell you who your leaders or guardians will be the Twelve I at their head." This was with the voice like the voice of the Prophet Joseph. I thought it was he, and so did thousands who heard it. This was very satisfactory to the people, and a vote was taken to sustain the Twelve in their office, which with a few dissenting voices, was passed.

Joseph Hovey recalled, "There were a few who were for Sidney Rigdon."64

Among men of influence besides Rigdon harboring questions about the conference decision were two apostles, Lyman Wight and William Smith, the Prophet's only surviving brother. Both had issues broader than the question of governance. William Marks, president of the stake at Nauvoo, also harbored misgivings. None of these men challenged the authority of the Twelve. Rather, they disagreed with the direction Brigham Young was leading the church. Discussions about Rigdon and other claimants to the Prophet's mantle caused some who were not well acquainted with the circumstances to speculate that the issue had not been resolved within the church. For some, it had not; but for most of the Saints, the answer had been made clear. Orson Hyde saw Rigdon's appeal as an attempt "to ensnare the people and allure their minds by his flowery eloquence; but the plan was defeated. The voice of the people was in favor of sustaining the Twelve to be their leaders."65

With the question of the priority of the Twelve over a counselor in the First Presidency resolved, the conference considered three other appointments. The standing of William Marks as Nauvoo stake president was deferred until the October conference because it was less urgent. The congregation authorized the Twelve to appoint a general patriarch from the Smith family. And those present voted to support Sidney Rigdon "in the place he occupies." The Saints also agreed to free the Twelve to travel again by shifting financial responsibilities to the bishops. Further, they pledged to support the Prophet's program for the church by completing the temple through a tithing of their time and money. This task, said Brigham Young, was the main responsibility of the Saints for that time. He concluded with a call to action, "Now let men stand to their posts and be faithful."66

Support and Discontent

The members who voted their own minds in support of the Twelve meant it. They accepted the Twelve's dual responsibilities in their own office and that of the First Presidency as an appropriate solution to a common concern. "There are others to fill their place," Edward Hunter said of Joseph's and Hyrum's deaths. Zilpha Williams informed her father in Pennsylvania, "Instead of two we have twelve to lead us, and the more they [the mob] destroy the stronger we are."67 Some of the Saints drew a parallel with the pattern of apostolic succession found in the New Testament.68 In the minds and hearts of these believers, the modern apostles did not usurp the unique position of the first prophet of the Restoration, nor was the church left without a head.

Many of those in attendance received a personal witness that Brigham Young had appropriately replaced Joseph Smith. For them, the very appearance, actions, and voice of Young were those of the dead Prophet. It was, paradoxically, the kind of experience anticipated by Sidney Rigdon, who promised that Joseph Smith would speak through him to the Saints in the same way God had spoken through Moses. But Rigdon was not to become the Mormon Moses. Henry and Catharine Brooke informed a friend in Pennsylvania:

The loss of Br. Joseph and Hyrum has been greatly felt but we have the twelve apostles to preside in their stead. Br. Brigham Young is president of the twelve and stands as prophet, seer, and revelator to the Church. He is an excellent man, and favours Br. Joseph, both in person, and manner of speaking, more than any person ever you saw looks like another.69

Soon after the August 8 meeting, Howard Egan shared his witness in a letter to Jesse C. Little in New Hampshire. In December, Little repeated the comments to Brigham Young: "He said if a man had been blinded he would hardly have known if it were not Joseph." Dozens of Saints received this special witness at the August conference. Typical is John Harper's remembrance that "when Bro. Brigham arose on the stand I received a testimony for myself; he appeared to me as if it was Bro. Joseph and it was Joseph's voice and there the mantle of Joseph fell on Brigham."70

The new church leader felt the same spirit that touched so many of the Saints. While those gathered before him in the open preaching ground below the temple saw Brother Brigham transformed before their eyes, he experienced his own sacred confirmation. His diary for August 8 says,

This day is long to be remembered by me. It is the first time I have met with the Church at Nauvoo since Bro. Joseph and Hyrum were killed and the occasion on which the church was called was somewhat painful to me. Br. Rigdon had come from Pittsburg to see the Brethren and find out if they would sustain him as the leader of the Saints. I perceived a spirit to hurry business, . . . right or wrong, and this grieved my heart. Now Joseph is gone. It seemed as though many wanted to draw off a party and be leaders, but this cannot be. The church must be one or they are not the Lord's. . . . In this time of sorrow my heart was filled with compassion. After Br. Rigdon had made a long speech to the saints (I should think 5 thousand), I arose and spoke to the people, my heart was swollen with compassion toward them and by the power of the Holy Ghost, even the spirit of the prophets I was enabled to comfort the hearts of the Saints. . . . I laid before them the order of the church and the power of the Priesthood. After a long and laborous talk of about two hours in the open air with the wind blowing, the Church was of one heart and one mind. They wanted the Twelve to lead the church as Brother Joseph had done in his day.71

Throughout the period of transition in leadership, the Saints could not forget their beloved first president. Brigham Young shared with his daughter Vilate in Massachusetts another reflection on the week's events, "I have ben in Councel all most all the time sence I arived here but this much I can say, the spirit of Joseph is here, though we cannot enjoy their [Joseph's and Hyrum's] persons."72

Between the August and October conferences, the Twelve met church needs in Nauvoo and elsewhere. They issued general letters of instruction to the Saints and made administrative appointments in scattered branches. Of special significance was the Twelve's decision to involve the high priests in an expansion of settlement options and the seventies in an enlarged missionary labor. Both ventures implemented the intentions of the martyred Prophet and helped strengthen the church after the temporary disruptions of dissent and assassination.73

The creation of new quorums of the seventy set the stage for an expansion of the missionary work that was so close to the hearts of the Twelve. Brigham Young's older brother, Joseph, had served since 1837 as the senior president of the seventy. He and six other men made up the First Seven Presidents. These men acted as general presidents over all other seventies quorums. They counseled regularly with the senior president of each quorum, who in turn taught the other six men who made up that quorum presidency. Quorum leaders in turn urged their members to sustain the Twelve. This show of support, they said, was a necessary component of the desired unity of the church.74

A further influence in building harmony within the church was the conference held every six months in Nauvoo. Because the Prophet said that a general conference could not be held until completion of the temple, the semiannual assemblies since October 1841 had been called special conferences. They convened only for specified business. The special conferences in October 1844 and April 1845 continued the unifying spirit of August's solemn assembly. At the October meeting, church leaders presented a full slate of Nauvoo priesthood officers for approval or disapproval. They replaced the few disaffected leaders with men loyal to Joseph Smith and the Twelve. And they reemphasized the need to remain in Nauvoo to complete the temple. At the special April conference, members once again reconfirmed the Twelve in their own office and as the First Presidency over the whole church, with Brigham Young at the head. The Saints then endorsed the labors of Joseph and Hyrum Smith as prophets, seers, and revelators proposals directly challenging the contentions of the dissenters.75

In a proclamation issued for the Saints in the British Isles, Parley P. Pratt spoke of the sealing powers received from Joseph Smith. Brigham Young served as president of the church because of his position as president of the Twelve and because he alone held the keys of the sealing power. Pratt recalled the event of early 1844:

[Joseph Smith] proceeded to confer on Elder Young, the President of the Twelve, the keys of the sealing power, as conferred in the last days by the spirit and power of Elijah, in order to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse.76

A key objective of the October conference of 1844 was to fill voids in the organization created by apostasy. The loyal Saints demonstrated a spirit of solidarity by manifesting their support to the newly chosen officers. Because the Twelve as a body served as the First Presidency, there was no need to replace counselors Sidney Rigdon and William Law. Amasa Lyman was retained "in his lot" as an apostle and counselor to the Twelve.77 William Marks was rejected as stake president because of his support of Rigdon. He was replaced by the Prophet's uncle John Smith of Macedonia, who moved to Nauvoo. Smith retained Marks's only remaining counselor, Charles C. Rich (the other counselor, Austin Cowles, had been dropped in May for joining the seceders and was not replaced). The high council received two new members to replace a deceased councilor and another who had supported the seceders.78

In connection with the assignments given to the high priests to build up stakes, the Twelve reaffirmed that Lyman Wight and George Miller were free to take the Wisconsin pine company but no one else to Texas. Even so, Brigham Young chided Wight for proceeding with plans to colonize in Texas and James Emmett for disregarding counsel in his movements across Iowa toward Council Bluffs. The Saints could not get their endowments in the wilderness, Young cautioned, to correct rumors about Wight's mission. "North and South America is Zion and as soon as the Temple is done and you get your endowments you can go and build up stakes, but do not be in haste, wait until the Lord says go." The Saints appreciated Young's frank clarifications. William Huntington Sr. was even more direct: "The purging out of the Lawites, Lymanites, Emettites and the Rigdonites relieves the church of a great burden."79

Many of those who rejected the Twelve's right to guide the church through new revelation had already spurned the Nauvoo revelations of Joseph Smith. In conference addresses and epistles and through adjustments in church policy, Brigham Young helped the Saints understand his role as revelator to the church. An important opening statement came in the address in October. Young said, "It is the right of an individual to get revelations to guide himself. It is the right of the head of a family to get revelations to guide and govern his family. It is the right of an elder when he has built up a church to get revelations to guide and lead that people until he leads them and delivers them up to his superiors." Interlaced with this explanation, Young identified the president of the Twelve as chief revelator: "If you don't know whose right it is to give revelations, I will tell you. It is I."80

Another central tenet of the opponents was that no one could replace Joseph Smith. The Twelve did not disagree. A mid-August epistle affirmed that while "Joseph . . . still holds the keys of this last dispensation . . . the Twelve Apostles of this dispensation stand in their own place . . . to minister, preside and regulate the affairs of the whole church."81 The Twelve wished to implement Joseph Smith's measures, not usurp his role in life and throughout the eternities as head of the last dispensation.82 In early August, the Saints had acknowledged the Twelve as "presidents of the whole church when Joseph was not; and now he has stepped behind the vail, he is not here, and the Twelve are the presidents of the whole church." The Twelve believed that Hyrum had been ordained to be his brother's successor, but Hyrum had died before his brother, so authority resided with the Twelve. "There never has a man stood between Joseph and the Twelve, and unless we apostatize there never will," Young explained. "If Hyrum had lived he would not have stood between Joseph and the Twelve but he would have stood for Joseph."83

Not only had the Twelve stood next in line to the president and his associate president, Young noted in his October address, but the prophets and the apostles derived their authority from a common base the apostleship. Paraphrasing Paul's instructions to the Corinthians, Young said, "The Bible says God hath set in the church, first apostles, then comes prophets, afterwards, because the keys and power of the apostleship are greater than that of the prophets."84 Joseph Smith had been an apostle first, he declared, and a prophet by derivation from his apostolic keys. With this explanation, Young established not only the basis for an apostolic interregnum in 1844 but a precedent for the future.85

Young found it necessary on several occasions to counter a lingering apostate claim that sullied the reputation of Joseph Smith. Many of the dissenters claimed that the Prophet had fallen from grace and that, in keeping with the provisions revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord had appointed them as new leaders. The distinction between competing claims to leadership centered increasingly on this point. "Time will tell who are the friends of Joseph Smith," Young said in early September. "We have no new commandments, but beseech the brethren to honor and obey the old ones."86 During the October conference, Young explained this position:

Every spirit that confesses that Joseph Smith is a prophet, that he lived and died a prophet and that the Book of Mormon is true, is of God, and every spirit that does not is of anti-christ.

It is the test of our fellowship to believe and confess that Joseph lived and died a prophet of God in good standing; and I don't want any one to fellowship the Twelve who says that Joseph is fallen.87

This emphasis placed foremost the understanding that a Latter-day Saint best expressed his or her conviction of the truth of the Restoration by declaring a personal witness that "the Book of Mormon is true" and that Joseph Smith "was and is" God's prophet. With this declaration, the Saints set themselves apart from the dissenters. During the October conference, the Twelve won unanimous support for their proposal to carry out Joseph Smith's plans for the church.88

Other speakers reinforced the message of a continuity of leadership through the Twelve. John Taylor countered those who wanted the Saints to abandon the concept of a gathered community at Nauvoo. It was the Lord's program revealed through Joseph Smith, he said, that "'those who had made a covenant with God by sacrifice'" would gather together to be instructed.89 Taylor's speech echoed proclamations issued by the Twelve in August and October reaffirming Nauvoo's role as the designated gathering place. The epistles corrected contrary claims made continually through the year by Rigdon, Law, and other dissidents who opposed the temple project in the place of gathering.90

The fall and spring conferences of 1844-45 helped build support for the Twelve among the Saints in and beyond Nauvoo. Consistently and tellingly, the Saints placed their confidence in their religious convictions and their sustained leaders, the Twelve. "Though our Prophet is dead I have confidence in the work of God and so has Mother," an English Saint wrote to relatives in Nauvoo.91 Journalist and orator William W. Phelps joined in the chorus of support. "I know the Twelve, and they know me," he wrote in a published exchange of letters with his friend William Smith. Phelps characterized his associates with biblical titles that would become as well known as the men themselves:

Their names are Brigham Young, the lion of the Lord; Heber C. Kimball, the herald of grace; Parley P. Pratt, the archer of paradise; Orson Hyde, the olive branch of Israel; Willard Richards, the keeper of the rolls; John Taylor, the champion of right; William Smith, the patriarchal Jacob staff; Wilford Woodruff, the banner of the gospel; George A. Smith, the entablature of truth; Orson Pratt, the gauge of philosophy; John E. Page, the sun dial; and Lyman Wight, the wild ram of the mountain. And they are good men; the best the Lord can find; they do the will of God, and the saints know it.

Phelps had one last word for his friend "Sidney Rigdon and his clique of dissatisfied beings": He was like the seed cast by the wayside in stony places. In Far West and Nauvoo, Phelps, who had himself temporarily apostatized at Far West, concluded that such men as George M. Hinkle, John C. Bennett, Wilson Law, and Sidney Rigdon men who had once believed that "Mormonism is ETERNAL TRUTH, and God Almighty is the author of it!" had turned away for one reason to seek popularity in the world. In contrast, said Phelps, the Twelve sought not their own aggrandizement but only to support a higher cause. With his biblical characterizations, Phelps succeeded in identifying Brigham Young and other members of the Quorum of the Twelve with friendly epithets that would outlive them all.92

Anti-Mormons hoped that Joseph Smith's death would lead to a sudden scattering of the Saints, but it did not happen. One resident reported an increased exodus during the fall months of 1844. An estimated two hundred people a week, he said, were heading downriver on steamboats or in loaded wagons after selling their property at low prices.93 Some of these exiles were people who followed Sidney Rigdon when he left in mid-September for Pittsburgh. Along with a few disaffected Saints, much of the traffic toward St. Louis would have been the usual departures of missionaries and of men seeking work for the winter. Saints fearful that vigilantes would sack Nauvoo may have left for personal safety. Heading in the other direction was Lyman Wight, returning to Wisconsin to prepare for a move to Texas.94 Despite the reported outbound traffic, the population of Nauvoo actually grew during the year following the murders at Carthage.

During the August 1844 conference and in private deliberations, Brigham Young gave Sidney Rigdon every opportunity to remain in full fellowship. In a gesture of friendship, the senior apostle invited the fifty-one-year old Rigdon to step forward and receive a vote of confidence from the church only minutes after the same congregation had sustained the Twelve as the church's new leaders. "We are of one mind with him and he with us," Young said, inviting the congregation to uphold the former counselor "by the prayer of faith." Rigdon accepted the courtesy, apparently without comment. If a reconciliation had been intended by the action, it did not take. Many of the Twelve knew Rigdon too well. His erratic show of support over the years and his militancy had left them skeptical. The Twelve did not expect the former counselor to remain a true friend for long. Nor did others. Jedediah M. Grant believed that he knew "the mind of our beloved and martyred Prophet on that point. I cannot be deceived," he confided to Newel K. Whitney, "I know what he [Joseph] thought of the Twelve and also what he thought of Elder Rigdon. Did all know this they would say with me that the Twelve stand in their proper place."95

Rigdon preached one last sermon in Nauvoo on Sunday, September 1. It was a complicated, animated, and somewhat confused oration outlining millennial events through the final winding-up scene. "I will say it in my opinion was an enthusiastic discourse," William Huntington observed. Rigdon feigned support for the temple and the gathering to Nauvoo and claimed to be united with the Twelve, but the words Brigham Young heard did not jibe with what he knew of Rigdon's recent actions. Rigdon "was not with us in spirit," Young concluded, "but I took him at his word . . . until it [could] be proved."96

The Twelve learned two days later that Rigdon had met privately with a few supporters on Monday evening and established his own leadership group. His immediate supporters included Samuel James (of La Harpe), Dr. Samuel Bennett, Joseph H. Newton, John A. Forgeus, and Leonard Soby (of the high council).97 In two separate meetings with members of the Twelve on Tuesday, Rigdon admitted under lengthy questioning the outlines of his administrative plans and new revelations. According to John Taylor, Rigdon "has been holding secret meetings; he has ordained men illegally, and contrary to the order of the priesthood . . . to the offices of prophets, priests and kings; whereas he does not hold that office himself." Furthermore, Brigham Young noted, Rigdon had convinced his council that "the man of sin spoken of in the revelations [2 Thessalonians 2:3], is the Twelve."98 Rigdon claimed an authority higher than the Twelve and said that the revelation he received before he left Pittsburgh had given him "the keys of conquest, the keys of David," authorizing him to lead the Lord's troops into bloody battle.99 When a committee of three apostles demanded his license, Rigdon threatened to publish what he knew of the Council of Fifty, other leadership councils, and the practice of plural marriage.100

The Twelve felt obliged to act. They called Rigdon in for a hearing on September 8 before First Bishop Newel K. Whitney and a council of twelve high priests (the high council of Nauvoo). At the advice of his friends, Rigdon ignored the invitation, but, in response to a general announcement in the Nauvoo Neighbor, a large congregation gathered that morning when the council convened on the meeting ground in the grove below the temple.101

The evidence presented by the knowledgeable witnesses confirmed a long-standing distrust of Rigdon's grounding in the church and its doctrines. While expressing personal feelings of friendship toward Rigdon, they refused to shirk their duty "when it touches the salvation of the people."102 Those who had known Rigdon from before he joined the Latter-day Saints and those who had followed his eleven-year career as a spokesman for the Prophet were united in their censure. They found him unreliable in doctrine, a constant absentee from council meetings, uninterested in bearing his share of the burdens of leadership, and the subject of frequent reprimands from the Prophet.103 A gifted man, Rigdon was known for his independent mind and self-centeredness. He had resigned from the Nauvoo city council in November 1841 because of chronic ill health; in his religious calling as counselor to Joseph Smith, the effect of "the violence of sickness" had "kept [him] in silence" since the Missouri exile. Newel K. Whitney said of Rigdon's mood swings, "He was always either in the bottom of the cellar or up in the garret window. At . . . Kirtland he was more sanguine than he is now."104

Of direct relevance to the trial were Rigdon's recent actions. He had admitted to members of the Twelve his claim to an authority higher than the Twelve, his efforts to divide the church, his unauthorized ordinations, and his untested revelations.105 Rather than participate in government by council the pattern established by the Prophet Rigdon had met secretly with supporters. Parley Pratt reminded the high council that church leaders must be "chosen and upheld by the faith and prayer of the church, and then they must walk according to the revelations, or there is no power in their appointment."106

During the trial, the Twelve recalled Joseph Smith's 1843 attempt to shake Rigdon off as a counselor. Only Hyrum's compassionate pleadings had prevented Rigdon's release then.107 Now, William Marks alone stood forth in defense. He was hesitant to vindicate the absent Rigdon in view of the weight of evidence against him. Nonetheless, more personally sympathetic to Rigdon than he let on, Marks offered several points in the former first counselor's favor. First, an investigating committee had cleared Rigdon of the charges raised at the 1843 conference. Marks had heard both Joseph and Emma Smith say since then "that all things were right between them" and Rigdon. Marks confirmed that Rigdon had not known that revelations were now to be cleared through what Marks called the "first quorum" (a group of endowed leaders). Marks admitted that he disagreed with the decision of the August conference. He believed that a quorum of the First Presidency was always necessary, that Rigdon had not transgressed, and that the quorum should be filled up. Citing the Doctrine and Covenants, Marks said his only objective was to discover the truth. He had stood with Joseph Smith when Rigdon was ordained a prophet, seer, and revelator in 1841. That ordination, Marks believed, had given Rigdon the keys and authority of the kingdom equally with the Prophet.108

Brigham Young answered Marks's concerns. Because of Hyrum Smith's pleadings, Young said, not all the evidence against Rigdon had been presented at the 1843 conference. Rigdon had left Missouri, saying that "he never would follow Brother Joseph's revelations any more, contrary to his own convenience. He said Jesus Christ was a fool to him in sufferings; was this not enough to cut him off?" Rigdon had pleaded with Joseph to release him from the inconveniences of life in Nauvoo and allow him to return to Kirtland. Because of Hyrum's pleadings that "'he will yet straighten out,'" Joseph had ordained Rigdon a prophet, seer, and revelator. "But did he help Brother Joseph after this? No." Even after reluctantly moving his family near to Joseph's, Rigdon seldom attended the Prophet's councils. In response to Rigdon's claim of having equal authority with the Prophet, Young observed, "As to a person not knowing more than the written word, let me tell you that there are keys that the written word never spoke of, nor never will." Brigham testified that "Elder Rigdon's revelations . . . are from the Devil. . . . If you make Sidney Rigdon your president and leader, you will soon have John C. Bennett here, with the Laws and Fosters and all the murderous clan. Elder Rigdon . . . is liable to be deceived, and has already been deceived."109

With the testimony aired, Bishop Whitney pondered a decision. The bishop had known Rigdon in Kirtland before Rigdon's conversion. He accepted the testimony of the Twelve; he had heard Joseph Smith rebuke Rigdon many times in Kirtland for his revelations. Whitney believed that Rigdon was not deceived but "that he is dishonest . . . an evil designing man" who opposed Joseph's plans for building the temple. By unanimous decision, the ecclesiastical court supported Whitney's decision for excommunication. The assembled congregation concurred, with about ten dissenting votes. When asked, William Marks publicly concurred in the actions; a few months later he quelled lingering doubts by publishing his acceptance of the Twelve.110

Rigdon met with his followers on the evening of September 9 and left Nauvoo the next day, taking a few converts with him.111 Latter-day Saints generally rejected Rigdon's right to govern alone. "The first Presidency being dead all but one, it was no longer a quorum," Isaac Haight declared.112 Furthermore, the Saints did not trust Rigdon. A member in Montebello wrote, "Rigdon don't stand very high in the estimation of the people here. We all know here that Sidney is not fit to be [the] leader of God's people. We all know that he is a wolf and would destroy the sheep."113 A Nauvoo couple reported, "Sidney Rigdon after Joseph's death, got so high, that he transgressed and has been cut off from the Church. He took some few with him and went back to Pittsburgh. He made some disturbance in the Church, but not much."114

Away from Nauvoo, Rigdon pursued his independent course. William McClellin tried to get Rigdon and William Law to collaborate on reorganizing the church that winter, but the three men differed over too many points of doctrine. Law had rejected Joseph Smith as prophet and soon turned his back on all institutionalized religion.115 Rigdon organized a church of Christ in Pittsburgh and promoted it through the Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate. Among his new followers were Dr. Josiah Ells and James Blakesley, who became members of Rigdon's quorum of apostles. Rigdon also organized a quorum of seventy-three. He continued to claim authority by virtue of his calling in the First Presidency, arguing that Joseph Smith had lost his keys of authority and had been rejected as a prophet by God.116

In discussions at Nauvoo, Rigdon had claimed a fresh revelation calling him to lead the church, received on the day of Joseph Smith's death. Back in Pittsburgh, Rigdon unveiled a second revelation, purportedly given through Joseph Smith to the First Presidency on April 7, 1841, a day after John C. Bennett had been appointed an assistant counselor to the First Presidency. It supported Rigdon's proposition at the August conference that after Joseph's death the First Presidency should be dissolved and Rigdon become the Prophet's successor. A note on the revelation directed Bennett to hold the document until needed and then deliver it to a church agent. Bennett had visited Nauvoo in September 1844, a few days before Rigdon left for Pittsburgh. The unsubstantiated document had little effect in Nauvoo, where it was generally believed that Bennett was the author of the revelation.117

Another prominent leader discontented over ecclesiastical developments in Nauvoo was Lyman Wight, one of those most anxious to realize Joseph Smith's dream of an expanded Zion. Even though the Twelve gave Wight the freedom to make his own decision in the matter, they clearly preferred and eventually required that all such expansionist efforts await completion of the temple. It was Wight's belief that the commission he had received from the Prophet in late 1843 was irrevocable. Desirous of creating a stake of Zion with his Wisconsin pineries company, Native Americans from that area and from Texas, and the Southern Saints, Wight left for Texas with his followers. The next spring, the Twelve invited the group back to Nauvoo, but the independent "Wild Ram of the Mountains" persisted in his separatist stance. Wight's differences with the Twelve were not just geographical. Beginning in the late 1840s, he held to the belief "that Joseph Smith appointed those of his own posterity to be his successor."118

The hesitant testimony William Marks had given on behalf of Sidney Rigdon concealed his own feelings of uncertainty about the new leaders. He had supported Rigdon's efforts to resolve the leadership question independent of the Twelve. Marks knew about plural marriage and disagreed with the practice. As the Twelve moved forward with Joseph Smith's proposals for the church, Marks distanced himself from the new church leaders: Brigham Young and the Twelve.

Not long after Joseph and Hyrum were killed, Marks had discussed the question of succession with Emma Smith, who seemed to favor the stake president as her husband's successor. James Monroe, the schoolteacher of the Smith children, said he "obtained several new and interesting ideas concerning the organization and government of the Church" in conversations with Emma. Apparently, she believed that the stake president was "the next office in the Kingdom immediately below the First President," just as the vice-president of the United States, and not a cabinet officer, succeeded the president. "It is not the Twelve," Monroe learned from Emma, "because they have authority only among the branches in the world, and their peculiar province is to spread the gospel among the nations of the earth." This outdated view ignored the expanded authority given to the Twelve at Nauvoo.119

William Smith contended that the right to lead belonged to the Smith family in the same way the office of patriarch did. Even though he sustained his quorum's authority, Smith preferred authority by lineage. That claim eventually led to a coalescing of supporters around the Prophet's eldest surviving son, Joseph Smith III. Meantime, William Smith sought appointment to an office more easily obtained, that of patriarch.

At the August conference, Brigham Young had acknowledged the Smith family's right to the office of patriarch to the church. Young's first impression favored Samuel, had he lived, but with that option gone the Prophet's only surviving brother, William, or a son, or Uncle John Smith were possible candidates. The Twelve, he said wanted to "wait until they know who is the man."120

On May 24, 1845, William Smith became the third patriarch to the Church when the Twelve ordained him to the office left vacant for nearly a year. He had returned to Nauvoo after spending two or three years organizing and presiding over the branches in the Eastern United States in his calling as an apostle. He took up residence in William Marks's former home, and as soon as he was installed to the office held by his father and brother before him, he immediately began giving patriarchal blessings in Nauvoo and elsewhere.121

At the time of William Smith's appointment, William W. Phelps created a misunderstanding about the patriarch's role. In an editorial comment in the Times and Seasons, Phelps referred to the office as "Patriarch over the whole church," which some took to mean that Smith presided in an office above that of the Twelve.122 Editor John Taylor issued a correction. The revelations clearly designated the church's president as the presiding officer. The 1841 revelation about the Nauvoo Temple, Taylor said, had named the patriarch first among the officers sustained only "in regard to seniority not in regard to authority in priesthood, for it immediately follows, 'I give unto you my servant Joseph to be a presiding elder over all my church.'"123 For a decade, Taylor said, the Twelve had been ordaining evangelical ministers (patriarchs) in all large branches of the church abroad. It was not intended that the senior church patriarch serve scattered members, Taylor noted. Local patriarchs blessed members in their own areas. William Smith, he said, "is not the only Patriarch, but would act as a senior Patriarch, holding the keys of that priesthood; and his labors would be more especially connected with the church in Zion." "A Patriarch to the church is appointed to bless those who are orphans, or have no father in the church to bless them." Taylor placed the blame for the misunderstanding upon assistant editor Phelps and absolved Joseph Smith of "any such ideas" as those being raised.124

Even as he was being given the patriarchal office, William was challenging Brigham Young's authority. Smith believed that the Twelve must act in concert as a quorum of the whole and that Brigham was "merely President by courtesy." The quorum had in fact been sustained as the First Presidency of the church, but only one man held the right to preside and direct the work. Something more was at stake. James Monroe heard William Smith privately accusing the Twelve of wanting to profit personally from publishing church works. He also objected to reports about him in the New York Messenger. Monroe said of Smith, "His words seems to portend a rupture between him and the Twelve."125

The October conference in 1845 rejected William Smith in his apostolic and patriarchal offices for aspiring "to uproot and undermine the legal Presidency of the church, that he may occupy the place himself."126 Excommunication followed two weeks later during a general conference of the seventies in the temple.127 Evidence included two letters written by Smith from Galena threatening Brigham Young and a pamphlet against the Twelve published in St. Louis.128 The church would not have another patriarch until 1849, when John Smith, the Prophet's uncle, was ordained by the Twelve to exercise the sacred calling.

William Smith headed for St. Louis, where he promoted the idea "that young Joseph is the only legal successor" to his father. Several members accepted the claim and were disfellowshipped by the branch there, among them the branch president. According to Almon Babbitt, Smith preached on a riverboat heading toward Nauvoo but failed to sway converts with his wonderful disclosures.129 A few weeks later, Smith was supporting the claims of James J. Strang in Wisconsin and urged others in the Eastern states to support this new prophet.130 But after a year or so, the erstwhile patriarch was in Kentucky promoting his own revelation appointing himself as prophet, seer, revelator, and translator until the Prophet's eldest surviving son, Joseph III, reached his majority.131

A few other Saints promoted the right of Joseph Smith III to the presidency. Twelve years old at the time of his father's death, young Joseph's claim centered on several supposed blessings that designated him as his father's heir in the office, subject to his preparation and the acceptance of the people.132 Among the youth's advocates was his uncle William Smith. As early as the fall of 1845, William was contending "that young Joseph is the only legal successor to the presidency of this church." He was supported in this claim by George J. Adams, who served "as Little Joseph's spokesman" and who was helping to establish a reform church.133 After the Saints left Nauvoo, others stepped forward as witnesses of Joseph III's right to his father's office, but in 1844, the youth lacked the maturity and priesthood qualifications to be considered a viable candidate.134

The Twelve advised members to avoid open speculation and to "be patient a little, till the proper time comes, and we will tell you all. 'Great wheels move slow.'" The August conference had accepted the Twelve as the presiding authorities, they said, "and when any alteration in the presidency shall be required, seasonable notice will be given."135 The Twelve had other concerns about advocating a leadership role for Joseph III, including fears that those who had killed the Prophet would visit the same vengeance on any others who held or who might be given presiding authority, including young Joseph.136 For the youth to receive a leadership position in the church, said one of the Twelve, "it will be at a proper time when he who holds the keys of the Presidency shall be moved by the spirit of God to make the proposition," and it will need the sustaining vote of the church. "If he ever come into power at all, he will come boldly in at the front door."137 For two decades, the Twelve kept the door open for Joseph III and David Hyrum, but the Prophet's sons chose other paths.138

Church members had one option for a new leader different from all the others. They had known Sidney Rigdon, William Marks, and William Smith for years in positions of trust. Succession claims of these men stemmed from ordinations to positions of ecclesiastical authority. Of these three, only Rigdon claimed divine sanction. His Pittsburgh revelations were singular attempts to act upon a deeply felt Mormon belief in continuing revelation. But upstaging all these familiar Latter-day Saint leaders was James J. Strang, a newcomer to the scene, whose claim to both revelatory and appointive authority mimicked most closely the leadership style of the church's first prophet. In his dramatic bid for Joseph Smith's office, Strang claimed revelations and translated an ancient record from metal plates, even offering them for inspection. He linked his authority to the Prophet's and created an organization imitating that in Nauvoo. His associates cited the revelations of 1830 that emphasized Joseph Smith's right to appoint a successor through revelation. Similarly, they pointed to early revelations identifying the Twelve as a traveling council without general administrative duties. In addition, Strang himself claimed that at the moment of Joseph Smith's death, an angel of the Lord appeared to Strang and ordained him the successor.139

James Strang had appeared in Nauvoo a few months before the martyrdom, a skeptical investigator. A lawyer from northwestern New York State, Strang and his wife moved to Wisconsin Territory in 1843. In Illinois as a consultant on the Illinois Canal project, he found time to visit the much-publicized "Holy City." His baptism in the temple font in Nauvoo, allegedly performed by the Prophet himself in February 1844, gave Strang entrance into the church. The thirty-one-year-old convert was ordained an elder, and then he headed home with a supposed assignment from the Prophet to select a Great Lakes gathering place for a portion of the Saints.140 When Strang heard of Joseph Smith's death, he quickly magnified his original calling. He claimed in an early issue of his religious newspaper, the Voree Herald, that the Prophet had designated him in a blessing as his personal successor.141

As further proof, Strang published a letter purportedly dictated by Joseph Smith identifying Strang as the Prophet's successor and designating a new place of refuge on the White River plain in Wisconsin Territory. The letter was dated June 18, 1844, but it carried a black postmark instead of the red ink used in Nauvoo. The letter demonstrated the extent to which Strang had tuned in on ideas important to the church. It told of a supposed revelation to the Prophet about his own impending death and Strang's call. It named the new gathering place "Voree, meaning, garden of peace."142 Although laced with scriptural phrases familiar to Latter-day Saints, it did not ring true to many in its intended audience. A missionary who obtained a copy for Brigham Young declared, "The letter carried upon its face the marks of a base forgery, being written throughout in printed characters. . . . But above all the contents of the thing, was altogether bombastic unlike the work of God."143

To strengthen his claim, Strang issued his own revelations. One of them established a law of tithing; another directed him to buried plates. Strang took four friends to a designated place under an oak tree in September 1845, where they dug in "undisturbed" earth (the plates had been slipped into place through a horizontal tunnel). The men found three brass plates covered with unfamiliar characters. Strang's translation yielded a chieftain's account of the final destruction of his people. By the end of 1845, Strang was ready to challenge the Twelve in Nauvoo.144

Strang's claims to revelation and new scripture were a closer imitation of the original prophet's story than any of the early claimants to Joseph Smith's office offered. As one newspaper report put it, "A fresh plate-digger, translator, and prophet has arisen in the West. . . . Whether this will resolve itself into Mormonism, or become the basis of a new sect, is a matter of speculation. In either case it will find adherents."145

The early followers of James Strang included some who were skeptical of the leadership claims and teachings of the Twelve. Among them were William Smith, who served as Strang's patriarch; John E. Page of the Twelve, excommunicated in March 1846 for preaching Strangism at the temple in Nauvoo and an ardent advocate of restoring the church to its pre-Nauvoo framework;146 John C. Bennett, whose influence eventually led Strang to introduce a version of the temple endowment and its doctrines that Bennett had previously rejected;147 and Aaron Smith, a Latter-day Saint friend in Wisconsin.148 With Emma Smith's support, William Marks had sat out the transition, but by 1845, he had bcome an affiliate of the Wisconsin "prophet."

Some of the Saints in Nauvoo and the Eastern branches were likewise lured away by Strang's revelatory approach and his interest in establishing a single head for the church.149 Others listened to the perplexing pitch of Strang's missionaries with disdain.150 Those who knew of the private teachings of plural marriage in Nauvoo found that Strang initially opposed the new doctrine. Strang also accepted the anti-Mormon claim that Nauvoo was a den of counterfeiters and thieves. When the westward migration from Nauvoo was announced, he opposed it. If the Saints follow the apostles to California, he told one reporter, "they will never reach there, but their bones will bleach on the plains."151

Thomas Sharp exaggerated reality with the claim that Strang was "making considerable inroads into the church at Nauvoo" and elsewhere. Some were misled by Strang's claims, but the Twelve were not concerned with this sifting. A Latter-day Saint in Philadelphia said that the branch "excommunicated the unruly Elders and lay Members that were advocating Strangism, etc., from the Church, having expelled between fifty and sixty within a short time."152 Other branches lost fewer members but felt some effects of Strang's appeal. From George Alley's perspective in Nauvoo, those leaving to follow Strang were part of a purging and purifying of the church. "They are the ones who have brought persecution on us by their evil deeds; so let them go. We are glad to get rid of all such."153

Confident in their own divine appointment, the Twelve had nothing but skeptical disbelief for the imitator of genuine revelation. They were concerned that others might be misled, however. Discussions between Strang's supporters in Nauvoo and church leaders gave the Twelve and others an opportunity to speak out. They saw a copy of Strang's purported revelation as early as August 25, 1844, and pronounced it false. In Warsaw, Thomas Sharp rejoiced in prospects that the factionalism would lead to the destruction of the power of the Twelve.154 But for Brigham Young and his colleagues, Strang was a nuisance with little meaningful influence.

Within the quorums of the priesthood in Nauvoo, Strang's early claims were challenged in two ways. First, in priesthood gatherings, quorum leaders invited individual expressions of support for the Twelve. Second, the quorums cleansed their membership of the few who became Strang's sympathizers. One quorum of seventy, for instance, dropped three members in February and March 1846 for joining the Strangites.155 Another dismissed one of its presidents for a litany of spiritual infractions "with getting drunk, denying the faith, and preaching Strangite doctrine."156 Brigham Young and Orson Pratt spoke to an assembly on the second floor of the temple on Sunday, February 1, 1846, at which a Strang advocate was invited to present the Wisconsin prophet's message. Young made no comment "but simply ask[ed] the People if they had heard the voice of the Good Shepherd in what had been advanced, when No!! resounded all over the house." The presenter was cut off from the church along with Strang and his associate Aaron Smith.157

When Strang's followers cited scriptural precedents, defenders of the Twelve turned as well to the word of God. From the Doctrine and Covenants and the book of Abraham, they demonstrated the need for priesthood keys to govern a dispensation properly.158 Their rejoinders emphasized Joseph Smith's right to appoint a successor159 and the need for the officers to be accepted by common consent. Strang had been rejected through excommunication.160 Defenders of the Twelve noted the primacy of apostolic authority.161 They pointed out that the revelations required the president to be a high priest, whereas Strang had been an elder before his excommunication.162 Defenders appealed as well to church history. They noted that Joseph Smith had given the keys of the kingdom to the Twelve. As prophets, seers, and revelators they would guide the church through revelation.163 More importantly, Nauvoo writers observed that the Twelve possessed knowledge of the temple ordinances and the authority to administer them to others. Strang, they said, claimed a pale imitation of the endowment that he "revealed" only after John C. Bennett and William Smith informed him of its central role in the restored gospel.164

As preparations to remove the Saints from Nauvoo proceeded, interest in Strang gradually subsided. Orson Hyde, the last of the Twelve in Nauvoo, preached vigorously against Strang. In March 1846, Hyde published his own warning against following leaders who were "strangers" to the voice of the Lord's Spirit.165 Others of the Twelve encouraged members to ignore Strang and other claimants to Joseph Smith's mantle. Likening the apostasy of schismatics to the plagues that God allowed to beset Job as a refining fire and ultimate blessing, John Taylor advised:

Persecution is for our good, and if we have hard things to endure let us round up our shoulders and bear them in the name of the Lord, and not murmur. . . . Do not find fault if we have a few apostates among us here, for they are mean, damnable, and pitiable characters. . . . Do not find fault with them, but let them do their own business, and pursue their own course, and if they come across you, cuff their ears and send them over the river; but not too many at a time, lest by cutting off too many branches, you spoil the growth of the seed. It is necessary we should have such things to meet with that we may be made perfect through suffering.166

The Nauvoo schismatics would continue their efforts to gather up followers for many years to come. For most of the Saints, the question of a new leader for the church had been resolved. It would be Brigham Young and the Twelve. Andrew Moore, senior president in the fifth quorum of the seventy, summarized the matter for his quorum in February 1846. He spoke for all of those satisfied with how the authority to lead had been transferred to the Twelve:

Suffice it to say Brigham Young and his counsel are the Leaders of this Church, placed there by Joseph Smith himself previous to his death, when he called them together and gave them the necessary qualifycatuns to accomplish the same, as he said upon you (the Twelve) rests the responsibility of the Church. Upon you I roll the burden, therefore round up your shoulder and bear it. There is something ahead but it matters not; now it is safe in spite of the Devil, and whether they kill me or not it makes no difference; the work will roll on in spite of Earth and Hell.167

NotesChapter 15. "Who Shall Lead the Church?"

Epigraph: Warren Foote, Autobiography, entry for June 28, 1844, Church Archives. The entry is retrospective and may reflect thoughts after this date.
