Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Part IV

Removal: New Places and New Peoples

As regards the temporal prospects of our church, it has been various since its beginning, the wheel of fortune, in its revolution, sometimes carries us up and sometimes down; at present we are down. . . . We have to leave this place as soon as possible, say in the spring. Our religion is not tolerated in this day any more than Christ's was in his. Suffice it to say that we can not live in peace here in consequence of mob violence, and the inefficiency of the government, State and General. We must, therefore, and will remove from this place in the Spring to some place westward, and so remote that we surely [will] not be trodden underfoot all the day long and not receive an adequate protection from the laws of the land. We are going west of the Mountains; but how such a body of people can accomplish this is best known to the Great God. We will have to go with such preparations as each can make for themselves, and whatever property either in houses or land that can not be disposed of, will be entirely sacrificed. From a letter by John S. Fullmer, November 4, 1845

Chapter 16

The Peaceful Interlude

All is union and peace at Nauvoo, and the temple is rising rapidly as a token that God has not forsaken his church and people. John Taylor, November 15, 1844

Though the papers report a total repeal of the Nauvoo Charter by a large majority in both houses, we remain undisturbed, and city affairs go on as usual. . . . The saints are more engaged than ever to finish the Temple. . . . The different quorums are becoming perfected in their several organizations, by which means the elders are learning their duty. Union, love and peace were never more universal among the saints at Nauvoo, than at the present time. Brigham Young, February 11, 1845

With the question of church leadership resolved for most Latter-day Saints and the voice of opposition muted, the Quorum of the Twelve focused on furthering projects launched by the Prophet Joseph Smith. During the eighteen months between the martyrdom and the removal from Nauvoo, the Saints worked hard to complete the temple on the bluff. Construction elsewhere in Nauvoo picked up again to provide for public needs and to supply homes and jobs for immigrating converts. Another economic effort engaged men, women, and children in home industries. The Twelve anticipated new stakes in the United States and early in their administration expanded the missionary force to accomplish that goal. The quorums that trained these messengers of peace urged their members to prepare themselves and their wives for the sacred experience of temple ceremonies. In addition, church leaders defined stricter personal standards to create harmony in the community of the Saints.

All of this had a real effect on the people of greater Nauvoo, and within a few months of Joseph Smith's death, Latter-day Saints felt a greater unity than ever before. Without lessening their vigilance, the Saints turned inward. Political, economic, social, and religious programs emphasized shared spiritual objectives. In June 1845, Brigham Young observed, "The most perfect union, peace and good feeling has invariably prevailed in our midst and still continues. It seems like a foretaste of celestial enjoyment and Millennial glory."1

Meanwhile, the old citizens outside the City Beautiful discussed the political implications of postmartyrdom Nauvoo. With the city's high-profile prophet-mayor-lieutenant general dead, his political opponents assessed their victory. They had wanted him out of power so that their own political influence could increase. They wanted elections decided in old ways, along traditional party lines, not by what they perceived as prophet-led block voting. And they still worried about the military might of Nauvoo's city militia. Initially, the heated rhetoric of the anti-Mormon press quieted. For the next year, the antagonism of local newspapers melted into silent celebration over Joseph Smith's demise. Yet lobbyists did not abandon their effort to end Nauvoo's political might. They recognized that the Saints had not given up their quest for community. The Nauvoo Neighbor carried a reminder of that goal on its masthead: "Our Motto. The Saints' Singularity is Unity, Liberty, Charity." When the legislature in Springfield assessed the Mormon question in its winter 1844-45 session, debate centered on Nauvoo's liberal charter. As representatives of the people of Illinois, legislators had created a powerful city and its now-mistrusted militia. The people's spokesmen decided that together they could strip Nauvoo of her clout.

Repeal of the City Charter

The Latter-day Saints heard varying opinions on how to deal with political tensions. Governor Ford advised citizens of Nauvoo to dodge the political fray by sitting out the 1844 election. This, he hoped, would maintain the fragile peace in Hancock County. His Whig opponents applauded the counsel, because it gave them an opportunity to regain lost political posts. But some in Ford's own Democratic party visited Nauvoo and encouraged participation.2 This pleased Latter-day Saints in Hancock County, who refused to give up their franchise, except in the 1844 presidential election. With their preferred candidate for president dead, they sat by and watched the Democrats' dark-horse candidate James K. Polk win a narrow national election victory over Whig Henry Clay.

In county elections, Nauvoo voters reached consensus at public caucuses held in the grove prior to the August 5 polling. They endorsed candidates on the Old Citizens Law and Order Ticket, people who decried the violence at Carthage. This nonpartisan ticket garnered all but five votes in Nauvoo and defeated most anti-Mormon candidates by a margin of one thousand votes. The Saints returned George Coulson, one of their own, to the three-member Hancock County commission and named as coroner Daniel H. Wells, a resident of Nauvoo, a non-Mormon, and a close friend of Joseph Smith. Another friend of the Latter-day Saints, Minor Deming, won the influential post of sheriff. Deming had been Ford's military commander at Carthage at the time of the murders; like others on the Law and Order ballot, he sought justice in the courts for the perpetrators. Latter-day Saint votes also sent church member Almon W. Babbitt and the friendly old citizen Jacob B. Backenstos to the state assembly. For the congressional seat representing the sixth district, the Saints endorsed Democrat Joseph P. Hoge, who carried the county by 76 percent.3 All of these victories demonstrated Nauvoo's electoral strength.

The local elections roused supporters of the Anti-Mormon Party. Ten of them, including Thomas Sharp and William N. Grover of Warsaw, signed a proclamation addressed to the governor:

It is impossible that the two communities can long live together. They can never assimilate. We repeat our firm conviction that one or the other must leave. The old citizens are now virtually disfranchised they have no guaranty of protection from the law. The Mormons control our elections and the administration of our courts. They have nothing to fear from the law. . . . As long, sir, as Mormons possess means of shielding themselves and oppressing us, it can hardly be expected that we should live together in peace and amity.4

For the more moderate residents, removal of a body of American citizens from their homes and lands seemed an extreme proposal. But opponents did win wide support for a short-range goal. When the state legislature met for its 1844-45 session, the time for repeal of Nauvoo's city charter was right. Democrats controlled the Senate 26 to 15 and the House 67 to 33. Yet, debate and voting on repeal created odd alliances that crossed party lines, including a melding of interests between southern Democrats and Whigs. In a special message on the issue, Ford urged repeal only of the obnoxious parts of the Nauvoo charter. Some in his party agreed, but most wanted to strip Nauvoo of the entire charter.5 Even though the anti-Mormon sentiment was strong among Whigs, many of them opposed the repeal movement and sided with Ford. These delegates accepted the Latter-day Saint argument that repeal was an illegal breach of contract.6

In the House, newly elected Hancock County legislators Almon W. Babbitt and Jacob Backenstos spoke on behalf of the charter. Babbitt carried written instructions from Nauvoo's mayor, Orson Spencer, imploring him to do his duty as a "watchman of Israel." Spencer argued that because the original charter had been issued in perpetuity and contained no provision for repeal, any ex post facto law attempting repeal would be illegal.7 Babbitt made two speeches before the House Committee on Banks and Corporations. Among other things, he charged the political opposition with a long list of crimes against Latter-day Saints.8 Babbitt became discouraged over prospects for saving the charter when legislators began grilling him about reports of counterfeiting in Nauvoo, the "spiritual wife" doctrine, and whether he believed Joseph Smith's revelations. When Backenstos spoke to the committee, he "pleaded like an apostle for the rights of his constituents."9

As the debate continued, many Democrats supported the bills introduced in the Senate and House in December for total repeal of the city charter. Others, mostly Whigs, took a contrary stance, offering compromise amendments. They proposed to weaken Nauvoo's independence by placing the Nauvoo Legion more clearly under the governor and by limiting the powers of the municipal court. As support for repeal solidified, some tried to eliminate the charters of the Nauvoo House and the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association. At the same time, efforts failed to repeal the city charters of Chicago, Alton, Springfield, and Quincy.10

A Scott County legislator argued that the charter was necessary to the peaceful governance of Nauvoo but could be amended to eliminate the city's excessive powers. State senator Jacob C. Davis of Hancock County argued that no tweaking of the charter would prevent abuse of power. Without repeal, he argued, the Latter-day Saints would continue to act as "a sovereignty within a sovereignty." Support swelled as one senator after another endorsed the call for repeal. The legislature, Davis said, could take away what it had given.11 The Senate passed the repeal bill on December 19 on a vote of 25 to 14.12 The House dropped its own bill and on January 24, 1845, voted 75 to 31 to approve the Senate bill stripping Nauvoo of its governing authority. The Nauvoo Neighbor reported that every negative vote was a Democrat. According to Babbitt, southern Illinois Democrats and Whigs joined forces to accomplish the repeal.13 Spokesmen for the church position had done their best, but, in the words of Illinois attorney general Josiah Lamborn, "the tide of popular passion and frenzy was too strong to be resisted."14

Even before the final vote was taken, officials in Nauvoo set about to correct one widely held misconception about the Latter-day Saints. Governor Ford, in his opening message to the legislature, had tried to counter reports of illegal activities in Nauvoo: "I have investigated the charge of promiscuous stealing," he said, "and find it to be greatly exaggerated."15 Nauvoo's leaders launched their own counteroffensive to the rumored illegalities in Nauvoo. They feared that reports of theft rings might prejudice the trial of the accused murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. On the first Sunday of January, Brigham Young exhorted a large congregation "to rise up en masse, and put down the thieving, swearing, gambling, bogus-making, retailing spirituous liquors, bad houses, and all abominations practiced in our midst by our enemies, who . . . publish that these things were practiced by us." He "severely rebuked the civil authorities of the city . . . and censured parents" for their failure to maintain law and order in the city. Over the next few weeks, Young led a two-pronged effort to change public opinion and enhance police action. Working with the Twelve, he invited two dozen men from the seventies and forty-seven from the high priests quorum to accept a two-month mission to nearby counties on both sides of the river to correct misrepresentations about the church. The delegates left on their public relations assignment at the end of January. "We will undeceive . . . the honest in heart," Young promised.16

Meantime, in response to Young's chastisement, the city council passed resolutions to counter the negative image created by "foes within and foes without." The council denied that any criminals had been harbored and blamed Whig anti-Mormon newspapers for the false perception. The council resolved to bolster the city police by as many as five hundred part-time officers and to enjoin citizens to be more vigilant. An independent investigation by a Hancock County deputy sheriff concluded that a theft ring operating thirty miles inland was funneling contraband through six agents in Nauvoo to a holding depot ten miles inside Iowa. None of them were Latter-day Saints. Mayor Orson Spencer called a public meeting to endorse the city council's actions. Perhaps he recognized that repeal of the Nauvoo charter had, in effect, made it impossible for the council to take any legal action. The citizens authorized fifty delegates to visit surrounding counties, probably the same men already called as missionaries by the Twelve.17

With the charter invalidated and the Nauvoo city council and municipal courts unable to function, a seven-member committee appointed by church and city officials wrote to leading jurists and politicians seeking advice on the legality of the repeal. The committee asked Daniel Webster, Stephen A. Douglas, John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, John Wentworth, and four others to direct them to the proper court of appeal. Leaders in Nauvoo seriously considered asking the United States Supreme Court to review the action.18 With a substitute bill introduced in the House by Babbitt languishing in committee, the city was left with few options. Sympathetic attorney general Lamborn advised patience:

All you have to do is to be quiet, submissive to the laws and circumspect in your conduct . . . and my word for it, there will be a mighty reaction in the public sentiment, which will ultimately overthrow all your enemies. The sober second thought of the people will always be right.19

News of Backenstos's letter confirming repeal circulated quickly in Nauvoo when it was received on January 29. Not all were ready to "be quiet . . . and circumspect" in voicing concern, as Lamborn had advised. The Saints had wanted to trust constituted government. Now it had voided the city's charter. Newspaper editors added insult to injury by making fun of the name of the city. They claimed it was a distortion of the Hebrew. Church newspapers in Nauvoo and Liverpool jumped to the defense of the name with quotations from a Hebrew Bible and a Hebrew-English dictionary.20 Many took the actions of the legislature in stride. "They have taken away our charter," twenty-three-year-old Calvin Reed informed a friend, "but the chimneys to our houses stand straight and upwards and the smoke goes out at the top as usual."21

Following counsel, members in outlying branches pledged a renewed demonstration of pacifism. A church conference at St. Louis viewed the charter's repeal "with mingled emotions of grief and surprise." A resolution of support declared, "[If] the chartered rights of Nauvoo . . . were granted wrong: they were taken wrong; but be strong, the day will come when you can triumph."22 The triumph of "Mormonism" was Thomas Sharp's greatest fear. At the news of repeal, he sarcastically proposed a new charter be written to keep the Latter-day Saints from abusing its powers.23

When official news of the repeal reached Nauvoo, the city was on the eve of a municipal election. The candidates had been selected on January 8 in a caucus made up of the Twelve, high councilor, and city officers. The Twelve had declined to accept elected office. To do so, they felt, might subject them to physical harm by opponents of Nauvoo. Residents approved the slate at a public nominating meeting convened on January 14 at the outdoor preaching stand where Sunday meetings were held. The city council met in emergency session on January 30 and decided to proceed with the voting, just in case Governor Ford vetoed the repeal bill. At the election at the Concert Hall on February 3, about eight hundred fifty voters approved the nominees without a dissenting vote. Hosea Stout, one of the election judges, declared that he had never before seen such union and peace at an election in Nauvoo. The election proved futile, however. Nauvoo's municipal charter had been eliminated, leaving the city without legal government.24

Following the repeal, the Twelve worried most about police protection. For two years, Hosea Stout's city police, with backup from the Nauvoo Legion, had kept the peace. Two months after the martyrdom, Brigham Young had replaced Joseph Smith as lieutenant general by election of the court-martial and subsequent appointment by Governor Ford.25 John C. Bennett's position as major general already had been filled by Charles C. Rich. But with the repeal of the charter, the Nauvoo Legion ceased to exist as a legal entity, as did the city police force.

On March 14, 1845, the "old police" met at the Masonic Hall to effect a reorganization as "new police" under Stephen Markham. When the "old" police chief, Hosea Stout, arrived, reorganization into companies of ten with a captain over each had begun. Then someone challenged the action, perhaps pointing out that without a charter, a new police organization would be illegal. After discussion, it was concluded that a legal entity did exist under which Nauvoo could enjoy police protection. It was the church. According to Stout, "It was concluded to organize the whole community of Saints in this County into Quorums of 12 deacons and have a Bishop at their head and they could thus administer in the lesser offices of the Church and preserve order without a charter."26

The matter of military service, required of all able-bodied men between ages eighteen and forty-five, also concerned Nauvoo's leaders. Should they now join other militia units in Hancock County to fulfill their obligations? An ecclesiastical answer was found for that question as well. Because state law exempted ordained ministers from military duty, none of the county's Latter-day Saint priesthood holders would need to serve.27

In his Sunday sermon on March 16, Brigham Young gave the plan of ecclesiastical government a name. Nauvoo would be reorganized as the "City of Joseph." It would not be a legal organization under state law, he said, but rather an interim government operating under the bishops, who would keep order in the streets and care for the poor. The Council of Fifty considered the matter the next Saturday. Two days later, the Twelve and others met in the Concert Hall, where church leaders ordained bishops for each neighborhood and instructed them to set apart adult deacons within their wards.28 These quorums of twelve deacons patrolled the streets in rotation day and night and served as bodyguards for church leaders under the direction of their bishop. Young told the new policemen the next afternoon that he was thinking about incorporating a town under state law. The legal town limit of one square mile within the old city would include the temple, Nauvoo House, and other public property. It would allow the appointment of a police force.29 Meantime, provisional police operated under the suggested name The City of Joseph. The April conference approved Young's motion to adopt the name "henceforth and forever."30

Despite the sound of permanence that the Twelve gave the arrangement, they were working quietly for a solution under state law. They had sought advice from Illinois officials, and Governor Ford responded in an April 8 letter repeating what Young's close advisors had already told him. A town corporation could not be larger than one mile square. Ford suggested a series of adjoining towns to cover the whole territory of the city of Nauvoo. These units, he said, could cooperate voluntarily to ensure compatible laws. Ford believed the Saints might win back the city charter in the next legislature. Meanwhile, diminished in power, a town government would be "somewhat better than none," Ford said.31

As for the future of the Nauvoo Legion, Ford proposed to make Nauvoo's troops part of the state militia, as were other local military groups. The militia would be under direct orders of the governor as commander-in-chief, whereas originally both governor and mayor could command. Ford intended to disarm the Carthage and Warsaw militias in response to reports that they were stockpiling weapons. "Whether they intend it as a mere bravado, to keep up agitation and excitement, until after the trials [of the murderers of the Smiths, expected at the May 1845 court]; or whether there is to be a general move and renewal of the designs of last summer and fall I am not aware." Ford was willing to leave with the Mormon leaders the initiative should a crisis develop:

In case a mob should be raised against you it will be your privilege and one of your highest duties to society and yourselves to resist it. But you know your condition as a people. You know the prejudices which exist; and the disposition of the public mind to believe evil of you. You will therefore have to be cautious. Do nothing which will allow your opponents to say that you have begun a war. Place them clearly in the wrong and keep them so.32

The governor's sympathetic counsel offered the only practical resolution to Nauvoo's need for basic civil government maintenance of a peaceful society through simple regulations, police protection, and a judicial system under a town government. Brigham Young shared Ford's letter with the high priests and then discussed it at length with the Council of Fifty. Together they decided against multiplying town governments. Rather than seven (some speculated it would take twelve) separate but adjoining towns, they chose instead to replace the short-lived City of Joseph with a single Town of Nauvoo.

Organized the next day, on April 16, 1845, the new town consisted of only the most central part of the former city.33 The five trustees appointed under the law Alpheus Cutler, Orson Spencer, Charles C. Rich, Theodore Turley, and David Fullmer were all members of the Council of Fifty. Three of them were among those who had won office in the February election. Spencer had been elected mayor, Rich an alderman, and Fullmer a councilor. The trustees then appointed Hosea Stout as the town's police captain, named the former policemen to serve with him, and designated assessors, tax collectors, and other officers.34 The new functionaries set about meeting day-to-day needs without fanfare.

The issue of Nauvoo's municipal power had been resolved, and the system worked because of a consensus within the community. John Taylor observed:

There never was so great union in the city before; with a few exceptions the whole population are saints, and are governed as easy as a "gentle hand would lead an elephant by a hair." The "exceptions" are mainly men who hang on "to keep taverns, stores, or groceries," contrary to the expressed wishes of the majority of the citizens.35

Because a town could not have its own militia, church leaders allowed the deacons (or new police) to continue as a church emergency defense force. Major General Charles C. Rich shed his military title for a new one: "President of all the Organized Quorums of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Hancock County." Brigham Young instructed President Rich to hold his quorums in readiness to act against mob threats in Nauvoo or in any of the outlying settlements. This thinly veiled militia organization was consistent with the governor's prescription to prepare for self-defense and to do so cautiously.36

Official church commentary encouraged a mood of optimism during the spring of 1845. Heber C. Kimball invited more immigration and construction. "Some think we shall be driven from Nauvoo; but we are going to stay in Nauvoo and we shall build it up. . . . The Legislature has repealed our city charter; but it cannot repeal Mormonism, neither can it take away our city." The Saints were reassured that law and order prevailed within Nauvoo and that threats from without were unlikely. The Times and Seasons editorialized that the Saints "were more willing to receive and listen to counsel" than ever before. "The high council have only had one [disciplinary] case in about seven weeks. Our magistrates have nothing to do. We have little or no use for charter or law. . . . Whenever a dispute or difficulty arises, a word from the proper source puts all to right, and no resort to law." A committee of the Council of Fifty agreed: "Great peace and union prevail among all the saints," they wrote to Lyman Wight. "All the saints feel spirited and determined to carry out the measures of our martyred Prophet. There is no prospect of any mob at present, and all things bid fair for peace and prosperity."37

To Brigham Young, president of the Twelve, the peace prevailing in Nauvoo signified that Zion even a peace like that of the Millennium had arrived. He counseled in April 1845:

Learn to suffer wrong rather than do wrong, and by so doing we will outstrip all our enemies and conquer the evil one, for know ye not that here is Zion? know ye not that the millennium has commenced? We have had Zion upon the earth this fourteen years. Peace reigns among this people which is Zion. Union and true charity dwells with this people: this is the most orderly and peaceable people upon the face of the whole earth. Well, this is Zion, and it is increasing and spreading wider and wider, and this principle of Zion, which is peace, will stretch all over the earth; that is the millennium.38

Furthering the Prophet's Objectives

The assassinations at Carthage and the repeal of Nauvoo's municipal, military, and educational charter gave the Quorum of the Twelve opportunities to make adjustments in the way the church and the city of Nauvoo were organized. They did so with one purpose to accomplish the Prophet's objectives. During the year of peace that began in August 1844, leaders and residents of Nauvoo focused on completing Joseph Smith's most important project the temple. In Brigham Young's spiritual searchings, he felt affirmed that this was the right thing to do. "I inquired of the Lord whether we should stay here and finish the temple," he noted in his diary. "The answer was we should."39

To accomplish the task, the Twelve repeated the Prophet's invitation to gather. Needed were temple construction workers but of greater need were investors in Nauvoo's economy as a support for the temple project. Open letters from the Twelve frankly acknowledged the economic necessity undergirding the call to move to Nauvoo. In his first epistle on August 15, 1844, Brigham Young encouraged capitalists to invest in industry, manufacture, and agriculture to provide employment for those desiring to gather. The temple, he said, would be completed by the tithing system already in place, a tithe of time or income, but both depended upon men of means to establish industry and cultivate farms. "Unless this is done," Young said, "it is impossible for the gathering to progress, because those who have no other dependence cannot live together without industry and employment."40 The Twelve ratified this appeal in an October 1 epistle, in which they gave first priority to the temple "as a great and glorious public work" of great spiritual significance. They designated as their second priority the gathering "as a work of salvation, to be accomplished in wisdom and prudence" so that employment and economic support would be available in Nauvoo and surrounding areas. A third concern of the new leaders was the moral base of Nauvoo. They urged a retrenchment from what they judged a slackening of standards in the City of Righteousness.41

Within days after the burial of the martyrs, the Saints returned to work on the temple and pushed it forward at a rapid pace.42 By October 1, 1844, the limestone walls were ready to receive the arches of the second-story windows. Seven of the sun stone capitals were in place and the others were being readied. Inside, timbers were being framed and raised. By the following May, the Twelve had expended more than three thousand dollars on framing timbers alone.43

Church leaders issued an urgent appeal for workers and for tithes and other free-will offerings. The plea revealed just how much both men and supporting resources were needed: "Let the saints now send in their young men who are strong to labor, together with money, provisions, clothing, tools, teams, and every necessary means, such as they know they will want when they arrive, for the purpose of forwarding this work," the Twelve wrote. The public relations missionaries sent out in January to correct misconceptions about thievery in Nauvoo carried this message as well, and many of them were authorized to collect tithing for the temple.44

The appeal to complete the temple caught on. Church members packed up and moved to Nauvoo, contributed time and means toward construction, and prepared themselves for the promised blessings. Many young volunteers moved to Nauvoo for summer work after the crops were planted. "The work of the Temple goes on as fast as possible," John Taylor editorialized in April 1845, "and, in fact, the anxiety is so great to labor upon this great house of the Lord, that the committee frequently have to set men at other work."45 Thirteen months after the Prophet's death, a reporter for the New York Sun captured the mood converging on the Lord's House. "The building of the Mormon Temple under all the troubles by which those people have been surrounded," he wrote, "seems to be carried on with a religious enthusiasm which . . . controls all the movements toward its completion." By August 1845, a St. Louis visitor found the walls of the temple nearly finished and a stone wall, intended to rise twelve to fifteen feet, well under way around the perimeter of the temple lot.46

With the placement of the final trumpet stones atop the sun stones on March 27, 1845, the work of the stonemasons on the Nauvoo Temple was nearly complete. This accomplishment turned the attention of the Twelve to the other project enjoined by the January 1841 revelation. As work on the temple continued at a heightened pace despite cold spring weather, deliberations in various councils centered on the neglected Nauvoo House. The Saints at April's special conference were reminded that God had sanctioned the project when Orson Pratt read the 1841 revelation and an extract from the Book of the Law of the Lord (Joseph Smith's official diary). The congregation unanimously accepted a motion to "fulfill the revelation, by completing the Nauvoo House, as soon as possible." Young sought and received pledges from those willing to buy shares of stock in the Nauvoo House.47

Later that month, crews began hauling bricks from Nauvoo's kilns to the riverfront site to lay on the stone basement walls. A portion of the temple lumber from Wisconsin arriving regularly at Nauvoo on rafts went to the Nauvoo House.48 Brigham Young's energy kept things moving. In mid-August, Young climbed upon the stone basement walls of the Nauvoo House with Heber Kimball, who dedicated it to the Lord. The outline defined an L-shaped foundation, 120 feet in its longest dimension and 80 feet wide. Workmen started laying brick. Young called for more bricklayers at a priesthood meeting the next Sunday. Fifty responded, and the project moved forward.49 In early September, citizens rallied to support a bee, held as a benefit for Nauvoo's hotel, "next in magnificence to the temple."50

On August 17, Brigham Young had an experience that caused him to pause and reflect on the crash course he had been pursuing on the hotel project. In a dream just before awakening, he later informed aides, "I saw Brother Joseph Smith, and as I was going about my business, he said, 'Brother Brigham, don't be in a hurry,' which was repeated the second and third times with a degree of sharpness."51 The new head of the church pondered this advice before translating it into a redirection of effort. Events soon convinced the Twelve that the peaceful interlude in Hancock County was ending. They shifted attention once again toward completion of the House of the Lord. Nauvoo's grand hotel at the river's edge would be abandoned after the stone sills for the second-floor windows had been placed atop the brick walls.

Meanwhile, other public buildings went forward on their own schedules. One of the first was an arsenal or armory to store the powder, ammunition, and public armaments of the Nauvoo Legion. It had been contemplated for more than a year when on September 16, 1844, Lieutenant General Brigham Young dedicated a site near the temple "to the God of the armies of Israel" and broke ground for the cellar. After a slow start in construction work, the stone walls were completed the following June and roof timbers installed in mid-July.52 This project had been launched even though Governor Ford had collected the state arms in June 1844. At the end of the year, Lieutenant General Young and Major General Charles C. Rich had encouraged Nauvoo's militiamen to return any state arms still in their keeping. Members of the Nauvoo Legion rearmed themselves privately and stored their own arms. Some of the arms and ammunition came from Saints in St. Louis. Local gunmaker William Kay drilled out a six-pounder cannon to prepare it for service. Three other cannon were secured as well. Because the armory was no longer needed for public arms, it was completed for use as a school instead.53

Another major building completed after Joseph Smith's death was the Seventies Hall. Begun early in 1844, construction had experienced delays occasioned by a windstorm but moved forward rapidly during the late summer and fall. By December 20, it was ready for use. Dedication ceremonies began on the twenty-sixth with a sermon and dedicatory prayer by Brigham Young. For eight days the services continued, with the families of each of fifteen quorums attending, two quorums per session. The Nauvoo Choir of Singers and a brass band furnished music at each gathering. John Kay premiered a new song composed for the occasion by John Taylor and dedicated to Brigham Young: "The Seer, Joseph the Seer." Participants were feted with fruits, nuts, and desserts. "Well might it be said," a reporter concluded, "that the saints enjoyed a feast of fat things."54 High above the entrance, a stone inscription read in simple italic letters, "Priesthood." Just above the entrance door, another entablature anticipated future buildings: "Seventies Hall No. 1."55

In the second block north of the temple, the Music Association dedicated a hall measuring 30 feet by 50 feet in March 1845. This single-story brick building had arched ceilings, a platform at one end, and a curved sounding board for the choir and other musicians. The high council, women's groups, the Nauvoo Lyceum, and others used the Music Hall (also known as the Concert Hall).56 In remarks at one of the first concerts, Heber C. Kimball applauded the musicians for the variety of music offered to suit different tastes.57

In early June 1845, the Twelve decided to buy canvas for a tent to serve as a tabernacle for large preaching meetings at the west entrance of the temple. Some described it as an "outer court" to the temple. Joseph Smith had initiated the project. The elliptical tabernacle, to run north and south, was expected to seat as many as ten thousand people in seats rising "one above another in the form of an amphitheatre."58 Orson Hyde headed east to raise funds for four thousand yards of canvas and appropriate fixtures, estimated to cost between one thousand and two thousand dollars. Howard Egan secured hemp for cords in St. Louis. The Twelve encouraged the Saints to contribute by tithing, donation, in-kind contribution, or even loans redeemable in land at Nauvoo. Hyde collected fourteen hundred dollars and paid out two-thirds of it for the canvas. According to one who heard Hyde's report of the cash raised, "He had got it not by loans from the rich, who held on to their money, but by begging and some voluntary donations."59 Orson Pratt said the collection effort so drained the Saints' resources that tithing donations lagged for a time. By September 10, Hyde had raised the needed funds; a week later he shipped the canvas from New York to the bishops in Nauvoo.60

Not long after Hyde left for the East, a crew moved the preaching stand and benches from the public square east of the temple to a newly cleared area immediately west of the temple the designated site for the tabernacle. Regular Sunday preaching meetings thereafter assembled in that place. By the time the canvas arrived in mid-October, the church did not need a conference tent in Nauvoo. Hyde loaded the canvas into wagons in 1846 and headed west with it.61

Sustaining the Poor through Home Industry

As the Twelve moved forward in their expanded role, they implemented Joseph Smith's desire to free the First Presidency from detailed involvement in temporal affairs. The Prophet had begun a transformation in 1841 by giving the Twelve increased responsibilities at home, yet his role as trustee-in-trust kept him absorbed. The Twelve gave the trusteeship to senior bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller, along with much day-to-day conduct of church business. Brigham Young accepted Joseph Smith's proprietorship of the steamboat Maid of Iowa on behalf of the church and secured the ferry license from the city in January 1845. He then immediately directed the bishops to sell the boat.62

All of these actions freed the Twelve to focus on ecclesiastical duties. Even so, they did not neglect Nauvoo's economy. They were anxious that all of Nauvoo's business interests serve the broader good that they contribute directly to the furtherance of church programs and principles. For example, when apostate land developers lured immigrants away from church building lots, Brigham Young circulated a handbill to prospective buyers in Nauvoo. Young promised competitive prices on church lots and urged immigrants to consult with the trustees or their agents before buying. "It is your duty," he said.63 Similarly, when a few Nauvoo merchants offended church standards by selling liquor contrary to city law, the Twelve privately encouraged priesthood quorums to boycott three storekeepers identified as "enemies to this people."64

An observer in Carthage complained that emigration from Hancock County since the murders of Joseph and Hyrum had depressed property values by two-thirds. Money was scarce, he said, and business could be conducted only through trade. These were largely symptoms of a lingering economic depression in America that had hit Illinois especially hard. The disruptive events of the summer of 1844 had added to the effects felt locally. After Joseph Smith's death, construction work slowed temporarily in Nauvoo, and some workmen joined the exodus of nervous Saints and other citizens. "A great many buildings partly finished were left on account of the mobs as a great many [people] left the city," Dwight Webster observed in December. Webster's diligent effort to find work as a carpenter in Nauvoo had failed. The conference in April 1845 offered some relief when the Saints voted to drop all old debts against the church, including "the debts of Kirtland, and Missouri, and the debts that are said to be accrued in consequence of purchasing the Galland tract in Iowa Territory."65

Despite the lingering depression, church leaders had for years hoped that industry and manufacturing would flourish in Nauvoo along with agriculture and a surging growth in population. The Twelve recognized that they could not pump substantial resources into construction of the temple without a sound economic base. At the time of the Prophet's death, the city was nearing eleven thousand residents, the point at which St. Louis had been eight years before. The Missouri metropolis and its suburbs had doubled in population in the next four years and did so again by 1845.66 Its economy was burgeoning. Why not the same for Nauvoo?

In August 1844, the Twelve launched an effort to involve the entire Latter-day Saint community in home industry and to focus all economic energies toward church purposes.67 They drew on ideas promoted before Joseph Smith's death (and carried those same ideas with them when they moved west eighteen months later). Brigham Young stated the objectives in an October 1844 epistle from the Twelve:

Not only must farms be cultivated, houses built, and mills [erected] to grind the corn, but there must be something produced by industry, to send off to market in exchange for cash, and for such other articles as we need. This must be produced, not by singing, or praying, or going to meeting, or visiting, or friendly greetings, or conversation, BUT, BY THE UNITED INDUSTRY, SKILL, AND ECONOMY OF THE WHOLE PEOPLE. Men, women, and children must be well, and constantly employed. In order the more effectually to do this, we must turn our attention to the erection of work-shops for the manufacture of every useful article; and wares thus manufactured must find a market, not in Nauvoo alone but in all the wide country, and in cities and towns abroad.68

Advocates of industry felt assured that the natural resources for increased home production could be readily obtained. For example, Brigham Young lauded the abundance of raw materials wool, flax, hemp, and cotton that would feed British-style textile factories. Church trustees agreed to accept these raw materials as tithing and use them in fueling manufacturing industries in Nauvoo.69 In this context, the Twelve and others taught the importance of work. "Time is property, and labor is capital" became a common phrase encouraging unemployed tradesmen to organize themselves into small manufacturing shops. "Labor is the manufacturer of wealth," a Nauvoo Neighbor editorial said. "It was ordained of God, as the medium to be used by man to obtain his living."70

Economic development fit well into Latter-day Saint religious belief. The consistent goal of Joseph Smith's economic policy had been to eliminate poverty. During the last year the Saints were headquartered in Nauvoo, the Twelve encouraged them to sustain themselves and the poor through home industry. If they would purchase the raw materials and then "employ their friends and themselves at home, instead of sending away all our cash for manufactured goods," the Twelve said, "we can soon produce millions of wealth, and the poor will have no cause of complaint."71 As new industries created jobs and goods for local purchase, cash would remain in Nauvoo and tithing would increase for use in building the temple and for other church needs. In New Hampshire, Jesse C. Little caught the spirit of this emphasis and kept six to eight hands busy in a private manufacturing business. Little expected to build twenty-five sleighs during the winter of 1844-45 before turning to carriages, he informed Brigham Young. "I think the Saints ought to prepare themselves to help themselves and others. By so doing," he wrote, "it would relieve the poor by giving them labour."72

Another religious reason for economic development was to prepare for uncertain times ahead. At the end of time, when nations crumbled, many surmised that the kingdom of the Saints would be left to its own resources. "Come on then, all ye ends of the earth," Brigham Young said to converts abroad, "take hold together, and with a long, strong, steady and united exertion, let us build up a strong hold of industry and wealth." Orson Spencer urged tradesmen to use money and labor "'to build us all up as one to secure us a home, a resting place from the impending storm that is gathering to burst over the world.'"73 The concept of home industry found its greatest advocate in John Taylor. He published articles and editorials in the Nauvoo Neighbor and in October 1844 launched a series of weekly trades meetings for Nauvoo's mechanics (tradesmen). Through these town meetings, he hoped to create an economy in which Latter-day Saints could buy goods made in Nauvoo by local workers using locally produced raw materials. He told one of the gatherings, "'We can manufacture every thing that is necessary for us to use or wear, by uniting our industry and means; for labor is wealth and power if we will only carry it out.'"74By common consent, Taylor chaired the Tuesday night gatherings and headed a general trades committee with Orson Spencer and Phineas Richards as his assistants. The general committee helped skilled craftsmen in Nauvoo organize. These committees reported their progress at gatherings known generally as the Trades Meeting but also as the Trades Association, Mechanics Association, or Trades Institute.75

The general trades council sponsored nothing directly but taught the principles by which it expected tradesmen to organize. Some worried about competition with imported goods or noncompetitive prices. Taylor reassured workers that small local companies would not create unfair monopolies in the market.76 The trades committees found that local products could be sold for less than imported items. Edward Hunter cast the effort in patriotic terms likening it to John Hancock's efforts to expel British manufactures from the American colonies.77

During its first four months, Taylor intentionally resisted organizing his general committee or the trades meetings themselves into any kind of formal body. Neither would he accept any authority over the trades subcommittees. His intention was to encourage the various committees to devise ways and means to organize separate companies for each trade. These companies would "manufacture articles and export them, instead of importing every thing we needed, impoverishing the city and mechanics."78 Nor would Taylor commit church funds to any project. He insisted that they be private companies; the church in Nauvoo would avoid the pattern of united orders tried earlier in Kirtland and Independence.79

During October, the trades meetings helped organize many of Nauvoo's trades "to produce all the dry goods, hardware, cutlery, crockery, or any other commodity, that a community needs for comfort or convenience." Various speakers encouraged shops to make pottery, farm utensils, firearms, and leather goods. The city could use a paper mill, a chair factory, a stove factory, and, eventually, a pork-packing house, they said.80 Organized into craftsmen's planning committees were weavers, shoemakers, carpenters, iron molders, blacksmiths, cutlers, coach and carriage makers, lace weavers, jewelers, tailors, cabinetmakers, hatmakers, and others all encouraged to form their own businesses. "We are determined to make all our own materials that we can," Heber C. Kimball insisted.81

The iron molders, weavers, and carriage makers moved forward aggressively by forming three independent businesses. Hiram Kimball's iron foundry had closed earlier that year for lack of iron and coal but had produced plows selling for seven dollars, three dollars less than imports. In the spirit of home industry, two entrepreneurs put the iron foundry back in production. "By industry we live; By commerce we thrive," an advertisement in the Neighbor announced.82

The weavers committee identified ten workers ready to make shirting, sheeting, satinette, ladies shawls, and gingham. They needed only looms, wool, cotton, and cotton yarn. In mid-November, the committee reported twelve looms finished, spindles under construction, and cotton ordered. A supporter had donated a carding machine. Local farmers had agreed to raise sheep.83

The weavers were excited by an offer from a Mr. Livingston of Peterboro, New Hampshire, who offered to finance a cloth factory in Nauvoo.84 A committee investigated.85 They found local investors willing to provide twelve hundred dollars, less than half the amount needed for a three-story stone building. To meet their June completion deadline, sponsors invited subscriptions for twenty-five dollars each. If a joint-stock arrangement didn't work, they would seek direct capitalization.86 Phineas Richards of the general committee estimated huge profits from the cotton factory. The weavers projected that they could produce cloth for wearing apparel at 75 cents per yard. They expected to launch the business by December with five or six looms.87

Carriage makers needed their own factory but wondered if they could share a building with the weavers.88 They told the Trades Meeting that vehicles made in Nauvoo could compete successfully with imports. Carriages could be built for six hundred dollars per dozen and sold for sixty dollars each. The profit for common elliptic wagons would be even greater; for an investment of sixty dollars per wagon, workers could sell them for one hundred dollars and clear forty dollars.89 Without waiting for a new building, the committee found a temporary workplace and on December 18 organized the Nauvoo Coach and Carriage Manufacturing Association.90 Following John Taylor's advice, they created an organization independent of the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association. By early January 1845, they were ready to begin making vehicles.91

The informal Trades Association existed apart from the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association (NA&MA), which had been organized in 1841 under state charter. Many of the new trades groups hoped to organize their manufacturing businesses under the authority of the NA&MA charter. The Nauvoo city charter had yet to be repealed, but it was facing serious threats. After much discussion, on December 31, the Trades Meeting resolved "that instead of commencing business under any charter of Illinois, we will unite our efforts in all manufacturing and mechanical labors in common co-partnerships, or private form, according to law."92

This action failed to satisfy proponents of a dam to provide water power for industries and a harbor for Nauvoo. These men believed that the only entity with legal standing was the state-chartered Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association. The Twelve supported the affiliation, even though legislative repeal of the association's charter seemed likely.93 Because as many as a third of the founders of the NA&MA had left the church or had died, the organization lacked direction. John Taylor advised the remaining officers to reorganize and fill the vacancies. Before the men could respond, one of the group's council members, Theodore Turley, suggested instead a merger with the Trades Association, which he thought had been formally organized.94

This gave John Taylor the opportunity he needed. Because Turley offered no plan for merging the two groups, Taylor proposed a meeting to develop "an organization, something like the priesthood." First, the assembled tradesmen voted to repeal the charter of the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association. Only they, and not the state legislature, had the authority to do so, Taylor said. With the NA&MA disabled, Taylor proposed the creation of a trades union. It would have a presidency of three and a council of twelve men. The council would govern as a body known as the Living Constitution. There would be no formal charter or written bylaws. Separate associations and companies formed by tradesmen would be subject to the council. The concept of a living constitution had been used in the creation of another special group, the civic-oriented Council of Fifty. These groups echoed the governing principles of priesthood councils and the Relief Society. Taylor and Amasa Lyman were appointed to select the twelve men.95

Those associated with the old Agricultural and Manufacturing Association did not wait for the new Trades Council. They set about to replace the NA&MA with a private joint-stock corporation. On January 31, 1845, at a gathering in the Seventies Hall, they formed the Mercantile and Mechanical Association and elected twelve trustees. Its stated purpose was to foster home industry and forestall the importation of goods by merchants and the resulting drain of money from Nauvoo.96 When organizers met four days later at the Masonic Hall to draft bylaws, John D. Lee, a member of the Council of Fifty, advised them "that the order of the Association differed from the arrangements then [in the] making by the Twelve in some points."97

The arrangements being made by the Twelve may have been considered that afternoon by the Council of Fifty. The meeting of the Fifty at the Seventies Hall that day, February 4, was its first since Joseph Smith's death. Brigham Young assembled the group to reorganize it, likely in response to the repeal of the city charter. During its short history, the Council of Fifty had dealt only with political issues and would continue that focus.98 Now, the Twelve saw a need for a separate council to manage economic issues. John Taylor was absent from the meeting of the Fifty, but it was the proposal he had made the previous week that the Twelve implemented. At that time or within days, they appointed a new twelve-member board "to organize the temporal affairs of the church." According to William Huntington, "twelve men were chosen called the living constitution. These twelve chose three of the twelve apostles, viz John Taylor, George A. Smith, and Amasa Lyman to preside over the temporal affairs of all the church."99

The dozen members of the Living Constitution for economic affairs, or Trades Council, were appointed by the Twelve.100 They were men of proven practical judgment: Samuel Bent, Alpheus Cutler, Phineas Richards, Edward Hunter, Daniel Spencer, John Benbow, Theodore Turley, Orson Spencer, David Fullmer, Charles C. Rich, William Weeks, and Joseph W. Coolidge.101 Five already served on the Council of Fifty; three others would be admitted on March 1.102 Seven had won municipal office in the February election but had been denied the right to serve because of repeal of the city charter.103 Five had seen service on stake high councils.104 Orson Spencer and Phineas Richards had served since October as John Taylor's counselors in the Trades Meeting council. The three apostles, all members of the Council of Fifty, served as presidents over the trades panel, with a relationship much like that of a stake presidency over its high council. Acting without charter or bylaws, this coordinating council for Nauvoo's economic affairs would operate under ecclesiastical authority as an executive, legislative, and judicial body.

The following Friday, February 7, the Trades Council met for the first time to plan a strategy. They decided to continue the informal Tuesday night trades meetings to promote home industry through a town meeting format. Four days later, the presidency of the Trades Council met with other members of the Twelve and drafted a significant document that became part of the incorporation papers of every trades company formed thereafter in Nauvoo.105

The stated purpose of the model constitution was to promote peace, to support the poor by employing them, and to eliminate any need to go to law to settle business problems. By adopting the guidelines, the board of directors of a participating company agreed to be "subject in all things to the counsel, advice, and directions of the body called the 'Living Constitution.'" Company directors would be appointed by this council with the advice and consent of association members. The board could appoint its own officers as long as the Living Constitution did not object. The company board pledged its loyalty to the Trades Council and agreed to be subject to council review and arbitration of its business. Company directors waived their right to sue in a court of law. They agreed to submit all grievances to the Living Constitution for arbitration, retaining the right to appeal only to the council's presidency.106

These actions of the Twelve in creating the Trades Council were presented and ratified on Monday, February 17, at a public meeting in the grove. At the gathering, the new presidency over Nauvoo's temporal affairs were introduced. They explained the religious nature of their economic stewardship. In an indirect reflection of the principles of consecration, they "urged the necessity of becoming one in feeling and in action in temporal things as well as spiritual."107

With the superstructure and guidelines in place, the trades groups proceeded. The Mercantile and Mechanical Association had been waiting for counsel since its first organizing meeting on January 31.108 On February 18, the group learned from John Taylor and Theodore Turley "the true nature of organizing Associations of this kind." After agreeing to the governing principles outlined by the Living Constitution, the association elected Daniel Carns as president. Two days later, they adopted a constitution that included word-for-word the guidelines provided by the Living Constitution. On February 24, they began selling stock.109

Other groups soon followed suit to move forward the effort in Nauvoo to employ skilled craftsmen in productive private enterprises. In six meetings during the last week of February, a committee from the Living Constitution met with several gatherings of unorganized tradesmen to propose plans for creating cooperative manufacturing associations.110 Between then and late April, at least three new companies were organized under the close supervision of the Trades Council. Among the new associations was one incorporating blacksmiths, whitesmiths, and gunsmiths.111 In December, five shoemakers had formed the Nauvoo Boot and Shoe Establishment on Mulholland Street next to Amos Davis's store and offered wholesale and retail goods.112 A broader, competing enterprise appeared in April as the Tanners and Shoemakers Association. This group organized the Nauvoo Tannery and appealed for calfskins and hides to supply its operation. Harnessmakers soon joined the association. By April, the group operated a boot and shoe shop on Young Street, a saddle and harness shop near the Arsenal, and a tannery at Hibbard and Rich Streets.113 The Association of Bricklayers, Stonelayers, and Plasterers sought work by advertising a detailed list of skills for hire. To accommodate its eleven members and the buying public, the Tailors' Association maintained two shops, one on Main Street and another on Mulholland.114

Many businesses, both new and old, existed outside the rules of the Living Constitution and the Trades Meeting movement because they were owned by individuals. These single proprietorships joined in the spirit of home manufacture by offering locally made products to residents.115 The emphasis on home industry did not keep the import merchants from selling goods made elsewhere. When A. A. Lathrop opened his Key Stone Store on Mulholland Street, he appealed to Latter-day Saint buyers with the explanation, "Being a Mormon, he goes on the principle: our interest; our cause, and Nauvoo for ever."116

Many of the trades associations sold directly to the public from their shops. Others sought retail outlets. In December, the weavers urged the Trades Meeting to create a commission store where they could place their cloth for sale.117 Three months later, the Living Constitution directed Samuel Gulley to establish just such an outlet. He did so as an affiliate of the newly organized Mercantile and Mechanical Association. Gulley quickly began to attract locally produced goods.118 In late February, Abel Lamb sensed a growing need and opened a second, independent commission store on Mulholland Street.119

All of the new manufacturing companies operated in an economy based largely upon the exchange of goods. They recognized that the supply of cash was limited. For instance, when the Tailors' Association of Nauvoo advertised their prices, they agreed to "work for wheat."120 As the new companies multiplied, church leaders encouraged residents to purchase the goods being produced, including pottery and rifles. The Nauvoo Neighbor advised buyers to let their imported shoes "go to Buncombe; the laborer is worthy of his bread and meat, and every good man will see that they have it."121

Women and children were likewise engaged in home industries. At a meeting of Aaronic Priesthood members in January 1845, Bishop Newel K. Whitney recommended that ward bishops establish "the manufacturing of palm leaf and straw hats, willow baskets and other business that children are capable of learning, that they may be raised to industrious habits." Two merchants had recently exhibited examples of willow baskets and worsted girting made in Nauvoo. It was evidence that local manufacturing had begun.122 In March, Charles C. Rich and Hosea Stout organized the women at Evans Ward, about six miles south of Nauvoo, as "an Association according to their several occupations for the purpose of promoting the cause of home industry and manufacturing the necessary articles for their own use without being dependent on the stores for all that we need." The proposition received unanimous support. Three women from each occupation were appointed to supervise the business for their group.123 Within weeks, the women of Nauvoo organized a Straw Manufactory to produce straw bonnets and hats. In the spirit of home industry, President Nancy H. Rockwood said, "The association agree to wear home manufacture, and to supply the place of ribbons by decorating their bonnets with straw trimmings." This pledge supported Heber C. Kimball's earnest call for "manufacturing our own materials and making our clothes."124

An important part of Nauvoo's effort to industrialize was the proposal to create a wing dam in the Mississippi to furnish better water power for factories and to improve access to the city's wharfs. Riverboats during the summer and fall depended upon portage service around the Des Moines Rapids, an expensive and risky detour. This series of five rapids along the eleven-mile stretch between Keokuk and Montrose consisted of miniature ridges of rock stretching across the river, invisible under the smooth, swift-flowing but unbroken sheet of water. The river stretched forty-five hundred feet between banks but had a mean depth of only two and one-half feet. Nauvoo's boosters proposed a dam that would bury the rapids under deeper water. A diversion dam on the Nauvoo side of the river would leave open the deeper steamboat channel on the Iowa side and create both a huge harbor and a head of water sufficient to power numerous mills.125

Promoters downstream from Nauvoo likewise recognized the benefits of tempering the effect of the rapids. In 1841, they attempted to build a wing dam at Montebello, midway between Warsaw and Nauvoo, but when high water washed out their beginnings, they abandoned the project. Two years later, a newcomer to Hancock County encouraged Eastern entrepreneurs to develop the water power at Warsaw, Nauvoo's chief economic competitor. The river fell twenty-five feet in twelve miles above Warsaw, and six feet in the last half mile of the rapids. He claimed that if it were harnessed, the river could supply power "for forty Lowells or one hundred Rochesters."126

Promoters in Nauvoo first considered the idea of a diversion dam in January 1841. Mayor John C. Bennett proposed a wing dam north of Nauvoo and a canal down Main Street, but it was judged impractical for the new city to attempt. In December 1843, with Nauvoo's population topping eight thousand, the city council authorized Mayor Joseph Smith to build a dam "from the lower line of the city [westward] to the island opposite Montrose, and from thence to the sand-bar above in the Mississippi."127 The design promised "one of the best harbors on the Mississippi river . . . [and] the best mill privileges in the western country." Under contract with the mayor, Robert Campbell drew ten sets of construction plans based on findings by city surveyor Alanson Ripley and delivered them the following April.128

The greatest challenge to the project was the lack of funds. Joseph Smith estimated costs at a quarter of a million dollars. Because it was English immigrants who most needed jobs, the Twelve invited their agent in Liverpool to seek capitalists with seven thousand dollars to invest in the dam and a cotton or woolen factory, but the disruptions of politics and assassinations soon delayed the project.129

Nauvoo promoters who in December 1844 revived the proposal to build a dam faced their own hurdles. They needed government permission, an institutional sponsor or corporate organization, and sufficient funding. Because the dam would intrude into a major river, the committee appealed to Congress for a federal permit, but that request died in a congressional committee in February. Without waiting, they moved ahead under the authorization of local authorities.130 The first hurdle was to gain rights from two previous grantees. The city council in April 1842 had given Newel Knight exclusive rights to build a wing dam to protect his water-powered gristmill from low water. The rights granted in December 1843 to "Joseph Smith and his successors for the term of perpetual succession" had been extensive and apparently ignored Knight's permit.131 Upon the advice of John Taylor, promoters brought Knight into their committee as a partner, and the city council repealed Joseph Smith's charter.132

Sponsors of the dam had first presented their ideas to the Trades Meeting in early December, along with the plans designed for Joseph Smith. They believed the dam could create a head of water to power as many as ten mills. The Trades Meeting agreed to guide the project and appointed committees to fund and build it.133 Sponsors planned to build fifty-three stone piers, connect them with timbers, and build a timber road atop them. The dam would extend eighty rods, or one-quarter mile, from the riverbank to the lower end of an island in the river. By mid-February, 1845, the committee had secured forty rods of riverfront property along the entire length of Davison Hibbard's farm.134

As promoters prepared to incorporate, Taylor invited them to consult with the Twelve, the temple committee, surveyors, and church trustee Newel K. Whitney.135 Church trustees proposed that ownership of the dam be vested in them and leased to the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association for a 10 percent share of the income. The rest of the profit would go to association shareholders.136

Alanson Ripley was assigned to sell the project to investors. Between each of the fifty-three piers was space for a flume to propel a waterwheel for machinery. The piers could be built for $7,500, Ripley said, with the flumes and bridge costing another $7,500. Three hundred shares at $50 each would fund the project. Operating costs would be significantly less than a local steam engine. Ripley estimated eventual profits at more than $175 per year for each shareholder. He expected to see a cotton mill, two gristmills, a sawmill, a paper mill, and a carding machine. Sponsors proposed to church leaders that "citizens be invited to subscribe twelve thousand days work, which it was estimated would put a sufficient dam in the Mississippi to propel machinery."137

During the last week of February 1845, investors organized the Nauvoo Water Power Company with stock at fifty dollars a share. Company president John E. Page represented his twelve-member board in dedicating a site for the dam while a hundred citizens of Nauvoo looked on. Brigham Young said a few words and then organized workers as teams to quarry limestone.138 A site one mile below Nauvoo soon yielded stone. A crew headed upriver to the Wisconsin pinery for lumber for the piers.139 The project attracted the attention of the whole community, and the promoters encouraged a spirit of industry:

Like bees in a hive, By labor we live, By union we thrive, By friendship we give.140

Despite this energetic beginning, in another two weeks the arrival of spring prompted a postponement of the project "till next winter." Workmen were needed on the Nauvoo Temple. More than one hundred workmen and thirty ox teams shifted their efforts from the riverbanks to the bluffs above Nauvoo. Officers in the power company agreed to the arrangement. Beginning in April, they offered riverfront lots for sale at bargain prices.141 Construction of a dam would await another time and another location closer to Warsaw.142

During its last full year, Mormon Nauvoo also experienced an important agricultural boom. As if anticipating the need the Saints would have for foodstuffs in 1846, the Twelve encouraged a massive gardening project. One objective of the April conference in 1845 was to "cultivate the earth both in the city and out."143 In their own lots, the Saints enjoyed an abundant harvest of fruits and vegetables.144 In addition, a community effort in what was called the Big Field east of Nauvoo expanded production significantly. By midsummer 1845, Brigham Young reported expectations for the fall harvest:

Nauvoo, or, more properly, the "City of Joseph," looks like a paradise. All the lots and land, which have heretofore been vacant and unoccupied, were enclosed in the spring, and planted with grain and vegetables, which makes it look more like a garden of gardens than a city; and the season has been so favorable, the prospect is, there will be enough raised within the limits of the corporation to supply the inhabitants with corn, potatoes, and other vegetables. Hundreds of acres of prairie land have also been enclosed, and are now under good cultivation, blooming with corn, wheat, potatoes, and other necessaries of life.145

A New Society of Saints

During his lifetime, Joseph Smith defined by revelation the basic shape of church organization and set it into place. Because the Prophet's energies were focused on translating and teaching, he delegated much responsibility to his colleagues in the presiding quorums the First Presidency, the stake high councils, and the Twelve. In August 1844, administrative matters took on a new importance. First, the Twelve appointed bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller to serve as trustees of the church to give themselves time to focus on spiritual matters. Next, they assigned Wilford Woodruff to move his family to England and preside over the church members in the British Isles and Europe. Then, applying to the church in North America what they had learned in England, the Twelve further defined geographical administration. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards divided North America into districts and appointed a high priest over each. This trio of apostles managed both the general business of the church and also American affairs as a presidency over the continent. The Twelve entrusted to Parley P. Pratt the branches in the Eastern states and the regulation of church immigration through New York. Reuben McBride was given the presidency over all church affairs "in Kirtland both spiritually and temporally."146

The Twelve wanted to regulate more closely the American branches. In the past, the district presidents convened quarterly and annual conferences to hear reports from the branches and to regulate ordinations. Now, they would be asked to bring greater order to the spiritual lives of individuals members and missionaries alike. The Twelve concluded:

This will save the trouble and confusion of the running to and fro of elders, detect false doctrine and false teachers, and make every elder abroad accountable to the conference in which he may happen to labor. Bishops also will be appointed in the larger branches, to attend to the management of the temporal funds, such as tithings and funds for the poor, according to the revelations of God and to be judges in Israel.147

Accountability was the key. Without a formal organization, the elders might be found "running to and fro," preaching all manner of doctrine, collecting funds for various church needs with or without specific authority, and reporting to no one their labors of preaching and raising up branches of the church. To the Twelve had been given responsibility for bearing off the kingdom in all the world, and they would do so in an orderly manner, just as they had done in Great Britain. The pattern of districts and conferences already existing in America would be reemphasized. The Twelve saw this system of governance as preparing the way for new stakes of Zion and an eventual millennial government.148

At the October conference in 1844, the Twelve used the boundaries of United States congressional districts to define eighty-five ecclesiastical districts. During and soon after the conference, the Twelve ordained forty new high priests. Then, from the expanded quorum, they assigned eighty-five men, whom they had selected two months earlier, to preside over members in these districts. In this dramatic organizational effort, the Twelve instructed the new leaders to move their families to their assigned areas, to raise up stakes, and to oversee the work of local branches. The district presidents were invited to visit Nauvoo when the temple was finished, receive their endowments, and then return to their homes and preside in full priesthood authority in their region.149

Brigham Young spoke openly of this comprehensive expansion plan for establishing the kingdom of God on the earth. Each worthy high priest would govern a portion of that peaceful kingdom as endowed leaders spread out over the continent. "Nauvoo will not hold all the people that will come into the kingdom," Brigham Young said.150 Just four months earlier, Joseph Smith had challenged the church to establish just such regional gathering places in all of the Americas.151 By accepting their assignments, the group of new high priests demonstrated loyalty to Joseph and to the Twelve, who held "the keys of the priesthood [to] go and build up the kingdom in all the world."152

Because unanimity in doctrine and practice was one of their concerns, the Twelve deliberated further about publications sponsored by and for the church. A New Year's Day message in 1845 conveyed their "great anxiety for the unity and prosperity of the whole church" with an endorsement of the Times and Seasons, the religious and historical biweekly publication, and the Nauvoo Neighbor, a general news weekly. All church members should subscribe and should encourage others to read these papers, they said. Such an effort would spread "correct principles, sanctioned by the highest authorities in the church, and . . . win the good feelings of the community, while the affections, and zeal of the brethren, are harmonized, by the same doctrines, the same rules, and the same laudable purposes."153 The Twelve certainly did not mean to exclude from support the Millennial Star, published under General Authority supervision at Liverpool to serve members in Great Britain. Brigham Young had already endorsed Orson Pratt's Prophetic Almanac.154

Parley P. Pratt, who was presiding in the Eastern states, advised the Twelve that the New York paper, the Prophet, was dying for lack of subscriptions. "The churches [in New York] are few in number," he wrote. "We decrease while you increase." Brigham Young advised editor Pratt and publisher Sam Brannan not to subsidize the Prophet with tithing funds. Survival would depend on subscription income, he said. The owners would need to justify the venture on business reasons alone. Pratt renamed the paper The New York Messenger in May 1845, and Brannan continued it for another six months.155

The Twelve expanded the work of preaching the restored gospel by increasing the number of quorums of the seventy. In June 1844, this missionary force involved only one quorum of seventy members. Shortly before the fall conference, the Twelve and senior seventies president Joseph Young selected seven presidents for each of ten new quorums. Sixty-three of these came from the first quorum.156 By the close of the conference, the Twelve had filled eleven quorums completely and a twelfth partially. The presidents of the seventies ordained more than four hundred men during the conference week alone, selecting men under age thirty-five from the elders and Aaronic Priesthood. That expansion was just the beginning. Thirty-five groups were functioning by January 1846.

With this action, Brigham Young and the Twelve implemented the priesthood revelation of 1835 in new ways. To the initial quorum of seventy, with its seven presidents, they looked toward the revelatory commission calling for "other seventy, until seven times seventy, if the labor in the vineyard of necessity requires it." Each quorum had its own presidency of seven members, and the presidencies of the first nine quorums retained membership in the First Quorum. The presidents of all seventies quorums living in Nauvoo met regularly to receive instruction from the seven senior presidents, who took counsel from the Twelve. "The seventies will have to be subject to their presidents and council," Brigham Young said in his announcement of the orderly management system for the missionary quorums.157

The Twelve expected to involve themselves in missionary labors once again, regulating the church in the East and overseeing the traveling elders. Instead, church members in Nauvoo prevailed upon them to remain at home. Because of this, the Twelve dispatched the seventy.158 Said Young:

We do not want any man to go to preaching until he is sent. If an elder wants to go to preaching, let him go into the seventies. You are all apostles to the nations, to carry the gospel; and when we send you to build up the kingdom, we will give you the keys, and power and authority. If the people will let us alone we will convert the world, and if they persecute us we will do it the quicker. I would ex[h]ort all who go from this place to do right and be an honor to the cause. Inasmuch as you will go forth and do right you shall have more of the spirit than you have heretofore.159

Once again Young insisted on order within the kingdom. The missionaries would go when sent, would go with proper authority, and would go worthily so that they could carry the spirit of God in their hearts. Quorum leaders echoed the theme. "If it is necessary in framing a large building that the carpenters should meet with the master workman to receive orders and instructions," one president observed, "so it is necessary for the members of this quorum to meet with their presidents." This was the way of the priesthood to "be governed in all things by those at our head."160

Order and unity were closely associated principles for governing the church and for personal relationships. The frequent mention of unity in public preaching reinforced aspirations for attaining the spiritual and millennial objective of harmony in human relationships. In November, Brigham Young spoke for two hours on the topic, giving it a central place in the faith of the Saints.161 Many church members could not remember having ever experienced such a spirit of unity within the church. Perhaps the apostasies surrounding the martyrdom had removed the most vocal dissidents. In quorum meetings, men regularly pledged fealty to their quorum presidents and to the Twelve. Seventies presidents often "requested the Brethren to arise and tell their feelings as regards the present organisation of the Church."162 Leaders strengthened the feeling of common interests by encouraging "a spirit of love and union one toward another," by forgiving the repentant, and by excommunicating men unwilling to meet church standards of morality, sobriety, or loyalty.163 George A. Smith reminded the seventies at the dedication of their hall that a unity of heart and mind would make earthlings like the angels. "Perfect union and harmony exist among them," he said. "Hence their concert of action, and consequently their influence and power with God; and upon the same principle . . . we could make a heaven wherever in the dispensation of providence we might be placed."164

Because the calling of the seventies was missionary service, the quorums encouraged their members to prepare to leave their families on proselytizing missions. In seeking brethren to fill four vacancies in the fifth quorum, the senior president stated "that he wanted men that was ready and willing to go at any time or any call without any excuse and would magnify their calling."165

The seventies were urged to study the scriptures and to hone their preaching skills in preparation for missionary service. When the presidents had no counsel of their own to share, they invited quorum members to take turns speaking. To share the opportunity to speak more widely, one group limited each participant to five minutes, which the clerk timed.166 Most of the quorums structured the experience less formally, merely going around the room and giving each member an opportunity. The Fifth Quorum organized a separate lecturing school that met weekly for three hours on Tuesday evenings. Speakers were given twenty minutes each to expound on a designated gospel topic.167 These subjects typically included the principles the seventies expected to teach as missionaries: faith, repentance, baptism, the gift of the Holy Ghost, the resurrection, prophecy, the Book of Mormon, priesthood, and the gathering of Israel.168

It was to provide a preparatory school where the prospective missionaries could stand before quorum members and practice preaching from the pulpit that the Seventies Hall was pushed to completion in December 1844. The hall served other purposes as well, but its primary function was for training missionaries. For regular meetings, the quorums most often met in other halls or in schoolrooms and homes. During good weather, they gathered at the meeting ground.169 The high priests were impressed by the accomplishment of the seventies and approved plans in January 1845 for their own hall, a single-story structure almost as large as the main floor assembly room in the temple. Brigham Young immediately discouraged the project and won support for an alternate effort: "I proposed to the quorum to finish off the upper story of the Temple in which they could receive their washings and anointings and endowments instead of undertaking a building from the commencement."170

Priesthood quorums in Nauvoo were expected to qualify quorum members to attend the temple. The presidents of quorums certified the worthiness of quorum members to receive temple endowments.171 The plan was for quorums to receive the ordinances as a quorum, with their wives. Nauvoo's seventies took seriously their spiritual preparations to enter the temple. In their weekly quorum meetings, they learned about the criteria for entering the House of the Lord. Sometimes the counsel was of a practical nature ("to improve all the land we could, that we might have grain enough for our own use"), sometimes procedural ("to keep our wives at home when we transact church business"); often it was spiritual ("the necessity of preparing themselves to receive their endowments").172

A common theme was unity the need for a uniformity of thought and action. In the months following the August 1844 conference, quorum members regularly voiced to each other their willingness to sustain their new leaders. By backing the Twelve, they were evidencing a lack of sympathy for Sidney Rigdon, James J. Strang, and other claimants to power. They shared feelings of distrust about Strang and his writings; some had investigated and rejected Strang's claims; others found no attraction in even considering the option. In this spirit, one brother "referred to Strangism as being too low to stoop to, and it was unnecessary to say anything about it."173

A more important objective of the quiet campaign for unity pointed toward a spiritual harmony to prepare themselves for the temple ordinances. "Let us cultivate a spirit of love and union one toward another and inasmuch as any of the brethren have had feelings against [another] brother . . . let them die and be forever forgotten," President Jacob Gates advised the fourth quorum.174

The seventies quorums met as frequently as possible to strengthen a sense of brotherhood. They appointed teachers to visit in the homes of quorum members and encourage them in their duties.175 One quorum sponsored a band concert.176 During the harvest season, another group picked grapes and juiced them for a quorum social. The activity was held at the home of a quorum leader, with band music, sermons, singing, and refreshments, including fresh juice and apples.177

Seventies presidents helped quorum members prepare for the temple by reminding them of gospel standards. President Harrison Burgess told the second quorum, "We have been councilled this day to put watch over ourselves, and endeavour to become a righteous people: ceasing all our lightness, evil ways, and habits, that we may have the favor of God and have peace this winter . . . to labor in building a Temple."178 Quorum presidents instructed their members on the need for "virtue, chastity and strict honesty, also the disadvantage of profane swearing and finally every evil practice." The seventies were counseled to stay away from grogshops, to pray in their families, and in other ways to "keep a straitforward course."179 Amasa Lyman advised one group, "It is of much more consequence to attend to such principles as will save us, and not pry so much at the things which are certainly out of place."180 To be worthy of temple blessings, the seventies learned, they must hallow their lives in patterns of Christian purity and uprightness.

This preparation made sense to the quorum members in the context of what they understood about the purpose of the temple ordinances and about their missionary assignment. The Lord had commanded the Saints to build a temple, Lyman reminded one group of seventies and their wives, so he could "confer power upon them, and they become the ministers of life and salvation to others." As missionaries, the men would go forth, preach, raise up stakes, and govern those stakes through revelation that would enable them "to act independent in the sphere of your office in the world." The temple experience would help them to "understand principles of life and salvation and . . . know just what to do" when they presided over large groups of members.181

Even as the Twelve revitalized the priesthood quorums, the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo was in decline. The women of the church's only auxiliary had helped the poor in Nauvoo through a constant effort. They had preached against immorality through the voice of their president, Emma Smith. After Joseph Smith's death, the poor still needed help, but the Relief Society ceased to exist after the widowing of its president. Others accepted responsibility for the poor and for encouraging moral living.

By definition, the poor included men without work and women and children without husbands and fathers. Epistles from church leaders emphasized the need to create industrial jobs to reduce poverty caused by unemployment. A prosperous Nauvoo, they taught, would have "no poor except the widow, the orphan, or the infirm, and these could be abundantly provided for."182 For more than two years, the Relief Society had helped the bishops care for the poor. With the women's group no longer meeting, the task fell solely on the priesthood leaders. Help for the needy came in part from the Thursday Fast Meeting. Brigham Young advised the Saints to deliver to their bishops the food they would otherwise have eaten. Don't forget "a few little comforts for them," he counseled, "among them a little ginger." This delicacy comforted the aged, who could make ginger tea. It interested the young, who enjoyed candied ginger as a sweet treat. In branches outside Nauvoo, presiding elders saw to the needs of the poor and the sick. At St. Louis, for instance, the city was divided into districts so that priests and teachers could more effectively care for needy church members.183

As president of the Relief Society, Emma Smith had discouraged participation in plural marriage. Those closest to her during the months after the Prophet's death heard her resist the leadership of the Twelve because of their willingness to carry on Joseph's doctrine and sponsor further plural marriages. To some, Emma claimed that Joseph Smith had taught only that these marriages were for eternity and did not mean that a man would live with his plural wife and have children by her.184

With this difference in interpretation dividing Emma and the Twelve, it was not surprising that the Twelve took over the Relief Society's special assignment to encourage virtue. The apostles broadened the discourse. "We must not only be industrious and honest, in providing abundantly for our temporal wants" and in caring for the poor, Young wrote on behalf of the Twelve in an October 1844 epistle. "But we must abstain from all intemperance, immorality and vice of whatever name or nature; we must set an example of virtue, modesty, temperance, continency, cleanliness, and charity. And be careful not to mingle in the vain amusements and sins of the world."185

This time of new beginnings in church leadership saw a reversal of the trend to mingle in public amusements. The Saints also heard admonitions to strengthen adherence to the Word of Wisdom. In social life, the Twelve had decided, the Saints who had gathered out of Babylon needed to leave behind some of the pleasures of the world, especially balls and dances, immodest theatricals, and magic shows. Young said that dances had been tolerated "for the sake of peace and good will. But it is not now a time for dancing or frolics but a time of mourning, and of humiliation and prayer." This retrenchment discouraged "all amusements in which saints and sinners are mingled." Such gatherings, he said, tended to corrupt the religious society of the Latter-day Saints and should be avoided. Young also urged the suppression of grogshops, gambling houses, and other houses or proceedings of disorder.186

What was allowed? The epistle endorsed "amusements which are at once both innocent, instructive, and entertaining. . . . Such for instance, as musical concerts, philosophical and astronomical exhibitions." These would be sufficient, Young said, along with regular religious meetings, "to exercise all our powers of enjoyment."187

The Times and Seasons hinted at two other things seen by many as inappropriate for a Latter-day Saint. Both notions reflected a rural society's distrust of certain professions. Both reinforced attitudes common among Nauvoo's people. An editorial titled "The Saints Make Nauvoo" said that good Christians should not take their grievances against one another to court and that they should depend upon the priesthood rather than doctors when ill. Nauvoo's two lawyers found little work among the Saints, the editor noted, and only one doctor kept busy "in his profession, and that is surgery." Attorney Almon W. Babbitt, a regular advertiser in the Nauvoo Neighbor who rented an upstairs office in the Red Brick Store, penned a friendly reply. Popular novels had created the negative view of lawyers, Babbitt said. Most lawyers were honest, and legal help was a necessity in a nation of laws. Lawyers may not be needed, he predicted, "in the kingdom of God, where men will be governed by His spirit and endure all patiently for sake of salvation."188

Whether dealing with benevolence, virtue, amusements, or the law and medicine, counsel from church leaders on such matters during the interlude between the martyrdom and the removal helped create a positive social atmosphere among members willing to listen to them. The Saints felt united and at peace. John Taylor summarized those feelings in a typically upbeat editorial: "Upon the whole, the union, perseverance, and love which pervades the bosoms of the saints, actually astonishes the world, and causes peace to reign in our midst; for which blessing we praise our Father in heaven."189

But during the relaxed months of the peaceful interlude, the Saints in Hancock County did not slacken their vigilance. Mosiah L. Hancock remembered his own last year in Nauvoo as a member of a junior militia. Known as the Sons of Helaman, the group drilled with real guns under the direction of a Brother Bailey, their captain. Hancock, eleven years old, served as a second lieutenant in the group, also known as the Prophet's Guard. Parley P. Pratt described the Sons of Helaman during a Nauvoo Legion parade for the governor in the fall of 1844 as a group of boys in full uniform, bringing up the rear with their banner sporting the motto "Our Fathers Will Protect Us." One of the boys, William Bryan Pace, remembered carrying wooden guns. All boys over age eight enrolled, he recalled. They were dressed in white pants, a blouse or sailor shirt, and a palm hat. And these, he said, were the boys who carried whittling knives and scabbards and went around Nauvoo whistling and whittling on sticks to warn ne'er-do-wells out of town.190 They did not attack these people but wanted to let them know they were being watched. The roving guards jokingly referred to their targets suspicious non-Mormon visitors and even some disaffiliated Mormon leaders or former Nauvoo residents as "black ducks."191

Some references from the times mention "full grown boys" as members of the whittling crews. At the April conference in 1845, a group of nearly twenty young men approached a visiting Warsaw newspaper reporter, former state assemblyman Dr. John F. Charles, and under instructions from police chief Hosea Stout "invited him to leave." "He pretended to be our friend," Stout noted, "but in reality he was a secret enemy lurking in our midst." According to Charles, the boys carried bowie knives, dirks, and whittling sticks. They whistled in concert and cried out "Carthage" and "Warsaw" to hurry the journalist's departure. When Charles complained, Brigham Young provided sanctuary via an escort to the Mansion House.192

Without the protection of normal police operations under a city charter, the Sons of Helaman offered the citizens of Nauvoo informal, nonviolent protection against thieves, counterfeiters, and other undersirable characters. The objective, said the Nauvoo Neighbor, was to rid the community of disreputable persons "so every man minds his own business." Some citizens looked at the activity with a smile. "It is true the boys get a little saucy now and then," Dwight Webster admitted, "but if a complaint is made about the boys the answer is our charter is gone now, 'We know your cause is just but we can do nothing for you.'" The Neighbor good-naturedly defended the action as a replacement for "the writ of 'habeas corpus,' or even the display of the old Nauvoo Legion; it might be termed a precept of Habeas Roustus." "They did not molest them in any way," Wandle Mace remembered, "not even by talking to them but simply follow them, whittling and whistling as they went."193

Apparently the whittlers did their job too well. Men in Warsaw imitated a similar action against a Mormon trader in that city in late May. Church leaders halted Nauvoo's whittling in June. The menace from intruders had not been corrected, according to Heber C. Kimball. "When we sleep let us sleep with one leg out of bed, and one eye open," he told a Sunday congregation. "Let us beware of those fellows, that do not like us very well. At this time a few of them do not like to dwell in our midst; they are afraid of the boys. Well, we will have no more whittling at present; let the boys go to school and attend to their own business."194

For many others besides Elder Kimball, the reign of peace and unity in Nauvoo during the year following the murders at Carthage seemed tenuous. The steady efforts of the whittling and whistling boys reminded the Saints of past troubles and of ever present enemies. The residents of Nauvoo lost their prized charter not long after bidding a sorrowful farewell to "two of the greatest and best men who ever graced our planet."195 The ghost of past glories failed to satisfy. Yes, the church was orderly and work pushed forward on the temple, a monument to Joseph Smith's religious mission. But the exoneration in 1845 of the murderers of the Prophet and the Patriarch seemed to many Latter-day Saints to be another in an unending series of injustices that would await resolution only in the Lord's time.196 Nor at that time of civil confusion could they forget Brother Joseph's comments on government's failure to protect their civil rights.197 For many, the Prophet's death and the repeal of the Nauvoo charter wrenched their hope that America would someday honor constitutional rights for the Saints.198

In this vein, Eliza R. Snow offered a poetic recital of the sufferings witnessed over many years by her mother-in-law, Lucy Mack Smith:

The standard of our country, she has seen Rising in glorious majesty, and wave Its fam'd unrival'd banner gracefully, Till other hands than those that rear'd it, sapp'd Its broad foundation, and its ensign marr'd Tott'ring and tremulous it now appears Ready to fall and in its fall to make The most tremendous crash the civil world Has ever known!199

Zion's poetess captured the feelings of many of her fellow Saints that in the death of Joseph Smith, America had lost its last chance to be redeemed by the elders carrying the restored gospel. Perhaps the millennial end to all governments was nigh.200 The peaceful interlude in the City of Peace allowed precious little time to finish the temple. The Saints would save themselves and await God's judgment on the nations. "The continued abuses, persecutions, murders, and robberies practiced upon us, . . . in a (Christian) republic, and land of liberty," John Taylor said, "have brought us to the solemn conclusion that our exit from the United States is the only alternative by which we can enjoy our share of the elements which our heavenly Father created free for all." Other Latter-day Saints agreed with Taylor that it was better to leave, "suffering wrong rather than do wrong."201 With Eliza Snow Smith, they were psychologically and spiritually prepared to turn their backs on the nation that had denied them refuge and flee into the wilderness.

NotesPart IV. Removal: New Places and New Peoples

Epigraph: John S. Fullmer to John Price, November 4, 1845, John S. Fullmer Letterbook, Church Archives.

NotesChapter 16. The Peaceful Interlude

Epigraph: Unsigned editorial, T&S 5 (November 15, 1844): 711; see also Phebe Foster to John Taylor, January 13, 1845, who echoes, "I am happy to learn that all is union and peace at Nauvoo, and that evidences present themselves to show that God has not forsaken his church and people" (T&S 6 [March 1, 1845]: 821). Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, February 11, 1845, in HC 7:373; cf. HC 7:394.
