Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 17

A Solution to the Mormon Question

The Lord once said he would make Kirtland a stronghold for a time; and he has done it. He said in Missouri he would sustain the saints for a time; and he did it. And when we came here, the Lord said, that if the people of the state of Illinois would maintain us in our rights they would be blessed; if not we might find it to our advantage to leave them. Amasa M. Lyman, October 7, 1845

The repeal of Nauvoo's city charter in January 1845 marked the beginning of the end for Nauvoo as a Latter-day Saint stronghold. Governor Ford's initial supposition that a year of peaceful coexistence would heal old wounds and allow rechartering was a hopeful but unrealistic assumption. The governor modified his position in an April letter to Latter-day Saint leaders. Along with issues of governance, Brigham Young had asked Ford for his thoughts on what had come to be known as the Great Western Measure, a plan calling for the establishment of a homeland for the Saints in an area unoccupied by anyone else. Ford liked the idea. Joseph Smith had confided in him during the early summer of 1844 just such a plan, Ford said. (And some others knew that the Prophet had considered the Rocky Mountains as a personal refuge just before his murder.) The governor suggested that if Congress would not grant land in some unsettled territory within the United States, the Saints could establish an independent government in Mexican California. This would require secrecy, Ford intimated, because if the United States government knew about the movement of a large body of people into a foreign territory, it would be obligated to halt the "invasion." "But," he noted, "if you once cross the line of the United States territories you would be in no danger of being interfered with." Ford's confidential suggestion revealed his own pessimism about any reconciliation between the secular and religious communities of Hancock County. The governor reduced the issue to its core:

Your religion is new and it surprises the people as any great novelty in religion generally does. They cannot rise above the prejudices excited by such novelty. However truly and sincerely your own people may believe in it, the impression on the public mind everywhere is that your leading men are impostors and rogues and that the others are dupes and fools. This impression in the minds of the great mass is sufficient to warrant them in considering and treating you as enemies and outcasts. . . . If you can get off by yourselves you may enjoy peace; but surrounded by such neighbors I confess that I do not foresee the time when you will be permitted to enjoy quiet.1

Because Ford saw no other way to resolve the Mormon question, he wrote to President James K. Polk with a suggestion. Ford believed that if Polk ordered a military force to block the departure of the Saints, Brigham Young would order an immediate evacuation. Polk rejected the proposal as inappropriate no matter how unacceptable the new religion was to the people of Illinois.

The Great Western Measure

Even though many friends suggested wholesale removal to a new place of refuge, Joseph Smith had intended to retain Nauvoo for at least some of the Saints while establishing other gathering places in a Zion that was to include all of America. He had charged the Council of Fifty with investigating potential settlement places outside the United States in the independent Republic of Texas, in Mexican upper California, and in the British and American regions of the Oregon country. In addition, the Prophet hoped to organize new stakes in major cities of the United States. Joseph Smith's successors were obligated by revelation to complete the temple first and administer its ordinances to others. This held them to Nauvoo, despite a growing pessimism that government officials would or could protect their rights. In late January 1845, Brigham Young confided in his journal, "I inquired of the Lord whether we should stay here and finish the temple. The answer was we should."2

One of Joseph Smith's last revelations was his April 1844 announcement authorizing new stakes in the United States. The Twelve set out to implement this plan. Two weeks after the October 1844 conference, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt left Nauvoo unbeknownst to most of the Saints to organize one of those stakes. Located at Ottawa, southwest of Chicago, they named it Norway because of the area's large number of Norwegian Latter-day Saints. When he returned, Young announced to a seventies' meeting, "We have created another place which will be a stake and a place of gathering in a short time, and there will be a great many more Stakes; but this place [Nauvoo] will be the Head place for the people to come to, and receive their endowments."3

The Latter-day Saints made two attempts to protect their Hancock County enclave. Both only further antagonized their opponents. During the winter of 1844-45, they canvassed the northern towns for signatures on petitions supporting a relocation of the county seat from Carthage to Nauvoo. Anti-Mormons saw this move as evidence that the Saints wanted to control county government. The matter died when the legislature failed to act on the petition.4 Soon after the Nauvoo charter was repealed, Brigham Young invited the Saints in the Eastern United States to sell their property, move to Nauvoo, and contribute money to the church to buy out the anti-Mormons in Hancock County. Orson Spencer sounded out state officials in Springfield, but they rejected this idea and "strenuously urged the necessity that the saints should cease to gather in one place."5

As these efforts illustrate, in early 1845 the Twelve had no immediate plans to abandon Nauvoo. They sought to retain it as a temple city, as Joseph Smith had intended. At the same time, the Twelve resolved to send out an exploring expedition to prepare the way for an expansion of Latter-day Saint settlements toward the Pacific. If needed long-term, a new western gathering place could provide refuge for the Twelve against legal and physical harassment and for any other Latter-day Saints needing a place of safety. That need became more evident with the repeal of the city charter. Despite the resolve of the Twelve to carry out the design of their martyred leader, developments during 1845 forced adjustments.

At the April 1845 conference, Brigham Young halted missionary work in the United States. This action in effect postponed Joseph Smith's hope of establishing stakes in major cities. At the same time, the decision emphasized the need to complete the plans at home. "By martyring the Prophet and Patriarch, the Gentiles have rejected the gospel," Young said. "We have travelled and preached to them enough. If they want salvation, let them come to us. . . . Let the elders stay at home and finish the Temple and get their endowment; and also finish the Nauvoo House."6

Besides efforts within Illinois, Church leaders consulted political leaders elsewhere for advice. A letter drafted by John Taylor went out from Nauvoo in late April and early May 1845 to President James K. Polk and the governors of every state except Missouri and Illinois. The missive invited legislators to provide a political asylum for the Latter-day Saints. Church leaders were willing to accept an appropriate site within one of the states, in United States territories, or even "at some place remote therefrom."7 The governors typically understood the remote option to be the politically attractive region of Oregon. None of them offered asylum in his own state, and many ignored the petition. A few submitted it for legislative review. The Connecticut legislature referred the message to a committee on foreign relations. Letters from several of the governors and from citizens in Massachusetts and New York recommended California. One Bostonian suggested the Bay of San Francisco.8 Arkansas governor Thomas S. Drew endorsed a move to the Oregon Territory but suggested other options Mexican California, north Texas, or Nebraska Territory for, he said, with the expansionist mood in the country, "the way is now open to the Pacific without . . . hindrance." Drew further recommended that Brigham Young accept Abraham's advice to Lot counsel that led their herdsmen to avoid strife by settling on separate lands.9

All of this counsel supporting a wholesale relocation of the Saints in the West affirmed to the Twelve the necessity of that action. For two years, they had actively discussed the Prophet's plans with him and had pledged to fulfill all of them, including the Great Western Measure. Even as they invited governors to offer places for refuge in the United States, they quietly planned for "some place remote therefrom." They considered possible destinations and routes, transportation needs, and questions of future governance.

On New Year's Day 1845, Hiram Kimball hosted six members of the Twelve and their wives for an afternoon and evening of eating and visiting. Among other topics, they discussed the propriety of establishing settlements for the Saints in uninhabited parts of the continent. A week later, the Twelve further considered sending an exploring company to the Mexican province of upper California.10

For years, church leaders had talked and read about the western and southwestern territories outside United States borders. Of special interest were the travels of government explorer John C. Frémont. Illinois senator Stephen A. Douglas had promised to mail to Nauvoo a copy of Frémont's latest report and new map of the West and apparently did so. Frémont's 1842 exploring expedition took him as far as the Wind River Mountains in modern Wyoming. His second expedition in 1843-44 along the Oregon Trail to the Pacific offered information of even greater value to the Twelve. The trip included a westbound reconnaissance around the north end of the Great Salt Lake and an eastbound excursion from southern California as far north as Utah Lake. The United States House of Representatives sponsored a combined publication of the two documents in March 1845.11

Reports about the contested regions of Texas, California, and Oregon appeared regularly in the public press, including the newspapers read by Latter-day Saints. During 1843 and 1844, the Nauvoo Neighbor published more than a dozen articles on the West, giving highlights of Frémont's Wind River expedition, excerpts from the Emigrants' Guide to Oregon and California by Lansford W. Hastings, and a report of the California explorations of Charles Wilkes.12 The pace increased during 1845, with additional reports from these three travelers, plus information on Colonel Stephen W. Kearny's trek to South Pass and general articles on the West. Extracts from Frémont's 1843-44 expedition published as early as January 1845 emphasized the Salt Lake region. Hastings shared his Guide with Sam Brannan during a promotional tour in New York, which led the New York Messenger to publish extensive extracts from it during the summer.13

The seriousness of the intentions of the Twelve in January 1845 is revealed by their attention to detail. After puzzling over how to transport a large expedition to California, they decided to recruit teams from branches of the church in and around Illinois. They wondered how they would organize a new state government once they found an uninhabited place of refuge. Through a notice in church publications, they invited missionaries to ask church members in the United States to help secure "the latest 'Revised Statutes' of each State and Territory" and to forward them to Nauvoo.14

To supplement the maps and travel reports available to them, the Twelve revived Joseph Smith's plan to seek firsthand information on the West. Brigham Young reorganized the Council of Fifty on February 4 for that purpose. Those who had left the church and the three men who were not Latter-day Saints were dropped from membership. Others were named in their place. As president of this special task group, Young renewed Joseph Smith's year-old assignment to organize an exploring expedition. During March and April, Young convened the council in a dozen working meetings to discuss the western mission, church construction projects, and city government.15

Initially, the Twelve considered asking Lewis Dana, an Oneida Indian convert, to lead a party of six men "to the west and especially to Texas." On the first of March, the Council of Fifty decided the party should include eight men to be sent westward toward the Pacific Ocean "to seek out a location and a home where the Saints can dwell in peace and health and where they can erect the ensign and standard of liberty." Along the way, they were to "proceed from tribe to tribe, to unite the Lamanites." Among the intended contacts was the Indian Council at Council Bluffs. The option of continuing on to the Pacific on the route outlined by Orson Hyde a year earlier was left to the best judgment of the men. The expedition planned to leave after the April conference.16

Few details are known of this private but successful mission. Dana left Nauvoo on April 24 accompanied by four other men on what had been called the Oregon Mission, the Western Mission, or a mission to the Indians. One of the explorers, Jonathan Dunham, died on July 28, two weeks' journey west of Nauvoo. His companions turned back sometime before the end of summer, having accomplished the primary focus of their mission. They had gained permission to establish settlements from relocated Indians living in the middle Missouri River region. Furthermore, they had found the Indians willing "to lend us any assistance they could or to go west with us to explore the country."17

To forestall government opposition, the Twelve kept confidential the precise regions being considered for new settlements. The Council of Fifty acknowledged the possibility of a settlement among the Native Americans of the middle Missouri River Valley, but by mid-March 1845, they were looking beyond the Rockies for a central gathering place. Church leaders had narrowed their options for what they would soon be calling a temporary way station. This main settlement would be a temple city in the northeastern portion of upper California. Immigrant agents and a few others would live in ports on the Pacific Coast. On April 11, John Taylor summarized this consensus in verses written and revised during a meeting of the Council of Fifty. The song identified upper California as a "land of life and liberty" for the Saints and their Native American friends, a place for the next temple, and a place of gathering.18

Persons close to the Twelve soon became aware of these discussions. In March, while Hosea Stout stood night guard at Brigham Young's house, the two men talked about plans for settling the Saints between the headwaters of the Arkansas and the headwaters of the Colorado of the West. On maps of the time, this area might have included the secluded valleys of the Central Rockies extending northward from modern Leadville, Colorado, or the region extending westward toward the Great Salt Lake.19 On the eve of the departure of Dana's exploring party, James Monroe overheard the Twelve and others singing John Taylor's new song, whose words, "Upper California! O! that's the land for me," convinced Monroe "that it is the intention to go to that country when we remove from here."20 It was clear to Nauvoo's leaders and to a few residents that the Saints would soon have another option beyond the temporary stronghold at Nauvoo a new gathering place in the unsettled portions of Mexican upper California.

While centrally directed settlement plans were evolving during the year 1845, two others privy to leadership discussions moved ahead on their own. Apostle Lyman Wight wanted to establish the stake that the Prophet Joseph Smith had approved for Texas. But in April 1845, Brigham Young and others of the Twelve counseled delay in implementing this dispersionary mission until more important matters could be accomplished. While acknowledging that "all the saints feel spirited and determined to carry out the measures of our martyred Prophet," the Twelve saw no need to leave Nauvoo during a period of peace and prosperity. They counseled Wight to delay his westward journey. "If you go westward before you have received your endowments in the Temple," they said, "you will not prosper." Courier Samuel Bent carried the written counsel to the Wisconsin lumber camps and read it to Wight's entire company. Bent then privately explained to Wight the "proceedings and future calculations" of the Twelve.21

James Emmett, one of those who had volunteered in February 1844 to explore the mountain lands of Oregon and California, had already launched his western mission. Emmett remembered the vivid imagery of Joseph Smith's talk about preaching to the Indians and governing them as inspired priesthood leaders. A restless Kentuckian sometimes more ambitious than wise, Emmett had had enough of the Gentile society that had killed his beloved leader. He longed to see the children of Jacob restored to their promised birthright. Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith labored in vain with Emmett in the fall of 1844 to convince him to halt his plans to launch a Lamanite mission settlement.22

Emmett set out to settle among the Sioux Indians of Nebraska in September 1844. He convinced around one hundred men, women, and children to follow him into the wilderness. Before Christmas, word reached Nauvoo of charges of stealing among the party. The Twelve sent John L. Butler to resolve the differences and remain among them. Because Emmett had earlier tried to recruit Butler, the messenger's help was accepted. Emmett's action to convert the Indians and take temple ordinances to them further displeased the Twelve. In late February 1845, they sent other delegates to dissuade Emmett or at least to turn back his followers. Amasa Lyman and Orson Spencer found the company at Fort Vermillion, 150 miles west of the Iowa River settlements and thirty miles beyond the mouth of the Big Sioux River. They were living on sparse rations, heavily armed, and ruled by Emmett with an iron hand. Most of Emmett's followers had consecrated their families and properties to his strict control under the belief that he was acting under the direction of the Twelve.23 Even so, Lyman and Spencer expected that the followers would soon abandon the project, having been "honestly and sincerely deceived by [Emmett's] vain pretenses and misrepresentations."24

Brigham Young had no time for Emmett. "Living poor, being in the wilderness, etc., is nothing to me when I am called to endure it," he told a Sunday congregation in Nauvoo, "but people who run headlong into misery and bring upon themselves suffering, do not arrive at anything but darkness and despair. . . . We told James Emmett, if he went, he would get into trouble: this congregation can be led by a thread. Religion is one thing and fanaticism is another."25

When Emmett returned to Nauvoo in early August 1845, he pledged to abide counsel. Accompanied by advisers Henry G. Sherwood and John S. Fullmer as camp leaders, he returned to the campsite, a 325-mile trip on horseback across unsettled country to Council Bluffs and then upriver. The men arrived after a month's travel from Nauvoo. "Emmett's camp contained about one hundred souls and were in a better condition than we expected to find them," Fullmer later reported. "They were tolerably well provided with provisions but somewhat destitute of clothing."26

After hearing the message sent by the Twelve, most of Emmett's group were rebaptized in the river as a sign of commitment to the Twelve's counsel. The settlers were instructed to build cabins for protection during the winter. In the spring, they should either remain there or "proceed west [with others from Nauvoo] to some place then unknown."27 After appointing Emmett as camp president, Fullmer and Sherwood returned to Nauvoo. The following spring, Emmett's chief assistant, John L. Butler, led Emmett's camp toward a rendezvous on the Missouri River with the westward-moving Nauvoo Saints.28

The Twelve opposed Emmett's unauthorized Indian mission in Nebraska Territory and the timing of Wight's proposed north Texas colony but moved ahead with their own plans for exploring and settling areas outside the organized states. The Council of Fifty had been adjourned sine die on May 10 when Brigham Young learned that the confidential talk of California was being spread outside the council.29 During the summer, only the Twelve considered the matter, but word circulated privately among some residents of Nauvoo, and public comments raised other speculations. The Neighbor praised California and published two stanzas of Taylor's song. Orson Spencer informed Governor Ford in late May that within eighteen months "very many of our people would colonize distant parts." During a June 1 sermon at the stand, Heber C. Kimball signaled his willingness to abandon Nauvoo. Anxious to live in a place without a whittling brigade and "where a man will not be shook to pieces with the ague," he said, "I am bound to stay while they [the Twelve] stay, and when they go, I go." When the temple is finished, he added, "I am satisfied; I do not care if I go into the wilderness the next day. . . . Ten years will not more than pass away, before we will be . . . in a land of peace, where we can worship God without molestation. Let us go to work and build this house." Kimball was anxious that the missionaries not serve, as the Twelve had done, "for ten or twelve years, without an endowment; but we want when you go to the nations of the earth, you may have that blessing." When Thomas Sharp saw the song "Hurrah for California" in the New York Messenger, he concluded with satisfaction that the Saints were planning to leave Hancock County.30

Comments such as those by Kimball and Sharp served only to raise the level of concern in Nauvoo. The Twelve urged patience. Amasa Lyman told a group of seventies and their wives at an August feast meeting, "When we are called to go to California, we shall know how large to make our camp and so in all things. We shall know what to do just as fast as we want it. . . . So there is no need of being in a hurry." The immediate objective remained completion of the temple.31

In early September, Orson Spencer and Charles Shumway reported on their mission to Dana's exploring camp. Among other things, they reported that Cherokee Indians along the upper Missouri River would welcome Latter-day Saint settlers among them and were willing to travel west with the Saints to explore the territory.32 The missionaries' findings plus their visit to Emmett's camp and much research in published reports furnished helpful information about the route between Nauvoo and Council Bluffs. During his return trip from Emmett's camp, Fullmer heard rumors from other travelers "that the apostates are trying to get up an influence with the president of the United States to prevent the saints emigrating westward, and that they have written to the president informing him of the resolutions of the General Council [Council of Fifty] to move westward, and representing the Council guilty of treason."33 This intimation could only have meant that word was spreading concerning the Twelve's decision to settle in the Mexican territory of upper California. In that secluded place of refuge, they could establish a government operating under divine guidance. It would have a militia for self-defense. Civil officers would be sustained in public conferences and be subject to the counsel of the First Presidency. Both this system of government and its location raised concern among outside observers.34

Around this same time, the Twelve refined plans for the western expedition sketched out earlier in the year. On August 28, the Twelve decided to send three thousand armed men and their families to upper California in the spring of 1846 to establish a settlement in the neighborhood of Utah Lake. A few days later, the plan was changed. The apostles concluded "that they should go with the company to select a location and plant the standard" but travel without their families.35 They sent specific information in private letters addressed to mission presidents outside the United States. They informed Wilford Woodruff, who presided in England, of their intent to establish immigration depots on the Pacific Coast within a year. More specifically, through Addison Pratt in Tahiti, they invited converts from the Pacific islands to immigrate to the Columbia River or to a planned settlement near the Gulf of Monterey or San Francisco, where agents would direct them to the larger Latter-day Saint settlements. "The [main] settlement will probably be in the neighborhood of Lake Tampanagos [Great Salt Lake] as that is represented as a most delightful district and no settlement near there," they wrote. Meanwhile, Parley P. Pratt informed his friend Isaac Rogers that the intent was to "maintain and build up Nauvoo, and settle other places too." The immigrant party would "stop near the Rocky Mountains about 800 miles nearer than the coast . . . and there make a stand until we are able to enlarge and to extend to the coast."36

Not until these plans were fully developed did the Twelve reconvene the Council of Fifty. On September 9, their first meeting in four months, the council accepted the assignment to organize the pioneer expedition. Brigham Young personally selected men from the council. They were allowed to recruit their own companies. Through this effort, many in Nauvoo learned of the Twelve's plans. The expedition was expected to scout out appropriate routes, locate viable settlement sites, and plant crops to establish a food supply for families and livestock. The Council of Fifty reduced the advance party by half and picked five men to find out what it would take to outfit fifteen hundred men for the trip.37

Citizens of Hancock County were unaware of these plans to establish other gathering places. Frustrated by the continued growth of the Latter-day Saints and their increased effort to complete the temple, they concluded that the Mormons were there to stay. On September 10, vigilantes began burning buildings and destroying crops in outlying settlements. Plans for the western mission swung into high gear. Discussions quickly shifted from considering a pioneer company followed by a selective, staged migration to planning for a total evacuation of the church from the region in the late spring of 1846. Brigham Young invited the harassed settlers to move to Nauvoo. "At a future day our course will be plain," he told leaders of Morley's Settlement. "Be calm and patient till all things are ready." Within a week, Young issued a printed declaration challenging Warsaw vigilante leader Levi Williams to halt the house burnings and allow the Saints to depart peacefully in the spring.38

As talk circulated in Nauvoo of a California destination for the Saints, local newspapers reinforced the idea. The Neighbor copied reports praising the climate and soil of California and anticipating that region's annexation to the United States as a territory.39 The Nauvoo weekly acknowledged that friends were encouraging the Saints to migrate beyond the Rocky Mountains to upper California. Rumors of a third Frémont expedition prompted the Neighbor to observe: "We hope he will do something to hasten the great western measure." The writer concluded with two stanzas from the new migration song:

The upper California, O that's the place to be; It lies between the mountains, And the great Pacific sea. With a climate pure as Naples, And budding liberty, O clear away the rubbish, And let us there be free.40

In mid-June, the Warsaw Signal had reported that a bloodless revolution of the settlers had established a free Republic of California.41 The report was premature, but within a year Americans in California would declare their independence, and President Polk would use a military skirmish along the contested west Texas border to justify a declaration of war against Mexico. By then, exiles from Nauvoo would be on their way toward a territory soon to become part of the United States and a new homeland for the Saints.

Issues and Images

The centrifugal forces working on Nauvoo came from many quarters. Some were friendly invitations encouraging resettlement; others were hostile propaganda messages seeking to consolidate support for expulsion. The Saints had friends in Illinois who concurred in the growing consensus for removal. Though pained by the public diatribes against Nauvoo, these tolerant old citizens saw no end to the debate as long as Nauvoo remained an important Latter-day Saint gathering place. They concluded that the tension between the opposing groups could not be resolved. Even neutral Illinois residents had accepted many of the charges laid by the church's enemies and believed them to be real. Public opinion favored the opposition call for removal.

One friend of the Saints, William P. Richards, an attorney in Macomb, Illinois, urged Nauvoo's leaders to petition Congress for a land grant twenty-four miles square in the Wisconsin pineries or some other unorganized territory. The self-governing "Mormon Reserve" he suggested resembled the Indian reservations being established for displaced Native Americans, who, like the Saints, had been "removed" from their habitations. It echoed as well the image of the religious republics of Roger Williams and William Penn. Bishop George Miller told Richards that to meet Mormon needs the enclave should measure two hundred miles on each side in the region just west of the state of Missouri or enclose about eighty miles square in Wisconsin, Texas, or Oregon.42

Those most ardently promoting removal enlisted allies from both political parties to create the impression of a widely supported, nonpartisan campaign. The leaders of the movement collected information from former Latter-day Saints working against the success of the church at Nauvoo.43 Feeding the anti-Mormon frenzy was the journalistic burr under Mormonism's saddle, Warsaw editor Thomas C. Sharp. During 1845, he continued his familiar litany of complaints over alleged Latter-day Saint theft and dupery and revisited control of county politics. Somewhat facetiously, Sharp supported the Twelve's willingness to seek an asylum away from Nauvoo. He wished them "a prosperous journey" and hoped that "the land where they settle may flow with milk and honey and be fanned by heaven's choicest breezes, so that they may never have any desire to return to their present Zion."44

The Twelve responded directly to Sharp's usually sarcastic and always focused attacks. They spoke through the Nauvoo press and sent emissaries into surrounding counties to disabuse their fellow citizens of the hostile journalistic claims.45

The Warsaw Signal was not alone in its biased reporting. In April 1845, the New York Tribune published a lengthy report mixing factual information with the familiar charges of fanaticism, despotism, and militarism in Nauvoo.46 Closer to home and under the influence of prominent anti-Mormons, the Quincy Whig adopted a more critical editorial stance and began reporting "anti-social behavior" on grounds that the Latter-day Saints had misused their charter.47

Among Nauvoo's political friends was the Hancock County sheriff, Miner R. Deming. A leader of the Carthage militia, Deming had denounced the violence of June 1844 and thus lost the support of both his troops and many fellow citizens.48 Nauvoo's leaders respected Deming for his evenhandedness. He won their support for reelection in August 1845. When Deming died unexpectedly of congestive fever in early September, Jacob Backenstos succeeded him as sheriff. The task of defending law-abiding citizens against vigilantes was left to Backenstos, another law-and-order friend of Nauvoo.49

Many of the opposition arguments distorted the religious beliefs of the Saints. Other attacks misconstrued their disappointment with government officials unwilling to help them gain compensation for property lost in Missouri. Some anti-Mormon journalists argued that Latter-day Saint doctrine was inconsistent with a republican form of government. The "spirit, designs, and tendency of Mormonism," one writer noted, includes a belief in a government of God, total obedience to leaders, political union, temporal union, and a millennial triumph all threats to democratic diversity.50

One intriguing religious topic for the press was that of plural marriage. Very few Latter-day Saints participated in this form of marriage, nor was the doctrine taught publicly. The Twelve honored Joseph Smith's counsel that it was not yet the time nor the place to involve the entire church nor to acknowledge the private sealings. Those who knew of the marriage practice and many who did not offered denials or explanations. Paradoxically, many non-Mormons accepted newspaper reports that the Saints practiced "spiritual wifery," while some church members who did not understand the difference between the revealed doctrine and its profane counterfeit understandably believed the reports to be untrue.51

Much of the information disclosing the practice of plural marriage in Nauvoo originated in the East with Sidney Rigdon and his followers.52 His missionaries in New York City urged the Saints to accept Rigdon as a purifier of the church. Joseph Smith, they said, had introduced abominations into the church under the influence of the Twelve.53 Parley P. Pratt publicly pronounced these charges false. His rebuttal of the "spiritual wifery" counterfeit left open the possibility of an authorized plurality of wives.54

Apostle William Smith was one of those involved in encouraging unauthorized plural marriages in the East. After returning to Nauvoo at the request of the president of his quorum, he delivered in August 1845 what one contemporary termed "a singular discourse." Claiming that plural marriage was taught and practiced privately in Nauvoo and that he was not ashamed of it, Smith invited the Twelve to make the whole matter public. The Twelve rejected the proposal. With few exceptions, Nauvoo's church leaders in 1845 did not repudiate the talk of plural marriage. They mostly stood aside while others spoke out. But this time, John Taylor stepped forward and rebutted Smith's presentation, causing, according to a contemporary report, "considerable feelings" in Smith.55

Behind William Smith's pronouncement lay a deeper issue, a claim that he held independent authority to exercise the sealing power. Brigham Young had already responded in writing to the church patriarch's assertion. "Joseph said that the sealing power is always vested in one man," Young explained, "and that there never was, nor never would be but one man on the earth at a time to hold the keys of the sealing power in the church, that all sealings must be performed by the man holding the keys, or by his dictation, and that man is the president of the Church."56

Thomas Sharp published William Smith's taunting message on spiritual marriage as a front-page "Proclamation" in his Warsaw Signal57 and printed other discussions of the subject that were copied by newspapers elsewhere. Even after the Twelve agreed to leave Nauvoo, Sharp used this issue to reinforce a negative view of the church. He continued to press the matter well after the Saints had departed for the West.58

Besides drumming the private practice of plural marriage to cast Latter-day Saint morals in a false light, detractors of Nauvoo added indictments of lawlessness. Anti-Mormon editors jumped at every chance to keep alive these notions transplanted from Missouri. The most noticeable effect on public opinion came from claims of counterfeiting. The issue had been actively raised against Joseph Smith two years before his death. Anti-Mormon spokesman Thomas Sharp voiced concern over bogus money in Nauvoo in his Warsaw newspaper again in 1845. These claims had some basis in fact. Alexander Neibaur learned that two apostates were involved in a counterfeiting group in Nauvoo.59 Another distributor in the city was spreading paper notes throughout the Mississippi Valley. These actions led to false charges against Brigham Young and others on counterfeiting charges. Several of the Twelve resolved the matter in a discussion with the marshal who delivered the writ.60

In October 1845, a farmer in Iowa asserted that the Twelve were producing counterfeit money at his farm. His claims led to attempts to arrest church leaders, but Governor Ford refused to cooperate with these interstate charges, calling the issue a federal matter. Then in December 1845, a grand jury at Springfield indicted several of the Twelve and others in the Nauvoo area for "counterfeiting Mexican dollars and American half dollars, and dimes." According to newspaper reports, "the Mormons had three presses for counterfeiting the coin named" and turned out a high quality coin of base metal covered by a thin exterior layer of pure silver. Once again, Ford disclaimed jurisdiction. The Twelve issued a circular denying the charges. When federal marshals appeared in Nauvoo with arrest warrants, church leaders went into hiding. The memory of the events in Carthage was still too fresh for the Twelve to trust fully in the process of law. Continuance of unfounded legal charges and the threat of sending federal troops influenced the Twelve's decision to leave Nauvoo ahead of schedule.61

Outsiders erroneously believed that ecclesiastical control of civilian life was so complete that nothing could happen in Nauvoo unless the church allowed or encouraged it. Some western Illinois friends of the church and opponents of anti-Mormon harassment who were otherwise neutral understood that this was not true. They defended Thomas Ford's refusal to cooperate in the arrest of Nauvoo leaders on counterfeiting charges. Newspapers in St. Louis and Peoria predicted that after the Saints were gone, counterfeit money would continue to appear in the region. "In the name of Peace," the Saint Louis Organ proposed, "let them go, and end this disgraceful turmoil and strife."62 When counterfeiting continued after the exodus, some of Nauvoo's neighbors were finally convinced of the innocence of the Latter-day Saint people generally.63 Until then, the accusations of the Warsaw Signal and the existence of some counterfeiting in the city tainted public opinion against the Saints.

The Resurgence of Mobocracy

While church leaders dodged legal attacks and endured media disinformation, church members living in settlements away from Nauvoo felt the brunt of a resurgence of vigilante action. The attacks began first at Morley's Settlement, along the southwestern boundary of Hancock County, on Wednesday evening, September 10, 1845. A messenger carried the news to Brigham Young. "We are in trouble and no hopes of it being any better," Solomon Hancock and Alanson Ripley wrote. "The mob is upon us. They have burned six buildings already and still carrying it on. . . . They are in number about two hundred. They shoot at every brother they see." The vigilantes continued their torching at nearby Lima, across the boundary in Adams County.64 After four days, the men led by Levi Williams had burned more than forty buildings belonging to Latter-day Saints. Within a week's time, all of Morley's Settlement had been destroyed. The self-appointed regulators then moved ten miles northeast to Bear Creek Settlement. Meanwhile, in the far northern edge of the county, marauders began driving out the Saints from Camp Creek and La Harpe Settlements.65

Over several weeks, bands of old settlers led by the Warsaw regulator Colonel Levi Williams torched two hundred homes and farm buildings, plus mills and grain stacks. The house burners intended to force the Saints into Nauvoo and then call upon "help from abroad" to expel them from Illinois.66 Forced from their homes by the marauders, one family after another watched their log homes and farm buildings burn. The Saints from Morley's Settlement and the Carthage area began to seek refuge in Nauvoo.67

The Twelve encouraged this response. They advised Morley branch president Solomon Hancock to move women, children, and grain to Nauvoo. The men would remain as watchmen to record in detail "all the movements of the enemy and friends, what houses are burned, by whom, at what hour, who were present, and who saw them do it." On the day after the burnings began, the Twelve sent messengers to Morley and Lima and further afield to Ottawa, Illinois, and to Michigan Territory. The advice was the same: The brethren should sell land and homes for livestock, wagons, provisions, and other such movable goods (needed for the as yet unannounced migration). The farmers should negotiate permission to harvest their crops and transport them to Nauvoo, along with their stored grain and their families.68

In response to a plea from Solomon Hancock, a call went out in Nauvoo for men with teams to help in the evacuation. Within hours, men with 134 teams headed south to haul families and grain to Nauvoo. The shuttling continued as needed over the next two months. At Nauvoo, the refugees found shelter in private homes and public halls. Residents took in friends as well as strangers. The seventies who had been using the Music Hall shifted their meetings to homes to free the building for "some of our brethren who have been driven here by our enemies."69

"The Mormons were allowed to remove all their furniture," the Signal reported a week after the evacuation began, "and most of them have already taken all their movables to Nauvoo. A determined spirit exists among the Anti-Mormons, and they have resolved to accomplish their object of driving the thieving [settlers], and destroying their houses, or die in the attempt." The anti-Mormons had organized for a war of extermination. One group calling itself the "Fire and Sword" party burned the buildings and drove off the occupants. A separate division acted as spies and guards.70

The leaders of Nauvoo may have believed initially that by withdrawing settlers permanently from the outlying areas and by sending them across the Mississippi, peace could be restored. This hope of resolving localized antagonisms by meeting specific demands of a few individuals quickly faded. The threat of a mass expulsion or war of extermination prompted Young to propose a broader solution to end the house burnings. A council of church leaders on September 13 agreed to his proposition that all the Saints leave Hancock County in the spring. Young informed Sheriff Jacob C. Backenstos of the plan.71

Brigham Young had already invited the help of government officials. On September 11, he asked the new sheriff to suppress the extralegal invasion and to seek Governor Ford's help in protecting private property. "The Sheriff is not a Mormon but is a friend to equal rights," Young said of Backenstos.72 The sheriff proved his loyalty to law and order by organizing an effort at self-defense. He informed Young in a letter on September 13, "My policy is to quell the mob peaceably if I can, and forcibly if we must." When no one in Warsaw would join a citizens' posse to stop the house burnings, the sheriff deputized the Saints of the Highland branch southeast of Warsaw. Then he asked Brigham Young's help in assembling aNauvoo defense force of two thousand men. Young, who wished to avoid the appearance of a religious war, urged greater efforts to enlist old citizens for the resistance force. Backenstos reluctantly disbanded the Mormon volunteers he had enlisted at Bear Creek. Doing so, he told Young, will "give every [thing] into the hands of the enemies and expose the property and lives of the Peaceable Citizens. This may be good policy but I think different." Backenstos issued a general proclamation on the thirteenth, inviting all law-abiding citizens to join his posse. As he expected, few responded. The next day, as a precaution, Young ordered Charles C. Rich to hold in readiness the organized quorums (the deacons, or ad hoc militia, of the City of Joseph). On September 15, Young invited the second cohort of the first regiment of the disbanded Nauvoo Legion to ready themselves under their former officers to serve, if invited, as a sheriff's posse.73 Young recognized that he lacked authority to reorganize the Nauvoo Legion as an independent force under its own officers. This action, he realized, "would be nothing more nor less than the alarm gun for an open and bloody war." Even so, he gave Backenstos advice on operations in the field and guided the deployment of Nauvoo's volunteers. Young's defensive-only stance reflected a policy of passive waiting.74

The marauders justified their attacks as the will of the people. As they had done earlier with Deming, they showed their dislike for Backenstos's attempt to defend the property rights of Latter-day Saints by threatening him verbally and physically. On September 15, vigilantes drove Backenstos from his house in Carthage. The sheriff fled to Warsaw, where he found attitudes no better. Several anti-Mormons confronted him on the night of the sixteenth while he was driving his buggy on the plains toward Carthage. Fearing for his life, the sheriff turned toward Nauvoo. He overtook two horsemen likewise headed toward Nauvoo and made them deputies. When one of the pursuing horsemen raised his gun, newly deputized Orrin Porter Rockwell fired. Rockwell's shot struck the man in his chest. The mortally wounded victim was Frank A. Worrell, who had been supervisor of the guard on the day of the murders at Carthage.

That evening, George Miller and a hundred Nauvoo cavalrymen from the first cohort of the old Nauvoo Legion escorted the sheriff to Carthage to bring his family to safety in Nauvoo. They were met with gunfire, which quickly subsided. The sheriff set up guards at the courthouse in Carthage to protect government officials but found most of them had already fled.75 Rockwell and Backenstos were later indicted for murder in Worrell's death and were acquitted on grounds of self-defense.76

Meantime, the shooting of Frank Worrell inflamed the feelings of old citizens throughout the area. To calm the tension, a quickly organized citizens committee composed of Brigham Young and ten prominent men called for a truce in the hostilities. On the sixteenth, they issued a Proclamation: To Col. Levi Williams, and Mob Party. This document announced the council's decision made three days earlier to abandon Nauvoo. It informed vigilante leader Levi Williams of Green Plains "that if the mob would cease their destructive operations," the Saints would "leave the country in the spring."77

While Young sought peace, Thomas Sharp issued an immediate call to arms. "[Worrell's] death has kindled and will kindle a flame that cannot be quenched until every Mormon has left the vicinity," Sharp wrote. "REVENGE, REVENGE, Fellow Citizens is now the word. . . . Blood will and must flow if necessary to rid the county of the cursed authors of our troubles." The newspaper's former owner Thomas Gregg was displeased with the reaction. Concerned that no anti-Mormons were responding to Young's message, Gregg offered to help "bring about a reconciliation." In a letter to Brigham Young, Gregg said that if it were known more widely that the Saints were willing to leave Illinois, "there are men of influence enough among the disaffected portion of the population in this and the surrounding counties who can and will put a full stop to all violence." That solution would very soon be implemented.78

The house burnings continued, and the flame of vengeance broadened. Backenstos authorized the besieged Latter-day Saints to defend themselves against the house burners with force, if necessary. Brigham Young issued a supporting epistle quoting the sheriff's counsel and sent copies to three northeastern Hancock County Mormon settlements and two south of Nauvoo. If directly threatened by mobbers, Young advised, the Saints could, if needed, follow the sheriff's orders and "give them the cold lead."79

Because the Jack-Mormon friends of law and order were unwilling to respond to the sheriff's plea for help, Backenstos was left with the Nauvoo volunteers under General George Miller to challenge the anti-Mormon torchmen. The goal was to preserve life. The sheriff deputized eight of the men with authority to arrest Levi Williams and others accused by witnesses of burning houses.80

On September 16, Backenstos led his Nauvoo posse south from Carthage to Knowlton Settlement in Bear Creek precinct and on toward the Highland branch, where they "found the mob burning houses. We gave chase," a Latter-day Saint volunteer reported, "killing and wounding three men, then returned home." Another Nauvoo resident said he "went with eight well armed and mounted men under command of Colonel Markham to Bear Creek to arrest the house burning men but they all fled into Missouri."81 Backenstos and Miller reported two house burners killed during their forced march of sixty-five miles over twenty hours on September 16 and 17. Efforts to locate and prosecute the perpetrators continued for at least several weeks.82

The sheriff and Nauvoo general George Miller decided to continue their campaign by attacking a reported eight hundred infantrymen below Warsaw. On September 18, Backenstos sent a message to Brigham Young asking for six hundred men and two cannon. Half the men would secure and hold Warsaw; the others would march downriver to cut off retreat. "We now intend to attack the stronghold and fortifications," he wrote. Young had just received a delegate from Warsaw who said Williams and six associates were willing to accept the Latter-day Saints' offer to leave Illinois, but the Warsaw committee wanted all references to a "mob party" and accusations of house burning deleted from the Proclamation: To Col. Levi Williams. The council at Nauvoo was unwilling to grant these concessions. Instead, they withdrew their offer to leave.83

With Williams seeking peace and quiet prevailing in the field, Young held the upper hand. "Everything indicates that the hottest of the mobbing is over," he concluded.84 He denied the field general's request for reinforcements. He advised Miller and Backenstos to secure Carthage and let the regulators flee. They should post guards on the prairie, protect private property, and avoid a massacre. If the posse needed cannon, they could capture some in Warsaw. He instructed Miller to return to Nauvoo with any horsemen not needed for reconnaissance. "I am the Counsel or General in the field and I am going to direct the affair," Young said. Backenstos accepted Young's directives. His field council dropped the Warsaw campaign but requested reinforcements and one cannon to support a foray to Warsaw, where Backenstos intended to arrest any vigilantes who could be found. The sheriff received two hundred armed Nauvoo soldiers with wagons. When Backenstos reached Warsaw, he discovered that many of the house burners had fled temporarily to Missouri and Iowa.85

Overall, the efforts of the sheriff and his deputies began to turn the tide of public opinion against the marauders.86 In response, the Warsaw Signal published extras accusing the Latter-day Saints of being the aggressors.87 Even with the quieted situation, watchmen patrolled Nauvoo and stood as sentinels along the river and on the prairie behind the city to protect against surprise invasion or sharpshooters' attacks.88 These precautions taken in self-defense sometimes interrupted the journeys of innocent travelers, who were interrogated and then allowed to continue. The Signal complained of these protective measures and claimed that the sheriff's posse was driving off livestock and plundering homes and farms, or allowing marauding bands to wreak havoc on innocent farmers. Early in the confrontation, Brigham Young had warned his men against such actions. They should harvest their own crops from this last season in Hancock County, he said. Young instructed Major General Charles C. Rich to investigate allegations of theft and correct any problems.89

The anti-Mormon claims caused many neutral observers in Hancock County to conclude that the Saints had now undertaken to fight fire with fire. Some Latter-day Saint farmers acknowledged that while moving their own cattle and belongings from outlying settlements to Nauvoo, herders sometimes unintentionally gathered up livestock not their own. After advertising for three days to seek legal owners, they butchered the cattle in Nauvoo. The Signal scoffed at that explanation and dismissed Latter-day Saint reports that non-Mormon marauders were fueling the propaganda against the Nauvoo community by setting their own homes and outbuildings on fire.90

Governor Thomas Ford responded immediately to the confrontation in Hancock County. Recognizing Backenstos's weakening ability to maintain the peace because of strong anti-Mormon antagonism toward him, Ford sent about three hundred men from other counties under General John J. Hardin to do the job.91 Men from this independent force replaced the sheriff's forty Nauvoo guards at Carthage on September 28. They called this post Camp Carthage. Hardin tried to prevent additional plundering in the latent civil war by outlawing the assembly of groups of more than four men.92 The general's difficult task was to mediate between the two sides, forestall a military confrontation, and facilitate the Latter-day Saints' departure. To assist Hardin, Ford assembled an impressive advisory committee: Major William B. Warren, a Whig clerk of the Illinois Supreme Court; and two Democrats, attorney general James A. McDougal and United States congressman Stephen A. Douglas, a former justice of the Illinois Supreme Court.

Brigham Young honored his promise to Governor Ford to sit out the fall election. He issued new orders counseling his people against retaliation and prohibiting even self-defense.93 When the house burning started, plans for the western expedition had not yet been announced to the church. "Let the sheriff of Hancock county attend to the mob," he had told the Morley settlers, "and let us see whether he and the Jack-Mormons, so-called, the friends of law and order, will calmly sit down and watch the funeral processions of Illinois liberty. . . . At a future day our course will be plain. Be calm and patient till all things are ready."94 It was important to Young that the Latter-day Saints not be the aggressors. Their only defense would be as victims. The better the evidence against the marauders, the easier the recovery of losses and the easier to win support from a broader American public.

On the afternoon of September 24, the Twelve and about thirty other men traveled to Carthage, where several of the party answered new charges of treason. The court dismissed the allegations when the signer of the affidavits could not explain what had been written by others. Those behind the writs were Thomas Sharp, Levi Williams, Chauncey Higbee, and Francis Higbee. For many of the Nauvoo party, among them John Taylor and Willard Richards, it would be the last opportunity to visit the jail where Joseph and Hyrum had died. They viewed the bloodstained floor and the shot-up walls and then headed along the dusty road into the setting sun. The Twelve had no desire for martyrdom. Their responsibility, even if it meant abandoning Nauvoo, was life, not death. All year, their preparations for expanding the kingdom had readied them to respond to the need to leave Illinois. President Young promised the Saints "a winter of peace in Nauvoo."95

At Quincy, meanwhile, the community that had extended charitable help to the Saints when they fled from Missouri nearly seven years earlier stepped in to broker a truce. Brigham Young had dispatched Hiram Kimball to Quincy on September 19 with printed proclamations from the Nauvoo citizens' committee and Sheriff Backenstos. Kimball returned the next day with a favorable report.96 In a meeting at the Adams County courthouse, prominent Quincy residents condoned the actions of neither side. They were not justifying the house burnings, Quincy merchant Joseph L. Heywood, a Latter-day Saint, explained to Brigham Young. The old settlers wanted to disclaim any responsibility for the actions of the vigilantes. Yet one speaker after another shared hostile feelings toward the Saints. "The most [hateful] set of speeches I ever heard, entirely mobocratic," Heywood reported.97

Intrigued that in the Proclamation: To Col. Levi Williams the Latter-day Saints had offered to leave Nauvoo, the meeting under its Whig chairman, Archibald Williams, proposed urging citizens of the counties surrounding Hancock to consider the offer. The resolution suggested a halt in the conflict to allow a peaceful departure if that was the real intent of the Mormons. Otherwise, they should "break up their present organization as a distinct community and amalgamate with the general population of the State." A committee of seven headed to Nauvoo to discern Brigham Young's intentions firsthand.98

The Quincy delegates were waiting for the Twelve upon their return from Carthage at sunset on the twenty-fourth. After lengthy deliberations that involved the exchange of written proposals,99 the Twelve issued a printed pledge affirming that the Saints would leave Hancock County as soon as grass was growing on the prairies. The statement urged an end to vexatious lawsuits and proposed that a joint committee coordinate property sales to help fund the relocation. Only the temple would not be sold, but it would be available for rent. The Nauvoo proclamation alluded to the expulsion from Missouri and pleaded for the right to worship freely. "It is very evident," William Clayton noted in his diary, "that the time is come for this people to separate themselves from all gentile governments and go to a place where they can erect the standard and live according to the law of God."100

A Quincy meeting on September 26 rejected the Twelve's proposal for a joint real estate committee and a cooperative exchange of Latter-day Saint property for cash, livestock, and travel supplies. The old citizens did not want to link the sale of property with removal. In contrast to their charitable offers seven years earlier, they offered only to collect contributions for Nauvoo's poor and widows. The Quincy delegates agreed that lawsuits and vigilante actions should end to allow a peaceful removal. They asked Governor Ford to dispatch troops to prevent theft and preserve the peace. Insisting that the Saints had brought their troubles upon themselves, the convention declared that the difficulties of Hancock County could be resolved only through a mass exodus of the gathered community from Illinois.101

As a result of active lobbying from Quincy and careful organization, citizens' groups in surrounding counties met during the last ten days of September and passed resolutions following the pattern set in Quincy. In all, conventions in nine Illinois counties gave Nauvoo's opponents enough support to force a resolution of the Mormon question in favor of the Anti-Mormon Party. Each caucus named delegates to a convention called by the Quincy Committee for October 1 in Carthage. From across the Mississippi, a meeting at Churchville, Missouri, added its own perspective. These citizens criticized Governor Ford's handling of the issue. Wishing to add extermination as another option, they urged him "to take Lilburne W. Boggs as a pattern for his action in relation to the Mormons."102

The Agreement to Evacuate

Negotiations soon moved to a higher level. On September 30, General Hardin arrived in Nauvoo with his state militia and the governor's negotiating committee. The Council of Fifty was in session at the Seventies Hall, reporting progress in organizing emigrant companies for the spring exodus. It was noon when General Charles C. Rich brought word of General Hardin's arrival. The troops, Rich said, were waiting on the public square northeast of the temple. One member of Hardin's negotiating committee, Judge Stephen A. Douglas, was with Sheriff Backenstos at John Taylor's house on Main Street. The council adjourned immediately, and the Twelve walked the one block up Parley Street to Taylor's brick home.103

Douglas and Backenstos delivered a simple message. First, residents east across the Illinois River toward Springfield believed false reports that it was the Latter-day Saints who were torching the buildings. The Warsaw Signal had published sworn affidavits to that effect, and prejudices would not allow any other interpretation. Second, Hardin wished to meet with community leaders. Young and five of the Twelve proceeded to a consultation on the hill.104 Hardin read his orders from the governor: Keep the peace in Hancock County. As a first step, Hardin gained Young's approval to search the city for the bodies of two men last seen in Nauvoo and supposed murdered. The troops searched the temple, Masonic Hall, Nauvoo House, and Mansion House stables in vain. At the stables, they found blood in the straw and resisted an explanation that a horse had been bled, preferring instead to stab their swords into the straw seeking evidence of dead men. Not finding any, the troops set up Camp Mississippi south of Nauvoo, after the two sides agreed to meet in council the following morning at John Taylor's home.105

Hardin's negotiating committee represented the governor but also served as liaison between the Latter-day Saints and the convention assembling at Carthage. Representatives came from Adams, Brown, Henderson, McDonough, Pike, Schuyler, Warren, Marquette, and Knox counties. Hancock, the seat of the problem, was excluded. Sponsored by the committee organized in Quincy a week earlier, the Carthage gathering was guided by three Adams County representatives Isaac N. Morris as chair, William H. Benneson as secretary, and O. H. Browning as a dominant figure in the deliberations.106

With the governor's troops camped on Nauvoo's southern border, the Twelve and Bishop Whitney assembled for prayer and discussion at Willard Richards's home. "We asked the Lord to frustrate the designs of our enemies," Heber Kimball noted in his diary. Later in the evening, at John Taylor's, a council drafted another proposition to the state of Illinois declaring the church's intent to leave Nauvoo and inviting area citizens to purchase the Saints' property. The council considered the proposed Carthage meeting "impolitic" and asked Hardin to prevent it, if possible, or to move it to a site outside Hancock County.107

At the joint council meeting held at Nauvoo during the morning and afternoon of October 1, the governor's representatives joined in a friendly and informal discussion.108 Young reiterated plans to leave Nauvoo and resettle in the West, probably, he said, at Vancouver Island (a ruse to keep confidential the actual plan to stop short of Oregon). The governor's committee endorsed the offer. When the Nauvoo leaders asked for help in selling or renting property, Hardin proposed that the church appoint trustees-in-trust to sell the property; they could continue sales after the people departed.109

The two sides exchanged written documents summarizing their discussions. The church memorandum, dated October 1 and signed by Brigham Young, included a copy of the printed proposal made to the Quincy Committee on September 24. Young noted that the church had "commenced making arrangements to remove from this county previous to the recent disturbances that we now have four companies organized of one hundred families each, and six more companies now organizing of the same number." These companies, he said, included all church leaders and totaled from five thousand to six thousand people willing to leave in the spring whether or not they had sold their property. The remaining Saints would need to sell their property to raise the means necessary for removal. "If all these testimonies are not sufficient to satisfy any people that we are in earnest," he wrote, "we will soon give them a sign that cannot be mistaken, we will leave them!"110

While Hardin remained in his camp south of Nauvoo, members of his committee carried Young's proposals to Camp Carthage for presentation to the nine-county conference. Convention managers first made certain that the delegates heard reports of alleged Mormon depredations against old citizens (mostly accusations of theft). Then the body approved a proposal calling upon the Saints to leave the state as promised. This and six other resolutions consolidated but softened the demands of the county conventions. The Carthage Convention pledged itself not to interfere with the removal but advised the counties to hold volunteer militias in readiness. Delegates asked for an end to further arrests so that the old citizens could return to their homes. They endorsed the proposal to station the governor's military force in Hancock County. In firm words, the convention rejected the Latter-day Saint explanation of events. "We do not believe them to be a persecuted people," the declaration said. Because delegates believed that Nauvoo's leaders exercised autocratic control, they held the entire Latter-day Saint community responsible for individual offenses against the old citizens. If any of the Saints engaged in theft or destruction of property, the convention declared, the old citizens would activate volunteer militias and "march to Hancock, to put a final and summary end to such outrages."111

On October 3, the day following the convention, the governor's negotiating committee wrote to the Twelve from Camp Carthage even as Hardin's regiment was pulling up stakes at Camp Mississippi. The committee had not yet read the Carthage document but had learned of its contents. "We are convinced that affairs have reached such a crisis, that it has become impossible for your church to remain in this country," the committee wrote. "Should you not [leave], we are satisfied, however much we may deprecate violence and bloodshed, that violent measures will be resorted to, to compel your removal." Ford's committee said that public evidence of preparations to leave would convince Nauvoo's enemies to allow the Saints "to depart peaceably next spring for your destination, west of the Rocky Mountains." Both sides would need to exercise restraint to avoid outbreak of civil war, the committee concluded.112

Their mission of negotiation completed, Hardin's group published the official correspondence in a broadside. In a cover letter echoing Brigham Young's pledge, the governor's committee reassured residents of western Illinois that the Saints had pledged themselves

by word and in writing, to remove from the state. . . . The history of their church has shown that wherever the leaders go the members will follow. This is a part of their religious duties. When, therefore, this colony will have started for a home west of the Rocky Mountains, it will be the best possible evidence that all design removing, and will remove.

The committee urged the anti-Mormons not to force a winter departure. Pleading with the house burners to halt and labeling the actions criminal and disgraceful, the committee argued that the negotiated agreement, though not ideal from either viewpoint, was "practicable and probable." The governor's committee had accomplished its mission. The Latter-day Saints would be leaving. The negotiators concluded: "Order and quiet are again restored."113

The committee reported to Ford that protection of property required a citizenry willing to abide by the law, a condition that these experienced public servants judged improbable. The marauders marched to a higher law, the negotiators wrote, and could not be controlled by the state. If the Latter-day Saints wished a place of peace, they would have to find it outside Illinois. Across the Mississippi, in Lee County, Iowa, a nonpartisan citizens' meeting echoed the Illinois resolutions and called for the removal of the Latter-day Saints living there as well.114

On Saturday, October 4, Brigham Young convened the Council of Fifty at the Seventies Hall to further study the correspondence from Hardin's committee, a letter from Governor Ford,115 and the resolutions adopted at the Carthage convention. After reviewing the materials, the council agreed to proceed with the details of their preparations for removal. At Young's suggestion, the council decided to halt publication of the Nauvoo Neighbor and the Times and Seasons. The Neighbor had achieved only limited success in its attempt to communicate the church view in secular things to a broader reading audience. "Now let them alone," John Taylor agreed in a general conference talk a few days later, "and mind our own business, and let them print what they have a mind to. . . . The world doesn't wish any news from us, and we don't wish to urge it upon them."116

In another action, the Council of Fifty appointed Parley P. Pratt, Orson Spencer, and William W. Phelps to preserve published reports on recent events and to write a pointed indictment of United States treatment of the Saints. Drafted by Spencer, the October 23 letter emphasized the feelings of those Nauvoo residents who were most offended by state actions. In doing so it likened Ford to Missouri Governor Lilburn W. Boggs and argued for removal of the troops from Nauvoo.117

Ford drafted an immediate rebuff to what he saw as an intemperate and unfounded charge. First, Ford said that he had posted troops in Nauvoo to protect the Saints and prevent civil war. Sheriff Backenstos had secured a tenuous peace in Carthage, he added, but the delegates at Carthage had agreed to "drive [the Saints] away before they get stronger and more capable of resistance." Second, the governor was convinced that a band of thieves not necessarily Latter-day Saints was operating out of Nauvoo "as is the case in all other cities of ten or twelve thousand inhabitants." In addition, he said, some of those burnt out by the mob may have been taking property from their enemies as indemnification. Ford acknowledged the impossibility of pleasing the radical elements of either side through his legal moderation. "In the course of my official duties . . . I have been called to do both of you some good and some harm. The harm is always remembered: the good is either not understood or is forgotten. I do not expect any gratitude or applause from either party."118

Ford's concern that the lawlessness would continue was proven valid with several incidents during the last three months of the year. The most inflammatory were headlined in late November in the Nauvoo Neighbor's only extra after it ceased publication. "Murder and Arson," the heading shouted. "Edmund Durfee Shot Two Houses Burned." Durfee, a fifty-seven-year-old New Englander who had joined the church in Ohio in 1831, had moved his family into Nauvoo after his house at Morley's Settlement had been burned, the first house attacked in the September mob actions. He and others had returned to the area to remove "a last load of grain." Around midnight, on Saturday, November 15, a small group of marauders set fire to a straw stack outside Solomon Hancock's barn. Hancock, Durfee, and others grabbed rakes to disperse the fire away from the barn. Hidden from view, the vigilantes fired six shots at the men and killed Durfee with a single shot to the chest, just above the heart.119

Two days earlier, again around midnight, an estimated thirty men appeared at the house of Samuel Hicks near Camp Creek and woke him with demands that he deliver William Rice to them. The marauders, claiming to be members of the governor's troops from Carthage, said they had a writ for Rice's arrest. When Hicks said Rice was not at the house, a few of the mob hauled Hicks off, dressed only in his nightshirt. His wife and child were sick with ague and remained behind. The remaining marauders instructed two men staying in the home to remove the family's belongings. Before these men could complete the job, however, the mob set fire to the stairs of the home. Hicks was returned to his family and harassed before the attackers left. The home was destroyed. The house burners later found Rice and burned his house as well.120

The Neighbor's report of the two events cautioned the Saints against retaliation for the unprovoked attacks and encouraged them to hasten preparations for the spring departure. "When we have settled on the other side of America," the editor wrote, "you will know of a truth that we were friends and not enemies to life, law, and liberty! That we were good men, engaged in a good cause, and will receive the meed of praise we deserve for universal benevolence, and everlasting friendship to goodness."121

Major Warren's handling of the two cases won the accolades of Latter-day Saints. Sheriff J. B. Backenstos thought the major had turned Jack-Mormon, so energetic were his efforts to apprehend and try the guilty parties. Warren and Mason Brayman succeeded in taking to Carthage three men charged with Durfee's murder and others with the burning of the two houses. One of them Warren had chased into Missouri and hauled back at gunpoint without the formalities of an extradition writ. Witnesses from Nauvoo traveled to Carthage for the court hearing but were not heard. The magistrate discharged the men without examination.122

Implementing Removal

The mob attacks of September 1845 and subsequent negotiations made necessary the immediate implementation of a general removal from Nauvoo. A massive exodus seemed the only option for preserving a large headquarters city. "The mob seem determined to drive us to our duty in gathering [to Nauvoo]," Brigham Young told Sheriff Backenstos in mid-September, "and then drive us to carry the fulness of the gospel from among them and carry it to Israel. We are all well."123 News of the negotiated decision spread through the state, even as Latter-day Saints were gathering in Nauvoo for an October conference. Many of the Saints already knew that the Carthage Convention had accepted the offer of the Twelve to launch a migration westward from Nauvoo the following spring. By the time of Brigham Young's September 26 speech to the Camp Creek emigrants, team captains of the emigrating companies were actively recruiting for the California expedition.124

The Prophet Joseph Smith had declared in October 1841 that no general conferences would convene until they could be held in the completed Nauvoo Temple. Four years later, the temple was finally entirely enclosed, and, although technically not finished, it was judged by the Twelve ready for a conference. The roof was on, the windows were in, and seats provided for a meeting. On Sunday, October 5, 1845, Brigham Young offered a dedicatory prayer before a main-floor audience of thousands. The general conference, Nauvoo's last, opened on Monday for three days of business and instruction. One concern dominated the meeting explaining and preparing for the evacuation of Nauvoo. Removal was the theme for the three principal speakers and for much of the business of the assembly.125

Monday morning was consumed with the presentation of general church officers, one by one. The conference accepted the Twelve as "Presidents of the whole church" and then sustained Brigham Young as president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. All of the existing members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles were given unanimous support except two. William Smith was dropped as an apostle and patriarch for aspiring "to uproot and undermine the legal Presidency of the Church, that he may occupy the place himself." An absent Lyman Wight was objected to for ignoring the Twelve's counsel and leading away a group needed to help build the temple. He was retained pending further investigation of "conduct calculated to destroy . . . [and] divide the church."126

The Monday afternoon session settled into preaching. Parley P. Pratt introduced the major theme of the remaining sessions. In a moving address that justified the abandonment of a hard-won homeland on visionary and prophetic grounds, he said:

We know that the great work of God must all the while be on the increase and grow greater. The people must enlarge in numbers and extend their borders; they cannot always live in one city, nor in one county. . . . The Lord designs to lead us to a wider field of action, where there will be more room for the saints to grow and increase, and where there will be no one to say we crowd them, and where we can enjoy the pure principles of liberty and equal rights.

Recognizing that the congregation would have concerns about leaving their homes and farms or businesses in Nauvoo, Pratt encouraged them to leave the city as "a monument to those who may visit the place of our industry, diligence and virtue." But, he said, despite the appearance of prosperity, a great deal had been squandered in vexatious lawsuits, mobocracy, and oppression. In a new country, "where the air, the water, soil and timber is equally free to every settler without money or without price, the climate healthy," and mobocracy absent, "we can become vastly more wealthy, have better possessions and improvements, and build a larger and better Temple in five years from this time than we now possess." Pratt illustrated his optimistic image of an expanded field with an agricultural metaphor:

One small nursery may produce thousands of fruit trees, while they are small. But as they expand towards maturity, they must needs be transplanted, in order to have room to grow and produce the natural fruits. It is so with us. We want a country where we have room to expand.127

Expansion was on apostle George A. Smith's mind, too, as were the prospects of a new land where the natural resources belonged to God himself as the sole proprietor. Smith reminded the Saints that in leaving Missouri they had covenanted to help the poor leave too. At his request, the congregation approved a similar cooperative effort for evacuating Nauvoo. Brigham Young, who had sponsored the covenant at Far West in 1839, prophesied that with God's blessings on the people, church resources would allow everyone to move who wanted to go. The following day, four bishops accepted donations for the poor, a timely reminder of the need to sustain one another in temporal needs.128

During a conference session the next day, Heber C. Kimball introduced the image of a modern Israel fleeing Egypt. "I am glad the time of our exodus is come; I have looked for it for years," he said. Then, addressing the question of funding the migration, Kimball rejected what he called a common stock business religion preached by some, and advocated "Apostolic religion; i.e., you will sell all, and come and lay it down at the Apostles' feet. . . . Every man will be a steward over his house and property; and if he is an unfaithful steward, his stewardship will be given to another." On another frequently asked question, Kimball (and the others) defined the place of destination only in general terms:

We want to take you to a land, where a white man's foot never trod, nor a lion's whelps, nor the devil's; and there we can enjoy it, with no one to molest and make us afraid; and we will bid all the nations welcome, whether Pagans, Catholics, or Protestants. We are not accounted as white people, and we don't want to live among them. I had rather live with the buffalo in the wilderness; and I mean to go if the Lord will let me, and spare my life.129

Amasa Lyman echoed Parley Pratt's image of a transplanted society. The concept promised continuity in the face of disruption and adjustment. Lyman commended the Saints for their decision to follow the Twelve to a prophesied destiny. "The course of this people is unalterably fixed," he said.

The people are becoming one, and their interests one. . . . And we calculate to go the same people we are now; preserving the same principles which have caused us to grow and expand as we have done. This people have grown until there is not room for them to grow, and now they need transplanting, where they can have more room: and however much the people may seem disposed to not go, the sails are set, the wind is fair, and we are bound to weather the point, whether we will or no; for we are not at the helm.130

At the conclusion of the conference, the Twelve issued a circular to inform the Saints living in the United States but away from Nauvoo of the decision to abandon the City of Peace because of "a crisis of extraordinary and thrilling interest."131 This important church statement set the decision to leave the United States first in broad eschatological terms and then stated immediate reasons. It included both testimony and practical counsel. "The exodus of the Nation of the only true Israel from these U.S. to a far distant region of the West, where bigotry, intolerance and insatiable oppression will have lost its power over them, forms a new epoch, not only in the history of the church, but of this nation," the circular declared. "If the authorities of this church cannot abide in peace within the pale of this nation, neither can those who implicitly hearken to their wholesome counsel. A word to the wise is sufficient. . . . Two cannot walk together except they be agreed. Jacob must be expatriated while Esau held dominion."

The immediate reasons for the decision, the circular noted, were the murders of the Prophet and his brother, the Patriarch, and the more recent burning of the houses of scores of Latter-day Saint families in western Illinois. "It is our design to remove all the Saints as early next spring as the first appearance of thrifty vegetation," it said. In the meantime, work would continue on the Lord's House, with an anticipated dedication by the next general conference. Before then, temple ordinances would be given to the faithful. To facilitate this effort, the Saints outside Nauvoo were invited to settle their affairs, dispose of their property, procure wagons and teams for the westward journey, and move their families to Nauvoo.

Wake up, wake up dear brethren, we exhort you, from the Mississippi to the Atlantic, and from Canada to Florida, to the present glorious emergency in which the God of heaven has placed you, to prove your faith by your works, preparatory to a rich endowment in the Temple of the Lord, and the obtaining of promises and deliverances, and glories for yourselves and your children and your dead.

This grand call to action concluded with two afterthoughts. The first postscript advised that all new wagons be built on a five-foot track to make travel easier during winter months. In the second addition, a hint of destination was included: "There are said to be many good locations for settlements on the Pacific," it reads, "especially at Vancouver's Island near [actually 150 miles north of] the mouth of [the] Columbia." The public declaration of a haven in a politically acceptable region, rather than the real target in the valleys of the central Rocky Mountains, satisfied at once both the politicians' need for a safe Mormon escape and the Saints' curiosity. More important, it protected the true destination from preemption by opponents. Mention of the Oregon country anticipated an intended later expansion to the Pacific Coast.132 A similar indirection two weeks later ("our future location will embrace California, Oregon, or Vancouver's Island") suggested only the certainty of a location on America's far western frontier.133

The press in Nauvoo, under the editorship of John Taylor, reported the church's agreement to leave western Illinois and eastern Iowa in both political and religious terms. The Nauvoo Neighbor bemoaned the failure of government to "protect its own citizens from the violence of corrupt men." In response, the Saints would follow the path the Savior had laid out. "We will suffer wrong rather than do wrong," the editor declared. "We could fight our way clear, but wisdom says let the wicked slay the wicked. The gospel whispers peace." He concluded, "We owe the United States nothing: we go out by force as exiles from freedom."134 A two-column recital of persecutions in the Times and Seasons concluded with a prescient summation. The "Christian" nation of America would be left "alone in her glory," Taylor wrote, while Mormon Israel withdrew to a place of refuge. "The wilderness shall blossom as the rose, and Babylon fall like a millstone cast into the sea."135

In New York, Parley P. Pratt's Messenger reacted to first reports of a planned exodus as rumor. When copies of newspapers from Nauvoo verified the seriousness of events in the West, the Messenger encouraged Eastern Saints not to postpone migration to Nauvoo. The paper reprinted vivid news of the house burnings and explanations of the decision to abandon Nauvoo for a new gathering place in the West.136

In western Illinois, newspaper editors split along familiar lines. Opponents of Nauvoo's political influence celebrated the decision and threatened an aggressive implementation.137 More neutral bystanders simply reported the news or puzzled over why Illinois citizens had violated the protected rights of others.138 The Springfield State Register applauded the governor's actions and supported the cease-fire as a way to end hostilities on both sides and allow the Saints to prepare for removal.139 On the other hand, after summarizing the troubles of the past summer and fall, the Peoria American sided carefully with the anti-Mormons.140

This range of ideas found its way into newspapers elsewhere in the United States. In St. Louis, editors generally reported developments in Hancock County during the fall of 1845 with an attempt at fairness. The St. Louis Organ, for example, charged the opponents of the Mormons with intentionally misusing and provoking them. Any misdeeds committed by the Saints, the editor said, "will be lost in the recollection of the great barbarism of their persecutors." The New York Sun editorialized, "We could not believe that, in a government of laws, any sect, no matter what their faith might be, would ever have been driven out of the land vi et armis." In Washington, D.C., the National Intelligencer copied balanced accounts from the St. Louis newspapers verbatim, issuing reports of the Quincy negotiating committee, Brigham Young's agreement to leave Illinois, and the church's general conference announcement.141

Despite its balanced news columns, the St. Louis New Era soon turned its editorial support toward the isolationist arguments of the anti-Mormons. Calling the church "an ecclesiastical oligarchy, exercising a despotic control over a large body of fanatics," the paper said, "The principles of the Mormons will always engender hostilities between them and the American people amongst whom they reside."142 When early reports circulated that the Saints might leave Nauvoo, some editors expressed disbelief. "The Mormons will never leave Nauvoo no, never!" one paper exclaimed. "They would relinquish life as soon as they would voluntarily, en masse, leave their glorious habitation, which to them is the gate of heaven."143

In Great Britain, editors of the Millennial Star encouraged migration and justified the decision to leave Nauvoo. "The place became too small for us to dwell in the church required to be sifted the celestial laws to be put in force, and the foundation of Zion laid according to that pattern," David C. Kimball explained. Added Thomas Ward: "Houses and land, what are they? We can build more."144

For the Saints in the British Isles, the evacuation of Nauvoo may have seemed distant. Yet abandonment of the Zion they had planned to join affected them immediately. Many postponed their migration. Others hastened departure in order to receive their endowments in Nauvoo and join in the removal. Counsel from regional president Wilford Woodruff to the Saints was to prepare to join in the mass movement. In mid-January 1846, Woodruff sent his wife and two children to Nauvoo by way of New Orleans with a company of about forty Saints. A week later, he took a packet ship to New York so that he could visit relatives in New England and arrangements move his parents with him to Nauvoo, where he arrived on April 13.145

Orson Pratt counseled members in his area of presidency in the Eastern states to move immediately to Nauvoo in order to be ready for the spring removal. Pratt offered no sympathy to the rich. He expected they might complain about losing money on the emergency sale of their property. "The Lord requires a sacrifice," he reminded those who had ignored earlier invitations to join in the gathering. Pratt advised the poor not to depend upon help in Nauvoo. Rather, they should purchase horses and wagons in the East or choose a cheaper route by sea. As encouraged by Brigham Young in September,146 Pratt appointed Samuel Brannan to enlist a company to go by way of Cape Horn in January. If a sufficient number were interested, Pratt said, Brannan could charter an entire ship or several ships to the west coast. Sensing that some of the Saints would be reluctant to go, the departing apostle stressed the urgency of getting out of the United States. He wrote in his message of departure:

It is with the greatest of joy that I forsake this republic; and all the saints have abundant reasons to rejoice that they are counted worthy to be cast out as exiles from this wicked nation. . . . If we die in the dens and caves of the Rocky Mountains, we shall die where freedom reigns triumphantly. Liberty in a solitary place, and in a desert, is far more preferable than martyrdom in these pious states.147

Church members in all parts of the United States and Great Britain talked among themselves and sought counsel from their leaders concerning the Great Western Measure. They wanted to know where the Saints would gather, when the migration from Nauvoo would begin, what the route would be, what was needed in the way of teams and supplies, how many would be going, and how long the journey would take. Certain information could not be shared, and other details were yet unknown. Church leaders shared what they could.148

For many Latter-day Saints, the pressing question was not where destiny would next lead them but how their close community might be affected. The anti-Mormons had encouraged the Saints to "break up their present organization as a distinct community and amalgamate with the general population."149 In their meetings, Nauvoo's priesthood quorums considered the effect of the pending move on their continuing fellowship. They expected to be scattered by the migration and by missionary assignments, "not knowing when we should meet again."150 But those who supported the Twelve shared a sense that the decision to leave Nauvoo and, indeed, the entire United States behind them was right. The central idea in their conversations was not the place of relocation as much as the quality of life as a united people in that new location. They desired to find a new refuge of peace, freed from the harassments that had prompted the decision to leave. They looked forward "to a land where the Standard of Liberty might be hoisted and we might worship God and there would be none to molest or make afraid."151 They wished to be free from the constraints on their desire to become a gathered people. In a letter to an unbelieving uncle in mid-November, John S. Fullmer explained the meaning of the mass migration:

We are preparing ourselves to go as exiles from the state as we came into it. We cannot remain here in peace any longer. This is demonstrated to a certainty; and the spirit bids us flee into the wilderness . . . and although we will be broken up here, we will not be broken up as a people. The Lord is on our side, notwithstanding he suffers us to be persecuted and to endure great tribulation, for the Kingdom is with us.152

NotesChapter 17. A Solution to the Mormon Question

Epigraph: Amasa M. Lyman, conference talk, October 7, 1845, T&S 6 (November 1, 1845): 1013 (HC 7:469).
