Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 18

Leaving Nauvoo

As life is sweet we have chosen banishment rather than death. . . . To stay [in Nauvoo], is death by "fire and sword," to go into banishment unprepared, is death by starvation. The Twelve to Governor James Clark of Iowa Territory, February 28, 1846

Our Pioneers are instructed to proceed west until they find a good place to make a crop, in some good valley in the neighborhood of the Rocky Mountains, where they will infringe upon no one, and not be likely to be infringed upon. Here we will make a resting place, until we can determine a place for a permanent location. Nauvoo High Council, Circular to the Church,

January 20, 1846

The task of preparing for removal from Nauvoo was an extraordinary effort. As the body in charge of all arrangements, the Quorum of the Twelve intended to equip and transplant an entire people. Besides more than ten thousand residents of the City of Nauvoo, the plan included several thousand others in the surrounding countryside and, eventually, every Latter-day Saint in the United States and Europe who would join in the journey. Arrangements extended beyond wagons and supplies to include a honing of religious motivations. To accomplish their objective, church leaders at the October conference championed removal in scriptural terms. They unfolded a funding plan and a management philosophy.

One of the first matters addressed publicly was the question of how to finance the removal. The Twelve expected each head of household to marshal the resources needed to outfit and transport his or her own family. "Every man was to go to work and stew his pumpkins to the amount of 20 [bushels] and parch corn to the amount of ten bushels for flour could not be obtained," Joseph Hovey recalled.1 Anyone lacking sufficient means would receive help through contributions from other members given to the church for distribution. This method emphasized self-reliant effort and echoed in spirit and intent the law of consecration.

Heber C. Kimball recognized the difficulty some Nauvoo Saints might have with what he termed the "apostolic religion," a voluntary sharing of resources managed by the Twelve. The Nauvoo emigration plan addressed one sensitive issue by allowing owners to retain all control over property. Under this proposal, the Saints would sell their houses and farms and volunteer to share their surplus. "It has taken a good scourging for fifteen years to bring us to this," Kimball observed. "There may be individuals who will look at their pretty houses and gardens and say, 'it is hard to leave them'; but I tell you, when we start, you will put on your knapsacks, and follow after us." John S. Fullmer echoed Kimball's counsel when he informed an uncle of the plan to dispose of their property and move west: "If we can't sell it we will leave it if we have to walk off with a bundle on our backs."2

The image of knapsack-carrying disciples following their leaders accurately reflected the religious ideal of Zion a people brought to an equality of opportunity because the rich had consecrated their surplus to the church to help evacuate the poor. Brigham Young advised one man who sought clarification "that those who went must expect to go on the Apostles' doctrines and no man say aught that he has is his own, but all things are the Lord's: and we his stewards, and every man receive his stewardship."3

At the October conference, Amasa Lyman used a metaphor of seafaring to illustrate the notion of following spiritual leaders. From a secular perspective, it was a personal decision to select a place to live. For committed Latter-day Saints, it was the prerogative of prophets to designate a proper dwelling place. Lyman's image of the ship of state ready to sail under fair winds with God at the helm reminded the people that their choice was one of faith. They could whine and stay behind, Lyman said, or they could climb aboard and sail with the Saints. Some who had complained about losses in Missouri didn't feel like sacrificing their newly won resources in Hancock County. To them, Lyman suggested only that they had yet to experience real suffering. "They have to get rich, and be made poor, about twenty times over, before they will come straight," he said. "When the rich are rich; and the poor are rich; then there will be nobody rich and nobody poor; for all will be on a level." Sacrifice and obedience had refined the people, he said. Through persecution and suffering, they would "come up out of the fire as gold seven times tried."4

Church leaders sympathized with those who lacked the means to outfit themselves for yet another migration. Just seven years earlier a committee of removal endorsed by members of the Twelve had helped the poor get out of Missouri. It would be so in 1846 under the direction of Brigham Young and the Twelve.5 Widows with limited means qualified for help. Some others received less sympathy. Brigham Young chided one delegation of thirty-eight men who felt ignored in their poverty brought on by the forced expulsion from Jackson County. The president apparently knew them too well. He reprimanded these men for their earlier slothfulness, their failure to magnify church callings, and their unwillingness to accept preaching missions. He would help the worthy poor, he said, but not those unwilling to help themselves and the kingdom.6

For many, the highlight of the final day of the conference was Lucy Mack Smith's lengthy address at the Wednesday morning session. Speaking at her own request, she discussed three topics. First, she advised parents on their duties in rearing their children in love and kindness. With the help of Martha Coray, the mother of the Prophet had recently completed her autobiography. This had turned her thoughts to children and to her own family. In the second portion of her talk, Lucy Smith reflected on the life of her prophet-son and recited her family's "hardships, trials, privations, persecutions, sufferings, etc.; some parts of which melted those who heard her to tears."7 Then Mother Smith endorsed the decision to abandon Nauvoo. "If [it] so be the rest of my children go with you (and would to God they may all go)," she said, "they will not go without me; and if I go, I want my bones brought back in case I die away, and deposited with my husband and children." The Prophet's mother had previously told Brigham Young she would not accompany the church west. He had not pressed her on the question. Her public sanction of the migration buoyed him, and he promised to honor her request. "We are determined also," he concluded, "to use every means in our power to do all that Joseph told us."8

In the area of spiritual preparation, church leaders felt a strong obligation to provide members with promised temple blessings. For fifteen years, in Missouri and Illinois, the Saints had endured a testing time to prepare them to live a celestial law. For five of those years they had labored with various levels of enthusiasm to build the temple. The promise of a special endowment of godly power urged them on. It was a potential for which the Saints had been willing to work and wait.9 The doors to the temple's upper level opened on Wednesday, December 10, 1845. On that date and for nearly two months following, a succession of members passed through the large front entrances and climbed two stories to the endowment rooms to receive their blessings. The long-awaited endowment prepared the Saints for their errand into the wilderness.10

As the temple experience ended and Latter-day Saints launched their trek west, they revived an Old Testament reference that had been applied at Independence and Nauvoo in a symbolic way. Now, looking beyond the Missouri River, Isaiah's "top of the mountains" could be understood more literally in geographic terms. Brigham Young had promised a new temple in the Rocky Mountains to replace the one being left behind at Nauvoo. In his closing editorial in the Times and Seasons, John Taylor proclaimed that the migrations of the Latter-day Saints were evidence of "the handy work of God":

Certainly it is a strange work and a wonder! Well might the prophet Isaiah exclaim: "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."

Although we have to flee from the presence of freemen, or civilized society, mark the act; watch till the end of the matter, and then judge whether God had a hand in it or not. The power of Israel was lost, by disobedience and scattering; and his power will be regained by obedience and gathering. Stand fast in the faith, brethren, the work of the Father hath commenced among all nations to restore Israel to mercy . . . and the kingdoms of the world must pass out of your way like the chaff of the summer threshing floor.11

The most enduring of the religious metaphors adopted by those leaving Nauvoo was one that evoked ancient Israel's journey through the wilderness to their promised land. The Latter-day Saints saw themselves as a modern covenant people. "We shall leave here May next, for a place where the God of Israel is the sole proprietor and he can give it to whom he pleases," George Alley informed relatives in Massachusetts. "A place where the foot of a white man never trod, nor the pestilence never came. . . . We shall go as the Israelites, by the shadow of the tabernacle of the Lord."12

Preparations for the Migration

The wholesale removal of the gathered Saints from Hancock and Lee counties did not proceed without planning. From the very beginning, careful organization marked the effort to implement Joseph Smith's Great Western Measure. On September 9 ironically, the day before the house burnings began Brigham Young began choosing leaders for the first company. Those selected became captains under Young and immediately set about filling up their groups. After the attacks began in Hancock County late in the month, the Twelve decided that together with their families, friends, and neighbors, they would all join the growing initial emigrant company.13

As word spread, company leaders were inundated with requests for inclusion. By the time of the October conference, inquiries from members and pressures from the marauders made it necessary to include the entire Mormon population but on a staggered departure schedule. Heber Kimball reassured the conference, "We calculate you are all going in the first company, both old and young, rich and poor; for there will be but one company." The first company had been expanded to avoid partiality. "We have a common interest, for the welfare of this whole people."14

The grand, unified migrating company that came to be known eventually as the Camp of Israel consisted of numerous manageably sized smaller groups, or emigrant companies, of about one hundred families each.15 By the middle of October, captains had been appointed for twenty-five companies. Potentially, this number could accommodate more than twelve thousand people. The Quorum of the Twelve headed the first company, followed by fifteen companies with captains chosen from the Council of Fifty. They were listed in the same order as their names appeared in the Fifty's roster, by descending age. Of the nine captains not of the Twelve or Fifty, seven were assigned to organize companies in specific locations away from Nauvoo. In popular discourse, many of these numbered companies took on the name of their leader.16

Emigrating Company No. 1 set the pattern for organizing the migrants with a hierarchy of officers resembling a militia. Like the plan given by revelation for Zion's Camp in 1834, the Twelve divided their company into fifties and tens with a captain over each. Later they paired the fifties as hundreds, with captains over them. Young single men received a special invitation to join the company to help with the hard work of pioneering.17 Twice during November, captains of the various emigrating companies met for counsel from Brigham Young and the Twelve, a practice that continued at regular intervals during the drawn-out migration of 1846.18

The potential size of the Camp of Israel greatly increased the organizational task. Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo and nearby settlements numbered an estimated seventeen thousand. With all American and European members invited, the long-term migratory potential doubled. But not everyone accepted the invitation to join in the 1846 removal. Some delayed temporarily, and others never did join modern Israel's journey into the wilderness. In early October, Brigham Young told Stephen A. Douglas and his negotiating committee that about one thousand Nauvoo families (or between five thousand and six thousand Saints) would leave in the spring. This accounting left half the city's residents for later departure dates. By late November 1845, the captains of the emigrant companies reported that they had organized 3,285 families. If these groups averaged five persons per family, the captains had included 16,425 people, or virtually all the Latter-day Saints in the upper Mississippi River Valley.19

The intent was for an all-male lead group to pioneer a route and establish farms. After three weeks of study, Parley P. Pratt's outfitting committee reported a plan typical of those found in travel guidebooks of the time.20 The list identified supplies that would support five men per wagon traveling all the way to the Pacific Coast. Each cluster of five was called a "family." Assuming the men had bedding and cooking utensils of their own, a complete outfit would cost about $250 for the group and weigh nineteen hundred pounds. The final draft of the committee's recommendation was ready on the Saturday before general conference.21

By this time, the Twelve had concluded that all of the Saints willing to go would be heading west. The supply list created for a thousand male pioneers was adjusted to accommodate women and children in traditional family groups of five. It was published in the Nauvoo Neighbor at the end of October. Broadening the immediate plan to include an entire people did not eliminate the need for the path markers. In late December, Orson Pratt took astronomical calculations of Nauvoo while his brother Parley worked out a schedule of travel from Nauvoo to the Great Salt Lake Valley for a pioneer company of one thousand men.22

Each emigrant company of one hundred families was responsible to identify and buy or build its own wagons for freight and transportation. Company leaders found wheelwrights, carpenters, and cabinetmakers to serve as foremen over less-experienced workers. While some men prepared timber for the wagon parts, others fashioned the metal parts. "The timber is cut and brought into the city green; hub, spoke, and felloe timber boiled in salt and water, and other parts kiln dried," according to a report in Brigham Young's history:

Shops are established at the Nauvoo House, Masonic Hall, and Arsenal; nearly every shop in town is employed in making wagons. Teams are sent to all parts of the county to purchase iron; blacksmiths are at work night and day and all hands are busily engaged getting ready for our departure westward as soon as possible.23

When the supply of material for wagon covers in Nauvoo ran out, the Saints visited merchants in nearby towns and exhausted their stock of unbleached domestic. As for other materials, one migrant noted, "All the fences for miles around were searched for oak rails that would do to work into wagon timber. Iron was scarce. There was little or none to be had in Nauvoo and many wagons were made with wooden tires." Cash was scarce, too. Emigrants paid for their wagons in a typical medium of exchange trade. For example, blacksmith Alfred Lambson accepted wood, cash, store orders, flour, books, and pork for doing the ironwork on wagons, making buckets, fashioning irons for a carriage, and shoeing horses.24

By the end of November, company captains reported 1,508 wagons ready to leave and another 1,892 under construction. This number, 3,400 in all, would provide an average of one wagon for each family counted among the twenty-five organized companies. That left another 115 wagons for other needs. But six months later, at the camps along the Missouri River, Brigham Young and his assistants concluded that only 1,000 wagons and about 775 teams were fit for the rugged overland journey beyond Winter Quarters. This was about half the wagons at or approaching the camps. In the spirit of the Twelve's cooperative management plan, Young decided to use the good wagons and their teams to shuttle immigrants across the plains and prairie in shifts. The trustees in Nauvoo stopped advertising for oxen. They passed along Young's advice encouraging the Saints to gather "cash, flour, meal, wheat, corn, dry goods and groceries, and be ready to load up when our teams return for them."25

Along with outfitting themselves for their journey, the Saints had to dispose of homes, lands, and unneeded belongings. Selling out was sometimes as great a challenge as fitting out. During the evacuations of the Morley and Hancock Settlements a Latter-day Saint committee in southern Hancock County tried a cooperative approach. They offered to sell property at reasonably low prices to the old settlers in exchange for livestock, wagons, and store goods. The Saints reserved the rights to the crops. But the Carthage settlement left the sale of Mormon property entirely to market forces. At the October conference, church leaders appointed a seven-member committee for Nauvoo and smaller committees for eight other nearby settlements to act as agents. In Iowa, the responsibility was left with individual landowners.26

The sale of Latter-day Saint property was disappointingly slow at first. Even so, much of the deeded and improved property of Nauvoo and surrounding settlements did eventually sell. "New citizens," as they came to be known, saw the opportunity as a bonanza. They bought good land and good houses at low prices in a buyer's market. Census taker Thomas H. Owen estimated in late 1845 that the Latter-day Saints had put twenty thousand acres under cultivation in the Nauvoo area and another ten thousand acres elsewhere in the county. He considered this land a bargain, with good titles and available to buy at about the value of a year's rent. All of it, he reported, "can be paid for in trade, such as cattle, oxen over three and under five years old, mules, sheep, wagons, and some good horses. Work oxen are very much wanted." He added, "They also have a great deal of other property to dispose of, such as cooking stoves, cupboard ware, household furniture, etc., for which the same kind of pay will be taken; and I suppose that cash will not be refused."27

By mid-November, church members in southern Hancock County and in the Fountain Green area had sold most of their property. Farms near Warsaw were selling at from five dollars to eight dollars an acre, considered a fair price by local buyers. Sales were slower at La Harpe, in the northeastern corner of the county and nearer Nauvoo. Farmers in these areas were asking twenty dollars to thirty dollars per acre, possibly because of higher initial purchase prices or more extensive cultivation.28

The proceeds realized from individual sales varied from one situation to another. "We have to make a great sacrifice in order to get away," Sally Randall informed her family in June 1846. "The most of the Saints are selling out although at a very low price. . . . We are going with a yoke of oxen and a mule. We have cows to drive." Englishman Robert Pixton sold his half-acre town lot and small brick house in May for two cows, a rifle, and a few other things. When Mary Ann Pratt (Parley's wife) left Nauvoo after the final expulsion in September 1846, she took one last look at the stove, the furniture, and the pictures on the wall of their home, visited the burial place of loved ones, and left without selling any of it. John D. Lee refused an offer of eight hundred dollars for his large house on Carlin Street. "I locked it up, selling only one stove out of it, for which I received eight yards of cloth," he recalled. A group of Canadian Saints passing through Nauvoo in early April found many houses "standing empty and unsold." One of them recalled, "We could have [had] brick, frame, or log or stone houses in which were some of the furnishings, chairs and bedsteads, etc. The Saints had been driven away and what they could not readily sell they had to leave." It would be a buyer's market, John S. Fullmer told a prospective buyer in November: "Our city will . . . fall into the hands of our enemies, both by purchase and by plunder, and by sacrifice. It is a place of too much importance to be left unoccupied." Once the Saints had departed, he anticipated, property values would rise. "No one will lose by buying now."29

Church property was offered for sale through designated agents. In November 1845, the Twelve sent Almon Babbitt to investigate the possibility of selling the Nauvoo Temple to the Catholic church. The Catholic bishop in St. Louis agreed to seek the support of the head of the Illinois Diocese in Chicago. The plan was to send circulars to bishops in every state to encourage Catholic migration to Nauvoo. In December, Brigham Young and his council considered other inquiries and answered questions from land agents who talked of buying the entire town on speculation. Church officials offered Philadelphia land agents a 50 percent discount if they would purchase all or part of the city or any of the surrounding farms for ready cash. "We should much rather wholesale than retail it," Brigham Young informed the agent.30 Hopes for a blanket sale died, leaving the task to piecemeal transactions.

As news of the pending mass exodus spread, offers of help arrived from various sources. The Twelve remained skeptical of most of them, including proposals from Oliver Cowdery encouraging an exploring expedition into northern California and one from James Arlington Bennet of New York to lead a revived Nauvoo military force in defense of Nauvoo.31

Another offer arrived in a late October letter from Palmyra, Missouri, signed only "Backwoodsman." The writer had learned from newspaper reports that the Saints were headed for California. Backwoodsman claimed to represent a partnership planning an independent, representative nation the United States of the West incorporating all of Oregon, upper California, and peninsular lower California. His party would occupy coastal California, with the Bay of San Francisco as their chief port. The Saints could have the eastern region as a self-governing state, with a port at the mouth of the Colorado River.32 He noted, "Experience ought to have taught you by this time that it is impossible for you to exist as a community collected together in a city in the midst of another community, governed by other laws, than those you esteem paramount to all laws. You cannot be tolerated long in that manner of living, anywhere."33 These sentiments were those of many Missouri citizens in 1838 and of the Illinois anti-Mormons in the 1840s.

On October 29 in their regular meeting, the Twelve read and discussed the proposal along with information on routes west.34 Their later actions reveal the Twelve's decision to implement their own plan to remain loyal to the United States. They skirted any entangling alliance with the Missouri Backwoodsman and his friends but concluded that they should avoid moving in on old settlers in coastal California and Oregon.

The original proposal for the Territory of Deseret and the subsequent Provisional State of Deseret established in 1849 resembled in size and boundaries Backwoodsman's proposed independent commonwealth in eastern California. The Latter-day Saints would get themselves west, and they wished to govern themselves there as an American state without any interference from those whose motives they did not fully trust. They would remain a people apart in a new land of refuge.

Beginnings of the Exodus

Brigham Young's epistle to the Saints in October 1845 announced that the migration would begin "as early next spring as the first appearance of thrifty vegetation." The intent was to leave after a final dedication of the temple and the April general conference. Even then Young knew that attempts at arrest might force an earlier departure for at least the leading men and their families.35

A hint of this threat came in mid-September, shortly after marauders began burning houses on the plains. One of the vigilantes swore out complaints of treason against six members of the Twelve and one other Latter-day Saint. The charges listed military preparations of the Nauvoo Legion, political involvements of the Council of Fifty, and a supposed plan for an alliance with the Indians. The accused offered to meet with a constable from Carthage at the Masonic Hall. But the officer wanted to meet at A. G. Fellow's house on the prairie four miles from Carthage, a rendezvous point used in June 1844 for Joseph Smith's party.36 With the implications of the last deadly trip to Carthage embedded in their memories, the men ignored the invitation. Heber Kimball understood the intent of the legal papers. "I positively know men . . . who with uplifted hands, swore they would take President Brigham Young's life and my own," he told the October conference. Kimball's associates remained on alert. When they did appear before a judge in Carthage on the twenty-fourth of September, the charges were dismissed as unwarranted.37

The Twelve could not be certain that any government officer would protect their civil rights. Every rumor reaffirmed their conviction that the enemies of the church would persist until the new leaders were dead or the whole people expelled. These unsettling rumors, plus specific incidents during the next several weeks, only increased the jitteriness of the cautious leaders. In October, they heard reports that General Hardin had pledged to use his troops and three hundred anti-Mormon volunteers to "unroof every house in Nauvoo" until he had arrested Porter Rockwell and others believed implicated in the shooting of former Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs.38 John S. Fullmer had heard that apostates were encouraging federal officials to prevent the move west. Migration to Mexican California, they argued, would ally the Saints with a foreign power, an act of treason against the United States.39

That same month, the Twelve had a verbal confrontation with Major Warren over the posting of twenty or so Mormon watchmen on Nauvoo's outer perimeter to guard against invasion. When Warren threatened to place the county under martial law, the Council of Fifty asked Governor Ford to withdraw his troops. "Some of the house-burners are actually in the posse of state troops and are prowling round in Nauvoo every few days," the council declared. Ford spent three hours listening to Nauvoo delegates and then convinced them that his troops were necessary to maintain an uneasy truce until the spring departure. The delegates left with a promise from Ford. After the Saints' voluntary departure, George Miller reported, the governor would bring the house burners and murderers "to justice and hang every devil of them."40

During the last months of the year, the Twelve were threatened a number of times with arrest. A marshal from Iowa made two attempts to serve writs sworn out in Iowa charging the Twelve with creating counterfeit money at the Iowa home of Dr. Abiather Williams. Iowa's Half-breed Tract had a reputation as "a sanctuary for coiners, horse thieves, and other outlaws," but the apostles were not culpable.41

On December 23, federal officials, reportedly escorted from Springfield by state troops, attempted to deliver warrants on counterfeiting charges issued there by the grand jury of a United States circuit court.42 The officials asked permission to search the temple for Brigham Young and Amasa Lyman. In a diversionary tactic, coachman George D. Grant left the temple and pulled Young's carriage up to the door. Then William Miller, dressed in Brigham Young's cap and Heber C. Kimball's cloak, descended the stairs in company with several women, nodded to the marshal, and entered the carriage. The officers served Miller with a writ charging Brigham Young with counterfeiting. Miller objected and denied guilt. He was allowed to meet privately at the Mansion House with an attorney who joined in with the ruse, as did others who gathered around. The marshal hauled his captive and the attorney on a two-hour ride to Carthage. The charade on the marshal was discovered soon after they arrived. Several witnesses, including Sheriff Backenstos, verified that the man in custody was not Brigham Young. Miller later told friends in Nauvoo that he was kept awake that night by the guffaws of his attorney. Ever after it was remembered as the "Bogus Brigham" incident. Thomas Sharp agreed that the "Mormon hoax" was the best joke of the season.43

On the evening of December 30, temple officiators ended their work earlier than usual. Relieved from the tension of the previous days, they sought to lift their spirits and express their feelings about removal. Peter Hanson, working in the temple on a Danish translation of the Book of Mormon, picked up his fiddle. Elisha Averett joined in on his flute. They played "several lively airs, among the rest some very good lively dancing tunes. This was too much for the gravity of Brother Joseph Young, who indulged in [dancing] a hornpipe, and was soon joined by several others, and before the dance was over several French fours were indulged in." Brigham Young opened the first, and others soon joined in. "The spirit of dancing increased," William Clayton's diary notes, "until the whole floor was covered with dancers." Dancing and singing continued for an hour. Erastus Snow sang "Upper California." Elizabeth Ann Whitney sang a hymn in tongues. Her husband, Bishop Newel K. Whitney, interpreted it as a message about building the temple, meeting in it for the present festivities, and then departing into Indian country to begin converting Native Americans and gathering scattered Israel. Other similar musical evenings occurred in the temple until Brigham Young halted the practice on January 9. Apparently by then the mood was shifting from spiritual uplift to a festive mood unsuited to the sacred space.44

The fragile truce in Hancock County faced other challenges that added to the apprehension during the last months of 1845. In early November, fifty-seven-year-old Joshua Smith was arrested in Nauvoo merely for carrying a knife. Held in Carthage, he became violently ill after eating food provided by the militia. The sudden death of the church member was attributed to poisoning. A postmortem by three doctors confirmed the diagnosis. Nauvoo residents immediately labeled the death a murder and feared it would not be the last.45

Almost from the beginning, government officials who were asked for an opinion warned against Mexican California as a place of resettlement for the Saints. Most had suggested the contested Oregon country or other American territories. Even though church leaders had privately decided to settle in upper California, they allowed the public to believe the destination might be Oregon or Vancouver's Island. Only by keeping their plans confidential could they achieve them. But a few who knew of the upper California destination shared the secret. Apparently, it was a matter of discussion as far afield as Washington, D.C. Within Nauvoo's inner circle, a few believed that William Smith and other disaffected Saints were behind the effort to prevent removal by revealing plans for California.46

In mid-December 1845, Brigham Young received a letter from Samuel Brannan. This New York publisher had visited with the United States secretary of war and other cabinet members. Brannan reported that these men objected to the departure of an armed band of men from the United States either to California or Oregon. Nor, said Brannan, were they inclined to let the Saints remain in the United States. It sounded to Brannan like another effort at extermination. Young shared the news in the temple with the Twelve and the bishops. A response to Brannan sought to defuse the issue. In addition, letters written on December 17 sought help from several prominent state and national leaders, among them congressmen Stephen A. Douglas and John Wentworth and United States secretary of war William L. Marcy. Nauvoo's leaders asked their support in getting government contracts to build blockhouses or carry the mail along the Oregon Trail.47

Soon afterward, the Twelve stepped up their study of recently published reports of western regions and routes. Several of the quorum, meeting in the council room in the temple, read together from John C. Frémont's report of his visit to the Wind River Mountains in 1842 and to California and Oregon in 1843 to1844. Frémont's circuit through California had taken him through the Bear River Valley to the north end of the Great Salt Lake. These parts of the report and the carefully drafted maps of the Platte River route held special interest for the Twelve. They remembered Joseph Smith's inspired foretelling of a place of peace in the Rocky Mountains. Now the planners needed specifics as they prepared their trek to a new promised land.48 Four United States maps were hung on the council room walls as references.49

Another text sampled by the apostles was the 1845 Emigrants' Guide to Oregon and California published by Lansford Hastings. The guide prepared by this avid promoter of emigration described a time-saving cutoff west from Fort Bridger to the Great Salt Lake and on to California. Church leaders must have seen other published reports of western travelers and explorers. They knew of the expeditions of Charles Wilkes and B. L. E. Bonneville, but reports of these trips had little of value to offer. Still other publications would have merely fed the interest of the Mormon planners.50

From firsthand witnesses and from newspaper articles monitored over many preceding months, the Twelve were reassured in their decision. Publicly they would say only that what they called the next "resting place" for the Saints would be somewhere "in some good valley in the neighborhood of the Rocky Mountains." The Nauvoo high council used those words in its mid-January circular.51 Privately, church leaders had focused on the Great Salt Lake Valley. The January statement would not have jeopardized the Twelve's desire to be the first permanent American settlers in that region. For others who wondered where "some good valley" might be found, the options were legion. The Rocky Mountains extended all the way from the northern portions of the contested regions of Oregon territory into the northeastern regions of upper California. The range continued southward under other names to the boundary between Texas and New Mexico.

Church members who were not part of the presiding councils did wonder about just where they were headed. Their letters to friends and relatives reflected an understandable uncertainty. Many correspondents echoed the descriptions given in the October conference. They simply told their friends that they were headed to an unknown destination in the wilderness.52 Some Latter-day Saints suspected they would land somewhere in Mexican California. One Nauvoo writer who knew of the San Francisco Bay destination of New York Mormons on the chartered ship Brooklyn informed relatives, "I go to seek a happy home on the coast of the Pacific Ocean."53 Most would-be emigrants lacked the specific information available to such insiders as Parley P. Pratt, who told a friend in September that the destination would be eight hundred miles inland from the Pacific Coast. Pratt knew that the targeted destination lay somewhere between Utah Lake and the Bear River Valley.54

At the beginning of 1846, the Twelve focused on administering the endowment to as many worthy Saints as possible before leaving Nauvoo. That work had begun a month earlier, but many yet desired their temple blessings. They were not disappointed. For some, the spirit they felt in the House of the Lord was reminiscent of the apostolic day of Pentecost. Jacob Gates, who assisted in administering the endowments, noted in his journal: "The Ninth of January I stayed all Night in the Temple of the Lord. The Spirit of God seems to fill the House and cause every heart to rejoice with a joy unknown to the World of mankind . . . insomuch that the Brethren shouted for joy."55

From early January until the final company left the temple on February 7, endowment groups received the ordinances six days a week, with sessions underway some days from early morning until late at night. More than one hundred Saints were endowed on a typical day, two hundred or more on peak days, and more than five hundred made covenants with the Lord on each of the final two days.56

One of those who had waited patiently for the blessings of the temple was James Jones, an emigrant from England who had buried his wife at sea in the Caribbean. After settling in Nauvoo near British friends, he lost two sons from malaria contracted while they were working in St. Louis to support the family. A married son, Henry, had remained in England. Henry had joined the church but then left it. Father and son kept in touch across the miles. As James was preparing to leave Nauvoo with his daughter, he once more responded to the queries of his skeptical son and shared his feelings about the blessings of the restored gospel. "Once more, you have heard that there was to be a Temple built," he wrote,

and that the pattern was given to one who has sealed his testimony with his own blood. . . . In the midst of mobs and persecution that house is built. The Lord has accepted the same at our hands. It is consecrated and in that house I myself with thousands more have received our washings, anointings, and endowments. . . . Now this one thing is worth all and more than all the sorrows and afflictions I have had to pass through.57

As the ordinance work continued, so did negotiations toward selling the temple and preparations for the migration. Behind it all was the worry that legal actions might lead to the arrest, incarceration, and murder of Brigham Young, who was anxious to get on his way.58

A few days into the new year, a troubling message reached Nauvoo. Writing from Springfield to Sheriff Backenstos, Governor Ford said that he had learned of plans in Washington to halt the evacuation of Nauvoo. President Polk, he said, might "order up a regiment or two of the regular army," supported by the state militia. Ford said he thought it "very likely that the government at Washington will interfere to prevent the Mormons from going west of the Rocky Mountains." Ford later admitted that this letter and his other efforts to convince Nauvoo's leaders that federal intervention was certain were part of an intentional ploy. The governor had encouraged Polk to activate the soldiers, hoping that news of the order would precipitate an early and certain departure of the Twelve. Polk refused to cooperate, but the artifice, Ford acknowledged, "had its intended effect."59

The governor's message solidified a feeling that the pioneer company should leave Nauvoo ahead of the spring schedule. Facing possible arrest with the help of United States troops, the Twelve reflected on an earlier arrest on false charges. "Our danger," Brigham Young noted, "consists only in being held still by the authorities while mobs massacre us as Governor Ford held Joseph and Hyrum Smith while they were butchered." Planning for an early departure began on Sunday, January 11, when the Twelve met with the Council of Fifty for the first time in four months. The Fifty assembled in the temple council room in their capacity as the heads of emigrant companies. The captains of fifties and tens had reported that only 140 horses and 70 wagons were ready to go. Presumably everyone else had been waiting until spring drew closer. Acting upon the false premise that federal intervention would prevent the planned spring departure and wishing to avoid arrest, the council vowed on January 18 to use all their resources to help one another get away from Nauvoo early.60

It was probably around this time that Brigham Young received an answer to a question that the Twelve had not resolved through much study, discussion, and prayer over the previous year. Joseph Smith had talked often of a refuge in the Rocky Mountains. The Twelve had concluded as early as the spring of 1845 that the Lord had prepared a place of peace somewhere in the northern reaches of the Mexican province of upper California. Sometime between March and August, they had narrowed their focus to the region between the Bear River Valley on the north and Utah Lake on the south. But President Young desired more specific information. During January 1846, while in the temple administering endowments to the Saints, he would find time to retreat to his office. In a spirit of fasting and prayer, he sought the Lord's will. During one of these contemplative moments, he saw a vision in which Joseph Smith showed him the precise place of settlement for the Saints. According to John D. Lee, Brigham Young told the captains in one of their January planning meetings "that the saying of the Prophets would never be verified unless the House of the Lord should be reared in the Tops of the Mountains and the proud banner of liberty wave over the valley." Young also noted, "I know where the spot is." George A. Smith said later that the Prophet Joseph Smith had pointed out a mountaintop with an ensign flying above it and said, "Build under the point where the colors fall and you will prosper and have peace."61

The decision to move up the departure of church leaders prompted the Nauvoo high council to issue a public circular. The January 20 notice filled at least three purposes: to deny charges of counterfeiting, murder, robbery, and treason made against the church; to reaffirm the Saints' intent to leave as agreed upon; and to offer the sale of Latter-day Saint property at bargain prices.62 Although the Saints were not guilty of the recurring charges of counterfeiting, Brigham Young admitted privately to priesthood leaders that bogus land office coins were being minted in Nauvoo "by wagonloads." The makers, he said, blamed the Latter-day Saints to cover their own crime and to get revenge on Nauvoo officials who had refused to approve the business. To allay concerns that the Saints might inhabit a foreign territory, the high council adopted the popular American position of Manifest Destiny. The council defended America's right to occupy Oregon and pledged to help prevent foreign dominion there. Despite the wrongs committed against the church, the circular noted, "still we are Americans."63

The circular reminded readers that both sides had pledged to file no more lawsuits. "In good faith have we labored to fulfil this engagement. Governor Ford has also done his duty to further our wishes in this respect." The circular announced that an advance "company of pioneers, consisting mostly of young, hardy men, with some families," would go first, sometime in March, "to put in a spring crop, build houses," and prepare the way for those who would leave later in the spring. "These are destined to be furnished with an ample outfit; taking with them a printing press, farming utensils of all kinds, with mill irons and bolting cloths, seeds of all kinds, grain, etc."64

A few days after the release of the high council circular, Brigham Young informed priesthood leaders of plans and problems. Arrest attempts had made it necessary for the Twelve to be part of the pioneer company. To protect church property in the area, he said, "We shall drop all political operations and church government, and by so doing we may preserve our public buildings from the torch."65

Young opened the general migration to interested, law-abiding peoples of all faiths. "I look upon every man that is a true republican as bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh," he said. At the same time, he counseled church leaders to avoid pressuring lukewarm Saints to join the trek. All emigrants must be willing to support the Twelve. Two men in particular were making inroads with their appeal for followers. "If any wish to follow Sidney Rigdon or J. J. Strang I say let them go; we will cut them off from the church, and let them take their own course for salvation."66

Young acknowledged that some Latter-day Saints might die for their religion. He felt concern over the safety of the Twelve. In Iowa, there was talk of harrassment. According to one report, men in Keokuk dressed in Indian garb had participated in a mock war dance and then met "to concoct schemes to take the Twelve, when they cross the Mississippi or soon after."67

Of more immediate concern were ongoing legal problems, combined with new information to support rumors of planned federal intervention. Men seen prowling in Nauvoo were thought by the Saints to be state troops seeking the arrest of church leaders. In the East, Amos Kendall, late postmaster general in the Polk administration, told Sam Brannan that the government intended to disarm the migrating Saints on the pretext that they were planning to join another nation. Young received additional details of this report two days before leaving Nauvoo.68

With tensions high on both sides, Governor Ford feared a breakdown of civil control and the outbreak of armed conflict. His actions and those of his military officers were being misunderstood on both sides. Efforts to curb violence until the Saints could depart, he said, often "pleased neither the Mormons nor the anti-Mormons."69 In this light, it was not surprising that Sheriff Backenstos returned from a visit with Ford convinced that the Illinois chief executive had turned against the Saints. An attorney in Springfield informed Brigham Young that the governor had sided with General Hardin's proposal to declare martial law in Hancock County, suspend civil offices, and halt the collection of taxes. In fact, Ford was doing all he could to speed the departure of the Saints. Meanwhile, he had agreed, tax collection should be deferred, if only to prevent misuse of the funds in a time of civil disruption. But he argued strongly against the imposition of martial law over a civilian population. It was an unconstitutional action, he said, except in an extreme national emergency. To do so would deny constitutionally protected freedoms and would be the first step toward anarchy and then despotism.70

The climate of uncertainty in Hancock County only reinforced the need to reconsider plans for a spring departure. On February 2, the Twelve, trustees, and members of the first company met to refine the schedule. "We agreed," according to Brigham Young's history, "that it was imperatively necessary to start as soon as possible." He alerted the captains of hundreds and fifties to procure boats for transporting wagons and teams across the Mississippi and to have supplies ready for loading with four hours' notice. "Our enemies have resolved to intercept us whenever we start," Young told a hastily assembled meeting with the captains later that day. "I should like to push on as far as possible before they are aware of our movements."71

Besides a surge of activity in physical preparations, talk that the Twelve would be leaving soon created a surge on the temple that day. Hundreds had not been endowed. Young told an assembly at the temple of the urgency of his departure. "We should build more Temples," he said, "and have further opportunities to receive the blessings of the Lord, as soon as the saints were prepared to receive them." He was ready to get his wagons and start for the West. He walked away, but the crowd failed to disperse. They had sacrificed for the temple and wanted the blessings. "Looking upon the multitude and knowing their anxiety, as they were thirsting and hungering for the word," Young noted, "we continued at work diligently in the House of the Lord." An additional 295 people received endowments that day. While the president loaded his wagons, the ordinance work continued until Saturday, February 7, with around eleven hundred endowed on the final two days.72

On Sunday morning, the day after completing the ordinance work, the Twelve met in Brigham Young's room in the southeast corner of the temple, knelt around the altar, and dedicated the entire, almost finished building to God. "We asked his blessing upon our intended move to the west," Brigham's clerk recorded. "Also asked him to enable us some day to finish the Temple, and dedicate it to him, and we would leave it in his hands to do as he pleased; and to preserve the building as a monument to Joseph Smith." Then they left the temple. At a meeting in the grove later in the day, Brigham Young announced that the pioneer company would cross the river that week.73

In one of his last actions before leaving Nauvoo, Brigham Young asked Major Warren to communicate his thanks to Governor Ford for refusing to cooperate with those who wanted to arrest church leaders on groundless warrants. Warren informed the governor that Young believed "that it was your action alone which permitted him and the Mormons to leave the country."74

The selective departure from Nauvoo soon swelled into a surge of wagons, teams, livestock, and people ferrying across the cold Mississippi. On Wednesday, February 4, an advance party of scouts led by Charles Shumway left Nauvoo with fifteen wagons. They set up camp at a place they called "the west side of Jordan" and prepared to help others ferry across the river.75 On Friday, the sixth, Bishop George Miller, with his family and their six wagons, became the first of the authorities to cross into Iowa. Two days after that, Nauvoo's stake president, John Smith, and his clerk, Albert Carrington, took their families over. On Monday, February 9, George A. Smith sent his family across, as did some other church leaders. The Mississippi at Nauvoo, nearly nine-tenths of a mile across, soon became a busy river road serving a steady stream of refugees.76

Overloaded skiffs and unskilled helmsmen added confusion to the ferrying. When one of the skiffs started sinking, a flatboat came to the rescue and got the passengers aboard, then someone squirted tobacco juice into the eye of one of Thomas Grover's oxen that were attached to a wagon on the flatboat. The beast lunged into the river, taking with it the other ox and Grover's wagon. The accident tore the sideboards off the flatboat. The vessel began to fill with water. The men headed the floundering craft toward the Nauvoo shore, but it sank short of its destination. A few of the frantic passengers climbed atop the wagon, still visible above the water. "Some were on feather beds, sticks of wood, lumber, or any thing they could get hold of," a witness reported. After a time, an empty boat, skiffs, and sailboats rescued the cold and wet people. Two oxen drowned, but the wagon was later pulled out of the river with most of its baggage wet but otherwise undamaged. To prevent similar problems, police chief Hosea Stout marshaled his men to operate many of the flatboats, skiffs, and "some old lighters" [barges]. Working from dawn until way into the night each day, they kept as many as six ferries running.77

The excitement of a sinking skiff added to the confusion of a day already busy with departing emigrants and punctuated by a fire in the temple. When someone noticed flames on the temple roof at 3:30 that afternoon, residents working or living close by rushed to the building. From his home on the flats, Brigham Young saw the blaze but felt powerless. "If it is the will of the Lord that the Temple be burned, instead of being defiled by the Gentiles," he told his family, "Amen to it." Ordinance work had ceased in the temple, and its only long-term use was as an asset to rent or sell. At the temple site, Willard Richards organized a bucket brigade. Lines of men and women passed water-filled buckets into the building and up the stairs to the attic and roof. The fire had started from an overheated stovepipe drying clothing in an upper room. It burned for half an hour, feeding on the wood shingles in a ten-foot to sixteen-foot circle surrounding the stovepipe. By the time Young arrived, the fire was out. Men on the deck roof shouted a triumphant "Hosannah!" to him. As the crowd dispersed, state troops arrived to investigate, but temple doorkeepers kept them out. That night, a large number of Saints gathered in the temple and celebrated the victory "with music and rejoicing" until two o'clock the next morning. The temple was safe now for whatever future uses could be made of it.78

On February 10, the Twelve appointed Joseph Young, senior president of the seventy, to preside as long as members remained in the area. This concluded the formal business of organizing Nauvoo for the departure of the Twelve. On the fourteenth, Parley P. Pratt crossed the Mississippi with his six emigrant wagons, three-seated carriages, and a one-horse wagon pulled by the family's favorite steed, Old Dick. The small wagon carried cooked provisions ready for use. The next day, a Sunday, Brigham Young left his unsold house and turned his teams down Parley Street to the ferry landing. Thomas Sharp reported this procession as thirteen wagons. Joined by George A. Smith and the Willard Richards family, the party crossed the river and made its way to Sugar Creek. This temporary camp in Ambrosia township, nine miles from the Mississippi River, in Lee County, Iowa, was well supplied with timber for fires and with a good water supply. Throughout 1846, Sugar Creek served as a temporary stopping place for the westward-bound Latter-day Saints.79

John Taylor celebrated "the great move of the Saints out of the United States" in an editorial in the next-to-last issue of Nauvoo's church newspaper. "About two thousand are ready and crossing the Mississippi to pioneer the way, and make arrangements for summer crops at some point between this and the 'Pacific,'" he announced in the February 1 issue. Then he pleaded, "Let us go let us go."80

The spirit of removal had already captured the hearts and minds of Nauvoo's Latter-day Saints. But many of their non-Mormon kinfolk elsewhere opposed the decision. Letters written to Nauvoo invited the departing relatives to return to their ancestral homes in the East. "I think it a wild goose chase to cross the rocky mountains," a friend in Pennsylvania told Edward Hunter. A relative of Joseph Heywood wrote, "The romance of traveling 2000 miles in an ox waggon is pleasant enough when contemplated by a quiet fire-side, but the tedious reality will present a different picture."81 Many writers imagined their Nauvoo relations heading off to a grave in the wilderness or into a country where there would be no further communication.82

Such comments typically left the Nauvoo emigrant unconvinced. These Saints wanted to stay with the church and had been convinced of the need to leave Illinois. A folk song making the rounds in Nauvoo captured their feelings. It began:

Early next spring we'll leave Nauvoo And on our journey we'll pursue. We'll go and bid the mob farewell And let them go to heaven or hell. Chorus: So on our way to California In the spring we'll take our journey: Far above the Arkansas' fountain We'll pass between the Rocky Mountain.83

When anti-Mormons in Warsaw learned that the general departure had not waited for spring, they worried that Iowa's winter weather might discourage other Latter-day Saints. Any Mormons who stayed behind would frustrate the anti-Mormon agenda.84 Even the scheduled pioneers seemed stalled. The first members of Emigrating Company No. 1 to leave Nauvoo waited at Sugar Creek nearly two weeks for the camp to gather. Not until Brigham Young arrived did things get organized. On February 17, "acting the part of a father to everybody," he issued the first of many instructions to the men of the Camp of Israel. Standing in his wagon to counsel those who had encircled the vehicle, he said, "We will have no laws we cannot keep, but we will have order in the camp. If any want to live in peace when we have left this [place], they must toe the mark." Young enlisted all the emigrants at Sugar Creek to join the pioneer camp, whether originally designated to do so or not. After making organizational assignments, Young returned to his tent and reorganized his own division of four companies of ten.85 The company decided to wait for the tabernacle canvas,86 the artillery,87 and certain public property before moving on.

Organizational matters occupied much of the attention of the Twelve over the next two weeks until the Camp of Israel moved out of Sugar Creek and headed west. During this time, Brigham Young set more rules for the pioneer company and clarified its purposes, procured supplies needed for the journey, and revised the schedule of travel. Some exiles had left Nauvoo before readying themselves for the trip or before their scheduled departure. Young made sure everyone at the temporary camp was assigned to an organized emigrating company. With a kindly frankness that won immediate support, he praised the men for their devotion and urged upon them improvement.88

During this time, President Young resolved for a larger group a question concerning the destination of the Saints. In mid-February, he called a formal council meeting with seven members of the Twelve in a quiet spot half a mile east of the Sugar Creek camp. The subject was information in letters from Samuel Brannan that Young had brought from Nauvoo. The letters described one product of an effort Young had launched two months earlier to enlist federal help with the migration by seeking federal contracts along the Oregon Trail. President James K. Polk had already suggested to Congress the need for such contracts. But Polk found the Mormon options politically difficult to endorse.89

The Twelve hoped for federal help but were prepared to accomplish the removal on their own. Since mid-November, Sam Brannan had been organizing an emigrant company in New York. He expected to benefit from the proposed contract. But, growing impatient when the effort stalled, the Eastern Saints chartered their own ship, the Brooklyn, and sailed in February. Still optimistic about some eventual government business to aid the Saints, these emigrants no longer expected to see a federal "highway cast up for the deliverance of God's people."90 Finding others interested, William I. Appleby began recruiting for a second shipload of Saints to sail from New York in May, but he dropped the project for a lack of means. In November, after he had visited with church leaders at the Missouri River, Jesse C. Little renewed the effort to move the Eastern Saints westward. Brigham Young had proposed an overland route and promised to shuttle the poor partway. Little shared Young's counsel in a circular, explaining that to conserve the strength of oxen for the trek to the mountains, the emigrants would charter steamships at St. Louis for the last leg of the journey to Council Bluffs. He expected as many as two thousand emigrants to make the journey.91

As the Camp of Israel moved westward across Iowa, a more acceptable assistance offer arrived from Washington. Events in the West were moving rapidly. During the last months of 1845, Polk had been attempting to resolve a long-standing financial claim against Mexico by purchasing New Mexico and upper California. Then, on December 29, Congress admitted Texas as the twenty-eighth state with a western boundary at the Rio Grande. Mexico challenged the line. Following a military clash within the disputed territory in late April, Polk declared war on Mexico. The United States government now found additional American settlers for California desirable.

The war presented a new way for the Latter-day Saints to secure government help in their forced removal. Young had asked Jesse C. Little, presiding officer over the Saints remaining in the East, to represent the church in Washington. With Thomas L. Kane advising him, Little offered to send one thousand Latter-day Saints from the Eastern states to California as settlers and a thousand men from camps scattered across Iowa for service in the American army. In a letter to Polk, Little included a hint that was intended to force Polk's hand. An absence of federal help, he said, might "compel us to be foreigners." Polk had given the shipping contract to others. Because he felt uncomfortable with an independent thousand-member Mormon militia and needed no more volunteers for the popular war anyway, Polk ordered General Stephen W. Kearny at Fort Leavenworth to organize a body half that size as a battalion in the United States Army of the West. Thus came about Kane's mission west with a message to Kearny authorizing the call of the Mormon Battalion.92

The Latter-day Saint contingent included 541 soldiers and more than one hundred others, among them wives enlisted as laundresses. This participation demonstrated Latter-day Saint loyalty to the nation and got the battalion across the country at government expense. The men's pay helped their families and others in the emigration.93 Even though some of the soldiers saw Polk's recruitment offer negatively, the opportunity seemed to the Twelve an appropriate federal response to the request for assistance. At very least, it was a partial redress for the wrongs of earlier years.94

The original intent was to get the pioneer company as far as the Missouri River by April. That would allow a thrust across the Rockies in time to plant summer crops. By late February, with six inches of snow on the ground and storms delaying departure from the Sugar Creek Encampment, the Twelve decided to seek permission from Iowa governor James Clark to raise crops on the public land of the territory or to rent established farms. Their letter appealed to the governor's sympathy. Thousands were leaving "their peaceful homes and firesides, their property and farms, and their dearest constitutional rights to wander in the barren plains, and sterile mountains of western wilds" rather than face extermination, the letter explained. With the governor's permission, the Saints established large farms at places that they named Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah.95

A roll call on February 18 counted about five hundred people and between three hundred and four hundred wagons in the encampment, most of the people organized into tens, fifties, and hundreds.96 That evening, after setting up the wagon shuttle for emigrants, Brigham Young and Heber Kimball returned to Nauvoo for three days to conduct additional church business. They felt comfortable in making the trip because word had just arrived "stating that there were no hostile intentions on the part of the U.S. Government toward Mormon immigrants." The reassuring news had reached the City of Joseph through two channels from state officials in Springfield and directly from an Illinois congressman. "The subject of the Mormons immigrating in armed bodies had been presented to the President," the letter said. "He deemed it of sufficient importance to call together his Cabinet and the conclusion was that if they stopped our immigrants they might with the same propensity stop all, and they decided none should be stopped on account of their religion."97

While in Nauvoo, the two apostles called a meeting in the temple to counsel anxious members. The new truss floor had just been completed in the first-floor room. The weight of the crowd caused a cracking sound as the floor settled on the truss girders underneath. The sound so frightened the congregation that some men overreacted and broke window sashes and glass in several windows in their attempt to flee the building. "Men plunged out like mad cats upon the frozen ground and stones below," Norton Jacob reported. One man broke an arm and bruised his face; another suffered a fractured leg. Failing in his efforts to calm the crowd, President Young dismissed the meeting and reassembled it in a foot of snow at the grove, where he and Orson Hyde spoke on apostasy and James J. Strang.98

After returning to Sugar Creek, Brigham Young met with the Twelve and captains of hundreds to resume preparations for moving the camp toward its westward destination. The men selected a route leading up the divide between the Des Moines and the Missouri Rivers. They dispatched Stephen Markham's pioneer company along the designated route to plot the course, to bridge sloughs and streams, and to select prairie sites for summer cropland in central Iowa.99

The emigrant companies of the Sugar Creek Encampment left in stages beginning that day. As spring broke on the mellow soil of Iowa Territory, the westward heading wagons slogged toward their immediate destination on the Missouri. For a few weeks, the roads were nearly impassable, but soon the soils dried and the way became more easily trod. Brigham Young established a second temporary camp about fifty-five miles west of Nauvoo at Richardson's Point, where his party rested for twelve rainy days in March. From this site, he wrote to his brother Joseph at Nauvoo, expressing his relief at being away from the threats of false arrest. "I am so free from bondage at this time," he wrote, "that Nauvoo looks like a prison to me. It looks pleasant ahead, but dark to look back."100

At Garden Grove, 150 miles from Nauvoo, Brigham Young issued one of his declarations of intent that helped define the march from Nauvoo to a new place of peace in the western wilderness. Under rainy skies on a Sunday morning, and before a congregation of three hundred, he rallied his people:

He that falters or makes a misstep, can never regain that what he loses. Some have started with us and have turned back, and perhaps more will, but I hope better things of you my brethren. We have set out to find a land and a resting place, where we can serve the Lord in peace. We will leave some here because they cannot go farther at present. They can stay here for a season and recruit, and by and by pack up and come on, while we go a little farther and lengthen out the cords and build a few more stakes, and continue on until we can gather all the saints, and plant them in a place where we can build the house of the Lord in the tops of the mountains.

Orson Pratt endorsed this message. It had been exactly eight years to the day, he said, since the Twelve had departed from the foundation of the House of the Lord in Far West, Missouri, for their mission in the British Isles. Even before that time, he said, Joseph Smith had contemplated sending a company of young men on a pioneering expedition to find a location west of the Rocky Mountains, which, when proven with crops, would become a gathering place for families.101

During the trek to Garden Grove, William Clayton received welcome news from Nauvoo. His youngest wife, Diantha, who had remained behind with her parents, had given birth to a son. Clayton had experienced the cold rains of early April and had felt discouragement firsthand. He remembered Brigham Young's acknowledgment that some might die while establishing a new place of refuge. Now, celebrating the good news from Nauvoo, Clayton rewrote the words to an old English tune he'd sung for years, "All Is Well." His new trail song encouraged the migrating Saints not to fear the toil and labor of the hard journey. If they would but gird up their loins for the effort, he wrote, God would protect them. The journey into the wilderness would bring its rewards:

We'll find the place which God for us prepared, Far away in the West, Where none shall come to hurt or make afraid; There the Saints will be blessed. We'll make the air with music ring, Shout praises to our God and King; Above the rest this chorus swell All is well! all is well!102

Young's group, with Clayton along as the president's scribe, reached the Missouri River in mid-June. There, on Pottawatomie Indian lands west of the river, they established a resting place called Winter Quarters. Because of the lateness of the season, the planned pioneer thrust across the Rockies was postponed until the spring of 1847. Meanwhile, the men built a ferry and concentrated on the arduous task of getting the emigrant families, their wagons and teams, and the cannons of the Nauvoo Legion across the river. The size of the first season's migration would eventually make necessary other way stations on both sides of the Missouri River.

The new settlements in the middle Missouri River Valley blossomed with the constant flow of exiles from Nauvoo, where the task continued of transplanting a people. At least two thousand left Nauvoo during the initial winter departure in 1846 and perhaps as many more from settlements in the surrounding countryside.103 Initially, the moderate winter weather had made ferrying the standard way for these Saints to cross the Mississippi River into Iowa. Then, cold winds from the Northwest dropped the temperatures. On February 19, a snowstorm pelted Nauvoo and the temporary camp across the river. Over the next two days, ice floes in the Mississippi began to catch along the banks of the river. Even though these chunks of ice made crossing the river dangerous, a few people attempted it, among them Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and John Taylor in a heavily loaded skiff. Temperatures dropped as the storm passed. Another storm swept in from the Northwest on February 24, bringing with it severe cold. That night, temperatures dropped to twelve degrees below zero under clear skies, not unusual in Nauvoo for this time of year. Above Montrose, the Mississippi River was frozen over. The following morning, Charles C. Rich arrived at the Sugar Creek camp from Nauvoo. He had walked across the river. For several days, daytime temperatures measured on Orson Pratt's thermometer did not rise above eighteen degrees Fahrenheit.104

The cold weather now facilitated the migration. The ice bridge allowed foot-traffic and loaded wagons to cross the frozen Mississippi. This was a common occurrence most winters, sometimes as early as November, but more often in the early months of the year.105 At Warsaw, the Mississippi had remained frozen during the previous winter from late November until the end of January.106 The frozen crust on the river at Nauvoo compensated for time lost to the Saints by the running ice. Nelson Whipple found at least one-third of the surface covered with uneven "ice-blocks that had stopped in the strong current and frozen together." Crossing on foot, he said, "we wound our way from one to another until we reached the other shore." A few days later, he recrossed the mile-wide stretch again, this time in Judson Stoddard's sleigh.107

As the time arrived for the planned spring departure, thousands more from Nauvoo and beyond were on the road behind the Camp of Israel. Many of the men who had left with the first groups returned, with or without permission, to get their wives and children after the main camp reached Richardson's Point. Willard Richards set up a post office in his tent to receive and dispatch the mail carried back and forth between the camp and the Saints at Nauvoo.108 The early winter departure and the more general, planned mass movement in the spring soon left Nauvoo a city with a small remnant of Latter-day Saints unable then to leave but anxiously preparing themselves for the trek beyond the Rockies.

Those who left Nauvoo during the spring and summer of 1846 found themselves as had many of the February exiles ill-prepared for the experience. Overburdened with household goods, bedding, crockery ware, and other such things, and lacking sufficient food for themselves and their animals, they soon spread out from the emigrant road to exchange excess baggage "for corn, oats, and other provisions." Some found work along the way. They plowed fields, split rails, built houses, and contracted for any other work they could get in exchange for supplies.109

Brigham Young put a positive twist on the forced exile. Recognizing its necessity, he told the emigrant companies during a sermon in mid-April 1846 that he was satisfied that the decision would prove to be salvation to the Latter-day Saints as a people. Still dismayed with a few who justified stealing from settlers along the way in retribution for thefts from the emigrants, he chastised those guilty but praised the others. It was a difficult experience at best, he acknowledged. "I did not think there had ever been a body of people since the days of Enoch placed under the same unpleasant circumstances that this people have been, where there was so little grumbling; and I was satisfied that the Lord was pleased with the majority of the 'Camp of Israel.'"110

In a later reflection on the departure, Young's historian summarized the abandonment of Nauvoo with an entry inserted at the end of the February 1846 chronology:

Our homes, gardens, orchards, farms, streets, bridges, mills, public halls, magnificent Temple, and other public improvements we leave as a monument of our patriotism, industry, economy, uprightness of purpose and integrity of heart; and as a living testimony of the falsehood and wickedness of those who charge us with disloyalty to the Constitution of our country, idleness and dishonesty.111

As the directness of this recital demonstrates, the Latter-day Saints left Nauvoo bearing the burden they had brought to Illinois from Missouri. In a country that guaranteed the right of religious freedom, they had been denied not only the right to build a gathered community but the opportunity to enjoy the fruits of their temporal accomplishments. The Missouri experience had been repeated with some variation in Illinois.

The generation that lived through that era would never forget it. When challenged by an arriving federal army in their mountain retreat a decade later, they would recall the experience. The words of a new hymn composed at that time by Charles W. Penrose linked the experiences of the three gathering places. It anticipated that the exiled Saints and their children to the third and fourth generation would "remember the wrongs of Missouri; [and] forget not the fate of Nauvoo."112 For the Latter-day Saints, the spiritual and the temporal were one. Having pursued their goals wherever they lived with vigor and self-confidence, the Saints would accept their role as a persecuted and exiled people of promise.

Brigham Young led the well-remembered 1847 pioneer trek to the Great Salt Lake Valley and then returned to Winter Quarters one last time. After a month spent discussing the need to reorganize the First Presidency and resolving concerns, the Quorum of the Twelve met in Orson Hyde's home near Miller's Hollow, and on Sunday, December 5, 1847, the apostles reorganized the First Presidency. Elder Hyde nominated Young, who then selected Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as his counselors. The following day, the council talked of plans for building a temple in Great Salt Lake City. On December 27, church members sustained the new First Presidency during a conference in the log tabernacle at Miller's Hollow (renamed Kanesville six months later in honor of Colonel Thomas L. Kane). At the same meeting, the Prophet's uncle John Smith was sustained as patriarch to the church.113

The apostolic interregnum that began with Joseph Smith's death had now ended. Church headquarters moved four times in sixteen years now raised an ensign in the tops of the mountains, while the Latter-day Saints enjoyed a refuge from the storm of political controversy. Brigham Young never again traveled east of the Rockies. When he left Winter Quarters on May 26, 1848, to return to the new Great Salt Lake City that he had founded in the valleys of the mountains, a new period in Latter-day Saint history was already underway.114

NotesChapter 18. Leaving Nauvoo

Epigraph: The Twelve to Governor James Clark of Iowa Territory, February 28, 1846, HC 7:601 (CHC 3:44); Nauvoo High Council, Circular to the Church, T&S 6 (January 20, 1846): 1096 (HC 7:570).
