Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 19

Transition and Expulsion

Why is it that we have been at all this outlay and expense [to purchase lands and build houses and the temple], and then are called to leave it? . . . The people of God always were required to make sacrifices, and if we have a sacrifice to make, [I am] in favor of its being something worthy of the people of God. We do not want to leave a desolate place, to be a reproach to us but something that will be a monument of our industry and virtue. Parley P. Pratt, October 6, 1845

It is with much satisfaction that I am able to state, that the people called Mormon have removed from the state. The great body of them removed voluntarily; but, a small remnant were barbarously expelled with force, and in a manner which reflects but little credit on the state and its institutions. Governor Thomas Ford to the Illinois Legislature,December 7, 1846

Throughout 1846, Nauvoo was in a time of transition. The management of church affairs, the makeup of the city, and the community's relationship with the old citizens of Hancock and surrounding counties was in constant flux. After the Twelve and other general and stake officers left for the West, Nauvoo was reduced from its ecclesiastical status as the headquarters stake of Zion to a small branch. The local president, Joseph Young, looked after the rapidly shrinking group of Latter-day Saints. He acted alone, with neither counselors nor a high council. In March, the Twelve invited Orson Hyde to remain in Nauvoo to oversee completion of the temple in their absence. He dealt with general issues and public affairs, while Joseph Young acted as presiding elder over the branch.1

When bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller left in February, their responsibilities for financial and temporal affairs were assumed by five special trustees. At the time of their public appointment on January 24, 1846, Almon W. Babbitt, Joseph L. Heywood, and John S. Fullmer were charged with preparing the Nauvoo Temple for dedication. In addition, the Twelve asked them to find buyers for unsold church and private property. Two other trustees, Henry W. Miller and John M. Bernhisel, accepted the task of completing the Nauvoo House. With Brigham Young's concurrence, William Weeks transferred his duties as supervising architect of the two buildings to Truman O. Angell and delivered the plans and designs to him.2

The trustees felt considerable pressure to sell the property. They found less support for the construction projects in a city being evacuated. With so much attention on preparing to leave, volunteers were hard to find, but the trustees kept work going on the temple with hired laborers. Some of the men believed the projects were continued "so as to employ the brethren until they can sell their property and prepare to move." It was actually more than this. The Saints wanted to fulfill the 1841 revelation and avoid its warning: If they failed to complete the temple, the Lord would withhold promised blessings.3

For most, finishing the Nauvoo House seemed much the less important of the two projects, despite the revealed mandate of 1841. The Twelve had postponed the project in September 1845 and given the temple priority. Finding no interest in reviving it, hotel trustees Miller and Bernhiseljoined the migration. An Ohio investor had offered to buy the unfinished building, but Emma Smith held title to the lot. Brigham Young asked the temple trustees to manage the property and resolve Emma Smith's claims. "The stockholders are scattered and cannot be consulted," Young said. But Emma sold the property to a buyer from Quincy.4

On Thursday evening, April 30, 1846, a small invited group met in the House of the Lord. Joseph Young led them in a prayer of dedication to mark the essential completion of the temple. Wilford Woodruff, who had recently returned from England, participated in these private services, along with Orson Hyde and about seventeen others, all clothed in white temple robes. Young, senior president of the seventy, dedicated the completed temple "and all that pertained thereto to the Lord, as an offering to Him as an evidence of the willingness of His people to fulfill His commandments, and build His holy house, even at the risk of their lives, and the sacrifice of all their labor and earthly goods." Hyde told a congregation the next Sunday that during the prayer, "while the earth was wrapped in the mantle of darkness, . . . the glory of the Lord shone throughout the room in matchless splendor." The elders rejoiced that the Saints had proven wrong the prophecies of Sidney Rigdon that the temple would not be finished and the threats of vigilantes that the building would not be dedicated. Hyde recalled the "oppression, robbery, burning, bloodshed, and murder" suffered over the preceding five years. He said the Saints "as it were, had to work with the trowel in one hand and the sword in the other." "At the close of the dedication," Woodruff noted, "we raised our voices in the united shout of Hosanna to God and the Lamb which entered the heavens to the joy and consolation of our hearts."5

The public attended services the following day in the main floor assembly room, each individual paying an admission fee of one dollar to help the trustees meet the payroll for construction workers. Music was provided by a choir with instrumental accompaniment. After Orson Hyde offered a public prayer of dedication, Almon Babbitt spoke for ninety minutes on the inspired design of the Nauvoo Temple and of a temple even more glorious to be built in the tops of the mountains. Babbitt reminded the Saints that to enjoy God's promised blessings, they must strictly observe their gospel covenants. Hyde began a speech on the nature of man that he concluded the following Sunday, observing "that man existed before the foundation of the world, and his chief end was to become even as God."6

Some of those who had left Nauvoo and were still camped along the Mississippi in Iowa returned for this special occasion. How many is not known. One who did was Elvira Stevens, a fourteen-year-old orphan under the care of relatives. She crossed the river to experience the spiritual power of the dedicatory services and then returned twice more just to feel the Spirit within the House of the Lord. She explained, "The heavenly power was so great, I then crossed and recrossed to be benefited by it, as young as I was." Elvira was yet to receive the temple ordinances, but for Wilford Woodruff the saving power he had experienced was the crucial thing for which to be grateful. "The Saints had laboured faithfully and finished the temple," he wrote, "and were now received as a church with our dead. This is glory enough for building the temple, and thousands of the Saints have received their endowment in it. And the light will not go out."7

The temple's dedication closed another chapter in Nauvoo's religious life. After more than five years, the Saints had met their commitment to build a dwelling place for the Lord. The administration of temple ordinances had been suspended in February, but the building served other religious purposes. The remaining Saints enjoyed the Lord's house as a place of learning and a place of prayer. At preaching meetings held in the main floor hall at least monthly during 1846, the Saints heard from resident church authorities. In addition, a small group met every morning and evening during the summer in prayer meetings.8

Selling Out and Moving on

Although completing the temple had great symbolic significance to the Saints, most of them had already participated in ordinances administered in rooms dedicated for that purpose. Of more immediate concern to those still preparing to head west was the sale of their homes and farms. Many of these people had no other way to buy a wagon and team and the provisions needed for the trek.

The selling that had begun with the October 1845 removal agreement continued under the direction of the trustees for nearly three years, longer than they had expected. They assisted resident Latter-day Saints in finding buyers and represented those who had left without selling. They were specifically charged with helping the poor buy outfits.9 The trustees offered several public buildings for sale in Nauvoo, including the Masonic Hall, Concert Hall, and Arsenal. They also advertised themselves as agents for two hundred houses and lots and twenty thousand acres of farmland within eight miles of the city.10

Many potential buyers recognized the bargain prices being asked for rich prairie land already fenced and plowed. In 1846 and 1847, the agents sold more than two hundred parcels of land at prices ranging from one hundred to one thousand dollars. Much of the land was bartered for goods. The handsome brick houses in Nauvoo offered similar opportunities for buyers. At the high end were the sale of Heber Kimball's home for thirty-five yoke of oxen (worth at least $1,000) and Joseph Young's house for $650 cash. The trustees realized from 15 percent to 40 percent of the normal value of the Saints' property and eventually sold practically all of the developed lots and land.11 They felt pressure from all sides in every negotiation. From time to time, unhappy clients circulated complaints of maltreatment or malpractice, but, John Fullmer noted, "We do all that God gives us wisdom and ability to do." To protect the title to church-owned lots, Almon Babbitt attended a public auction in May 1847 and bid against local residents to prevent them from getting the land for back property taxes.12

Prospects for sales dwindled after the second year. The trustees had helped all leave who would go, said Fullmer, and "we alone are left to tell the tale." Brigham Young invited the agents "to leave all 'to the owls and the bats' and repair to headquarters without unnecessary delay, as best [they] could." Fullmer and Heywood transferred their agency to others and departed with their families in May 1848. They were replaced ten weeks later by two local citizens as agents and a third man as secretary. Babbitt, who had replaced Bernhisel in July 1846, stayed on for a time to help the new agents negotiate sales.13

In the weeks prior to the dedication of the temple, the trustees had continued to seek a suitable renter for the sacred building. In April, a well-to-do New Orleans Catholic offered to buy it and other Nauvoo property for two hundred thousand dollars. Brigham Young was by then camped at Garden Grove, three-and-one-half days' journey west of Nauvoo. Orson Hyde wrote for counsel, because the Twelve and a church conference had authorized the trustees only to rent the temple. Hyde suggested that both the Nauvoo and the Kirtland Temples be sold, with the proceeds going to help Nauvoo's poor emigrate westward. At an Iowa council meeting in April, church leaders agreed after some discussion that the temples were of no use if members could not live in the two abandoned gathering places. They concluded that the buildings would be better protected from vandalism in private hands. If the Saints were ever able to redeem their private dwellings, certainly "they could redeem the Temple also." The decision was sustained in subsequent meetings in Iowa and in Nauvoo. The Twelve later set two hundred thousand dollars as a minimum sale price for the temple, one-quarter of its estimated cost.14

At a gathering in early May in Garden Grove, Brigham Young reminded the Saints that the revelations allowed flexibility in designating places for temple cities. The church had shifted its focus from Missouri to Nauvoo and now would abandon that city and Kirtland for a new place of refuge beyond the Rocky Mountains. "Joseph Smith said that where the keys of the Kingdom were, there would be the place to gather," Young taught. "Wherever the Twelve and Council are, there will the keys be, and the place of Gathering." Temples would be built in gathering places, whether in the City of Zion or her stakes.15

Meanwhile, the trustees aggressively pursued the purchase offer for the Nauvoo Temple. Babbitt and Heywood journeyed to St. Louis in late June to meet with the agent of a wealthy New Orleans investor but accomplished nothing. A year later, an offer of seventy-five thousand dollars from the Catholic church for the temple and other Nauvoo property failed because of a reported defect in the title. Soon after that disappointment, trustee John S. Fullmer informed a relative, "The Temple is still unsold, and I do not know but the God of Heaven intends to have it so remain as a standing monument of our sacrifice, and as a witness against this nation. Sold or unsold, I should think it such as we shall not be able at best to get one dollar in twenty of what it cost." In November 1848, Babbitt deeded the temple to David T. and Esther M. LeBaron, his brother-in-law and sister-in-law, for a listed value of five thousand dollars. Perhaps this action was taken simply to clear the title, because the LeBarons then gave Babbitt power of attorney to continue seeking a buyer for the property.16

Meanwhile, in the Hancock Eagle in late April 1846, the trustees advertised the Kirtland Temple for sale. Completed just ten years earlier, it was no longer needed by a church in exile. The trustees suggested its suitability for a school, perhaps aware that a Kirtland minister was already teaching a school there. Dissident Latter-day Saints in control of the building were allowing other religious, educational, and civic groups to use it. But no one offered to buy the temple, and after a few years it fell into disrepair.17

The return to "normalcy" in Hancock County removed Nauvoo from prominence as a center of political influence. County residents prided themselves on their achievement in expelling the Latter-day Saints. The future seemed certain to offer more typical relationships in business, religion, and politics. New owners took over some of the shops of Nauvoo. Ministers arrived to serve the community's religious needs. New citizens moved into the empty houses. In all, the transition progressed rather quietly. Even though Mormon political influence ended when church leaders left, the most strident of the Anti-Mormon Party saw in the few remaining Saints the potential for a new challenge.

Discontinuance of the two Latter-day Saint newspapers created an immediate business and political opportunity in Nauvoo. Brigham Young was barely out of Nauvoo when William E. Matlack announced plans on February 23, 1846, to publish a replacement for the weekly Nauvoo Neighbor. It issued from the same printing shop, using the Times and Seasons presses and type.18 In launching his venture with the Hancock Eagle, Matlack summarized the transformation in civil, ecclesiastical, and domestic affairs just beginning in the dwindling city of the Saints:

Nauvoo and its immediate suburbs, until recently, contained over 15,000 inhabitants the greater part of whom were known as "Mormons" of these, some two or three thousand have already left together with an equal number from the country. A majority of those remaining, will, in due season depart upon their pilgrimage towards the setting sun. The high council is dissolved, and the church organization has been entirely broken up to be reestablished, we opine, in some distant region whose waters flow into the Pacific Ocean. The Twelve with their thousands of followers have abandoned their Temple and their city; with them, goes all that the enemies of Mormonism regard as inimical to the genius of our institutions and the well being of the community at large.19

It was indeed the beginning of a transition that would introduce what Matlack called a "new order of things" in Nauvoo. Friends of the Saints who had benefited from the boomtown atmosphere noted the difference as Nauvoo's population began to leave in earnest. In mid-March, with removal entering its busiest stage, merchants Hiram and Phineas Kimball informed Brigham Young, "Business is very dull and Nauvoo appears to be almost forsaken and looks as desolate as a sheep pasture." Three months later, economic vibrancy was even further deteriorated. The trustees worried about their ability to find buyers for the remaining properties. "Nauvoo is becoming anything but desirable," John S. Fullmer reported.20 The view that Nauvoo had contributed in a positive way to the economic life of its region was widely held. More than a decade after Nauvoo was evacuated, a land dealer forty miles upriver, in Henderson County, observed, "Since Mormons have left our midst business is falling away. . . . The Mormon people . . . had business sense, and in a few years, Nauvoo will be no more. I believe if Joseph Smith were still living we would all be richer."21

For some Hancock County residents, the "pilgrimage towards the setting sun" described by Matlack's prospectus did not happen fast enough. If the editor's estimate is correct, no more than one-fourth of the county's Latter-day Saints left during the first month of the exodus. Remaining for later migration were between nine thousand and eleven thousand people. Most of these residents abandoned their homes between March and the end of May 1846. Some who left during the spring months headed not west across Iowa but into neighboring regions to find work. A few had decided not to follow the Twelve west nor to remain in Nauvoo. Citizens of Warsaw noted three or four Mormon wagons from Nauvoo passing through their community headed south in early April. The migrants were escorted by two of Major William B. Warren's soldiers, allegedly for protection.22

When Governor Ford established the Hancock Guard essentially the Quincy Riflemen to keep the peace, he had expected the force to disband after the April conference. Major Warren maintained headquarters at the county seat and detachments there and in Warsaw.23 But the Saints' departure took longer than expected, and Ford extended the guard's duty. The public dedication of the temple on May 1 coincided with Ford's anticipated deadline. Dedication signaled a formal end to Latter-day Saint activities in Nauvoo. But the event itself and the presence still of a thousand or more Latter-day Saint residents raised questions among anti-Mormons about intent. Committees in surrounding counties, anxious to enforce removal, set a new June 1 deadline for a complete Mormon withdrawal.24 A committee in Quincy warned Nauvoo's newest citizens against encouraging the Saints to stay on. The committee threatened Mormons in Adams and Hancock counties with forced expulsion and extermination if they did not leave voluntarily.25

Major Warren cautioned the public through the Nauvoo and Warsaw newspapers that no one needed to tell the Saints to be gone. The governor, he said, fully expected them to honor the agreement forged by the October 1845 Carthage Convention. "The removal of the entire Mormon population," Warren said, "has been looked forward to, as an event that could alone restore peace and quiet to this portion of our State, and for the peace of the inhabitants and the honor of the State, public expectation must be gratified."26

Warren's guard had dropped from its original one hundred riflemen in 1845 to fifty during the winter, and only ten men remained during the spring. Because of the Quincy threat, they stayed on at Ford's request for another two weeks and then until the end of the month to assure the opposition party that the Saints really planned to leave.27 In mid-May, Warren moved his men to Nauvoo, where they helped at the ferry. About the time Warren arrived, the Hancock Eagle was reporting that twelve thousand exiles were on the way west. A month later, the Warsaw Signal observed that three thousand to five thousand people remained in Nauvoo but that as many as half of them had no intention of leaving freely. To satisfy those outsiders who distrusted published figures, Warren issued his own weekly reports during May from his headquarters at the Mansion House. He estimated that 1,350 people left during the second week of May and 1,617 the following week. He based his count on his men's report that thirty-two teams had ferried across the Mississippi at Nauvoo each day and forty-five per day at Fort Madison.28

Despite this heavy traffic, at month's end the church trustees still were advertising for a thousand yoke of cattle to help in the westward trek. The Twelve had asked for twenty-four teams of oxen for a pioneer company and needed others for ill-equipped Saints waiting in eastern Iowa. Some were made available to the poor, anxious but unable to leave Nauvoo. Other Saints without means wrote to relatives seeking funds for steamboat fare to St. Louis or money for provisions and teams necessary for a trek into the wilderness.29

The steady spring migration accomplished its objective. In mid-July, the Hancock Eagle analyzed reports from across Iowa and reaffirmed its earlier estimate that at least twelve thousand Saints with thirty-seven hundred teams were somewhere between the Mississippi River and the Council Bluffs region. With the onset of summer, the paper estimated, only a few hundred Saints remained in Nauvoo and no more than eight hundred in all of Illinois. With that in mind, Ford rejected appeals from Nauvoo's new citizens for a further extension of Warren's assignment. He begrudged the cost of maintaining a token force too small to defend a dwindling city. On the first of June, Warren discharged his ten military guardians.30

As the Hancock riflemen left Nauvoo, Thomas Sharp commended Warren and his men for the impartial attitude toward the contending parties. Both sides had expected to find an ally in the Quincy Riflemen, Sharp said, but neither party found the troops biased in their favor. Brigham Young agreed that Warren had remained fair to both sides as he enforced the peace.31 Warren issued his own reminder to the anti-Mormon minority who still argued for a military action against the Saints. To do so, he said, would violate an order issued when he took charge the previous fall. The order prohibited more than four armed men from assembling together unless they were state troops.32

Despite this warning, armed vigilantes once again took the law into their own hands and began to enforce the evacuation agreement. Small posses harassed Latter-day Saint families living on scattered farms in Hancock and surrounding counties. They demanded immediate removal. Vigilantes stripped several men, tied them to a fence, and whipped their bare backs with ox goads to draw blood. State officials denounced the beatings.33 Threatened with their lives, Mormon families loaded up their belongings and headed for Nauvoo.

The stated intent of the dwindling Latter-day Saint population should have allayed concerns. By late summer, according to a private estimate by church agents, 750 adults who wanted to leave remained in Nauvoo. Another 250 adults waited in nearby gathering places and 200 more in St. Louis. If children were added, the total would be at least 2,400. Nearly all of the Saints in Nauvoo lacked the means to leave, the agents discovered. The others had resources for everything except teams. By definition, all of these Saints intended to head west "as soon as a way can be opened to go."34

There were some, however, who resisted Brigham Young's counsel to head toward the Rockies in 1846. A few of these had sided with the seceders and ignored the call to leave. Still others intended to remain another winter before joining their fellow exiles on the trail. At the April conference in Nauvoo and consistently after that, Orson Hyde encouraged the remnants to get across the river and find work in Iowa until they could outfit themselves for the journey. Hyde confided to Brigham Young that an angel had warned him in a dream: "This people cannot stay here." To do so, Hyde said, would provoke an attack.35

Brigham Young had agreed to the October 1845 terms and supported the total evacuation of Nauvoo. Only the trustees and their families were authorized to remain behind. In July, Young urged departure for another reason. Enlistment of five hundred men and boys in the United States Army left the Saints in western Iowa short of herders and teamsters. Young encouraged the Nauvoo trustees to "call upon all the old men, the young men and boys, big enough to drive cattle," and send them to help move the Saints to a winter camp in Indian Territory west of the Missouri. The unloaded wagons could then return to Nauvoo for the families of these men. "Buy no more teams," he counseled, "for we have as many in the church as can be taken care of at present." Some volunteers were raised during a meeting in the Nauvoo Temple on July 20, but few able men were available to respond.36 At the Missouri River, summer haying kept the men busy and delayed the return of empty wagons to Nauvoo. In late August, Young suggested that the trustees sell Nauvoo property and hire teams to transport the poor of Nauvoo to a point on the Missouri as close as possible to Council Bluffs.37 He also asked families along the Missouri to send their spare oxen east to bring wagons waiting in Nauvoo. Four men with teams left on September 14 to help "remove all who want to come." "Nauvoo and the adjacent country must be cleared," Young said. He donated three yoke of his cattle as an example to others. He encouraged Iowa Saints busy with the haying to go with teams and wagons later, find work away, and shuttle the remaining families west in the spring.38

One night in June, someone slipped into the Hancock Eagle print shop and produced a handbill urging the citizens of Nauvoo to take arms against the remaining Mormons. The paper's editor discovered the subterfuge, pied the type, and destroyed the bills. Upset with the call to arms, a group of new citizens met at the Mansion House and issued a broadside denouncing the perpetrators. Fifty distraught residents, including Lewis C. Bidamon (who later married Emma Smith), signed a second circular cautioning citizens of surrounding counties to cease their militant expulsion plans. The new citizens wanted the anti-Mormon faction to know that they trusted the Saints to honor the agreement to leave.39

A congressional election in August heightened the political concerns of Nauvoo's opponents. The city cast 850 votes and helped elect the Democratic candidate. Many new citizens had not been resident long enough to vote in the district, causing the Whigs and members of the Anti-Mormon Party to conclude, "Most of these votes must have either been Mormon votes or illegal votes." Some speculated wrongly that the vote was in return for Polk's favor in sponsoring the Mormon Battalion, a financial benefit to the Latter-day Saints.40

Despite the reassurances of the new citizens, impatient opponents of the Mormons once again turned to forceful action. Even as the teamsters were leaving from the Missouri River camps on September 14 to remove the poor Saints, an armed attack on Nauvoo was underway. The anti-Mormons had revived their plan of the previous summer to drive the Saints into Nauvoo like sheep and then herd them across the river onto Iowa's grasslands.

The Battle of Nauvoo

The organized effort at expulsion from Illinois began when a group calling itself the Convention of Hancock County Old Citizens met at Carthage in early June to plan an Independence Day observance. The delegates concluded that the county could not celebrate its freedom as long as any Latter-day Saints remained. They decided to postpone the holiday festivities in a show of patriotic sacrifice and resort to force. Thomas Sharp trumpeted the decision in a headline: "War Declared in Hancock." As if to justify a military solution, the editor defined remaining Mormons as lazy, dishonest people seeking "an opportunity to pilfer and rob their neighbors."41 In late June, acting under the authority of the Quincy anti-Mormon coordinating committee in neighboring Adams County, several hundred armed volunteers led by Levi Williams of Warsaw marched toward Nauvoo to demand an immediate surrender and evacuation.

The departure of Major Warren's force at the end of May had left Nauvoo with no military defenses. Governor Ford believed that the ongoing departure of the Saints had eliminated the prospect of armed conflict. Left without state protection, the remaining Saints and their new neighbors decided to arm themselves for self-defense. Stephen Markham, newly arrived from the Missouri River camps, and Sheriff Jacob Backenstos organized a ragtag Nauvoo militia. But the invading posse stopped short of Nauvoo. They had not expected the new citizens to join in a military resistance. In addition, reports of Markham's return included rumors that he had been escorted by armed legionnaires. From a camp at Golden's Point, six miles south of Nauvoo, the vigilantes considered their options and dispersed to their homes. The Warsaw commanders then quarantined Nauvoo, prohibiting the Saints from leaving except to ferry to Iowa.42

Nauvoo's jubilant citizens ridiculed the failed invasion with doggerel verse making fun of "Old Williams and his plund'ring crew" of drunken mobbers. A second broadside published the words of a newly written folksong that scorned the fleeing mobbers and celebrated the efforts of the "noble brave boys of Nauvoo."43 Feelings remained high. The uneasy truce led to a series of individual harassments during the summer. Ignoring the illegal quarantine, certain Nauvoo residents hired out as harvesters in the grain fields of the Amos Davis farm east of Nauvoo. Non-Mormon farm families during the first week of July accused three of these workmen of loitering and annoying mischief.44

Word of these incidents spread among others who were stung by the taunting doggerel and unhappy with the continuing Latter-day Saint presence. On Saturday morning, July 11, while harvesting wheat at the Davis farm, eight workmen from Nauvoo, two of them new citizens, found themselves surrounded by nearly eighty armed regulators under the command of Major John McAuley, a red-haired Irish immigrant from Appanoose. The farmhands were disarmed and marched to the nearby Rice home. Two by two, they were forced to kneel in a ditch and receive twenty lashes across their shoulders with hickory goads. The regulators kept four of the Mormon pistols and two long guns and smashed another four guns on a stump before ordering the workers back to Nauvoo in their wagons. The incident set off a serious round of charges and countercharges. One of the harvesters from Nauvoo carried with him the handgun "of peculiar construction" that Sheriff Backenstos and his posse had taken at Green Plains during the 1845 house burnings. Under orders to "claim the gun if he should ever see it," McAuley confiscated the unusual firearm as stolen property.45

Returning to Nauvoo, the harvesters swore out a warrant against McAuley and his men. The charge included theft of the gun and the beatings. William Pickett, one of Nauvoo's new citizens, headed a posse of Latter-day Saints and a few newcomers to deliver the warrant. Riding through the night, they found and arrested McAuley and James W. Brattle and repossessed the gun before daylight Sunday. Over the next few days, Pickett's men arrested fifteen other anti-Mormons, including former Latter-day Saint Francis M. Higbee, in connection with a lynching charge at the Davis field and hauled all of their prisoners to Nauvoo.46

"Things are hot here," deputy sheriff H. G. Ferris reported from Carthage on July 14. The regulators had vowed to destroy the whole city of Nauvoo, Ferris wrote, including the property of any new residents who defended Mormon rights. "The mobbers have sent messengers to every part of the country to raise a force," he said. "No efforts will be spared and no lies will fail to be manufactured to accomplish the object." In Nauvoo, the Hancock Eagle charged the Anti-Mormon Party with raising a ruckus to win votes in the August election.47 The regulators placed the blame for the skirmishes on the Latter-day Saints. The Nauvoo workers, they claimed, had harvested only a few acres in a day and had spent most of their time threatening other settlers. The anti-Mormons denied that anyone had been beaten severely each man received only twenty lashes. Their spokesman Thomas Sharp reiterated his declaration of war against the remaining Latter-day Saints.48

The Pontoosuc Regulators soon held their own prisoners in the "Mormon War." Four residents heading toward McQueen's mill in Henderson County to get wheat ground for the journey west were captured and kept at and near Pontoosuc "as hostages for the safety and release" of McAuley and the others. A fifth hostage was already in custody. A forty-man Nauvoo posse headed by William Anderson confronted the regulators and hunted for the hostages in vain. For nearly two weeks, the Mormon captives were shifted from place to place under cover of darkness to avoid detection. They were deprived of proper rest and nourishment and were transported as far away as McDonough County. "The excitement is spreading to other parts of the county," anti-Mormon editor Sharp intoned, "and if any serious collisions should take place, the whole country will become involved. The fact is, there is no peace for Hancock while a Mormon remains in it!"49

Now both sides bartered for the release of prisoners, each demanding that the other move first. The stalemate ended when the officer holding the anti-Mormons at a hotel in Nauvoo surrendered them under a writ of habeas corpus issued at Quincy on Tuesday, July 21. The prisoners left Nauvoo two days later by boat for Quincy. As might be expected, Judge Purple acquitted them of whipping the Mormon farm workers. On Saturday, the anti-Mormons moved their five hostages to Warsaw and then across the river to Keokuk, where they released them.50

As the hostage crisis was being resolved, another event heightened tensions. The McDonough County sheriff visited Nauvoo on July 21 with writs charging William Pickett and three of his assistants with invading the county as an armed hostile force. Pickett's group had camped near McComb while looking for the captives from Nauvoo. After initially resisting, Pickett's men went with the sheriff to McComb, accompanied by their own guard, and posted bail. En route back to Nauvoo, Pickett swore that he would never again submit to arrest.51

These incidents left Hancock County citizens of all persuasions on alert. Wheat and corn fields ripened in the hot, dusty weather of August, but many farmers ignored the harvest, distracted by the political turmoil and fearful of violence against them by the marauding raiders.52 Thomas Sharp's declaration of war awaited only an opportunity to justify shooting. If the Mormons left in Nauvoo ignored the vigilante injunction and left the city again, Sharp threatened, county citizens would "take to the bushes and pick the Saints off." Curiously, the Carthage Convention,organized in the fall of 1845 to negotiate the removal of the Saints, disbanded in July 1846 in the midst of this war of words. The Saints had promised the committee they would be gone by the summer. That time had arrived, and with most of the region's Latter-day Saints on their way west, the nine-county body decided it had no right to continue to function. Without the stabilizing influence of the peacekeepers, the more strident voices once again prevailed.53

The question of the peculiarly built gun captured at Green Plains had not yet been resolved. The captured firearm remained in Mormon hands in Nauvoo. To resolve this issue, John Carlin, a special constable of Hancock County (who, some claimed, had been illegally appointed), arrived in Nauvoo on August 7 with writs against William Pickett and two others who had taken the gun from McAuley. True to his pledge, Pickett refused to leave Nauvoo. He arranged for bodyguards and threatened to shoot anyone who attempted to arrest him. The others agreed to answer the charges in Green Plains, where both were eventually bound over for court appearances.54

In response to this standoff, on August 17 Carlin issued the Proclamation to the Citizens of Hancock County seeking volunteers to help him recover the gun. "Obedience [to the law] must be enforced at all hazards," Carlin wrote, "or its benefits will be at an end." The recruits were told to meet at Carthage on the twenty-fourth. Be prepared to "meet determined resistance," Carlin warned. There would be no "parlaying of committees." State officials would soon discern that Carlin had motives other than simply arresting Pickett.55

The Hancock Eagle responded with an extra, denouncing the militant tactics of the regulators. "The new citizens are as anxious for the removal of the Mormons as the worst anti can be," the editor wrote, "but they will not see cruelty practised upon the helpless families" of the city's remaining Latter-day Saints.56

Constable Carlin's appeal for help prompted Pickett to turn himself in. He traveled to Green Plains with four or five companions but found that Justice Banks had placed the arrest papers in the hands of an attorney in McDonough County. Pickett located the attorney, who had given the writs to an officer in Carthage. Separated from his companions, Pickett went alone to Warsaw, where he confronted the editor of the Warsaw Signal, Thomas Sharp, over the legality of the warrant. Avoiding Carthage, Pickett then returned to Nauvoo without realizing his original objective.57

In Carthage, a volunteer militia that included some members of the Carthage Greys stood ready to push the remaining Latter-day Saints out of Nauvoo. Carlin had given command to Captain James W. Singleton of Brown County and J. B. Chittenden of Adams County. A Nauvoo spokesman asked Governor Thomas Ford for help. The governor had lost his more reliable officers, including General John J. Hardin and Major W. B. Warren, to recruitments in mid-July for the Mexican War. Nauvoo's friend Jacob B. Backenstos had also accepted a position in the army. These three, all Whigs, had been reasonably effective in restraining the Whiggish anti-Mormons and had earned the cautious trust of the Saints. On August 24, Ford sent another Whig to Hancock County. Major James R. Parker of the 32d Regiment of the Illinois State Militia and ten militiamen from Fulton County arrived in Carthage with the full authority of the state. The Hancock County vigilantes did not know Parker and assumed he was a Democrat. Because of his frank and fair handling of the issues, Parker was immediately discredited by the Whig newspapers, lessening his effectiveness in curbing Nauvoo's lawless opponents.58

Parker's assignment from the Democratic governor was to prevent an attack against Nauvoo and to prevent lynchings during the trials of Pickett's friends. In a circular on August 25 and a proclamation three days later, Parker put the anti-Mormons on notice by denying that the Mormons were the aggressors. He ordered Singleton and Chittenden to disperse their opposition forces. The Latter-day Saints are leaving as fast as they can, Parker declared. "I am informed by the Trustees of the Mormon Church, that if they could have peace, and sell their property, that every Mormon would be away before snow flies." His small body of Illinois volunteers was sufficient, he said, to keep the peace.59

In an exchange of letters with Parker, Constable John Carlin rejected the captain's authority. If Parker interfered with the regulators' efforts to disperse the Saints, Carlin said, he would treat Parker's government forces as if they were a mob. Carlin backed his threat with an assertion that he had six hundred men at Carthage and another four hundred at La Harpe. Parker responded in kind. The Carthage forces were the mob, he told Carlin. Yet, Parker wished to avoid bloodshed. In secret communications with Singleton, Parker pleaded for a peaceful solution. Singleton and Chittenden agreed to let the Mormons leave in peace if they departed within sixty days. But Carlin and the Carthage posse rejected this agreement. Consequently, Singleton and Chittenden resigned their posts; Colonel Thomas S. Brockman, a former Brown County commissioner, took command of the Carthage militia. The posse now followed a man of action. Governor Ford described "Old Tom" Brockman, a Campbellite preacher, as large and awkward, an unschooled, self-serving man willing to use position for personal gain. At the same time, Major Benjamin Clifford of Quincy, who owned land and a store in Nauvoo, replaced Parker as head of the state forces in Nauvoo.60

With Ford's blessing, Clifford organized Nauvoo's able Latter-day Saints and new citizens into a militia, with Daniel H. Wells and William L. Cutler as aides and four other men as captains of fifty. The volunteers of the "New Organization" paraded and practiced to hone their skills. "We had no cannon," William Hickman remembered, "but cut into a steamboat's shaft, plugged it up, fixed it up on wagon wheels, [and] hammered out balls of pig lead, which was plenty." The makeshift cannon had the same firepower as a regular six-pounder but was not as accurate.61

As tensions grew, Governor Ford attempted to learn from reliable sources the real situation in Hancock County and to defuse it if possible. The governor sent his trusted attorney general pro tem, Mason Brayman, to investigate the situation. About the same time, Ford commissioned Mayor John M. Wood of Quincy to negotiate a truce. Soon after receiving his assignment on August 31, Brayman visited the posse camped east of Carthage, then still under Singleton's command. Brayman estimated the force at six hundred men, equipped with five six-pounders requisitioned from neighboring counties and a good supply of small arms. He left Carthage convinced that the fifty or sixty writs in Singleton's possession had been sworn for one purpose only, to give the forces the color of legal authority and hide their real intentions to expel the remaining Latter-day Saints. Brayman reached Nauvoo on September 8. He was told that the city had marshalled nearly six hundred well-armed soldiers, a figure he correctly dismissed as inflated. He found the militia ill-equipped, with only a remnant of the Nauvoo Legion's once formidable cache of small arms and six pieces of artillery, four of them newly made of steamboat shafts. A supply of muskets ordered by a Nauvoo merchant had been seized at Keokuk and diverted to the anti-Mormon camp.62

With considerable effort, Brayman concluded that only six hundred to eight hundred Latter-day Saints still lived in Nauvoo, around two hundred of them adult males. Opponents had pegged the figure at more than three thousand. The remnants of the once thriving city signaled no threat, Brayman observed. The departing Saints had hauled away all that would fit in their wagons

without making proper provision for those who remained. Consequently there was much destitution among them; much sickness and distress. I traversed the city, and visited in company with a practicing physician many of the sick, and almost invariably found them destitute, to a painful extent, of the comforts of life. Much sickness and many deaths, I am persuaded, resulted from want of sufficient and proper food, particularly among the women and children, whose husbands or parents were dead or had left them. Everything in and about their habitations wore an appearance of decay and wretchedness. The gardens were thrown open, fences removed for fuel the supply of furniture and ordinary household comforts meagre indeed. Wagons were standing before the doors of many dwellings, and great numbers were in process of construction, indicating preparations for removal. Many, I was told, had been for months in this condition, with their wagons, goods, and families prepared to leave only awaiting the sale of their little homestead for enough to purchase a yoke of oxen to convey them away.63

Many of the stranded residents complained to Brayman that their ability to sell their property had been frustrated by the ongoing harassment of lawless mobs. Others, Brayman was convinced, had no intention of selling. This and one other condition concerned the old citizens. Nauvoo residents were fleeing the city, but would they stay away? "Hundreds of poor and destitute families were encamped in tents, in huts, and covered wagons on the opposite side of the river," Brayman told the governor, "and it was feared the approach of winter would drive them back to the city, reduced to pauperism and theft for subsistence." Among those who had just crossed the river was Mary Fielding Smith, Hyrum's widow. With the help of her sister, Mercy, this faithful Missouri exile would oversee the westward trek of eight children and several elderly adults. The Saints remaining in Nauvoo faced similar challenges of inadequate means or skills. Meanwhile, unable to raise a posse, Quincy mayor Wood reached Nauvoo two days after Brayman, with a dozen or so companions hoping to find a peaceful solution to the problem. Two attempts to convince the Carthage force they should disband failed.64

The citizens' armies of both sides readied themselves for a battle that would end the straggling Mormon occupation of Nauvoo. Some residents of outlying farms hurried into Nauvoo to join in the common defense. Others fled from the city for safety.65 Egged on by the anti-Mormon press in Quincy and Warsaw, Nauvoo's opponents took the offensive.66 On Thursday afternoon, September 10, Thomas Brockman left his new camp five miles west of Carthage. He marched his anti-Mormon force composed of several hundred men toward Nauvoo. Militia banners and United States flags led the way.67 In Nauvoo, the temple bell sounded the alarm. Clifford and his men hid themselves in a cornfield east of the city on Parley Street. They intended an ambush but were spotted. The two sides exchanged fire briefly. At nightfall, Brockman's men set up camp just beyond Joseph Smith's farm near Jeremiah Woodbury's.68

To defend the city, Major Clifford decided to post his forces ten blocks due east of the temple near Winchester Street, between Knight and Mulholland Streets. He set up headquarters at a Dr. Bailey's home on Knight Street. Working all night, the volunteers erected a breastworks. At strategic points around the perimeter, they planted three shrapnel-laden land mines assembled in the basement of the temple. A fourth powder keg was buried near the entrance to the temple.69 Next morning, the women of Nauvoo furnished food and warm drinks as a breakfast for the workmen and baked bread to help sustain the soldiers for the expected battle. Some of the women clustered with their children in a home near the temple, a place they deemed safer than most because of guards posted nearby.70 Armed and ready by seven that morning, the army of Saints and new citizens composed of around two hundred men and boys drawn from a city of about fifteen hundred residents waited for another attack by the invading force.71

On Friday morning, from their camp outside the city, Brockman's regulators and their support wagons headed east and circled around to the new La Harpe Road, an extension of Young Street. This caught the Nauvoo defenders off guard. They had dispatched William Anderson with a company of thirty sharpshooters to engage Brockman at the Parley Street entrance to the city. When spies notified the sharpshooters, they took off running northwesterly to get ahead of the invading regulators. Halting in a ravine, the men decided to break into two groups. Anderson's half called themselves the Spartan Band. Alexander McCrae was elected to head the remaining men. Around noon, Anderson's men spotted Brockman's artillery moving toward Nauvoo. Anderson planned a pincer attack to separate the Carthage cannon from the three-hundred man posse following behind, but he and his Spartan Band were discovered while waiting in a cornfield. The two forces exchanged fire from a distance of fifty yards, the Spartans with their repeating rifles, the invaders with cannon. One of Anderson's men suffered a foot injury. Anderson retreated slowly, trying to draw Brockman's men over one of the buried mines. The Carthage posse would not follow. The two forces exchanged fire once again after Anderson's men had taken shelter in a cluster of log homes. This time, more than one hundred of the posse tried to take the log homes without realizing Anderson's men were inside. Reinforced with one of the steamboat-shaft cannons and using lead cannonballs, Anderson quickly scattered the posse, noting that a number of the opposition fell with wounds. Brockman's men withdrew to Law's Field for the night. The Spartan Band waited in the woods a short distance north of the camp until after dark. Their superiors decided against a night attack on the camp, but the Nauvoo forces remained on alert until well after midnight.72

Sporadic firing and brief encounters between the two forces continued through the following day. Sometime before noon on Saturday, September 12, the invaders sent in a white flag and demanded an unconditional surrender. The Nauvoo defenders refused. The anti-Mormon forces readied another attack. A crowd of onlookers numbering nearly as many as the invading force itself gathered from the surrounding countryside and Iowa to watch the battle. The tower of the temple offered a distant overview of the battlefield. Mayor Wood of Quincy and sentinels for the defenders watched from that vantage point.73 Some residents did not wait for the confrontation but scattered to safety. Emma Smith boarded the riverboat Uncle Toby, whose captain was one of the few willing to defy the anti-Mormon warning to avoid the port. With her five children and housekeeper, Emma headed upriver to join relatives and Mormon dissenters, among them William Marks, at Fulton, Illinois.74 Lucy Mack Smith moved with relatives to Knoxville, Illinois, for the winter and returned the following spring.

About one o'clock that afternoon, with dozens of banners waving, the posse marched in a solid column to engage the city's defenders. The five hundred troops of the ambitious Brockman barraged the Winchester Street barricades with cannon and musket shots. Clifford's defending forces clustered behind the barricades, but Brockman, a clever tactician, again surprised them by swinging southward to get around the breastworks. The Nauvoo soldiers followed on the posse's right flank. Clifford's men fired with their makeshift cannons and from nearby buildings with rifles. Outnumbered by the advancing anti-Mormons, they were being pushed house by house toward the city.75

William Anderson's picket company had been posted in the timber north of Brockman's camp, where they saw little action. When the invaders headed south, Daniel H. Wells sent the Spartan Band to get ahead of the advancing posse. Moving single file, their standard pattern, the Nauvoo soldiers crouched and scurried along the flanks of the posse to a point almost a mile away. Quickly Anderson's men filled the space between a brick house and nearby log barn with large corn shocks leaned against a fence to form a breastworks. When the invading army got within one hundred fifty yards, the Nauvoo force opened fire with their rifles. The posse returned fire but then broke and scattered. Encouraged by their officers, the anti-Mormons regrouped and made a second assault. Boldly setting aside caution, Anderson and a few others moved beyond the protection of the buildings, jumped a fence, and faced the advancing forces. Killed in this futile defense were Anderson himself struck by a cannonball his fifteen-year-old son, August, and David Norris. Three or four defenders suffered wounds. Another half dozen were injured in other encounters.76 The invaders admitted to ten or twelve wounded but refused to indicate the number killed in the three-day attack on Nauvoo. Governor Ford said the posse lost one man. Anderson's Spartan Band had fired three hundred shots through their repeating rifles. "It appears," Ford told the House of Representatives in December, "the remarkable fact of so few being killed and wounded on either side, can only be accounted for by supposing great unskillfulness in the use of the arms, and by the very safe distance which the parties kept from each other."77

While Anderson's Spartan Band was trying to stop the advancing troops, other Nauvoo units harassed the invaders on the right. Nauvoo's respected justice of the peace Daniel H. Wells led one spirited counterattack. Rallying Captain Andrew L. Lamoreaux's company into action, Wells persuaded the men to engage in battle just as many of them were preparing to retreat. With that example, the units of Hiram Gates and William L. Cutler soon followed Wells's encouraging call.78 Many of the men fought one-on-one against the invaders in a military engagement typical of the time.

After a battle lasting two hours, the attackers ran short of powder and cannonballs and withdrew. Fresh munitions had failed to arrive from Quincy. Brockman estimated that his men had captured two hundred houses fewer than a tenth of the city's total. On the other side, Anderson's leaderless men had used up all of their ammunition as well and were about to make their own retreat. The defensive lines had held in a stalemate. "I had been anxious from a boy to be in a battle," William Hickman recalled, "but I assure you this fight took a great deal of starch out of me. . . . We saw our forces weakening, and knew eventually we should have to surrender; so we sent a flag of truce with a committee to settle in some way the existing war."79

The defenders of Nauvoo presumed that the waving of the white flag had ended the war, but sporadic skirmishes continued for two days. On Sunday, workers in a cornfield near Daniel H. Wells's home found members of the Carthage militia hiding there and exchanged shots. Fearing a renewed attack, work details set about building new defensive batteries Monday morning for self-protection until a peace treaty could be drafted.

As it had done a year earlier, a citizens' committee from Quincy interceded to forge terms of surrender. Mayor Wood's group had left Nauvoo on Sunday, September 13, after the decisive battle. A new committee, without the mayor and his more neutral colleagues, arrived in Nauvoo two days later. Discussions began that day and continued into the next, with negotiators "riding out and in to the mob . . . in a buggy and carrying a (white) flag of truce."80 Negotiators on both sides signed the "Articles of Accommodation, Treaty and Agreement" on Wednesday, September 16, to end the fighting.

At a meeting in the temple early the next morning, residents learned the terms of the agreement: The City of Nauvoo would surrender and be occupied by Colonel Brockman's forces. Ten men from the Quincy Committee and the occupation forces had pledged to protect all citizens and property from violence. They would treat the sick and helpless humanely. The Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo would surrender the city and leave the state or otherwise disperse "as soon as they [could] cross the river." (Residents understood this to mean within ten days.) All Nauvoo citizens would turn in their arms, and the Quincy Committee would return the guns to the Saints after they had crossed the Mississippi. Five men with their families, including the church trustees, would be allowed to remain in Nauvoo to dispose of property, assisted by five more as clerks. The church trustees surrendered the key to the temple to the negotiating committee. With the peace in place, Nauvoo's military leaders dismissed their volunteer armies to prepare for evacuating the city. The Carthage militia entered Nauvoo that afternoon.81

The Latter-day Saints recognized the urgency of the situation. All who could do so left immediately. Thomas Bullock felt lucky to find a buyer willing to pay one hundred dollars for his house and lot, only to find the deal threatened by an interfering neighbor. "Many a house and lot were exchanged for a horse or a yoke of oxen," one observer noted. "Sometimes a cow drew the wagon on which the family's all was loaded, while the family itself trudged along beside it on foot."82 Even though the Saints left quickly, and despite promises not to molest residents, the occupying forces harassed many who were frustrated by their own lack of preparations for the forced evacuation. The militia seized fleeing citizens at random and threw them into the river, shouting obscenities at some in mock baptisms. They held courts-martial for others, condemned them to die, and then expelled them from the city. The soldiers searched for arms in wagons and homes, burst open trunks and chests, and tore up floors. "The mob kept up one continual stream thro' the Temple," Bullock noted, "and up to the top of the tower, ringing the bell, shouting and halloing. Some enquired 'who is the keeper of the Lord's House now.' . . . A mob preacher ascended to the top of the tower and standing outside proclaimed with a loud voice, 'Peace, Peace, Peace to all the inhabitants of the earth, now the Mormons are driven.'"83

Besides the forced removal of Latter-day Saints, often given only an hour or two to depart, Brockman ordered the expulsion of the new citizens who had joined with them in defending Nauvoo and others who sympathized with the church. Abram Van Tuyl, who had leased the Mansion House from Emma Smith, furnished many of the names. The commander placed a detachment at the temple with orders to prevent the Saints and their Jack-Mormon sympathizers from returning. His men stationed a cannon on planks a few yards in front of the stairs. Governor Ford's emissary, Mason Brayman, discovered the harassment of new citizens when he arrived in Nauvoo on September 18. He was aghast. He could not believe that such a gross violation of the Quincy Committee agreement would be undertaken but learned from Brockman that such was in fact his intention. "This order," Brayman reported to Ford,

was rigorously enforced throughout the day, with many circumstances of the utmost cruelty and injustice. Bands of armed men traversed the city, entering the houses of citizens, robbing them of arms, throwing their household goods out of doors, insulting them, and threatening their lives. Many were seized, and marched to the camp, and after a military examination set across the river for the crime of sympathizing with the Mormons, or the still more heinous offense of fighting in defense of the city under the command of officers commissioned by you and instructed to make that defense. It is, indeed, painfully true that many citizens of this state have been driven from it by an armed force, because impelled by our encouragement and a sense of duty, they have bravely defended their homes . . . from the assaults of a force assembled for unlawful purposes.

Brayman estimated that upwards of half of Nauvoo's new citizens had been forced from their homes.84 Some of them stayed away for several months. Only ten or fifteen Mormon families remained in the city. Following the initial takeover of the surrendered city and forcible expulsion of the Saints and their sympathizers, Brockman dismissed all but about one hundred of his forces.85

Evacuation of the Latter-day Saint remnant and most of their friends from Nauvoo following the siege created a memory not soon forgotten by former residents of the city. The evacuation the previous winter by church leaders had been largely of their own planning, even though under threat of arrest, and without military intervention. The steady spring removal had happened as groups of families prepared themselves and left. In contrast, the September Battle of Nauvoo precipitated a river crossing by those least prepared to endure it. A correspondent from the Burlington Hawkeye reported the situation during a visit to Nauvoo on September 19: "On either shore of the Mississippi may be seen a long line of tents, wagons, cattle, etc., with numberless wretched specimens of humanity. Since the armistice or 'treaty' the Mormons are crossing in almost breathless haste. Three or four 'flats' are running constantly, both day and night." The newsman found a small detachment of soldiers bivouacked at the Mansion House and others at the temple. "Some lay sleeping on their 'arms,' and others lay rolled up in their blankets," he wrote. "On every hand lay scattered about in beautiful confusion muskets, swords, cannonballs, and terrible missiles of death. Verily, thought I, how are the holy places desecrated!" The city seemed desolate. "Not a human being was seen. Houses appeared suddenly deserted as though the inmates had precipitously fled from a pestilence or the burning of a volcano. . . . It appeared as if the vengeance of the Almighty rested upon this doomed city."86

The violation of their civil rights caused by the military occupation left the citizens of Nauvoo vulnerable to looting, vandalism, and other problems. Those rushing to leave sold what they could for pennies on the dollar. Few of the firearms turned in for "temporary" custody during the occupation were returned to their owners; some refugees received a substitute gun of inferior quality. Vandals cut holes in the temple floors, disfigured the stone oxen in the basement, and chiseled names in the wood. Stealing from abandoned homes and shops was commonplace. Only Amos Davis's store remained open for business. One exile returned to Nauvoo on the twenty-first for some belongings: "I felt indeed I was an outcast and a stranger there."87

Across the Mississippi, the refugees gathered in a temporary campsite to consolidate their resources and organize for the march across Iowa. In all, about three hundred Latter-day Saints and some new citizens crowded into makeshift tents on the river bottoms near Montrose, where they endured cold autumn rains and chills and fever. On the twenty-eighth, Fanny Wardle gave birth to a baby boy, who died the same afternoon. Dubbed the "poor camp" by their friends farther west, the exiled Saints helped one another with the basic needs of life. Mitigating their hunger was a willingness to share the limited resources of the united camp. Newel K. Whitney procured flour at Bonaparte and counseled on future options. He decided that fifty wagons would be ample to remove the camp to better quarters. Some of the exiles had scattered to Burlington, St. Louis, and other places of refuge.88

The Twelve learned of the situation on September 24. They directed those camped at Council Point, east of the Missouri, to assemble an immediate shipment of teams, wagons, tents, and provisions. Church leaders had already dispatched a small relief company on the fourteenth to bring the poor out of Nauvoo as a routine matter. That company completed the three-hundred-mile trip to the Mississippi on October 7 and removed 157 people in twenty-eight wagons. The Council Point express teams reached the poor camp several days later to rescue the remaining exiles and transport them west.89

Brigham Young took news of the forced expulsion in stride. He told a Sunday meeting in Winter Quarters that the Saints on the Missouri had suffered as well as those in Nauvoo. All were destitute together. The Lord would allow the suffering to continue, he said, until "the Saints are chastened enough. . . . I have never believed the Lord would suffer a general massacre of this people by a mob. If ten thousand men were to come against us, and no other way was open for our deliverance, the earth would swallow them up." He sent word to the Nauvoo trustees to sell the temple and other church property for the best price available. Proceeds would help the poor. With few drivers to spare and a scarcity of grain in the Missouri River camps, he could do little more.90

Meanwhile, Nauvoo trustee Joseph L. Heywood hurried to St. Louis to solicit help. Newspapers there had condemned the vigilante actions. Mayor Peter G. Camden appealed for donations, and several St. Louis merchants agreed to accept food, clothing, tents, and other provisions for shipment upriver.91

Almon Babbitt and William Pickett traveled to Winter Quarters early in October to confer there with Brigham Young. Babbitt reported that the trustees had paid off sixty thousand dollars in church debts but still held obligations for another twenty-five thousand dollars. They hoped to sell all of the church property and raise five times that amount. The surplus would help in the migration. Young encouraged Babbitt to liquidate the property in Nauvoo and Kirtland quickly.92

On the morning of October 9, as the poor camp prepared to move west, flocks of migrating quail settled onto the river bottoms for forty miles along the Mississippi. Grateful for the supplement to a spare diet, the exiled Saints caught the small birds with their hands and gave thanks to the Lord for welcome fresh meat. Thomas Bullock, whose suffering family was among those benefited, called the arrival of the quail

a direct manifestation of the mercy and goodness of God, in a miracle being performed in the Camp. . . . Men who were not in the Church marvelled at the sight. The brethren and sisters praised God and glorified his name, that what was showered down upon the children of Israel in the wilderness is manifested unto us in our persecution. . . . Every man, woman and child had quails to eat for their dinner.

That same day, the trustees arrived from Nauvoo with clothing, shoes, molasses, salt, and salt pork. Lifted in spirits, the company started off on their trek west, "amid the songs of quails and blackbirds."93

Among the friends Mormon leaders had found in the East was a twenty-four-year-old Pennsylvania attorney, Thomas L. Kane. Schooled in Paris and Philadelphia, Kane hailed from a respected family active in civic and military life. Kane's father, John K. Kane, was a prominent Philadelphia judge. Thomas Kane himself had aspirations to political office. After learning of the migratory plans of the Saints from Jesse C. Little in May 1846, he sought a letter of introduction in Washington to allow him to journey to California with the Twelve.

Thomas Kane went west in 1846 on a mission from President Polk to deliver to General Stephen W. Kearny the president's authorization to enlist five hundred Latter-day Saint soldiers in the march on Mexico. The Pennsylvanian traveled to Fort Leavenworth by way of the Mississippi River and stopped off at Nauvoo for a brief visit to the near-vacant city. He arrived in late September. Most of the Saints had left by then. Those evacuated after the Battle of Nauvoo had just departed, along with a number of new citizens, creating the impression that the city's entire population had vanished in a day. When he returned to Philadelphia, Kane spoke to a public meeting called by his father to organize a charitable fund-raising effort to aid the exiled Saints. Four years later, Kane's interest in pleading the Mormon cause in Washington led him to remember his 1846 visit again when he spoke before the Pennsylvania Historical Society about his misunderstood friends.94

Thomas Kane's memorable 1850 description of an empty Nauvoo created a lasting image of the Desolate City, similar in angle of vision to that of the Burlington reporter. Church leaders preferred a portrait of a deserted Nauvoo that emphasized accomplishment rather than abandonment. The Nauvoo of future memory, Parley P. Pratt had told the October 1845 conference, would be "something that will be a monument of our industry and virtue. Our houses, our farms, this Temple and all we leave will be a monument to those who may visit the place of our industry, diligence and virtue." The sacrifice of a developed city, he said, was worth the price paid by the Saints. Inside the temple, above the pulpit of the High Priesthood, an inscription paralleling Pratt's sentiments read, "The Lord has beheld our Sacrifice, come after us."95 Kane saw the inscription and acknowledged the monumental accomplishments of the industrious people of Nauvoo. For his Eastern audiences, however, Kane went beyond the honorific in an attempt to win a nation's sympathy for the injustices against the Latter-day Saints.96

Because of low water, Kane had left his riverboat at Keokuk. Traveling overland by carriage through the Half Breed Tract in Iowa, he was not impressed by the ill-kept places of the settlers there. In contrast, while still opposite Nauvoo, Kane spotted the Mormon city, "a landscape in delightful contrast" to the scenes just witnessed. Brockman's forces still occupied Nauvoo. Kane described the scene in prose crafted to win the sympathy of his listeners for the unfairness of the forced evacuation. "The unmistakable marks of industry, enterprise, and educated wealth, everywhere, made the scene one of singular and most striking beauty," he wrote. Noting that he found the city deserted, Kane explained,

I went into empty workshops, ropewalks, and smithies. The spinner's wheel was idle; the carpenter had gone from his workbench and shavings. . . . The blacksmith's shop was cold; but his coal heap, and ladling pool, and crooked water horn were all there, as if he had just gone off for a holiday. No work people anywhere looked to know my errand . . . no one called out to me from any opened window, or dog sprang forward to bark an alarm. I could have supposed the people hidden in the houses, but the doors were unfastened, and when at last I timidly entered them, I found ashes dead upon the hearths, and had to tread a tiptoe, as if walking down the aisle of a country church to avoid rousing irreverent echoes from the naked floors.

In two sections of the city, Kane founds signs to explain the sudden evacuation. At the site of the battle in the southeastern portions of the city, he noted the effects of cannon shots on battered walls and foundations. At the temple, armed men were barracked amidst their arms and heavy ordnance. "They told me the story of the Dead City," Kane concluded, and how the battle a few days before had forced the remaining residents out of their homes. Kane visited the temple with militiamen and then resumed his journey westward. Along the route to Winter Quarters, he encountered the struggling poor camp and passed through Miller's Hollow, which the Saints would later rename Kanesville in his honor.97

Brayman's report of the Battle of Nauvoo and an appeal from the displaced new residents of Nauvoo brought yet another visitor to the empty city. Governor Ford arrived on October 28 with about two hundred fifty troops for a personal investigation. He set up camp within the Temple Block against the north wall. On November 7, the governor was visited by twelve "Ladies of Nauvoo," wives of anti-Mormons living in the area who considered Ford a Jack-Mormon. To show their disapproval of his fair-minded treatment of the Latter-day Saints and their friends, they presented him with a black petticoat (some said two one a black one, the other fringed with red). His troops objected to the insult in a hastily called indignation meeting. A formal statement denouncing the event and praising Ford's courage appeared in a broadside signed by nineteen officers.98 In response to the women's affront, another group of Nauvoo women visited the governor, each representing one of the twenty-nine states of the Union. These delegates were new citizens (Thomas Sharp called them "Jacks"). They presented Ford with an American flag. A handbill reporting this event quoted Ford as saying "no event of his life ever gave him more sincere pleasure."99

Satisfied that nothing more could be done, the governor posted a small guard of about eighteen men to maintain order. After a stay of some two weeks, he traveled to Quincy and on to Springfield. Residents would not see another Illinois governor in Nauvoo for sixty years.100 The state forces remained until just after newly elected governor Augustus C. French took office in December.101 The exiled non-Mormon citizens returned to their homes gradually during the fall and winter of 1846-47. With the tensions resolved, Thomas Sharp echoed the appeal of the new governor to residents of the Nauvoo region to avoid further trouble and to demonstrate to people elsewhere in Illinois that the Anti-Mormon Party believed in law and order.102

On his final day in office, Ford expressed satisfaction to the state general assembly that "the people called Mormons have removed from the State," most of them voluntarily. The mass migration had been inevitable, he acknowledged, but he regretted that the state of Illinois had been discredited by the forced expulsion of a small remnant. Despite his efforts, Ford confessed, he had failed to resolve the dilemma short of removal.103

With the Latter-day Saints gone, a new state administration and the people of Illinois could reflect on the experience of Mormon Nauvoo and move on to other challenges. In one of his last official acts as governor, Ford issued a routine proclamation setting aside Thursday, December 17, as a statewide day of thanksgiving and prayer to God for his bounteous blessings during the year just past.104 The returning new citizens at Nauvoo joined in the observance. The Battle of Nauvoo had served as a final event in the transition effectively ending the Mormon years in Nauvoo and concluding the Nauvoo period in Latter-day Saint history. The forced expulsion of a relatively few innocent people, unpleasant for thoughtful citizens on both sides of the issue, allowed a new order of peace to prevail in the city.

NotesChapter 19. Transition and Expulsion

Epigraph: Parley P. Pratt, general conference address, October 6, 1845, T&S 6 (November 1, 1845): 1010; Governor Thomas Ford to Illinois Legislature, December 7, 1846, Signal, December 5, 1846 [published after date], and in Nauvoo New Citizen, December 12, 1846.
