Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 20

"The New Order of Things"

Our object in commencing the publication [of the Hancock Eagle in Nauvoo] at this juncture is to anticipate the new order of things which will inevitably result from the changes now taking place in the civil, ecclesiastical, and domestic policy of this large city and the country adjacent. Prospectus for Hancock Eagle, February 23, 1846

[The Mormon] society, like all others, in its organization and progress developed a history, and it is those developments, only, which constitute its history. From 1830 to 1840 those developments created an unbroken chain of history. In 1840 it culminated and its history tended in a different direction and found its level in the order of things which now exist in Utah. If the world ever gets that history it must, according to the laws of historiography, divide itself into those two divisions, for each one had its own peculiarities and its own results. Sidney Rigdon, July 9, 1858

The departure of the Latter-day Saints from Illinois in 1846 allowed Nauvoo to become a community like others in the surrounding countryside. It fulfilled the desire of anti-Mormon politicians for a city under a new order of civil, domestic, and ecclesiastical policy. Residents acted independently within existing political parties, as private entrepreneurs, and with diverse religious affiliations. They were typical Americans.

Meanwhile, the Saints who had tried to create a religious community in Nauvoo moved on. They remembered Nauvoo and what they had learned during those pleasant if troubled days. Many of them recalled Joseph Smith's earliest teachings and treasured what they termed "original Mormonism." Others embraced the changes implemented in Nauvoo as a further unfolding of revealed religion. Some had come late to the church; others had found it early. But more important than the length of their membership was what individual Saints heard and applied of the Prophet's teachings. Thus, while the Nauvoo years did indeed forever change the nature of Mormonism, believers responded differently to the changes. Mormonism meant one thing to the Saints who gathered in the Intermountain West and something else again to those who chose to remain behind in the Midwest. Church members in both places acknowledged the significance of the Prophet Joseph Smith's contributions in Nauvoo, but they viewed many of his accomplishments and messages with contrasting levels of acceptance.1

From every perspective, the events of the Nauvoo years made a significant difference in the subsequent history of the Latter-day Saints. As Sidney Rigdon noted in 1858 and as Brigham Young and others recognized during their last months in Nauvoo, the final years of Joseph Smith's life and the months immediately following his death marked a watershed in church doctrine, practices, and governance. The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, with Joseph Smith III as its first president, in 1860 adopted the pre-Nauvoo patterns as its model of the Restoration. For the Reorganization in general, Nauvoo held dark memories because of the theological developments of those years. Many of its members rejected the temple doctrines and practices, including eternal and plural marriage and, eventually, proxy baptisms. It was the influence of man, not of God, they concluded, that had introduced those things. Savoring their independence in political, economic, and social aspects of life, they wished to severely limit ecclesiastical involvement in those arenas as well.2

In contrast, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with Brigham Young and the Twelve at the helm, headed in what Sidney Rigdon termed a "different direction." That direction was defined through the doctrines unfolded and expanded during the Nauvoo years by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Brigham Young and the Twelve pledged to the Saints that they would continue the Prophet's revealed program, including the revelations and ordinances of the Nauvoo years. The church that headed across the Rocky Mountains did so as a religious community a distinctive, covenant people centered in the doctrines and practices surrounding the House of the Lord, which were for them a recognition of the ultimate Source of eternal peace.3

For Brigham Young, the prophetic contributions of Joseph Smith that culminated at Nauvoo could best be preserved in a new and isolated gathering place. Relocation, a necessity anticipated by revelation through Joseph Smith, offered a fresh beginning under new leaders to accomplish a divinely established plan. It was in this context, four months before leaving Nauvoo, that Young said, "The exodus of the Nation of the only true Israel from these United States to a far distant region of the West . . . forms a new epoch . . . in the history of the church."4 A new prophet and a new gathering place defined the changes. Transplanted from Nauvoo unaltered were the established religious beliefs and practices given to the church through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The members of the Quorum of the Twelve commissioned by the Prophet and given the keys to carry forward that spiritual agenda would nurture the church in the western refuge.

Nauvoo under the New Order

While the Saints of the exodus and the dissidents of the dispersion carried forward their separate understandings of what their years in the City of Peace would mean for the future, life in Nauvoo continued for other peoples. The city had grown from its small beginnings in 1839 as a result of an active real estate business, which gained its momentum from Joseph Smith's call to the Latter-day Saints to gather to a temple city. Over a busy six seasons, the Saints built an estimated two thousand homes in the city and another five hundred in what they called the suburbs. Half were small log or frame homes. According to a St. Louis newspaper reporter, the rest were about evenly divided between brick and frame houses. "Most of [these] are good buildings," he wrote, "and some are elegant and handsomely finished residences, such as would adorn any city." By late September 1846, he guessed, only two hundred of Nauvoo's houses had occupants.5 In this buyer's market, the ten thousand departing residents and their agents offered properties at a significant discount of around 50 percent of market value. Most of it sold for much less than that, some of it to speculators expecting soon to resell at a profit. Some undeveloped lots reverted to the original patent holders.

For anyone willing to relocate to Nauvoo, the developed properties provided a head start in frontier village living. The first people to take advantage of the opportunity were those calling themselves new citizens. They arrived from nearby areas during the selling spree of 1845 and 1846. They tended to be moderates politically law-and-order citizens who sympathized with the plight of the Latter-day Saints. The anti-Mormon community called them "Jacks" and expelled many of them in September 1846 along with lingering Saints. The anti-Mormons did not want anyone living in Nauvoo who would encourage the Saints to stay or invite them back. Even so, most of the tolerant new citizens returned to occupy the property they had purchased. For many years afterward, the Anti-Mormon Party kept a vigilant watch on Nauvoo to prevent it from again becoming a major gathering place for the Saints.6

Yet there were Latter-day Saints who returned, including members of the Smith family. Emma Smith returned to Nauvoo with her children in February 1847 from their temporary home in Fulton City, Illinois. She took possession of the Mansion House from a dishonest lessee and remained custodian of several city lots and the family farm. On Joseph Smith's birthday, December 23, 1847, Emma dressed in a plum-colored satin dress for her wedding to Lewis C. Bidamon. A tall and charming forty-five-year-old merchant in Nauvoo, Bidamon was a widower with two daughters. Emma had known Lewis and his brother John for several years through business dealings. During the year of transition, the Bidamon brothers had been law-and-order new citizens in Nauvoo. The marriage between the Prophet's widow and the new citizen from Canton, Illinois, was "the all absorbing topic of conversation" in Nauvoo. But residents soon allowed the Bidamons to become ordinary citizens. Meanwhile, the Prophet's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, had sought refuge with her daughter Lucy Milliken seventy miles north of Nauvoo. In 1851, she moved in with the Bidamons in Nauvoo. Crippled by arthritis, Mother Smith remained at Nauvoo until her death in May 1856.7

The initial effort to make something of the abandoned Mormon capital lacked the religious motivations and magnetism found in the City of the Prophet. Consequently, the community took on the characteristics of a small midwestern town. Its population hovered just over one thousand. Of necessity, the new order in Nauvoo required a scaling down of public life. New citizens purchased vacant public buildings and put them to new uses. For example, the Seventies Hall served for a time for public meetings, but after a few years became a storage shed for corn.8 Parley P. Pratt's store became St. Patrick's Church to serve a congregation established in 1847 by a missionary priest.9 Other public activities continued in a fashion typical of small-town America. Residents advertised for teachers to establish schools, and someone revived a lyceum to further adult education.10 A town council governed Nauvoo within boundaries redefined optimistically in 1846 and reduced to a more modest size two years later to fit the realities of the new community.11

Private enterprise likewise served a diminished Nauvoo population. Merchants, millers, craftsmen, and others replaced those who had left. The commercial district on Mulholland Street east of the temple remained active; most of the stores and shops on lower Main Street were left empty. The most prominent of several merchants on the hill was Amos Davis. He had found early success in Commerce before the Saints arrived, made friends and enjoyed prosperity in Mormon Nauvoo, and then adapted to the needs of another group of customers in the new Nauvoo. "We have more goods and traders than business," a resident opined in 1848. "Money is scarce and business dull. We hope it will be better after harvest. The Post Office is moved to Davis' Store and the business seems coming on to the Hill."12

Even with this expected consolidation and normative economic development, Nauvoo retained some of the old tensions. By expelling the Saints, the anti-Mormons had neutralized the political influence of the Latter-day Saint voters who acted in unison. But local newspaper editors wielded a significant influence in county politics, and that influence continued. The editorial voice during the first months of the transition was William E. Matlack. Through the Hancock Eagle, he spoke hopefully of a "new order of things" in all aspects of life. A student of medicine at Princeton College and of Greek philosophy in Europe, Matlack promised to be religiously neutral and to support the Democrat Party and Nauvoo's general welfare. Despite this intent, the paper was criticized by anti-Mormons as too friendly to Latter-day Saints. The thirty-four-year-old editor had only a few months to articulate a new civic order in Nauvoo. His death in late July 1846 meant an early end to the Eagle.13

After the Battle of Nauvoo, the Eagle was replaced by the Nauvoo New Citizen. Even with most Latter-day Saints gone, control of the newspaper's editorial voice remained an issue. Within weeks, John M. Bernhisel informed Brigham Young that "the mobocrats" were behind the paper, with Iowa promoter Isaac Galland (Thomas Sharp's brother-in-law, who had helped establish the Saints in Commerce and Montrose) the intended editor. In fact, a Mr. Slocum maintained an editorial stance tolerant of both new and old citizens but with a clear bias against Latter-day Saints.14 A year later, another change in ownership created the Hancock Patriot. This time Thomas Gregg criticized the paper for a pro-Mormon position that he said had continued from the Neighbor through the Eagle and the New Citizen.15 The politicized editorial climate was finally neutralized in January 1851 when a new group of immigrants who lacked experience in the Nauvoo of Joseph Smith's time bought the Patriot. The Icarians, a communal group with roots in France, published the Popular Tribune to serve their own interests reforming society through a social and economic system of equality.16

This second wave of immigrants chose Nauvoo for many of the same reasons that had attracted the new citizens. Vacant homes and abandoned farms were selling at bargain prices. Etienne Cabet, the group's leader, was seeking a place to build a utopian community under a democratic form of government and with no private ownership of property.17 An advance group from France in 1848 had failed in a first attempt along the Red River in Texas. While waiting in New Orleans for Cabet's arrival from France, the delegates heard about Nauvoo. Three of them visited the city and returned to New Orleans in February 1849 with glowing reports. Almost immediately, Cabet personally led nearly three hundred followers to Nauvoo to build factories, farms, and schools. They purchased abandoned houses for back taxes, rented eight hundred acres of farmland in Illinois, and later bought three thousand acres near Corning, Iowa.18

Among the sites purchased by the Icarians was the Nauvoo Temple Block and its burned-out temple. Just a year after the Latter-day Saint trustees left Nauvoo, a fire destroyed the internal wooden structure of the building. When first spotted about three o'clock on the morning of October 9, 1848, fire was burning in the spire. Before firefighters could respond, the flames had spread to the roof timbers. The fire lit the streets of Nauvoo for nearly a mile in all directions, and the sound of falling timbers could be heard across the river. The stones cracked from the intense heat and remained hot to the touch for a day. "It was a sight of mournful sublimity," the Hancock Patriot reported. Who, the editor asked, would destroy such an elegant and celebrated work of art?19

Because first suspicions pointed to arson, local citizens raised a reward, but no arrests were made. Lewis C. Bidamon later told visitors from Utah that Joseph Agnew of Dallas City, Illinois, had been paid five hundred dollars to torch the temple. County residents who feared that the Saints would return if the temple remained intact had raised the funds. Agnew allegedly made a deathbed confession to a friend in 1870 implicating Thomas Sharp and John McAuley as coconspirators. Agnew said that he had been trapped in the burning building and was seriously injured when he threw himself into the flames and rolled to safety.20

The Icarians acquired the temple in March 1849 for the minimum established by the trustees, two thousand dollars. Before they could realize their plans to restore the gutted structure as a meeting hall, dining hall, and school, a second disaster hit. On the afternoon of June 27, 1850, a fierce windstorm toppled two walls of the temple and left a third unstable. Seven masons laying new foundations for interior supports in the basement narrowly escaped injury when the north wall slammed into the cavity. To save their investment, the Icarians salvaged the shaped temple stones for use in a communal dining hall, a boarding school, and other buildings.21

Not everyone welcomed the Icarians to Nauvoo. For some residents of Illinois, Cabet's effort to build a self-contained community seemed too much like that of the Latter-day Saints. The legislature rejected the Icarians' request for a city charter in February 1851. The memory of Mormon Nauvoo was too fresh.22 A cholera epidemic among the new immigrants raised fears in Nauvoo that the Icarians had brought it with them from New Orleans. Actually, the epidemic affected communities up and down the Mississippi. A Latter-day Saint visiting St. Louis reported, "It was the Asiatic cholera. They would be taken first with the cramps in the stomach and vomiting, then they would begin to look a dark black color in the face, then their limbs would cramp up, and in a short time they would be dead." The Icarians buried their dead secretly to keep confidential the number of deaths.23

These temporary setbacks did not deter the Icarians from pursuing their dream. Residents and visitors alike complimented them on their orderly, industrious, virtuous approach to life. At Nauvoo, they operated a sawmill, a large flour mill, a brewery, a distillery, two weekly newspapers (one in French), and a communal vegetable garden and orchard. They exported local products to St. Louis. They preached against smoking, dressed uniformly and simply, ate in a common dining hall, emphasized education, and resolved community issues through deliberation and arbitration.24

It was internal dissension that thwarted Cabet's hope for a utopian community. Strife over leadership roles and the definition of economic equality prompted some followers to leave Nauvoo, but replacements kept coming from France. In 1855, Cabet announced plans to abandon Nauvoo. A third of the group in Nauvoo helped Cabet establish a colony in Cheltenham near St. Louis and elected him president for life. He died a month later of a stroke. The Cheltenham colony continued for a decade before collapsing. Other followers established communes on the group's lands in Iowa; still others moved to California. The scattered groups disbanded or died off in the late 1880s and 1890s. A few Icarians remained to continue their communal efforts in Nauvoo and died there.25

Besides the new citizens and the Icarians, Nauvoo attracted immigrants who had been drawn to the fertile lands of Illinois from Germany, Switzerland, England, Ireland, and Scotland. Arriving at the same time as the Icarians in the late 1840s and 1850s, these settlers came as individual families. German immigrants received direct encouragement to settle in Nauvoo from the United States and Foreign Emigration Homestead Association in Philadelphia. This group, whose motto read "Every Man a Freeholder!" promoted the city with a Map of Nauvoo created in 1848 by A. Cherill. It carried a title section in two languages.26

The Germans came in numbers sufficient to create a distinct identity for Nauvoo's economic and cultural life that lasted until World War I. By 1866, the city was dotted with two hundred fifty vineyards. Temple limestone lined many local wine cellars. As the Icarians withdrew, religion took a Germanic turn. For many years, the city's Catholic, Lutheran, Presbyterian, and Methodist churches offered services in the German language. The maturing of an English-speaking second generation eliminated this need. Nauvoo's German and English Presbyterian churches merged in 1890, with other denominations adjusting later on. The growth of German nationalism in Europe caused German-Americans in Nauvoo to minimize identification with their ancestral homeland, and a distinguishable Germanic Nauvoo faded further from view.

During the Icarian and German stages of Nauvoo's development, the new citizens coexisted with these and other cultural groups. As Germanic distinctiveness faded in the early twentieth century, Nauvoo's small-town identity reflected a gradual blending of various peoples and cultures. The new order that emerged after World War I became more typical of the rural Midwest. But residents of Nauvoo did not forget their past and eventually came to celebrate the best part of the several Nauvoos those defined in turn by Joseph Smith, the New Citizens, Etienne Cabet, German immigrants, and the forces of American assimilation.

Gathering the Remnants

While Nauvoo was adjusting to new peoples and new ways of public life, Latter-day Saints faced again the question of the necessity of congregating as a people in a centralized location. The majority, who followed the Quorum of the Twelve to an isolated refuge beyond the Rocky Mountains, accepted this and other foundational doctrines. Besides their willingness to move to a new place of refuge, the westering Saints were set apart from the schismatic groups because they accepted the principles and practices centered on the ordinances of the House of the Lord and other doctrines taught by Joseph Smith. These the Prophet had implemented in Kirtland and Nauvoo.

The restoration of the "ancient order of things" as preached in the 1830s had emphasized three related points: the apostasy from the truth of Christ's pure religion after the death of his apostles, the failure of Christian reformers to remedy this falling away,27 and the restoration of priesthood authority and the spiritual gifts of the New Testament Saints, including revelation and the visitations of angels. These last points encompassed acceptance of a new witness of Christ's ancient ministry, the Book of Mormon.28 Early missionaries also focused on the new order of righteousness anticipated during the Millennium.29 The schismatics of the dispersion from Nauvoo held to at least some of these early statements of Latter-day Saint doctrine.

But the Saints most in tune with Joseph Smith's teachings recognized that the ancient order of things included more than the doctrines and practices that had been restored during the first years of Joseph Smith's ministry. The early phase of the Restoration, including the heavenly visits in the Kirtland Temple, combined with the doctrines taught in Nauvoo to yield a fulness of the gospel, a joining of truths from all dispensations. This unfolding of doctrines, line upon line, included the keys to administer the exalting priesthood ordinances not just baptism for the living but also for the dead and the temple covenants of the endowment and eternal marriage. These doctrines and ordinances, unique to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, pointed worthy Saints toward the hallowed glories of exaltation.30 This was the distinctive inheritance preserved in their wilderness refuge in the West.

Those who were ignorant of the doctrines unfolded in Kirtland and Nauvoo or who rejected them shunned the call to move west and sought fellowship apart from the gathered Saints. Some of these people dismissed the need for a centralized location. As others had done in 1839, they blamed the gathering for the violence and confrontation that had happened and would have no part of it. Once again, to gather or to scatter, temporally and spiritually, was a choice many had to make. Doctrinally, they remained anchored in the Book of Mormon and certain of the canonized revelations of the 1844 Doctrine and Covenants. Some of them rejected as the products of a fallen prophet the temple doctrines and practices introduced in Nauvoo. Others held to some of these essentials of the unfolding Restoration but without a full understanding or the authority to administer temple ordinances. A few, out of ignorance or apostasy, denied that such things existed in the church before the Twelve took charge. Most of these ungathered Saints remained behind in the Midwest. The others left Utah to rejoin scattered branches in Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and eastern Canada.

Over a period of years, new dissident groups emerged. Most of them continued or redefined the religious core they had known before Nauvoo. Some leaders built a new church from ideas garnered from their experiences with the restored Church of Christ of the Kirtland years. Others underscored specific aspects of the faith to satisfy themselves and their followers. Through this process, the Prophet's spiritual inheritance was divided among many children of the Nauvoo experience. Eventually, some of the dispersed Saints in the Midwest coalesced around a movement that became the Reorganization, headed by Joseph Smith III. The Saints who followed the Twelve remained in numbers the majority and in doctrines and programs the heirs to the unabridged restoration of all things.

Some of those who abandoned their homes in Nauvoo in 1846 reversed the gathering and returned to relatives in the United States or Canada or elsewhere.31 Each decision reflected individual needs and concerns. At the time of the western exodus, an estimated three hundred branches of the church existed in the United States and Canada and in the British Isles. These were the destinations for those seeking a home among the ungathered Saints. Many exiles from Nauvoo simply stopped at convenient places up and down the Mississippi River or in towns a convenient distance inland. This dispersion, like a similar scattering during the expulsion from Missouri, was a practical necessity at the time. As explained in an epistle from the Twelve at Winter Quarters, "The Saints were obligated to scatter to the north, south, east, and west, wherever they could find shelter and procure employment."32

One of the closest magnets was St. Louis. A large number of Latter-day Saint men from the Hancock County area had worked in that booming commercial center during the years of Nauvoo's own rapid expansion. In 1846, some of them transported their families downriver. St. Louis became a place for the Nauvoo exiles to gather as well as a port of call for British immigrants. At a branch conference in January 1847, the elders reported 1,478 members in the city, an increase of more than one thousand in three years. Brigham Young encouraged able men in St. Louis to leave their families temporarily to help with the work in the Missouri River camps. Some of them accepted the invitation. Others fitted out wagons and, with their families, joined in the migration across the Rockies.33

When the Twelve returned to Winter Quarters after designating a place of settlement in the Great Salt Lake Valley, they launched an effort to reverse the scattering of the Saints. According to the Twelve, never before in the history of the church had so many members been scattered over such a broad area and become so isolated from normal communications channels. On December 23, 1847, Brigham Young signed an important epistle inviting the Saints to gather to a new Zion beyond the Rockies to help "build a house to the name of the God of Jacob, a place of peace, a city of rest, a habitation for the oppressed." The letter from the Twelve served as both a news sheet and a plan of action. It brought members up to date on the activities of the apostles, their travels, the pioneer journey, and the recruitment of the Mormon Battalion eighteen months earlier. The message addressed both economic and cultural needs. Continuing the emphasis from Nauvoo, it encouraged the rich to help the poor and to establish factories to create jobs. It reminded the Saints of the need to provide books and a museum for the education of the rising generation. Most important, it reemphasized the need to congregate in the West to accomplish the church's mission of salvation to preach the gospel and to administer temple ordinances. "Should any ask, Where is Zion? tell them in America," the epistle instructed the elders; "and if any ask, What is Zion? tell them the pure in heart."34

The Twelve sent special missionaries across North America and to the British Isles to encourage the Saints to gather. The elders delivered copies of the epistle and sought funds to help transport the belongings of the Twelve to the Salt Lake Valley. Three members of the Twelve led out in the financial aspect of this mission: Orson Hyde and Ezra T. Benson were assigned to gather funds in the Eastern states, and Amasa Lyman, in the Southern states. A fourth apostle, Orson Pratt, was sent on a mission to England to preach, preside, and encourage the gathering. Meanwhile, the Twelve instructed Orson Spencer, presiding in England, to route emigrating Saints via New Orleans and St. Louis to Council Bluffs. A first group of eight missionary couriers left Winter Quarters on December 26 to seek those lost in the dispersal from Nauvoo. The men traveled together as far as St. Louis, where they had printed the General Epistle from the Council of the Twelve Apostles, then they fanned out along assigned routes.35

One of the missionaries, John Scott, visited towns along the Mississippi River northward to Galena. At every stop, he found a few Saints, some of them organized as a branch under a presiding elder. When appropriate, Scott would call a meeting to explain his mission. He would summarize or read the account from the eight-page General Epistle of the Twelve. Then he would rehearse the financial needs of poor members and church leaders. He encouraged the Saints to move soon to the Missouri River staging grounds in preparation for the spring 1848 migration to Great Salt Lake City. The response at Nashville, Iowa, was typical: "I found some of them very desirous to go with the church but they were generally very destitute of means. There are some that are rich and able to go but are not willing." A few declined because of poor health or their affiliation with James J. Strang or with others actively canvassing for support.36

Former Nauvoo city marshall Jonathan C. Wright crossed a frozen Mississippi from Iowa in mid-January 1848 on a similar mission to gather up the Saints in western Illinois. He visited with Emma Smith Bidamon and the church trustees in Nauvoo and later sailed downriver to St. Louis before launching his mission northward along an inland route to Springfield and beyond. In her conversation with Wright, Emma said she distrusted the Saints who had gone west, or Brighamites, as she labeled them. Among other things, she disliked their unwillingness to admit their covert practice of plural marriage. Reaffirming her belief that the church had been established by revelation, she told Wright that one of Joseph's revelations had warned of the church's destruction if it did not complete the temple. Emma wrongly believed the Saints had left an unfinished temple in Nauvoo. She declined Wright's invitation, saying that "she could go to Heaven without going to the Mountains."37

Other Illinois Saints visited by Wright who were unwilling to move west gave reasons as disparate as poverty and prosperity, poor health, and religious disagreements. Some remained puzzled over plural marriage, which they knew only through John C. Bennett's distorted exposé of the "spiritual wife doctrine." One man struggled to understand why William Smith, George Miller, and Lyman Wight had separated themselves from the church.38 The Saints sometimes were merely uninformed about doctrinal developments in Nauvoo:

I visited some persons who had been in the church and still were in but they said they believed Mormonism as it used to be preached, but as it is preached nowadays they did not know anything about it. I gave them such instructions as I had for them. They seemed to rejoice in it and said it appeared something like old times and they wished they was in the camp.39

For others, the comfort of the status quo interfered. A member in St. Clair County was reluctant to leave his prosperous four-hundred-acre farm and orchard. Besides, the man said, with so many schismatics claiming the right to lead, he would "wait awhile and see who was right." At Alton, Wright "found the Saints very cold, many of them, and not much of the Spirit of the Gospel, but a good deal of the spirit of the world." Wright cautioned those he contacted that their salvation depended upon their going to a temple city in the West and advised against procrastination.40 On his visit to St. Louis, Wright similarly had "found many warm hearts in the city but a great many of the Saints . . . becoming much attached to the good things of this world. . . . They are more in favor of a City than a Wilderness life," he wrote, "yet there are many who are desirous to come with the Saints west and will do so."41

One of those anxious but unable to gather with the Saints was Sarah J. Potts. A convert with six children and two orphans under her care, she and her unbaptized husband could not afford to migrate. A government clerk for years with the Engineer Service in North Carolina, he had barely supported his family and faced a layoff because of reduced funding of public works. In April 1847, Sarah informed a church trustee in Nauvoo,

It is very painful to me to think that my children should be brought up in Babylon, deprived of the privileges of the Church, perhaps never to hear the Gospel in its fulness, surrounded with so many temptations and follies, but I must try and point out to them the straight and narrow path, and leave the result to God, in whom I put my trust.42

The missionaries who were sent out to gather the Saints were continuing a process begun in 1830. Congregating in designated gathering places remained for the Saints a test of faith, an outward manifestation of an inward conversion. It was a choice each convert had to make, time and again during the first decades, a choice influenced both by desire and by ability to act. "Come All Ye Saints," a migration song popular in the late 1840s, captured both the sacred promise of gathering and the premise that individual members were making their own decisions. They could heed the call to the wilderness refuge with its promised temple blessings or follow other options. The song concluded:

Who are these ye are leading forth Upon these lonely wilds? Yea, they're prophets, priests, and kings Who all have been exiled Together with their little ones And wives in sorrow moving, Have left their homes for better ones. This is a day of choosing.43

The most significant religious factors keeping Latter-day Saints from moving west were concerns about teachings and practices. Scattered members often lacked a clear understanding of the doctrines and ordinances revealed to Joseph Smith. They heard contrasting claims and didn't know how to resolve their confusion. They knew of the temple but lacked the converting spirit that came to those who heard the Prophet explain the doctrines in Nauvoo. Those who wondered about what should be taught or who should lead the church listened for a convincing voice. One Iowa Saint confided to a relative in Vermont,

We feel like a sheep without a shepherd. . . . Many of the church are wholly giving up the ship entirely and others are very restless not knowing the right way and want to find it. So it is with us. Strang has given some good revelations if they were true, but time will soon tell the story.44

Time did eventually resolve the question for the wondering Saints. Most found satisfaction for their spiritual yearnings through The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the West. Others felt satisfied by the selection of doctrines and practices embraced by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints in the Midwest. Some converts returned to their Protestant roots. Others were satisfied, at least for a time, with options proposed by various dissident groups.45

Those Who Did Not Go West

Of the schismatics, James J. Strang was the most outspoken early claimant to the Prophet's mantle. For a decade after Nauvoo was abandoned, he continued the proselytizing effort that he had launched immediately after the murder of Joseph Smith. In the spring of 1846, the thirty-three-year-old Strang published a notice in the Warsaw Signal inviting the Saints still in Hancock County to join him in Voree (later named Burlington), Wisconsin. The Signal's anti-Mormon editor, Thomas Sharp, optimistically predicted that Strang would attract as many disciples as Brigham Young. The number who actually accepted Strang as leader fluctuated continually. Estimates of those in various scattered branches ranged as high as two thousand overall. In 1847, Strang created a center on Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan. The number of his followers who congregated there peaked seven years later at just above five hundred.46

The claims of the Wisconsin prophet appealed to some prominent Latter-day Saints who had been casualties of the transition after the assassination. They wanted to be "Mormon" without plural marriage or late Nauvoo doctrines. Acting largely upon the advice of some of these former leaders, Strang offered revelations and some practices imitating those of Joseph Smith. Strang established an Order of Enoch at Voree, Wisconsin, in 1848, with all property held in his name. He published a code of conduct and outlined a system of church government in The Book of the Law of the Lord.47 Among his earliest supporters were John C. Bennett, George J. Adams, William Smith, John E. Page, and the former president of the Nauvoo stake, William Marks. Smith became the patriarch in Strang's organization. Bennett worked behind the scenes, and the others served as counselors or apostles. Bennett helped create a secret monarchical organization called the Order of Illuminati, with Strang as imperial primate. The body was governed by a grand council and noblemen.48 At one time or another, Strang claimed as associates men who had first affiliated with Sidney Rigdon, among them Benjamin Winchester, Martin Harris, Warren Post, Lucian R. Foster, Jason W. Briggs, and Zenos H. Gurley Sr.49 Many of these men later became leaders in other groups of Midwestern Mormons, including the Reorganization. Martin Harris rejoined the Latter-day Saints later in life and died in Utah.

Those who joined Strang on Beaver Island when he moved there from Voree soon faced new challenges. In 1850, Strang had himself crowned King James in an elaborate ceremony choreographed by George Adams. Then Strang further alienated many followers by taking a plural wife.50 In the mid-1850s, he faced numerous lawsuits, including federal charges of counterfeiting, trespassing on United States lands, obstruction of the mail, and treason. Two disgruntled followers stalked Strang and in June 1856 boldly shot him. He died three weeks later at age forty-three, having maintained a following for twelve years. Even though he did not appoint a successor, a token organization continued through the twentieth century with several hundred members living in four states.51

Other less controversial leaders attempted to serve the scattered Saints during the late 1840s and 1850s. Some created formal organizations. Others offered casual counsel. Among these earnest shepherds were Lyman Wight, Alpheus Cutler, James C. Brewster, Austin W. Cowles, William E. McLellin, and John E. Page. Each of these men emphasized certain aspects of Latter-day Saint beliefs or practices. Most of them opposed teachings related to the temple. They shared an earnest desire to protect the church from dissolution. Even though they had not challenged the authority of the Twelve in 1844, all of them eventually rejected Brigham Young's right to lead the Saints.

Lyman Wight and Alpheus Cutler disagreed with the Twelve over the timing of carrying the restored gospel to Native Americans and living the law of consecration. Anxious to fulfill the assignments given to them by Joseph Smith, they abandoned their loyalty to the newly sustained authorities and struck out on their own. Wight failed to convince Wisconsin Indians to accompany his pineries group to Texas, nor did he find converts among displaced tribes south of the Red River. In late 1845, with about one hundred fifty Wisconsin Saints, Wight set up a settlement in the area of Austin, Texas. Two years later, the community moved west a short distance and founded Zodiac along the Pedernales River near Fredricksburg. After the Twelve excommunicated Wight in December 1848 for his unwillingness to accept their counsel, he became president of his own Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Wight continued the doctrines and practices of the church in Nauvoo. His followers administered temple ordinances in the upper level of a large storehouse built to house their consecrated donations, and they accepted plural marriage. With some others, Wight soon came to believe that Joseph Smith III was the Prophet's rightful heir. In 1851, floods forced yet another relocation; two years later, the colony moved to Bandera, Texas. Wight died there suddenly in March 1858 at age sixty-three, leaving his followers to seek other affiliations.52

Cutler, a faithful convert from the Kirtland years, worked as a stonemason on the temples in Kirtland and Nauvoo. He followed Brigham Young across Iowa and established an encampment at Cutler's Park. Cutler was a member of the Council of Fifty and had served on the high council in Nauvoo. Like Lyman Wight and others, he had accepted from Joseph Smith a special mission to the Indians and had helped lead the Wisconsin pine country expedition in 1841. Cutler and his wife, Lois, had received their temple endowments and sealing, and Cutler took plural wives in 1846. With Brigham Young's blessing, Cutler and about two hundred followers offered agricultural education and the gospel to the Delaware and Oneida Indians in Kansas Territory.53

Over the succeeding years, Cutler's actions alienated him from Orson Hyde and the Kanesville high council. They branded his message as "Lamanism" because of its single-minded concentration on preaching to the Lamanites, or Indians. The preaching mission was not aberrant, but other matters put Cutler into apostasy, including his creation of the True Church of Jesus Christ in 1850.54 Cutler was excommunicated in 1851 for his unwillingness to take counsel. The Cutlerites formed a colony in Iowa in 1852 at a place they called Manti. Cutler claimed special authority from Joseph Smith to reorganize the church after the Prophet's death. In doctrine, the Cutlerites held to the ideal of a communal economic order and an eventual return to Jackson County, Missouri. By the late 1850s, Cutler's following included more than five hundred members in three branches in southwestern Iowa. Despite Cutler's death in 1864, at age eighty, his True Church of Jesus Christ carried out a planned move to Clitherall, Minnesota. Only part of the Clitherall congregation accepted the establishment in 1902 of a headquarters in Independence, Missouri. Eventually, only the Missouri congregation survived, a group reduced to fewer than three dozen by 1990. In the upper level of its meeting place, the surviving church administers some ordinances reminiscent of those given in Nauvoo but not temple marriages or sealings.55

Two other schismatic leaders found direction through revelation and doctrine. James C. Brewster imitated the early Joseph Smith, while Austin Cowles challenged the Prophet's Nauvoo teachings. Like James Strang, Brewster attracted followers when he issued revelations and translations of ancient books. Brewster had been claiming revelations for the church since 1836, at age ten. During the mid-1840s, Brewster issued "abridgements" of seven lost books of Esdras. The publications were filled with apocalyptic forecasts and challenged Joseph Smith's authority. In 1848, Brewster organized a Church of Christ at Springfield. Soon he had branches in Ohio and Iowa made up largely of former Strangites. For four years, Brewster's Kirtland colleagues published a periodical, The Olive Branch. Meanwhile, the twenty-four-year-old Brewster took a band of pioneers to New Mexico on a mission to native peoples. Dissension led to an early dissolution of the group, and Brewster returned to Illinois, where in 1867 he joined Sidney Rigdon's church.56

While Brewster pursued the prophetic strains of Latter-day Saint beliefs, Austin Cowles reacted against developments in Nauvoo. A merchant and active Freemason, Cowles had served as a counselor in the stake presidency in Nauvoo. Disturbed by the institution of plural marriage, political involvements by church leaders, and the ordinances of the endowment, Cowles joined William Law's reformed church. When the group's members fled Nauvoo after the martyrdom, Cowles affiliated with Brewster for a time and then formed his own short-lived group in Kirtland.57

Another group with a Kirtland geographical and doctrinal base appeared in March 1847, when a six-member committee began publishing The Ensign of Liberty for about forty followers. William E. McLellin, one of the original apostles, whom Joseph Smith later described as having "more learning than sense," served as chairman and editor. McLellin had withdrawn from the church in 1836 but held to his belief in the Book of Mormon and his hopes for the establishment of Zion. Over the next decade, McLellin joined briefly first with George Hinkle, then with William Law, and next with Sidney Rigdon. After flirting with the Strangites, he and a few former Strang affiliates in Kirtland tried to reestablish the church on what they called its "old foundations." McClellin argued that Joseph Smith had lost his prophetic mantle when he manifested a militant spirit in leading Zion's Camp to Missouri in 1834 and succumbing to a spirit of speculation surrounding the Kirtland bank. The Kirtland group accepted David Whitmer as the Prophet's successor on the basis of his 1834 ordination as president of the Clay County high council with jurisdiction over the church in Missouri. On a visit to Richmond, Missouri, McClellin convinced Whitmer to head the new Church of Christ. Participating in this reorganization were Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and Book of Mormon witnesses Hiram Page, Jacob Whitmer, and John Whitmer, all of them dropouts from the main body of the church in the mid-1830s. Leaving the new leaders in Missouri, McClellin returned to Kirtland to build up the church there. Through the Ensign, he challenged Brigham Young's leadership and "Twelveite Latter Day Saintism." Besides their succession claims, McClellin's group believed that the original church had strayed when it added "Latter Day Saints" to its name. In less than two years, Whitmer's presidency in Missouri was denouncing McLellin's organizational efforts. A letter written by Hiram Page on behalf of Whitmer rejected the offices of high priest and seer and denounced the doctrine of the gathering. That ended McClellin's credibility. As his followers went their separate ways, McClellin resumed his practice of Thompsonian medicine. Though approached by others, he never again affiliated with any religious group.58

Another early apostle, John E. Page, a member of the Twelve from 1838 until his excommunication in 1846, turned first to Strang. Dissatisfied, he became an independent counselor in the early 1850s to those perplexed over competing claims to succeed the Prophet. His supporters included William Marks and William W. Blair, both of whom became leaders in the Reorganization. In 1863, Page joined Granville Hedrick, who was assembling disaffected followers of James J. Strang and William Smith and who later established the remnant Church of Christ on part of the Independence temple lot. Page died four years later at age sixty-eight, still not satisfied that he had found Joseph Smith's true successor.59

Many of those perplexed about issues of doctrine and succession found satisfaction in a form of Mormonism advocated by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. The Reorganization coalesced during the 1850s around individuals drawn together from various groups searching for answers in the postmartyrdom church. Individuals who had stayed aloof from other would-be leaders were among the early affiliates, along with most of Lyman Wight's followers, many Cutlerites and Strangites, and some from various other dissident groups and isolated branches. The emergence of what was first known as the New Organization was nurtured most effectively by Jason W. Briggs and Zenos H. Gurley Sr. They were two among many people seeking to preserve what they termed an "original Mormonism" reflecting aspects of the pre-Nauvoo church. Both affiliated first with James Strang but lost faith in him when he began to imitate the political and religious developments of Nauvoo. As did so many dissidents, these men rejected the final revealed teachings and practices of the Prophet. By 1851, they were working together to prepare a remnant to receive Joseph Smith III as their leader.60

Briggs, a native of upstate New York, was a Latter-day Saint convert of 1841. He served as presiding elder in Beloit, Wisconsin. In 1846, he and the entire branch switched their loyalties to James Strang. Briggs promoted Strang until 1850 and then spent a year with William Smith at Covington, Kentucky. Briggs rejected Strang's autocratic style but was attracted to William Smith's teachings on lineal descent. Briggs disagreed with both leaders when they introduced plural marriage. In November 1851, back on his Wisconsin farm, the thirty-year-old Briggs eventually concluded that a lineal descendant of Joseph Smith would ultimately be called by the Lord as "one mighty and strong" to preside over the high priesthood. In the meantime, Briggs decided that it was his mission to preserve this notion and to contend against the leadership of Brigham Young and the practice of plural marriage. He convinced most members of the Beloit branch to reject Strang and join him in preparing a people to accept the leadership of Joseph Smith III.61

Gurley followed a similar path to the New Organization. A Presbyterian leader in Bridgewater, New York, he joined the Methodist church and became a schoolteacher in Leeds, Ontario, Canada, where Latter-day Saint missionary James Blakesley baptized him in 1838. He moved to Far West, Missouri; then, as a seventy, he helped establish the church at La Harpe, Illinois. Attracted by the claims of James J. Strang, Gurley became a Strangite missionary in Canada and Wisconsin, where he became president of Strang's Yellow Stone branch in Wisconsin in 1850. A year later, the fifty-year-old seeker rejected Strang. He had decided that the right person to lead the church was Joseph Smith III, then a nineteen-year-old farmer in Nauvoo. By the spring of 1852, most members of the Yellow Stone branch had likewise rejected Strang and accepted Gurley as their spiritual leader.62

The two branches led by Briggs and Gurley met for a series of semiannual conferences near Beloit beginning in June 1852. Gurley believed that an interim organization was necessary to formalize their shared beliefs. The conferences passed resolutions defining ecclesiastical matters and doctrine. Delegates agreed that the only legitimate heir to the authority of Joseph Smith Jr. would be a direct descendant. The New Organization disavowed any association with plural marriage and encouraged an active missionary effort. At the April conference in 1853, held at Zarahemla, Wisconsin, a formal organization emerged with Jason W. Briggs as temporary president.63

It would be seven years before Joseph Smith III stepped forward as a leader of the New Organization. Meanwhile, missionaries from the New Organization established followings among scattered Saints in northern Illinois and across southern Iowa. In Iowa in 1859, they baptized a hundred members and organized six branches. At the spring conference that year, in Amboy, Illinois, former Nauvoo stake president William Marks joined the church and helped established the True Latter Day Saints' Herald.64

By 1855, Joseph Smith III had decided what he did not want to do. "The Mormons of Salt Lake are not the Mormons of my Father's faith," he informed a friend. "They teach doctrines which . . . my Father never taught or believed." His mother, Emma, had taken a similar position, ignoring or denying the role plural marriage had played in her life. The Prophet's associates in Utah knew the truth, for they had received personally from Joseph Smith the doctrines and ordinances that his family in Illinois had rejected.65 Emma feared that harassments like those suffered by her deceased husband might beset any son who took an active role in church leadership. Yet she was not averse to the opinions of William Smith and William Marks that Joseph III might yet lead the scattered church. On this point, Emma's eldest son kept his own counsel. Over a period of several years, he pondered his options whether to spend his life in secular pursuits or accept the invitation to guide a religious remnant looking for a leader.66

In October 1856, Joseph III and Emmeline Griswold of Nauvoo were married by a Presbyterian minister. Not a Latter-day Saint, Emmeline agreed to allow her husband to pursue an ecclesiastical path if he chose to do so. The following month, he was visited by George A. Smith and Erastus Snow, apostles from Utah. He rejected their invitation to move west, citing his disagreement with plural marriage. Nor was he ready yet to join the New Organization. He had been kept informed of the actions and publications of the interim conferences but ignored a letter from the New Organization in 1856 inviting him to fill the "vacant seat" of his father. For a time, Smith cared for the family farm outside Nauvoo. He had worked as a laborer and had tried his hand at merchandising with his stepfather, Lewis Bidamon. Later, he read law and served in Nauvoo as a justice of the peace. Supporting a family was a difficult task in that economically depressed region. In late 1859, he decided against a secular vocation. Early the next year, he informed William Marks of his availability for religious service. With his mother, the twenty-eight-year-old Joseph attended the April conference at Amboy, Lee County, Illinois. He was accepted by unanimous vote of the conference, and then William Marks, Zenos Gurley Sr., Samuel Powers, and William W. Blair ordained him president of the high priesthood.67

This action allowed the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, as it came to be known in the 1860s, to fulfill the needs of those uncomfortable with the structures and teachings of the church as they stood in 1844. (The Reorganization continued the traditional use of separate words for "Latter Day Saints" in its name; the British hyphenated usage "Latter-day Saints" prevailed in Salt Lake City.) The Midwestern church offered a familiar priesthood pattern, spiritual gifts, a hope for a communal Zion, and a promise of personal salvation. It had the quiet, steadying leadership of Joseph Smith III to guide it through the nineteenth century and into the twentieth.68

Through an active missionary program, focused on Latter-day Saints who had not yet moved to Utah, the church gradually expanded its beginning membership of five hundred followers. First, it contacted the scattered Midwestern Saints. Next, it reached out to Saints in Utah and England. Most of Lyman Wight's followers, who shared William Smith's emphasis on lineal succession, joined the Reorganization. Attempts to recruit the Cutlerites met with some success.69 The largely unsuccessful effort in Utah included challenges against polygamy and the authority of Brigham Young. As many as two-thirds of those recruited there moved east, leaving fewer than a thousand members of the Reorganization in Utah by the end of the century.70 Contacts made in England beginning in 1863 led to the creation of five congregations there, but many of these people migrated to America. Missionaries sailed to Tahiti, Australia, and Scandinavia in the 1870s and continental Europe in the 1880s. After twenty years, the church counted fifteen thousand members. By 1914, the year of Joseph III's death, membership had grown to more than seventy-one thousand; in contrast, more than six times that number were then affiliated with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.71

During the first decade of his service, Joseph III filled the presiding quorums. Among those interested in serving was William Smith. Joseph III offered his uncle church membership but not appointment as an apostle or patriarch. William died in 1894, at age eighty-two, without obtaining the office he desired. Three years later Alexander Hale Smith, the next oldest surviving son of Joseph and Emma Smith, was called as patriarch.72

An essential step for the Reorganization was to clarify its beliefs. The new church stood by its commitment to the three standard books of scripture from the early days of the Restoration. Emma Smith Bidamon preserved the Prophet's "New Translation" of the Bible as family property and allowed the church to publish it in 1867. Acceptance of the Book of Mormon and the 1844 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants further identified the Reorganization as believing in the early translations and revelations of Joseph Smith. A grandson of David Whitmer donated the printer's copy of the Book of Mormon manuscript in 1903, providing another historical link with the past. The Reorganization eventually rejected the book of Abraham, first published in Nauvoo, as an uninspired document. They expanded the Doctrine and Covenants with revelations from Joseph Smith III.73

Most of the divergent groups had spoken out against plural marriage, temple ordinances, and associated doctrines. With strong support within the church, Joseph Smith III made it a central endeavor of his administration to denounce plural marriage. For nearly twenty years, church agents actively encouraged the federal government to outlaw the practice and to curb Latter-day Saint political influence. Joseph III visited Utah several times, and he and his cousin Joseph F. Smith conducted a lifelong correspondence over this and other issues.74

Some members of the Reorganization accepted the doctrines of the nature of God taught in the King Follett sermon and in the book of Abraham. To accommodate this diversity of opinion, church leaders defined the belief as optional. As advocates died, the Nauvoo teachings faded. They were dismissed as heretical by an 1878 conference and replaced with a more orthodox Christian doctrine of the Trinity. During this same time, belief in the divinity of temple ordinances such as baptism for the dead and sealings diminished. Officially, the church allowed personal interpretation on proxy baptisms. By 1886, the practice was deemphasized as not binding by revelation. From a practical perspective, believing members lacked a place in which to implement these temple practices. Utah observers pointed out their lack of authority to do so anyway.75

To resolve differing positions on the question of gathering, Joseph III set a clear direction within months of his ordination. Members would remain "separated for the present," he said, to avoid the problems that gathering had caused in Missouri and Illinois. The establishment of Zion in Jackson County was not as urgent as many believed, he said, for the Millennium only seemed close through the "prophetic eye." He advised the Saints to avoid places of wickedness. They should seek out a tranquil place of peace and quiet an encouragement to settle in the rural towns and farms of the Midwest. "Our land is wide, and full of pleasant places wanting good men for citizens," he said.76 Smith's counsel was not uniformly accepted, and some followers began the movement back to Jackson County in 1867. A branch was organized there six years later, and a small brick church erected in 1884. A much larger stone building, seating fifteen hundred, was completed in 1892. A stake of the Reorganization was organized in Independence in 1901 and two more in 1916.77

Joseph III moved from Nauvoo in 1866 to make his home northeast across the state in Plano, Illinois, where the Saints' Herald was being published. He relocated to Lamoni, Iowa, in 1881 to support a communal experiment known as the United Order of Enoch, a joint stock company launched more than a decade earlier. In 1895, Graceland College opened its doors in Lamoni as a church-sponsored institution of higher education. In 1921, the Reorganization established its headquarters in Independence, Missouri. Within a few years, construction began of a building known as the Auditorium, which would serve as an assembly hall and office building. It was a daunting undertaking for a church of around 125,000 members. Financial problems, the Depression, and World War II delayed completion until the 1950s, but parts of the building were used earlier. The church completed a temple nearby in 1993. Not intended for ordinances like those performed in Latter-day Saint temples, it was designated instead as a house of learning, prayer, and contemplation and a place to promote the church's mission of world peace in families, congregations, communities, and nations. The Kirtland Temple, purchased by a member of the Reorganized church and later deeded to the church, became a historic site and meeting place. Title to the first temple of the Restoration was clarified in an 1880 court case denying the donor's claim to ownership.78

Joseph III was succeeded in office in May 1915 by his eldest living son, Frederick M. Smith, who had been serving as a counselor in the First Presidency. The office of president continued in the Smith line until 1996, when it passed to W. Grant McMurray, a counselor in the First Presidency who was not a descendant of Joseph Smith.79

By that time, many other traditional practices and doctrines of the Reorganization had been altered. The church in the twentieth century became even less like its sister church headquartered in Salt Lake City and more like contemporary Protestantism.80 After more than a century of attempting to distinguish itself from its Utah relative, the Reorganized church inaugurated its own new order of things. Beginning in the late 1960s, its theological position shifted significantly toward compatibility with mainline Protestant churches. Authority was decentralized to allow more diversity within the organization. W. Paul Jones, an outside consultant whose advice had influenced that shift, cautioned that without a change in direction, "there will be an increasing liberal dilution until the RLDS Church simply becomes one more Protestant denomination."81

These trends and the ordination of women to priesthood office in 1984 created an internal schism. As the New Organization itself had done in the 1850s, a reactionary faction formed independent branches in an attempt to preserve the old order. The conservative leaders of this schism drew away around twenty thousand supporters. The remaining congregations, meantime, encouraged the participation of women in local ministries. The church basked in a broadening ecumenical spirit and moved forward its temple emphasis as a symbol of its mission of peace. At its biennial conference in April 2000, the Reorganization emphasized its differences with its roots by adopting a new name. One year later, it became the Community of Christ.82

The Reorganization's interest in distancing itself from the Utah-based Latter-day Saints led it ultimately to a new, Protestant definition of itself. As it moved toward internal pluralism and external ecumenism, the new identity of the Reorganized church became a pale imitation of its beginnings. In contrast, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has carefully shepherded its core, unique doctrines, whose common thread lies in their relationship to the House of the Lord.83

During a symposium in 1989 celebrating the sesquicentennial of the founding of Nauvoo, a presentation on the doctrinal contribution of those years summarized the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith that began unfolding in the earliest years of the church and reached their full development in Nauvoo:

[These] include some of Mormonism's most central doctrines and practices: celestial marriage, the familial relationship of God the Father and of his Son Jesus Christ to humanity, the character of God, the materiality of spirit, a more comprehensive understanding of the keys of the priesthood, premortal existence, the plurality of gods, ordinances for the dead, and the endowment. These precepts represent Joseph Smith's key Nauvoo teachings, the list of which reads like a summary of the most distinctive aspects of Latter-day Saint religion.84

Although dissidents and apostates rejected or drifted away from these central doctrines and practices, the church that had been transplanted to a new gathering place in the West nurtured them. The memory of Nauvoo that carries the greatest meaning for Latter-day Saints today is centered in these doctrines and their application. The geographical and spiritual center of Nauvoo during the 1840s was the temple. Nauvoo will be remembered in the future because of the House of the Lord and what it represents a place where "the peaceable things of the kingdom" are taught and where God's covenant people receive sacred ordinances that point them along the path toward eternal life.85

NotesChapter 20. "The New Order of Things"

Epigraph: Prospectus of the Hancock Eagle, February 23, 1846; Sidney Rigdon to William H. Paynes, July 9, 1858, Rigdon Collection, Church Archives.
