Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 21

Remembering Nauvoo

[Nauvoo] reveals a piece of work so fine in character and of such significance and magnitude as to reflect great credit upon the people who did it and upon the state where it took place. The example which those people gave to the world of self-reliance, of faith in a just and beneficent Creator, of power to do, to do without, to endure, to conquer . . . must be preserved and passed on to coming generations. Bryant S. Hinckley, August 1938

While the churches of the dispersion moved forward in time to meet the changing needs of the world in which they lived, the Nauvoo they left behind was not forgotten. Eventually, the two major churches that grew out of the removal of the Saints from Nauvoo established congregations in the City of Peace. In the twentieth century, these ecclesiastical steps paralleled the historic restoration of selected buildings in Old Nauvoo. At the same time, the process continued of preserving the memory of the Nauvoo experience by telling its stories and writing about the past.

The Reorganized church first attempted to reestablish a religious Latter Day Saint presence in Nauvoo, in large part because of the Smith family's long association with the city. Joseph Smith III, after accepting appointment as the new church's first president in 1860, stayed in Nauvoo. He remained active in civic affairs and served as branch president for six years. The presence of an organized group did not go unnoticed in Hancock County. Resolutions signed by a few area citizens in 1864 opposed the small congregation. But, according to the Carthage Republican, most residents viewed the Saints "as quiet, orderly, and industrious citizens, . . . who are generally esteemed and respected by their immediate neighbors."1

The Nauvoo branch of the Reorganization retained its strength until after the Smith family moved to a new headquarters across the state in Plano, Illinois, in 1866. Then, after a decade of declining participation in the Nauvoo area, the church discontinued worship services there. Nauvoo residents not only missed the Latter Day Saints as neighbors but noticed especially the loss of their economic contribution. Four hundred residents petitioned the Reorganization to reestablish its headquarters in Nauvoo. Only the Saints could make Nauvoo prosper, the local editor said. "Our citizens for many years have made no attempt to do it." A church site selection committee instead decided in 1881 to move the headquarters to Lamoni, Iowa, 210 miles west of Nauvoo.2Because leaders of the Reorganized church had adopted a policy that allowed members to choose where they lived, rather than gathering to a particular location, some did choose Nauvoo. In 1920, the church purchased a vacant schoolhouse and organized a branch for the twenty-one members living in the area. Growth was slow, and membership in the Nauvoo region did not reach one hundred until the early 1980s. In 1988, the branch built a red brick church to serve these modern Latter Day Saints.3

Meanwhile, for Latter-day Saints in early Utah, Nauvoo eventually became a place of interest to visit. Many nineteenth-century missionaries passed through Nauvoo and reported on the situation in the city that they and their parents had abandoned. The creation of a local church organization depended more upon the conversion of local residents than move-ins from the West. Missionary efforts, begun in the 1860s, found few investigators. With time, prejudices diminished somewhat. During the early decades of the twentieth century, a scattering of members appeared. The first Latter-day Saint branch, created in 1956, served the members and the missionary guides called as temporary residents to serve visitors at restored historic sites. The first convert from among permanent Nauvoo residents was baptized in 1961. The branch moved from one existing building to another to serve a slowly growing congregation within a radius of twenty-five miles. The first meetinghouse built specifically for Latter-day Saint use, at the corner of Durphy and Hibbard Streets, was dedicated in 1969. A replica of the Nauvoo Temple bell was hung in its steeple. When a ward was organized a decade later to serve one hundred members, Walter H. Pierce, Nauvoo's first Latter-day Saint mayor since the 1840s, was called as bishop.4

That same year, the Nauvoo Ward and several branches in nearby communities qualified for organization as a stake. Creation of the Nauvoo stake attracted media attention because of its timing to reflect a landmark in church growth. On February 18, 1979, the one thousandth stake in the church was organized to serve the Nauvoo area. It included members affiliated with six wards and two branches in Canton, Galesburg, Kewanee, Macomb, Nauvoo, and Quincy, Illinois; Burlington, Iowa; and Hannibal, Missouri.5

Today's Latter-day Saints in Hancock County have much in common with the Saints who built Nauvoo in the 1840s. In other ways, they differ. Twenty-first century Mormons live and vote like their neighbors, privately and without ecclesiastical direction. No longer are local elections a contest between candidates virtually ensured of election by a Mormon majority and opponents standing on an Anti-Mormon Party platform. Still, in exercising their franchise, the Saints preserve the core principle of the political advice found in revelations given through Joseph Smith. That counsel applauded constitutional law and encouraged the election of individuals who would respect the property and religious rights of their constituents.6

The principles behind the law of consecration find place among today's Latter-day Saint congregations through applications that would seem familiar to Nauvoo's first Mormons. Now, as then, tithing supports overall church programs, including construction of meetinghouses and temples and administrative expenses. Local fast offerings by members and food and clothing from bishops' storehouses sustain the poor while they regain financial self-reliance. Educational opportunities, some of them sponsored by the church, have created a more prosperous people. Gone are the universal consecrations of property, cooperative enterprises, church-sponsored trades unions, and other economic programs that allowed Mormonism's first generation to curtail poverty. But though these specific applications no longer serve the needs of today's Latter-day Saints, the principle of consecrating one's means to further the Lord's work and assist the needy remains part of their religious life.7

Along with political and economic adjustments, the church also made social changes at the end of the nineteenth century while retaining the core doctrinal basis of earlier practices. Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo still answer questions about plural marriage, even though a revelation to President Wilford Woodruff ended its practice in 1890. His famous Manifesto, while preserving the central premise of the revelation on eternal marriage, halted the controversial aspects of that revelation, which Joseph Smith had committed to writing in Nauvoo. Today's Latter-day Saints place a significant focus on temple marriages and strive to establish eternal families.8

The expectation of many during the Nauvoo era that Christ's millennial rule was soon to begin softened with succeeding generations.9 Church members now focus more on preparing their lives for the ultimate triumph of the King of Righteousness. They turn to the Savior as the center of their life, as their advocate before the Father. While continuing to build the church and kingdom of God through service to others, they seek guidance from scripture, living prophets, and personal revelation in their quest for eternal life. Placing Jesus Christ at the center of that quest, they strive to remember His ultimate sacrifice by keeping covenants made in His name and by serving others.10

For most of the twentieth century, temple ordinances were available to Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo only by traveling to the Intermountain West or, in the late 1970s, to Washington, D.C. An expansion of temple building in the 1990s brought that opportunity as close as Chicago and St. Louis. Nauvoo's historic temple site remained a grass-covered excavation, identified with memorial plaques and a model of the 1840s House of the Lord.11 Demographics showed little prospect of justifying another temple in Nauvoo. Then President Gordon B. Hinckley surprised the church in April 1999 by announcing that the historic temple would be rebuilt. Church members in Nauvoo received the word in a live satellite broadcast of the general conference. Initial gasps of amazement quickly turned to hugs and tears.12

Constructed over the next three years of a limestone exterior on the original plot and patterned after the original design, the reconstructed Nauvoo Temple would look as it did when the Saints departed from the City of Joseph. After a century and a half, it would once again become the physical and geographical focus of the community and a spiritual beacon for Latter-day Saints. An upright angel now stands atop the steeple, heralding as it had done in 1846 the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. A bronze replica of the temple bell and four clocks are positioned on the tower beneath it. Inside, Latter-day Saints receive the sacred ordinances first introduced to the church in Nauvoo. These are administered in simply adorned rooms that reflect the fine craftsmanship of the past. As contractors and volunteers moved the House of the Lord toward completion, formal dedication was set for June 27, 2002, the anniversary of the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith.13

In an international church, the Latter-day Saint congregation in Nauvoo differs little from thousands of others worldwide. Yet, despite Nauvoo's typicality in ecclesiastical terms, as a historic site, the area ranks high among the destinations of the modern Saint's vacation trip along the Mormon Trail from Vermont to Salt Lake City. The accomplishments of the first generation of Latter-day Saints, through their sacrifices during the Nauvoo years, became a monument to their faith, as the departing pioneers hoped it would.

Latter-day Saints are no longer enjoined to gather to any single geographical location. Stakes in numerous locations around the world provide a place for spiritual refuge from Babylon's evil. In December 1845, John S. Fullmer explained what would be needed to make that work. He told a relative who was resisting the call to gather in the Rocky Mountains:

As to serving God as well in the South as here, [it] may become true some day, but is not true now, nor will it ever be unless some one will receive authority and power through the priesthood to organize a church there and rear a Temple, such as is done here, in which the ordinances pertaining to the order of salvation can be attended to as here.

The tithes of a twelve-million-member organization now fund temples in many regions. These same offerings provide for meetinghouses and other needs. As it was in the original Nauvoo, members are still reminded of the blessings to the church and to themselves that come through tithing their income. And they strive for unity within their wards and branches under a common set of beliefs.14

Nauvoo's restored historic buildings and the resurrected historic temple attract visitors to the city today. They make the trip to learn about the patterns of life for Nauvoo's first residents and the challenges endured by those early Saints. Old Nauvoo has become a popular vacation spot, especially for members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whose current definition as a people depends so critically upon what happened in the city. For the people who look to Salt Lake City for prophetic direction, the Church of Jesus Christ is anchored not just in the doctrinal moorings of the past but in its past. As one historian so cogently put it, "Mormonism is history, not philosophy."15

An interest in honoring the early settlers and remembering Old Nauvoo grew steadily for Utah-based Latter-day Saints during the first half of the twentieth century. The first efforts, during the 1930s and 40s, involved the erection of a monument, the purchase of properties associated with the church or its people, and the celebration of centennials. The monument, commemorating the founding of the Relief Society, was installed at the suggestion of George Albert Smith, head of the Utah Pioneer Trails and Landmarks Association, in 1933. Wilford Wood, a Bountiful, Utah, furrier, who purchased a number of church historic sites, often with his own money, acquired the first parcel of the Nauvoo Temple Block in 1937 and later bought the James Ivins Times and Seasons complex. Wood urged the First Presidency to enlist volunteers to tell Nauvoo's story to visitors. Another advocate of Nauvoo as a tourist site was Lane K. Newberry, a Chicago artist with Mormon roots. For seven years during the 1930s Newberry visited Nauvoo and painted historic scenes. He lived in the area for a time and actively promoted the idea of a memorial on the Temple Block and restoration of surviving buildings on the bottomlands within the bounds of a state park. He won the support of Bryant S. Hinckley, president of the Northern States Mission, and of President Heber J. Grant. Together, they sponsored a celebration of Nauvoo's founding in 1939. A number of factors prevented development of the site at that time, including World War II. After the war ended, the Sons of the Utah Pioneers celebrated the centennial of Brigham Young's arrival in Utah by reenacting the exodus from Nauvoo to Salt Lake City with a caravan of automobiles decorated to look like covered wagons.16

It was J. LeRoy Kimball, a Salt Lake physician, whose interest in his own ancestral home ultimately secured a place on tourist maps for Nauvoo. His first step was the purchase in 1954 of the home of his great-grandfather, Heber C. Kimball. Interest by others in this family vacation home expanded into a dream of recreating a memorial to Old Nauvoo. In 1962, President David O. McKay organized Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated to buy and restore other buildings under the direction of the First Presidency. Dr. Kimball was named president. The National Park Service designated the city a Registered National Historic Landmark for its value in commemorating the nation's history. By the mid-1990s, the nonprofit corporation managed a thousand acres of the old city, and Latter-day Saint missionaries fostered understanding and appreciation of sixteen restored homes and shops by offering information about their histories. Among the sites opened to visitors were the houses of Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Wilford Woodruff, plus the shops of a gunsmith, baker, blacksmith, shoemaker, druggist, and tinsmith. Other restorations came later, and replica homes were built in 2001 as apartments for seasonal temple ordinance workers. At Carthage, the old county jail, purchased by Joseph F. Smith in 1903, became a memorial to Joseph and Hyrum Smith, with its own visitors' center.17

The holdings of Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated did not include the Smith family properties. The Reorganized church purchased the Mansion House in 1909. An offer to sell the building to the Utah church was rejected by President Joseph F. Smith. A caretaker-guide for the home was appointed in 1918. As negative attitudes towards Nauvoo and the "Brighamites" waned and as funding became available in the 1970s, the church now known as the Community of Christ launched its own professional preservation program on a forty-four-acre parcel at Nauvoo's southern border. By the late 1990s, trained guides were graciously hosting visitors at the rebuilt Red Brick Store and the restored Homestead and Mansion House of Joseph and Emma Smith. In addition, the Nauvoo House was furnished as a hostelry. Maintenance and operation of these sites fell to an adjunct entity known as the Restoration Trail Foundation. One project on their property involved a cooperative effort involving members of both churches. Descendants of the Joseph and Hyrum Smith families jointly raised funds to beautify the family burying ground behind the Homestead. In 1991, they erected new grave markers for Joseph, Emma, and Hyrum Smith.18

Today, the two churches welcome guests at separate visitors' centers. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints opened its Nauvoo Visitors' Center in 1971 toward the north end of the peninsula. In 1980, the Community of Christ completed the Joseph Smith Historic Center at Nauvoo's south extremity. A memorial garden established in 1978 at the Latter-day Saint Visitors' Center celebrates the organization of the Relief Society at Nauvoo and honors the role of women. The garden features thirteen life-size bronze statues by sculptors Florence P. Hansen and Dennis Smith. A musical pageant, City of Joseph, launched two years earlier, celebrates the triumphs of historic Nauvoo. Films and exhibits at the two centers provide consistent historical data, nuanced to fit the distinctive religious traditions and interpretive views of the host organizations. Even though the two groups see the Nauvoo years from different perspectives, they maintain a cordial relationship and have exchanged property and information about historic Nauvoo.19

In addition to the restored buildings at Nauvoo and Carthage, the Utah-based Latter-day Saints have actively celebrated their Nauvoo heritage through reminiscences, histories, and the arts. The effort began as the "Old Nauvooers" those who had lived through the Nauvoo years shared their vivid recollections in Sunday gatherings in the Salt Lake Valley. They spoke feelingly about their beloved Prophet and his death, and they relived the defense of the embattled Nauvoo. Others recorded these treasured memories of important events. Retrospective diaries, reminiscences, and verbal recountings of key events helped preserve the memory of Nauvoo. These efforts together with visual, literary, and musical celebrations helped descendants of the Nauvoo Saints to understand what happened during those critical years in the early 1840s and what the events mean today. These efforts have ensured that Nauvoo will be remembered.20

Descendants of the Old Nauvooers have not forgotten Nauvoo, but they have tried valiantly in recent years to reevaluate their feelings about the troubles of both Missouri and Illinois. In the spirit of the counsel given in Joseph Smith's letters from the jail at Liberty, Missouri, they have tried to forgive the people of that early time and leave ultimate judgment to God.21 The phrase in Charles Penrose's hymn that enjoined early Latter-day Saints to remember the wrongs of those years has been altered. Since 1985, the Saints have sung, "Remember the trials of Missouri; / Forget not the courage of Nauvoo."22 Through the efforts of church leaders in Salt Lake City and Independence, historic sites restorations and public relations efforts have emphasized the need for healing. As a symbol of this process, in June 1976 Missouri governor Christopher S. Bond rescinded the 1838 extermination order of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs. In 1989, officials of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints presented a plaque of friendship to the mayor of Quincy on the anniversary of the city's reception of the Mormon refugees from Missouri. In the same spirit, the Carthage Jail and an expanded visitors' center, refurbished in 1989, draw attention away from the injustices of the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Instead, visitors are given a message of tolerance and reconciliation. Sesquicentennial monuments and statuary on a plaza outside the jail honor the role of the Prophet and his loyal brother in launching a new religion on the American frontier.23

As it once was for its original inhabitants, Nauvoo today has become again a place of inner peace and spiritual promise. Friendly interactions between the Community of Christ and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and among Saints and local residents encourage congenial relationships. Tourism reinforces a sense of harmony, and visitors contribute to the local economy. In addition, the tradition of being a part of small-town America has continued from the days of the 1846 removal. The new citizens who arrived in Nauvoo immediately after the Latter-day Saint exodus easily made the town a place of peace because of its isolation from the turmoil of the larger world. Its small-town lifestyle has defined community relationships over the last century and a half.

One of those who found solace in Nauvoo was Ferdinand F. Bent. A resident of western Illinois during the Mormon period, Bent took advantage of the property bargains in the abandoned city. In late 1857, he informed Eastern relatives that he expected to spend the rest of his life in Nauvoo. "It is immaterial what part of the world we live or die in," he wrote. "If the Lord is with us we shall live and die happy." He explained further:

I lived near Nauvoo before the Mormons came here. I was here frequently to market when the Mormons were at the height of their power and grandeur. I was acquainted with the celebrated Joe Smith. . . . He is now dead but alas the Mormons have been driven away . . . and Nauvoo is going to destruction rapidly.24

Despite Bent's negative assessment of the declining city, he wrote lyrically of the beauties of western Illinois. In four stanzas of verse, he celebrated the region as a land of beauty filled with green meadows, rich fields, wild animals, and sweet flowers. Bent's poem is reminiscent of the sentiments that Levi Hancock evoked in song on the rolling prairies of Missouri in 1838 to celebrate his search for peace and plenty among the Latter-day Saints.25 Even with the people of promise gone from Nauvoo, the city retained for the new citizens a vestige of its role as a place of peace. Bent concluded his poem with that affirmation:

Here from the cares and the vexations of life Riot, contention, bustle, and strife Here the husbandman reaps almost without sowing, In this land of milk and honey flowing. Here is peace and plenty, gladness and joy, Pure earthly happiness without any alloy.26

When Mary Fielding Smith left Missouri in 1839 in search of a new place of refuge, like Bent, she found peace by placing her relationship with God ahead of the many challenges that faced her people and her family. Her husband, Hyrum Smith, remained behind for several months in a cold jail in Liberty. Mary moved a few belongings and their infant son, Joseph F., to Illinois to await a reunion with her husband. Uprooted from her place of peace in upper Missouri, she was not weakened in her deep religious persuasions. Mary informed a missionary brother in their British homeland that no matter where she lived, she would find eternal rest in the kingdom of God through her faith in the restored gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.27

In 1846, Mary Smith again left a Latter-day Saint gathering place with a displaced people again without her husband to seek a new place of refuge. Once more, her faith carried her forward with the Saints. This time the widowed mother of a future church president drove her own ox team to the new gathering place in the West, no doubt rejoicing in the goodness of God as she had in the 1840 letter to her brother Joseph:

You will . . . have heard of our being driven, as a people, from the state [of Missouri], and from our homes. . . . I had to be removed more than 200 miles, chiefly on my bed. I suffered much on my journey; but . . . my health is now as good as ever it was. . . . We are now living in Commerce, on the bank of the great Mississippi river. The situation is very pleasant; you would be much pleased to see it. How long we may be permitted to enjoy it I know not; but the Lord knows best what is best for us. I feel but little concerned about where I am, if I can but keep my mind staid upon God; for, you know in this there is perfect peace. . . . I have a hope that our brothers and sisters will also embrace the fulness of the Gospel, and come into the new and everlasting covenant. . . . I do not feel the least discouraged: no, though my sister [Mercy Fielding Thompson] and I are here together in a strange land, we have been enabled to rejoice, in the midst of our privations and persecutions, that we were counted worthy to suffer these things, so that we may, with the ancient saints who suffered in like manner inherit the same glorious reward. If it had not been for this hope, I should have sunk before this; but, blessed be the God and Rock of my salvation, here I am, and am perfectly satisfied and happy, having not the smallest desire to go one step backward.28

The Saints who followed the Twelve into the wilderness moved forward. They left behind their homes, farms, and businesses and the temple they had sacrificed to build. But they did not abandon their faith nor their sense of mission. Within days of his arrival, Brigham Young launched construction of a temple in Salt Lake City, the first of four he authorized during his thirty years as church president. These and later temples provided succeeding generations of Latter-day Saints with opportunities to receive exalting ordinances for themselves and for their deceased ancestors. Church leaders continued and expanded the divine mandate to carry the gospel to the people of all nations. They established a cornerstone stake in the Salt Lake Valley and other stakes in regional gathering places in the Rocky Mountain refuge and eventually in many other locations where the Saints could be nurtured in their faith.29

In its new place of refuge, the church that had been restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith endured new challenges and flourished. Under the guidance of men sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, the Church of Jesus Christ continued its steady rise "out of obscurity." The objectives behind that expanding presence had been defined by the Lord in 1831: revelation would guide His latter-day work, the fulness of the gospel would be preached to all people, faith in His atoning sacrifice would increase, and His everlasting covenant would be established in preparation for His return to earth in glory. The inheritance received by Latter-day Saints from the Nauvoo period includes all that had been revealed and all that had been accomplished up to that time in the ongoing process of establishing the Lord's church and kingdom on the earth for the last time "in these last days."30

NotesChapter 21. Remembering Nauvoo

Epigraph: Hinckley, "The Nauvoo Memorial," 459.
