Glen M. Leonard, Nauvoo: A Place of Peace, a People of Promise (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Abbreviations

The following abbreviations for publications, repositories, and collections have been used throughout the Notes and the Sources.

Publications

BYU Studies Brigham Young University Studies. Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. Quarterly, 1959-.

CHC B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century One. 6 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930.

Dialogue Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought. Dialogue Foundation. Quarterly, 1966-.

D&C Doctrine and Covenants of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1981. First published in 1835.

Ensign The Ensign of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City, 1971-.

HC Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 7 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1902-12, 1932.

JD Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1855-86.

MS Latter-Day Saints' Millennial Star (Manchester and Liverpool, 1841-46).

Neighbor Nauvoo Neighbor (Nauvoo, Illinois, 1843-44), continues The Wasp.

Signal Warsaw Signal (Warsaw, Illinois, 1840-53).

T&S Times and Seasons (Commerce and Nauvoo, Illinois, 1839-46).

Wasp The Wasp (Nauvoo, Illinois, 1842-43), renamed Nauvoo Neighbor.

Repositories and Collections

BYU Library Mormon and Western Americana Collection, L. Tom Perry Special Collections of the Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Church Archives Church Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Church History Church History Library, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Library Salt Lake City, Utah.

Coe Collection The William Robertson Coe Collection of Western Americana, Beinecke Library, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, microfilm copy, Church Archives.

DUP Museum International Society of the Daughters of Utah Pioneers, Pioneer Memorial Museum, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Lyon Collection T. Edgar Lyon Collection, on loan to the author, for eventual deposit at the Church Archives. The collection includes articles, papers, and notes on people, places, and historical and restoration topics assembled while Lyon was historian for Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated. Much of the material is duplicated in the NRI Archives, because Lyon and Rowena Miller, NRI executive secretary, cross-filed their research material.

NRI Archives Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated Collection, Land and Records Office, Nauvoo, Illinois.

Library and Archives, Community of Christ (formerly Reorganized Church Christ Archives of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints), Independence, Missouri.

University of Utah Special Collections, Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.

USHS Library Utah History Information Center, Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City, Utah.
