Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

PREFACE

My service with the brethren of the First Presidency and the other General Authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been a very unusual and rewarding experience. It has provided the opportunity and privilege to study these men, to witness the guiding hand of the Lord in the leadership of the Church in a way that perhaps few, if any, others could do.

For many years I have been urged by my family and numerous friends to write my experiences in the office of the First Presidency. I have been reluctant to do so, being convinced that my associations with these remarkable men and the work of the Church which is entrusted to them are of such a confidential and sacred character that it would not be wise nor advisable to make them public.

I feared that were I to publish them I might betray confidences, which would be something entirely contrary to my life's training and desire.

However, after much thought and repeated persuasion by certain brethren of the General Authorities that such a contribution would strengthen the faith of our people and increase testimonies to the truths of the gospel, I have responded. I have been persuaded that perhaps a worthy purpose could be served by a personal account of some things that have transpired and so impressed me in my long service as secretary to the president of the Church and to the First Presidency.

After half a century of such association I can say the men who have presided over this church from the beginning have been raised up by the Lord for the particular time during which they served. They have been and are men prepared and well qualified for the service they were to render and the leadership they were to give. They have never been mediocre men. Instead they were and are giants of the Lord, chosen and ordained before they came to this earth to perform the work assigned to them.

Fortunately they are not of the same mold. Each differed from the others, but all, however, were highly spiritual, men of revelation, of devotion, and of faith. They have been and are prophets of the living God.

Some years ago a prominent business executive said that the greatest asset of a man or a nation is faith. He said:

"The men who built this country and those who made it prosper in its darkest days were men whose faith in its future was unshakable. Men of courage, they dared to go forward despite all hazards; men of vision, they always looked forward, never backward. In these days of stress, let us hold to faith, faith in divine leadership." (Thomas J. Watson)

Whenever the gospel has been upon the earth, the Lord has had prophets and representatives through whom he has made known his will. Through them he has given commandments to his people. When they have hearkened to the counsel and word of the Lord they have been blessed. When they have rejected his word, destruction has come upon them. Such has been the case since the beginning of time.

The Lord loves his children and wants to bless them. He knows what is for their best good, and accordingly, he has made these things known through his servants, the living prophets.

It has been a thrilling and very humbling experience over a period of 50 years to have association with five presidents of the Church, with 13 combinations of brethren serving in the First Presidency, and with 46 apostles, and the many other General Authorities of the Church. It has been a rare assignment to meet with the First Presidency nearly every morning and with the First Presidency and the Twelve every Thursday in their meetings in the Holy Temple. There have been, as well, many other occasions to feel of their spirit and to know of their devotion and integrity.

It has been a blessed and inspiring privilege to have the love and confidence of these brethren and to have the responsibility of keeping a record of their meetings.

Space will not permit my discussing each of the brethren I have associated with over these many years. My failure to do so is by no means a suggestion that their influence upon me and upon the Church has not been as impressive as that of those who are mentioned herein. On the contrary, the brethren who, during my time, have served as General Authorities have had and now have my utmost confidence, love, and esteem. I have refrained from mentioning in this record the brethren of the Twelve who have passed away and those who are now serving. I have a deep affection for each of them and any association with them is stamped indelibly upon my heart. To attempt to write my impressions of these great and noble men would require volumes. Accordingly, it is advisable to draw a line of limitation.

In quoting rather extensively from some of the brethren to whom I refer, it is with the thought in mind that few of the young people now living have heard of or read some of these faith-promoting and inspirational incidents. The hope is that the older generation who may have heard them will find interest and testimony enlargement in refreshing their memories. Some of them are taken from shorthand notes that heretofore have not been transcribed.

I perhaps have referred to past administrations more than the present. This has been done in the thought that there are living at the present, few, if any, who can give the firsthand account that I can of these events and that the experiences related should not be lost to future generations. The all-important present is built upon the sturdy foundation of the past, as the glorious future will in turn have a close relationship both to the present and the past.
