Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

1

I Start My Life's Work

February 1, 1922, was a most important—indeed a red-letter—day in my life. As I look back to that day it is difficult to realize that it was over a half century ago. Yet, I realize so much has happened within the Lord's earthly kingdom; there has been so much of progress, with significant events bringing with them so much of interest and so many happy, inspiring experiences, it seems improbable that they could be crowded into the space of only 50 years.

It was on that day, after several interviews, that I began to work as the secretary to the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Little did I realize at the time what supreme joys and responsibilities lay ahead of me.

I was excited but humbled and a bit frightened when I first met with President Heber J. Grant. It would be putting it mildly, indeed, to say that I was awed just to be in the presence of that great man. He spoke with an honest, sincere frankness and was so kind and friendly that he completely won me over. That day was the beginning of an association of mutual love and confidence that was to last more than two decades.

As secretary to the president I first worked alongside George F. Gibbs, who was the secretary to the First Presidency. It was not until October 1923, a year and a half later, that I became also secretary to the First Presidency and began meeting weekly in the Salt Lake Temple to record the minutes of those sacred and inspiring council meetings of the presidency and Council of the Twelve.

Right from the beginning I was fearful of the responsibility of taking those minutes, organizing and condensing them, and then reading them back the next week for approval of the brethren. I have always been appreciative of their frequently offered resolutions of appreciation. As the years passed I gained more and more confidence, overcoming my fears, but never ceasing to be awed in the presence of these great men.

President Grant's counselors at the time of my earliest association were Charles W. Penrose, who was then nearing his ninetieth birthday, and Anthony W. Ivins, who lived one of the most colorful careers of any of the General Authorities I have ever known.

Perhaps as I list the names of the members of the Council of the Twelve I first met with, the reader will recognize names that are now legendary in their accomplishments and the legacy they left for us of their generation. Seated in their order of seniority in a circle in the temple council room, they were:

Rudger Clawson, President of the Twelve, and Elders Reed Smoot, George Albert Smith, George F. Richards, Orson F. Whitney, David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, James E. Talmage, Stephen L Richards, Richard R. Lyman, Melvin J. Ballard, and John A. Widtsoe.

This circle of Twelve Apostles was unchanged in its personnel for nearly a whole decade and was not broken until the death in May 1931 of Orson F. Whitney. The resulting vacancy was filled then by the appointment of Joseph F. Merrill.

Among these Twelve Apostles I first met with were

With one exception this picture represents the Council of the Twelve when the author began his service in 1922. Elder Joseph F. Merrill, was named to the Twelve in 1931, to fill vacancy occasioned by death of Elder Orson F. Whitney. Left to right: George F. Richards, Joseph F. Merrill, Joseph Fielding Smith, David O. McKay, James E. Talmage, Reed Smoot, President Rudger Clawson, George Albert Smith, Stephen L Richards, Richard R. Lyman and Melvin J. Ballard. Elder John A. Widtsoe, was in London presiding over the European Mission.

three who subsequently became presidents of the Church—George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, and Joseph Fielding Smith. The last one to pass away was Joseph Fielding Smith, who ended his career as the tenth president on July 2, 1972, only a few days from his ninety-sixth birthday.

As I approached my awesome duties, I was extremely conscious that in the beginning of the Church in 1830, the Lord told us through revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith of the importance and necessity of keeping proper records. Surely the history of God's dealings with his people in the ages past emphasizes this need. The experience of Nephi in securing the Plates of Brass upon which were engraven the records of the Jews and a genealogy of his forefathers is an impressive example. The Book of Mormon itself is another outstanding illustration of inspired record keeping.

The account related in Third Nephi of Christ's appearance unto the Nephites and his interest in the records of that time has been a matter of much interest to me as an indication of the importance of proper records. There we read:

And it came to pass that he [the resurrected Lord] said unto Nephi: Bring forth the record which ye have kept.

And when Nephi had brought forth the records, and laid them before him, he cast his eyes upon them and said:

Verily I say unto you, I commanded my servant Samuel, the Lamanite, that he should testify unto this people, that at the day that the Father should glorify his name in me that there were many saints who should arise from the dead, and should appear unto many, and should minister unto them. And he said unto them: Was it not so?

And his disciples answered him and said: Yea, Lord, Samuel did prophesy according to thy words, and they were all fulfilled.

And Jesus said unto them: How be it that ye have not written this thing, that many saints did arise and appear unto many and did minister unto them?

And it came to pass that Nephi remembered that this thing had not been written.

And it came to pass that Jesus commanded that it should be written; therefore it was written according as he commanded. (3 Ne. 23:7-13.)

The Lord is working with the leaders of his Church today, as he had done during the past. Great things are happening in this Church; this is the dispensation of the fulness of times, and the Lord through his inspired leaders has chosen mighty men, good men, devoted and faithful men, men of the hour, to lead the affairs of his church in this day and time. They have the keys of authority, the keys of the kingdom, the keys and power of the priesthood.

It has been a glorious privilege to see the Spirit of the Lord working upon the leaders of his Church, to be with them when they have prophesied in the name of the Lord and to see those prophecies fulfilled.

Sometimes we are inclined to accept the teachings, the inspiration, and revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith and early presidents of the Church, but have some reservation in our minds regarding the decisions, advice, and counsel of our present leaders.

President Wilford Woodruff said on one occasion:

Now we may take the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine & Covenants, and we may read them through, and every other revelation that has been given to us, and they would scarcely be sufficient to guide us 24 hours. We have only an outline of our duties written; we are to be guided by the living oracles. (Journal of Discourses 9:324.)

And I think that we would remember that President Woodruff also said:

I referred to the Doctrine & Covenants—a code of revelations which the Lord gave to Joseph Smith. This book contains some of the most glorious revelations upon doctrine, upon principle, upon government, upon the kingdom of God and the different glories, and upon a great many things which reach into the eternal worlds. . . If we had before us every revelation which God ever gave to man; if we had the book of Enoch; if we had the untranslated plates before us in the English language; if we had the records of the Revelator St. John which are sealed up, and all other revelations, and they were piled up here a hundred feet high, the Church and Kingdom of God could not grow, in this or any other age of the world, without the living oracles of God. (Millennial Star 51:548.)

It has been aptly said that the Lord's will to Abraham did not suffice for the people of Moses' time; nor did the will of the Lord to Moses suffice for the people of Isaiah's time. The same could be said about the people of the Book of Mormon days. Different dispensations and different missions required different instruction; and that is true of the people of today. People become acquainted with the knowledge of the Father only as the Lord reveals it. Without the revelation of additional or new truth men would not progress in the world.

On another occasion President Woodruff said:

Read the life of Brigham Young and you can hardly find a revelation that he had wherein he said, "Thus saith the Lord," but the Holy Ghost was with him, he taught by inspiration and revelation, but with one exception he did not give those revelations in the form that Joseph did; for they were not written and given as revelations and commandments to the Church in the words and name of the Savior. Joseph said, "Thus saith the Lord" almost every day of his life in laying the foundation of this work. But those who have followed him had not deemed it always necessary to say "Thus saith the Lord," yet they have led the people by the power of the Holy Ghost; and if you want to know what that is, read the first six verses of the 68th Section of the Doctrine & Covenants, where the Lord told Orson Hyde and others to go out and preach the gospel to the people as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost.

"And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.)

It is by that power we have led Israel. By that power President Young presided over and led the Church. By the same power President John Taylor presided over and led the Church. [And I might interpolate here that it is by that power that his successors have led the Church.] And that is the way I have acted according to the best of my ability, in that capacity. I do not want the Latter-day Saints to understand that the Lord is not with us, and that he is not giving revelation to us; for he is giving us revelation, and will give us revelation until this scene is wound up. I have had some revelations of late, and very important ones to me. (Millennial Star 53:794-96.)

And then he mentioned the Manifesto pertaining to the discontinuing of the practice of plural marriage and said that the Lord had shown to him in vision and by revelation what would take place if we did not discontinue that practice. Some have questioned whether that was a revelation. We sometimes have such questions submitted to us now. President Woodruff said very definitely it was.

I can reaffirm the testimony of President Woodruff by bearing my certain witness that "by that same power" the presidents of the Church I have known have led the Saints of God.

This is a glorious dispensation in which we live—a dispensation into which all other dispensations of the gospel have been merged. Speaking of this dispensation and of the wonderful things that have happened, are happening, and will happen, and the fact that the Lord will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, I have been greatly impressed by this quotation from the 121st section of the Doctrine and Covenants:

For there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be.

God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the world was until now;

Which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as held in reserve for the fulness of their glory;

A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest.

All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ.

And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times—

According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest. (D&C 121:25-32.)

This is a part of that great revelation that was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith on March 20, 1839, when he was confined as a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri.

We are seeing today a fulfillment of a part of that revelation in the remarkable accomplishment of placing men upon the moon and gaining information regarding that great celestial body.

These men who stand at the head of the Church are men of destiny. It is my firm conviction that they were chosen for their work before they came here.

I am convinced of the wisdom of the Lord in providing that there should be three men in the First Presidency. There is only one president at a time, and he has power and authority greater than any other living person. He is the mouth piece of the Lord; he has the last world. Whosoever sins he may remit, the Lord will remit. He has the keys of the sealing power, and he alone can delegate that power. He alone has the keys of authority to restore former blessings to one who has been excommunicated, and he alone can delegate that power. However, it is important that he have counselors to assist him and to counsel with; he may also call others to assist him in his work if he desires.

I have learned a great lesson in realizing that the Lord does not always whisper audibly to his servants, telling them what they should do in each situation. They must figure things out in their minds, make a study of the situation, and seek the guidance and inspiration of the Lord. The Lord can and does, when occasion requires, make his mind and will known to his servants, as indicated by the Book of Mormon prophet Enos, who said, "And the voice of the Lord came into my mind, saying. . ." If necessary the Lord can appear to his servants in person, as he did to Joseph Smith, but the Lord does not do such things to satisfy men's curiosity. It would seem that there would needs be some very weighty and important matter that would call for such a manifestation.

There is safety in such counsel, and it has been a glorious education to see the wonderful divinely inspired decisions that result from discussions of important matters that come before the First Presidency. I have marveled as each, a man of wonderful innate qualifications, expresses himself on the subject under consideration, and then how all three minds harmonize and reach the correct decision.

President George Q. Cannon, a counselor in the First Presidency during the administrations of Presidents Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow, said, referring to the First Presidency:

There are at the head of this Church, chosen by the Lord, three men, who constitute what is called the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. One is the President, the other two are his counselors. But all three are Presidents according to the revelations. One, however, holds the keys. President Woodruff is distinguished from every other one of us by the fact that he possesses the keys of the kingdom on the earth. He represents the supreme authority. His voice to us, in its place, brings to us the voice of God. Not that he is God; not that he is infallible. He is a fallible man. His counselors are fallible men. The First Presidency cannot claim individually or collectively infallibility. Infallibility is not given to men. They are fallible. But God is infallible, and when God speaks to the Church through him who holds the keys it is the word of the Lord to this people. Can President Woodruff do this without his counselors: I do not know what he can do, or what he might do; but I know that he does not do it. I know that President Young did not, nor President Taylor. I know that President Smith did not. He sought the counsel of his counselors. They acted in concert. And when the First Presidency act in concert, they are a power. But . . . if the First Presidency were divided, and the Twelve were divided, then we would not have the blessings that God has promised, and I do not know what would be our fate. (Millennial Star, September 5, 1895.)

I can personally attest to the fact that the other presidents I have known and worked with from President Grant down to and including President Harold B. Lee have likewise sought the counsel of their counselors and weighed it carefully before making decisions.

The question has occasionally been asked by Latter-day Saints when the First Presidency has issued a statement to the Church whether they were setting forth their opinion or whether the Latter-day Saints should accept the pronouncement as the word of the Lord. In other words, would the members be out of harmony with the Lord's will if they acted contrary thereto.

Members of the Church, and others, have their free agency to accept or reject the advice of the First Presidency. There is no coercion. As stated by President Cannon, individuals are fallible, but God is infallible, and when these brethren unitedly give advice and counsel to the Church, whether it is over their signatures or by oral expression, they are speaking for the Lord. They are sustained by the members as prophets, seers, and revelators. Those who think their understanding is better are at liberty to act as they see fit, but they must accept full accountability for their actions.

It is as the late President Stephen L Richards said:

When a judgment is reached and proclaimed by the Presidency and the Twelve, it becomes binding upon all the members of the Church. God's kingdom is a kingdom of law and order. He is a lawgiver and the Supreme Judge, but he has delegated authority and conferred the keys of the Kingdom upon these men whom he has chosen. They act for him . . . they act in response to the operation of the Spirit of the Lord.

It has been an inspiring experience to listen to the First Presidency discuss the many weighty problems that have arisen over the years. It is a rare privilege to hear the wise discussions and witness the inspired decisions where questions and problems are presented, and to be touched by the spirit of each as his feelings on the matter are expressed. It is thrilling to know his Spirit is directing the minds of his servants, and to have the Spirit bear witness to my own soul that the decision arrived at is in accordance with the will of the Lord.

These men, over the years, have been and are men with independent minds, men of faith, men with opinions of their own, men whose minds are not easily swayed. If Mormonism, so-called, were a false philosophy or church, it could not produce a group of men such as the General Authorities are and have been so far as my acquaintance with them over 50 years has shown.

These men are making scripture today. They are doing the will of the Father and his Beloved Son today as did the apostles of old. The disciples of the Lord when he was on the earth and following his departure left to future generations the gospel, spoken or written under inspirations. On occasion they gave their personal opinions on matters and so indicated. The same condition may on occasion prevail in our day. This does not detract from the truth that the Lord is at the helm, that there is a channel of communication, inspiration, revelation between him and his chosen servants—and that applies to local as well as general authorities, if they will conduct their lives prayerfully, devotedly, and unselfishly to the welfare of God's cause, seeking, studying, and serving.

I have often thought it must have been a great privilege to know the apostles of the Lord in the time of the Savior and subsequent to his resurrection—perhaps more so after the Lord left them, because they had the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, to be with them, the spirit of revelation attended them, and they enjoyed the gifts of the Spirit. They knew beyond any question that they were teaching and preaching the truth, the gospel of their Lord and Master, and they were willing to give their lives for that testimony.

I have concluded, however, that the same is true of the First Presidency and the Twelve today. They know they are special witnesses of the Lord; they know that the spirit of truth accompanies them and their utterances; they know that they are teaching the word of the Lord, and they are ready to give their all, including life itself, for the cause they represent.
