Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

2

President Grant—A Man of Strength and Faith

I always looked upon President Heber J. Grant as an important and powerful link between the early pioneer prophets and leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the more modern prophets even to this very day.

His parents were among the founding pioneers. In this new country, they, with others of the courageous and devout Saints, had struck roots deep into the soil of practicality and spirituality. Their extreme faith and the revelations of the true and living God in restoring gospel truths had illuminated their minds with an understanding of the purposes of life, of the pre-existence and eternal progression. These motivating forces—being a far cry from the false, stunted, and "pot-bound" ideas of their Christian contemporaries—had fortified them with the courage and determination to move beyond the reach of their enemies. They accepted and practiced a nobility of faith, hope, charity, industry, devotion to duty, and love of God and country. So strengthened, they bequeathed to their posterity these same fundamental principles.

Heber Jeddy Grant was born in Salt Lake City, November 22, 1856. The pioneer Mormon community was not yet a decade old when he was born a son of its first mayor, Jedediah M. Grant, who also was a counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency. His mother was Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant, who possessed an abundance of these sterling pioneer qualities.

Mayor Grant died when his son was but eight days old, and upon the mother fell the full responsibility of rearing the child through her own toil and independence and thrift. The son, in his later years, often "thanked God for that mother of mine."

President Grant was called to the apostleship in October 1882, just before his twenty-sixth birthday. His call came as a result of direct revelation to President John Taylor, who had succeeded Brigham Young as the third president. Already the young apostle had established himself as a Church leader. Two years earlier, when appointed president of the Tooele Stake, he had set aside personal ambitions and desires to devote himself to a career in business and finance at which he would have made a remarkable success. Instead he was foreordained to a life of church service and leadership that was to bring him to the position of foremost importance in the restored church—prophet, seer, and revelator and president of the High Priesthood.

One of his many interests was the Mutual Improvement Association, and in 1875 he became a member of the Thirteenth Ward YMMIA superintendency, which was the first ward to be so organized by Junius F. Wells under direction of Brigham Young. This launched him on a long career of MIA leadership, which included becoming a member of the general superintendency and business manager and one of the founders of the Improvement Era.

As an apostle, Heber J. Grant was assigned to open up the Japanese Mission, and he remained in that land for a year, returning to begin on January 1, 1904, an assignment as president of the European Mission, which at that time also included being president of the British Mission.

With this much of biography to introduce this wonderful man to the readers—realizing that many of you did not have the privilege of knowing him personally—I return again to my first statement of this chapter relative to President Grant's being an important link between the early prophets and the modern ones.

President Grant knew Brigham Young well since some of his closest boyhood associates were a son and a grandson of the pioneer president. President Grant often told of his experiences with Brigham Young and especially of running to the Lion House when the prayer bell rang and joining the Young family in the prayers offered by the father. Heber Grant was in his twentieth year when Brigham Young died. Many of the pioneer leaders, including his own mother, were close friends and associates of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum—the martyrs who gave their lives for their testimonies in 1844.

It was John Taylor, Brigham Young's successor, who called President Grant to the apostleship. After that he had close and intimate association with three other presidents—five in all—before becoming president himself. These were Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and Joseph F. Smith. He also had had close comradeship during many years with those who followed him as presidents—George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, and Joseph Fielding Smith.

The link with our present-day prophet, President Harold B. Lee, is made complete with the realization that it was President Grant who in 1941 called President Lee to be an apostle and ordained him to this high office.

President Grant was truly a man without guile, and he gave me the benefit of his utmost confidence. I kept all of his accounts. Every dollar that he received he turned over to me to pass through his accounts and place in the bank for him. He wanted to make absolutely certain that he paid a full tithing on every dollar that came into his hands. He trusted me implicitly, and I gave him no occasion to question my loyalty to him.

Loyalty is a two-way road. As an employee is expected to be loyal to his employer, so should the employer be loyal to the employee. President Grant fulfilled that requirement as completely and openly as any man could, and in return I would have given my life rather than be disloyal to him or take advantage of his confidence in me.

As secretary to the president, it became one of my duties to interview those who came to see him. It was not possible, nor is it possible or wise today, for the president of the Church to see everyone who calls or who would like to see him. There were many who had personal axes to grind, or chips on their shoulders. Some were interested in selling something and wanted to obtain the president's personal endorsements. Some came, I am sure, out of curiosity, and then there were the cranks, and some were charlatans.

It was important that the president see everyone whom he should see, and it was just as important that he not be bothered by those whose missions were not important or necessary. Within proper church organization it was then, as it is today, the policy that members with personal or doctrinal problems should take them to their bishops and stake presidents and that these authorities offer the solutions. When further help is needed then the local ward or stake leaders should take up the matters with the appropriate General Authorities.

As people came to the office, it required considerable wisdom and tact and, yes, often sought-for inspiration, to meet wisely every situation. There were those who had to be denied audience with the president, although an attempt was made always to make the refusal in the kindest way, and sometimes the individuals could be helped in some other manner.

Occasionally the person who had been thus refused managed to get the ear of the president in some other way. Some were unkind enough to say to President Grant, "Your secretary does not think I am good enough to see you." President Grant always manifested his loyalty to his secretary and his confidence in him by answering somewhat as follows: "That is what I have my secretary for, to take care of matters of that kind for me." Never did he take me to task for any decision I made in regard to these matters.

In September 1941 I wrote an article regarding President Grant and my feelings toward him at that time. When I wrote these words I had been his secretary for more than 20 years. As I have read over the things I said on that occasion, I find they are my feelings today. These written impressions have never left me, and I borrow from them today as the basis of my discussion in this chapter, since he passed away about four years after I wrote them.

On November 21, 1921, President Grant delivered an address in the Assembly Hall to the students of the Latter-day Saints University. He told of his experiences in overcoming obstacles and of his accomplishments through perseverance. To me this was an eventful day, for it was the first of his speeches that, at his invitation, I had attempted to report by shorthand. Upon my success that day depended very greatly the answer to my application for employment with the president of the Church. I shall always believe that he made it a special point to speak with the utmost rapidity on that occasion. Of one thing I am certain: it was with great difficulty that I followed him. On many occasions since then I had opportunity to learn just how fast President Grant could really talk.

That experience stands out so very vividly in my mind because it was the commencement of an intimate and enjoyable association with President Grant that endured for nearly a quarter of a century. As the years passed, my admiration and affection for him continually increased. One could not do otherwise than recognize his many virtues and profit by the wonderful examples he had set.

We should not seek for perfection in men—since no one is perfect—but no one who became intimately acquainted with President Grant could fail to recognize in him the fundamental human virtues of courage, loyalty, perseverance, generosity, initiative, faith, and hard work.

All his life he was an indomitable worker. He never felt that work hurt anyone. I am convinced that one of the qualities most responsible for his prodigious achievements was his love of work. Illustrative of his penchant for work is the fact that in his young manhood he toiled until the late hours of the night and into the early hours of the morning, devoting his dynamic energy to the tasks assigned to him and that he himself assumed. Surely hard work in his youth and young adulthood was one of the great foundation stones upon which he built the enduring ideals that went into the structure of the successful man.

During all the years that I knew him that same "drive" continued. Thousands of Latter-day Saints and many friends in the business world have received from him letters—long letters—dictated to the dictaphone late at night or in the early hours of the morning when he could not sleep. Many times when on a train going east or west, or perhaps away from home in a hotel room, he and I would be busy early in the morning—perhaps between six and seven o'clock—taking care of matters that needed his attention. Or perhaps he would send a message of comfort or cheer to someone whose heart was aching because of a tragic or distressing experience. Even when traveling by automobile to attend a conference in some distant stake he would often open the briefcase and answer correspondence or give instructions as to how certain matters should be disposed of. Not infrequently he remarked that he had never been able to catch up with his work. This he could never do, for he was always thinking of things to do to add to the happiness of others.

Nor did the situation change greatly whenever he was confined to his home because of illness. It was not unusual for him to take care of more work when he was ill than he did otherwise—this, of course, being due largely to the fact that he was then free from frequent interruption.

I recall the occasion when President Grant became seriously ill while in Los Angeles and on the advice of his physician was taken to the hospital. He was in a critical condition. Many friends sent flowers to cheer him and brighten his room; others sent letters of encouragement. Though almost too sick to talk, President Grant insisted that letters of thanks and appreciation be written to these friends, and he could not be dissuaded from signing these letters personally. It was with much difficulty that he signed his name, but he insisted on doing so.

President Grant had developed an attractive spencerian style of penmanship and took great pride in his signature, whether he was signing a letter or a memorandum or autographing a book. His personal calling cards were a reprint of his own signature.

There are many thousands of books today in the libraries of Latter-day Saint homes that bear this signature along with a personally inscribed friendly or affectionate greeting. The distribution of good books, without doubt hundreds of thousands of them in his lifetime, brought President Grant great pleasure. He felt he was doing this for the benefit and pleasure of the recipients, for he loved good books.

Thousands have been influenced to righteous living and noble thinking by the messages of the volumes he has given. Countless others have been comforted in times of trial or sorrow by reading his messages and accounts of his own experiences on similar occasions. I treasure beyond possible monetary value the dozen or more such books I have in my own personal library with messages and the signature of President Grant. Some of these are books by other authors; some are compilations of the writings, letters, and messages of President Grant. Some contain his favorite hymns, or especially loved poems.

One of these, a booklet he sent out for Christmas in 1939, contained a photograph of his mother with the following words of tribute:

I live today in the eighty-fourth year of my life as one whose mother was all to me. She set an example of integrity, of devotion and love, and of determination and honor second to none. Her life was a sermon that rings through my soul to this day. So near to the Lord would she get in her prayers that they were a wonderful inspiration to me from childhood to manhood. One of the main reasons I am President of the Church today is that I have followed the advice and counsel and the burning testimony of the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ which came to me from my mother.

Often the pages in these Christmas booklets contained poems or messages in his own handwriting. One such, which he noted was copied into his notebook while in Japan in 1902, is so typical of his life and philosophy:

Luck and Laziness Luck tapped upon a cottage door A gentle, quiet tap; And Laziness, who lounged within, The cat upon his lap, Stretched out his slippers to the fire And gave a sleepy yawn; "Oh, bother! Let him knock again!" He said, but Luck was gone. Luck tapped again, more kindly still, Upon another door, Where Industry was hard at work Mending his cottage floor. The door was opened wide at once; "Come in!" the worker cried, And Luck was taken by the hand And fairly pulled inside. He still is there a wondrous guest From out whose magic hand Fortune flows fast—but Laziness Can never understand How Industry found such a friend. "Luck never comes my way!" He sighs and quite forgets the knock Upon his door that day. —Author unknown

On yet another page are some statements by President Grant, really gems of thought revealing the wisdom, spirituality, and practicality that characterized his leadership:

Spoken by the Sender

(These sentences were selected by my daughters from some of my sermons and articles.)

There is nothing on this earth that brings so much satisfaction and comfort as the knowledge that we are in the line of duty.

* * * * * *

The Lord gives to many of us the still small voice of revelation. It comes as vividly and strongly as though it were with a great sound. It comes to each man according to his faithfulness, for guidance in matters that pertain to his own life.

* * * * * *

The average man is born with a capacity to stand on his tiptoes and reach out just as far as he can to gather in all he can get and hold tight; but it requires a great deal of exertion to open the arms and give out something.

* * * * * *

Other men judge us not so much by what we preach, as by the product of our preaching.

* * * * * *

The fundamental thing for a Latter-day Saint is to value his word as faithfully as his bond; to make up his mind that under no circumstances, no matter how hard it may be, by and with the help of the Lord, he will dedicate his life and his best energies to making good his promises.

* * * * * *

By the mere exertion of the will, by mere desire, we accomplish nothing; we must put with that desire the labor to accomplish the things we desire.

* * * * * *

When men stop praying for God's Spirit, they place confidence in their own unaided reason, and they gradually lose the Spirit of God.

* * * * * *

The chief secret of success is nothing more than doing what you can do well, without thought of fame. If fame comes at all, it will come because it is deserved, not because it is sought after.

When President Grant went to New York City, he had no difficulty whatever in finding his way about in the winding and confusing streets of lower Manhattan, where the great financial and industrial institutions of the nation have headquarters. The chief executives of these institutions, financial wizards, so to speak, were his personal friends. They welcomed him warmly when he entered their offices. Their doors were never closed to President Grant. They seemed always delighted to entertain him at lunch, to listen with rapt attention as he related the thrilling and unusual experiences of his life, of which he had had such an abundance.

Into these experiences, as he recited them, were frequently woven incidents of a faith-promoting nature, the struggles of the Saints, accomplishments of the Church, and the faith of the people. These hard-headed, practical businessmen, who in their daily lives and social contacts were accustomed to encounter deception, perversion of facts, and evasions of truth, found in President Grant a man of simple faith, one whose utter frankness bespoke an honesty that could be relied upon implicitly, a man who was willing to tell in detail the intimate facts of his life and not given to exaggeration. These friends greatly admired him for these traits of character.

Whether in the presence of the chairman of the board of a multibillion dollar banking institution, the president of a great railroad or insurance company, the head of a famed institution of learning, or in the home of the humblest wage earner or tiller of the soil, President Grant was at perfect ease and would generally lead out in the conversation.

To all who knew him, his life was an open book. His utter frankness was a distinguishing characteristic. He was honest in his faith and testimony. He never deceived anyone, nor had he any desire ever to do so. He was truly one of the greatest ambassadors of friendship and goodwill to the professional and business men that the Church has ever had. No one can begin to estimate the great good he did in the matter of allaying prejudice in the minds of influential people.

In the home of the humblest he was as welcome and content as in the mansion of the wealthy. Bread and milk and the simplest fare when offered him in the homes of the Saints were gratefully received and even more highly appreciated than the choicest foods that the famous chefs of the great hotels could prepare. The privilege of partaking of the hospitality of true Latter-day Saints, who always gave him the best that the land affords, always brought him joy and satisfaction. He never ceased to relate to them the goodness of the Lord to him, and he always appreciated being asked to join with them in prayer in the family circle.

He will always be remembered for his fervent, sincere, and fearless testimony. No one in our time was blessed with a stronger testimony of the truthfulness of the restored gospel. Surely no one was more diligent in bearing that testimony to the people of the world. He never hesitated to let it be known that the truths of the gospel and his love for them were the most important treasures of his life. Those who heard him bear witness to the goodness of the Lord could never honestly question his sincerity.

In President Grant's mind no doubt ever existed regarding the divinity of the work in which we are engaged; he knew that he was indeed God's chosen earthly representative in the position he occupied. In childlike faith he approached his Father in heaven, and his prayers were often answered in miraculous ways. The Lord talked to him through the revelations of his Spirit and inspired him with the wisdom and guidance he needed in his vast responsibilities. Both at home and abroad, on land and on the sea, wherever his travels took him, he bore fervent testimony to the divine truth. Many thousands were stimulated to righteous living and strengthened in their faith as they listened to his clear and forceful voice fearlessly declaring:

I know, as I know that I live, that God lives; that Jesus is the Christ; that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the true and living God; that the Gospel commonly called Mormonism is in very deed the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, with every gift, grace, power and blessing that was enjoyed in the former days.

President Grant's penchant for work developed the latent powers within him. His faith in God and his simplicity of character enabled him to obtain from divine sources the inspiration to lead and direct his own course of life in right channels. He was a true servant of God, wholly worthy of the position he occupied. Certainly he whom the Lord thus honored and so greatly magnified earned the love, respect, and support of the Saints whose welfare and blessing he so earnestly sought and devoutly prayed for, and of sincere lovers of truth everywhere.

As I think back about President Grant and the near quarter of a century I was so closely associated with him, I am more than ever convinced that he was the man the Lord had prepared to lead his church and kingdom during those years. And what I say of President Grant I know of personal experience is true of the other leaders who have followed him in this great responsibility. Each one did not attain his position merely by accident or birth. That is not the Lord's way of selecting his prophets. In the preexistent world, when the Lord chose his leaders to send to the earth during the various dispensations of his providence, Heber J. Grant, George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, and Harold B. Lee had undoubtedly manifested those traits of character, abilities, and qualifications that befit them for the work to be entrusted to them in their generation of time. I am a firm believer in the truism that "the Lord has the right man in the right place at the right time to lead his earthly kingdom."

Having now given this word picture of President Grant, I feel it worthwhile to relate some of the many experiences of his life—many of them I enjoyed with him—that will show his greatness of character, his faith, integrity and devotion to the work of the Lord. This I feel especially privileged to do because I was so close to him, traveling with him constantly and enjoying his frankness and confidence for so many years.

President Grant was very considerate of nonmember visitors and guests who used tobacco. He always delighted to take his friends, especially those from the East, for rides into the beautiful canyons. He would arrange to stop along the way so that his guests could get out of the car, and he would conveniently disappear for a time so that the guests could have their smokes if they desired.

He particularly liked to take his friends and guests up American Fork Canyon and around the Mount Timpanogos loop. He took this ride many, many times and always was delighted himself with the beautiful scenery and pleased when his friends also could enjoy these experiences, which were unusual for them. Frequently on these trips he would entertain his guests by singing in his strong voice "O Ye Mountains High" and other appropriate hymns.

One of the great virtues so manifested by President Grant was his honesty. In this he set a worthy, exemplary pattern. If he had a piece of property to sell and there was something about it of an undesirable nature he would not think of withholding that information from the prospective buyer. He was extremely honest in meeting his obligations. At times in his life he had been in financial difficulty, even near the point of bankruptcy, but he could never rest until all those obligations were liquidated.

President Heber J. Grant and his wife, Mrs. Augusta Winters Grant, at a community dinner honoring the president on his eightieth birthday.

While he was president it became necessary for him to undergo serious surgery. Because of the nature of the trouble and his being president of the Church, local doctors did not want to assume the responsibility for the operation but wanted the benefit of the best surgical skill available. Accordingly they recommended that he be sent to a specialist at the Presbyterian Hospital in Chicago. The operation was successful, and he was naturally very grateful to the surgeon for his skillful service.

When President Grant returned home, the doctor sent his bill and the amount was somewhat shocking—$2,500. He wrote the doctor and enclosed a statement of his financial condition, saying he thought the doctor considered him a wealthy man, being president of the Church and a director of a number of corporations. He said he felt that the doctor in reading his financial statement would understand that he was not wealthy, and if the doctor felt to discount his bill it would be greatly appreciated.

The doctor responded kindly and discounted the bill by $1,000 and President Grant gladly paid the $1,500. Some two or three years later when his financial condition had improved, he had pleasure in sending the doctor his check for the other $1,000.

Another experience of a somewhat similar nature emphasizing his honesty in all dealings occurred in connection with the Salt Lake Theater. He loved the theater. He had taken small parts on the stage when he was a child. He loved drama and good plays and frequented the Salt Lake Theater. He became a heavy stockholder in it. The time came when the theater was losing money and the stock decreased very seriously in market value. Knowing that two women, the daughters of an old friend of his in Grantsville, had some stock and could ill afford to lose the money they had invested, he purchased their stock at the price they paid for it, which was very much in excess of the market value.

As the years went by and it was decided to tear down the theater and sell the property, President Grant thought of the two widows in Grantsville whose stock he had purchased. The sale of the theater and the property on which it stood brought a sufficient sum that the stockholders received a substantial profit on their investment. President Grant sent his check to these good women to cover the amount that they would have received had they held on to their stock.

No one will ever know how many mortgages on homes of widows he paid out of his own funds. Time and again he would inquire as to his bank balance. He had no special interest in the accumulation of money except for the good he could do with it.

Perhaps not too many readers today are familiar with the gift of tongues and prophecy as they relate to President Grant's call to the apostleship and as president of the Church. On occasion he related the following interesting experiences:

My mother was the president of the Female Relief Society in the ward where I was born for over thirty years. She resigned only after she had lost her hearing. I grew up in the Relief Society meetings from the time I was a little boy.

* * * * * *

Upon one occasion Eliza R. Snow had the gift of tongues, and she gave a blessing to each and all of the sisters in a meeting of the presidents of different Ward Relief Societies, and my mother told me that each and every one of these blessings was fulfilled to the very letter, and the interpretation was given by Zina D. Young. Mother asked me when I became one of the Apostles if I remembered that meeting, while I was playing on the floor as a child. I told her yes, but I did not remember anything that was said, with the exception of just one sentence by Zina D. Young. Mother said, "Of course you could not understand Sister Snow, because she was speaking by the gift of tongues." I said, "I remember that Sister Zina raised her hand and said I would become a great big man." Mother said, "She didn't say anything of the kind; she said you would become a great man in the Church, and become an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ; it had no such meaning as that you should grow tall."

* * * * * *

I was in a ruined condition financially because of the panic of 1893. My wife who is dead promised me by the gift of tongues that I should live to pay all of my debts, and all of my friends thought I never could, but I did.

* * * * * *

My wife who is dead, when I was operated upon for appendicitis—the one who gave me this blessing by the gift of tongues—appeared to my wife who is living, and told her that no matter how sick I was, how near I came to death, I would not die, because my labor was not finished and that I should live to preach the Gospel in many lands and many climes. There were ten doctors present at my operation—nine said I must die because blood poisoning in the last stage had set in, but the promise was made by my wife who is in heaven that I should live, and I did live.

* * * * * *

As a young boy I had two very dear friends. We were called "the three inseparables." One of them was Feramorz L. Young and one was Richard W. Young. One was a son and the other a grandson of Brigham Young. My nearest friend was Fere. He went on a mission to Mexico. While coming home from his mission he died and was buried in the Gulf of Mexico. His companion, one of the apostles, made a report to his mother that he was one of the finest young men he had ever known in his life, and the mother answered that from a little child to the time of his death, he had never given her the slightest sorrow. She could not think of an act he had performed or a word he had uttered that she could not endorse. Perhaps some other mothers could say the same thing about their sons, but if the nearest and the most intimate boy friend could tell what he knew of the boy, perhaps the mother could not say that. As the nearest friend of Feramorz Young, I can say I never knew him to say a word or do a thing that was not absolutely right. If a man or a boy started to tell a story that could not be told to a lady, Fere Young would turn and walk away. He was the sweetest spirited boy I ever knew.

The following is taken from a letter written by President Grant regarding his call to the apostleship the spirit of revelation, and related matters:

My dear Brother:

President John Taylor, at the time that George Teasdale and I were called to be Apostles and Seymour B. Young to be one of the Seven Presidents of Seventy, gave to the Church a printed revelation which was voted upon and accepted by the Church. None of the successors to President Taylor have published any revelations similar to those that are contained in the Doctrine and Covenants. The leaders of the Church who have succeeded President John Taylor have been blessed with the spirit of revelation in guiding the church.

Speaking of revelation by the spirit, you will find the following in D&C 8 of the Doctrine and Covenants, starting with the 2nd verse:

"Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart.

"Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground."

And again in D&C 9, starting with verse 7:

"Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

"But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right, I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore you shall feel that it is right.

"But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me."

I had no thought whatever, at the time I was made the President of the Church, of nominating Melvin J. Ballard to be an apostle; my mind had rested upon another man for this position. But, I supplicated the Lord for days for the inspiration of his Spirit, or revelation if you like to call it that, that my mind might become perfectly clear in naming a man to fill the vacancy caused by my elevation to the presidency; and there was no doubt whatever in my mind that Brother Melvin J. Ballard was the man that the Lord desired for this position. I do not claim to have had a direct revelation to be given in so many words to the people, as Brother Taylor had when Brother Teasdale and I were called to be apostles.

Referring to calls to the apostleship reminds me of the fact that when Brother Francis M. Lyman was presiding over the Tooele Stake of Zion, the patriarch of that stake gave him a blessing and stated that he should be called to be one of the Twelve Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ in this last dispensation. This patriarch, the late John Rowberry, gave me a blessing in which he stated that I should be taken from that position and become a leader of great magnitude among the people, and I now stand at the head of the church as its president. I think it is perfectly proper to say that Brother Rowberry was inspired and was told in his mind that in his heart by the Holy Ghost what should befall Brother Lyman and myself in our future lives, and that it would be perfectly proper to quote from the revelation to Oliver Cowdery, namely: "This is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground." And it was that same spirit that inspired Brother Rowberry to make these promises to Brother Lyman and myself, which have been fulfilled to the very letter.

You can feel perfectly safe, that the presidency and apostles of the Church are entitled to and will receive the whisperings of the Spirit of the Lord to them by the Holy Ghost to guide and direct the affairs of the Church in the way and manner that shall be pleasing and acceptable to our Heavenly Father, and for the best good of the saints.

With kind regards,

Sincerely your friend and brother,

(signed) Heber J. Grant

About Brother Ballard, President Grant said he was never in his home. He had never met his mother or any of his brothers and sisters at that time. He had met his father because he was a bishop in Cache Valley, and he had met Brother Ballard many times. He then said:

When I became the president of the Church, I had the right to name a man to succeed me in the Twelve. I told the Lord that he knew whom I wanted because I had nominated him three times, but now that it is my duty to nominate a man I want the witness of the spirit from You whom to nominate _____, and the impression to me was to nominate Melvin J. Ballard.

Many good and faithful Saints came to President Grant from time to time asking that he administer to their loved ones who were sick, thinking that his blessing would have the effect of healing the sick person, while a blessing by some humble elder or even a bishop or stake president would not have the same influence with the Lord. Some went to these brethren in various positions and, not getting the desired results, came to him as a last resort.

It is natural for us to leave no stone unturned when the lives of those we love are in jeopardy. However, it is not intended that we shall go on living forever in mortality, nor is it intended that the sick shall always recover. In spite of our love for our dear ones and our faith and knowledge that the Lord can and does hear our prayers and recognize the administrations of the priesthood, we must reconcile our thinking to the truth that God's ways are not necessarily man's ways and that we want his will to prevail.

Illustrative of President Grant's thinking on this subject, I quote a letter that he addressed to a brother and sister who wrote to him regarding their sick daughter:

I have your letter of December 21, in which you tell me of the affliction which has come to your youngest daughter, following a severe case of scarlet fever. That disease is certainly a dreadful one; it so frequently leaves in its wake some permanent physical ailment.

Born and reared in the Church, as you have been, I am sure I need only say to you that I as president of the Church have no greater authority or power in the matter of healing than any other man bearing the Melchizedek Priesthood. I have often thought that this is one of the great blessings which the Lord intended to flow to his children by reason of our priesthood organization, which brings into every home of those who live faithfully the healing power with all its attendant blessings which belong to that priesthood. If, therefore, you hold the Melchizedek Priesthood, as I assume you do, and if you are living righteously, as I trust you are, you yourself have as much power and authority in this matter as anyone else. If you feel you need help in the administration I would urge you to get in touch with the president of the mission, or if you happen to know the elders who are living in that area get in touch with the elders directly, who can assist you in the ordinance of administration.

The Lord has told us, as recorded in the 42nd Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 44, referring to the sick: "And the elders of the Church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name."

In order that the members of the priesthood should come to a fuller sense of their rights, prerogatives, and power, so that they themselves and the other members of the Church shall be able more fully to enjoy the blessings of the priesthood, the Church has found it necessary, as a policy, rather to discourage the thought that administration by one of the General Authorities has any greater efficacy than administration by any other person holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, because, as indicated above, the results from administration come by reason of faith, and not by reason of official position. The Church has on more than one occasion found if necessary to discourage so-called "healers"—good men whom the Lord had blessed with the power of healing—from going about over the Church administering to the sick. The reason for this is not that the man who has the gift of healing shall not exercise that gift, but it is that the rank and file of the priesthood must be brought to feel their own duty and responsibility and powers, and the necessity for living as the Lord would have them live, in order that they may exercise those powers. If these so-called "healers" should travel around about the Church there would soon grow up an attitude and a practice which would result in throwing off the restraining against sin which the priesthood must ordinarily feel in their daily lives, and the great mass of our Church members would cease to feel the need for right living.

There is an added reason, but by no means the most important one, that because of the demands which would be made upon me, and which I have neither the time nor the strength to meet, I have found it necessary to ask, where similar requests have been made, that the people suffering apply to their local priesthood for help.

I shall be very glad to place your daughter's name upon the temple prayer roll, and I myself do pray that she may be restored to complete health.

I am sure that you will understand the need which I have, both as a personal matter and as a matter of Church organization, for making the above explanation and decision.

With the kindest well wishes to you and yours, with a prayer that your daughter may regain her full health and strength, and wishing you the Compliments of the Season, I am,

Faithfully yours,

(signed) Heber J. Grant

President Grant, on various occasions, related a dream experienced by Patriarch John Rowberry of the Tooele Stake. He dreamed that he was on a great vessel and every once in awhile somebody fell overboard. Brother Rowberry finally fell overboard himself, and when he finished struggling in the water, he came out into a most beautiful country, the most beautiful he had ever seen. He met Orson Pratt, and he asked Brother Pratt to show him the homes of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Patriarch Hyrum Smith.

It seems that Brother Pratt, who was a member of the Council of the Twelve, happened to be in Tooele at that particular time when Brother Rowberry had this dream, visiting the various wards in the stake. Brother Rowberry related this dream to Brother Pratt and asked him if he could give him the interpretation, praying to the Lord that Brother Pratt would not ask him who the man was that he met in his dream. He did not want to tell Brother Pratt that he, Brother Pratt, would precede him in death. Brother Pratt said, "I will pray about it and if I get the interpretation I will give it to you."

Brother Pratt was in Tooele County for several weeks, and when he was getting ready to leave to return to Salt Lake City, he said, "Brother Rowberry, I prayed about your dream, and I got the interpretation." He said, "That vessel that you saw represented the world. You said that the majority of the people that fell overboard you did not know. If you will write down a list of those you did know, in the order in which they fell overboard, I promise you that they will die in that exact order, and I promise you that you shall go to heaven and you shall meet the identical man whom you met in your dream and when you meet him tell him that the dream was from the Lord and that the interpretation was also from the Lord through Brother Orson Pratt."

President Grant said that sometime later when he was out in Tooele serving as the president of the stake, word was received by telegram that Brother Orson Pratt was in a very serious condition of health and requesting that they hold a prayer meeting in Grantsville and also in Tooele for Brother Pratt's recovery. They did so, and as Brother Grant and some others were going into the upper room of the meetinghouse to have the prayer circle, Brother Rowberry said to Brother Grant, "Heber, do you remember my dream?" Brother Grant said that he did. Brother Rowberry then said, "Well, it is all right to pray for him, but it is Brother Pratt's turn next."

Brother Pratt did not recover, and the Lord gave a revelation to President John Taylor calling George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant to be apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ. President Grant filled the vacancy in the Twelve caused by the death of Orson Pratt.

Some years later President Grant, as an apostle, was out in Tooele attending a stake conference, and Brother Rowberry was a speaker at one of the meetings. He was in very good health though he was an old man at that time. President Grant said that he spoke with a great deal of power and expressed his love for the gospel. After the meeting, he said to President Grant, "Brother Grant, do you remember my dream?" President Grant said he did.

The patriarch then explained that the people had died in the order in which he had seen them fall off that vessel, and that they were now all gone and it was his turn next, and he said, "I am the happiest man in all Tooele County." He said he could not wait to meet Brother Pratt and to meet Brother Grant's father and other men and women he had loved with all his heart. He said, "By the way, I will tell your father, Brother Grant, that you are doing very well as a young apostle." President Grant said that the next time he went to Tooele Brother Rowberry had passed on, and he visited his grave.

When President Grant's daughter Lucy was only six months old she was very sick. The Grants were living in Tooele at the time, he being the stake president. He went to Patriarch Rowberry and asked him to come and administer to her, and after they had administered to the child, Brother Rowberry turned and said, "Did you get the witness of the spirit that your baby should live?"

President Grant said, "No, I did not."

Brother Rowberry said, "I did, and I know she is going to live." He told President Grant to go to the desk and get a piece of paper, and that he would give her a patriarchal blessing. He did give her a blessing and made remarkable promises to her about her future life, all of which were fulfilled to the very letter.

Some months after this Brother Rowberry met President Grant and said, "I want you to come to my office [he was the probate judge there] as I have a blessing in my heart for you, of a patriarchal nature." President Grant said he gave him a most wonderful and marvelous blessing, all of which was fulfilled to the very letter. After giving the blessing, Brother Rowberry said, "Brother Grant, when I had my hands on your head I saw something that I dared not put in your blessing." President Grant said of himself that he had an impression then, as a young man just 24 years of age when Brother Rowberry made that remark, that he should live to preside over the Church. He said that he never spoke of it to anyone until he became the president of the Church, and that he tried to persuade himself at the time and through the ensuing years that it could not be, that he was mistaken in that impression.

The Lord gives to his servants various gifts. Some have one gift and some another. Brother Rowberry had the still small voice of revelation, which comes to many as vividly and strongly as though it were with a great sound.

I recall an experience with President Grant one Sunday morning. I was superintendent of the 33rd Ward Sunday School in Salt Lake City at the time. He telephoned my home asking that I come at once to his home. Word was sent to me at the ward, and I immediately drove to his home. He asked me to write some things that were on his mind, and he dictated to me a prophecy pertaining to a political situation, which prophecy was literally fulfilled within a very few weeks.

The following experience which was related by President Grant, is of an interesting nature.

I am a firm believer, beyond the shadow of a doubt, in the divinity of the work in which we as Latter-day Saints are engaged. There is no doubt in my mind as to the truth of it. There is no doubt that when the Lord speaks through his servants in bestowing blessings, those blessings will be fulfilled. . .

I call to mind that the Apostles upon one occasion had a man that they were trying for neglect of duty, and felt that he was unworthy to occupy the position that he did occupy, and he pled and pled for an extension of opportunity to work, and finally a motion was made that he be dropped from the position that he was occupying, and it was seconded, and one of the brethren of the Council of the Twelve made a talk and prophesied in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the authority of the Holy Priesthood that he held, that we would never have to take action against this man, that unless he repented of the methods he had employed in his careless labors, that he himself would cut the cord that bound him to his associates in the Church. Finally, a motion was made that he be given another chance.

Years later the man became very careless and indifferent and the President of the Church instructed the Apostles who had tried this man to take action, that his carelessness was such we should not endure his occupying a position of trust, and that we should take action. I have never had my faith tried, I believe, in my life, as much as during about three or four hours when the Apostles were in a meeting and the expressed purpose of the meeting was to take action regarding this individual—to think of that marvelous prophecy that was delivered by one of the Apostles years before and which thrilled me from the crown of my head to the tips of my toes like an electric shock, and here we were about to take action against this man, instead of him cutting the cord that bound us together.

We had been discussing another matter, and finally President Lorenzo Snow, who was then the President of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, hit the table and said, "I won't hear one more word. We were sent here by the Prophet of the Lord to take action on a certain individual who has neglected his duty, and here we are talking and talking and talking about an insignificant matter, and I will not listen to another word. We will now take action in connection with the case that has brought us together." A knock came upon the door, the door was opened and a letter was handed in. It was the resignation of this man about whom the prophecy had been uttered to the effect that he himself would cut the cord that bound him to a chain with the Brethren. It made a marvelous and profound impression upon my mind that the Lord does not allow prophecies made, or blessings given under the inspiration of the Lord to fall by the wayside, and that men occupying positions of importance, if they do not do their duty, it is only a question of time when they will lose their standing.

One of the great things that has made a profound impression upon my mind from my earliest manhood is that I have never known a man or woman in this Church who was upright, faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord that ever lost his standing in the Church; they grow all the time, and I have had my faith strengthened by seeing people that occupied important positions in the Church, even Apostles of the Church, who were not obedient, who did not fulfill the duties and the obligations devolving upon them—I have seen them drift in the wrong direction and finally lose their standing.

If I were to discover that as men and women grew in the light and knowledge and testimony of the Gospel and in doing their duty, eventually they dropped out, it would frighten me, but from childhood I have never been frightened.

Being somewhat of a financial genius and having made many friends among the businessmen and financiers in the eastern part of the United States, President Grant often related some unusual experiences that showed that on many financial missions for the Church he was blessed and inspired of the Lord.

One such experience occurred in 1891 on his first trip to New York. There was a panic in the country, and money was being lent at the rate of one-half of one percent a day on the stock exchange in New York. Banks were failing; businessmen were going broke by the hundreds. President Grant went east for the purpose of raising money.

Before he started on his trip, President Woodruff gave Brother Grant a blessing in which he said that he would be able to get all the money he was going for, and in addition would have the privilege of obtaining more if necessary. He returned home after raising $136,000 and with a promise by wire from Chicago that he could have an additional $48,000 if needed, but it was not needed.

President Grant said he went with perfect assurance that President Woodruff's promise would be fulfilled, and he was not discouraged even though he was laughed at by some of the bankers that he approached.

He first called on a bank in Omaha and requested $12,000, which request was declined. He asked for $24,000 in Chicago and then $48,000 in New York, which requests were declined. He afterwards got the $48,000, $25,000, and $15,000 in New York. He then sent a wire to the Chicago bankers for $12,000 more, and they answered, "Send the note."

President Grant explained that President Woodruff was not a businessman; he was a farmer and an orchardist. He was, however, the greatest converter of people to the Church that we have had. More than 2,000 people were baptized by him on his first mission to England. He was the power that made for the success of the sugar business.

President Grant said he shed the bitterest tears of his life when he thought of a certain bank failing of which President Woodruff was the president. He went to New York for the purpose of raising money to save it. He said that one morning while he was in New York he jumped out of bed just before eight o'clock and got down on his knees and said, "O Lord, I do not ask you to work two miracles. Money is lending at one-half of one percent a day, or 182 1/2 percent a year. O Lord, I do not ask you to send me a philanthropist to give me the money, but inspire some man to lend me $200,000 and charge me $50,000 for the privilege."

He then took a bath, took things very easy, ate his breakfast slowly, got on the elevated train, purchased a morning paper, and started to read it. Just before he reached the office of H.G. Claflin & Co., he thought to himself, "I will get off here and shake hands with John Claflin." He went into the office and was told that just about an hour earlier Mr. Claflin had left the office and said, "If you can possibly find Heber J. Grant, I want to see him."

President Grant said to himself, "He is the man who is going to lend me the money." He then asked the people in the office where he could find Mr. Claflin, and they answered they did not know, but they were to let him know where he could find Mr. Grant. President Grant told them that he would be at the National Park Bank as soon as he could get there, and that he would remain there until he heard from Mr. Claflin.

He got back on the elevated and commenced reading the paper again, and he went past the station where he should have gotten off for the National Park Bank. He felt very much annoyed because the next station was quite a distance away, and he would have to walk back or catch the streetcar to go to the National Park Bank. Greatly disappointed, he got off on Broad Street, which is one street east of Broadway, and was walking up the street to catch a streetcar when he saw a sign in a window, "Blake Brothers, Stock Brokers." He walked into the office and there he found Mr. Claflin and Charlie Blake talking together.

In the course of the conversation that ensued, Mr. Claflin said, "Grant, you once pounded the table and said a man was a fool who, if he had a couple of banks that were liable to go broke, and if he could get three or four hundred thousand dollars to save them, would hesitate a moment in paying $100,000 premium for the money. Charlie and I have been talking it over and Charlie has agreed to cash the notes of H. G. Claflin and Co. for $400,000 and we are going to divide the $100,000 you offered to give."

President Grant said, "Oh, I was just talking through my hat."

Mr. Claflin said: "Well, Mr. Grant, you know and I know that your bank and every other bank in the United States today is tottering, and you do not know how soon they are going to fail. You dare not look me in the eye and tell me that your bank is not in a dangerous condition."

President Grant answered, "Mr. Claflin, I do not want $400,000. I am sure that $200,000 would save my two banks, and I will gladly give you $50,000 provided you lend me $200,000 and will hand me a check right now for $50,000 to telegraph home this afternoon before the banks close." Mr. Claflin pulled his checkbook out of his pocket, wrote the check, and handed it to him, and Brother Grant telegraphed the money home. The balance came later.

He got 7 1/2 percent instead of 6 percent because of the bonus of $50,000. He carried that note for three years. Brother Grant came home and arranged with the principal creditors to take care of them, told them the circumstances, and asked them to pay 12 percent for the money for three years. This saved both the banks, and the amount the banks had to pay on the bonus was $9,000 each. The 12 percent, which they were mighty glad to give, and only having to pay 7 1/2 percent, made the loss to the banks only $9,000 each.

Mr. Claflin was one of the President's dearest friends from that time on.

President Grant seemed to have almost what some people would consider a mania regarding the sugar business. He felt the Lord had a purpose in establishing that institution, so that the farmers might have a cash crop to assist them in their economic conditions. The following excerpt from remarks of President Grant in Boulder City, Nevada, March 25, 1934, about the sugar industry and other matters, is indicative of his interest in this subject:

The Utah-Idaho Sugar Company had borrowed over ten million dollars. They had contracted for beets at $12 a ton when sugar was selling for $17 a bag, but when they had on hand 2,300,000 bags of sugar, the price of sugar had gone down to $5 a bag, and there was no sale for it, and we had the experience of losing $5,000,000 that year. We had borrowed over $10,000,000 and we needed more money for the next year's crop. We had only paid back $3,000,000, and the other $7,000,000 was past due, and we needed another $2,800,000 for our next crop. We did not need very much under the circumstances because the farmers were so mad because we had to reduce the payment to them. They did not stop to figure that we had given them $5,000,000 more than their beets were worth the year before.

Mr. Fred W. Shibley, an official of the Bankers Trust Company in New York, was sent out here representing the bankers of New York, San Francisco, and Chicago, to look into our affairs and to make a recommendation as to whether we should be declared bankrupt and turned over to the bankers to wind up our business, or what should be done. I am very grateful that he became thoroughly convinced that our business would eventually be successful. He went back into our books for between 20 and 25 years, and compiled a looseleaf book with various statistics consisting of nearly 200 pages, which he jokingly called "Book of Mormon," and he recommended to the bankers in New York that they renew our notes and give us the $2,800,000 additional on certain conditions and the condition was that $2,800,000 more be put into the Company as capital stock.

However, the bankers did not pay any attention to his optimistic report, and they declined to loan us the $2,800,000 necessary unless security was put up, and we had quite a time, but we finally did get a renewal, and we finally arranged with Uncle Sam to lend our Company the other $10,000.00 so we did not need any of the bankers' money. Then they finally concluded to lend us the money which they had refused to lend on the very security they had refused to accept. . . .

This man, Shibley, told me he was not a money-lender in his work as a banker, but he said, "I am a financial doctor, diagnosing the cases of sick financial institutions, and prescribing the remedy to cure them!". . .

When I parted from him in Chicago he went on a fast train to New York, and I on a slow one. . .

I said to him, "Mr. Shibley, I have thoroughly enjoyed my visit with you, and am grateful for this wonderful and optimistic report you are making of our company. . . I would like you to promise me that between here and New York you will read two pamphlets that I want to give you. You are the vice-president of a great bank with hundreds of millions of dollars in assets, one of the greatest in all New York. You would not think of such a thing as reading these pamphlets when you get home, but promise me you will read them between here and New York." I handed him the pamphlet, "Joseph Smith Tells His Own Story," and also, "My Reasons for Leaving the Church of England and Joining the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," by Col. R. M. Bryce Thomas.

When I got to New York I called on him, and he said, "My life has been spent in analyzing things. As I have already told you, Mr. Grant, my business is to analyze the affairs of sick financial corporations. By every rule of my life to arrive at the truth, I have to acknowledge this story of Joseph Smith as true." I was told he had charge of looking into the affairs of the great General Motors Corporation at the time they were in distress when there was some fear of their failing many years ago, and was subsequently invited, after he made his report to the company, to become one of their directors. He made the statement: "No liar ever did write or could write such a story as the story told by Joseph Smith," and he was so excited when he said this that he pounded on the table and said, "A liar would never think, in describing an angel, to say his feet did not quite touch the floor. It would not enter his head. Nor to say that he had on a loose robe and that he could see into his breast. No liar ever deals in details, and this story deals in nothing but details—the hour, the place, the circumstances, the spot, the people—everything. Liars would not dare tell a story like that. They could not do it."

He said, "Of course, you know it is generally conceded that liars ought to have good memories and they are always deficient in that particular. Liars in business never give you a detailed statement. They just give you a lot of high points. If they gave you the details of a business in a bad company, they would have no chance of getting a continuation of notes, etc."

When he told me that, I thought, "I know now why you went back for 20 long years on our books. You were looking for something crooked and could not find it."

He continued: "This man had the visions he claims to have had. I do not expect to join your Church, but that story, by every rule of my life, is the truth. Mr. Grant, I am a student. I am agnostic. I do not accept it as the word of God. I only say to you that if I actually believed the Bible to be the word of God, I would not be an honest man after reading this pamphlet if I did not join your Church. I say that no honest man who believes in the Bible can get away from the proofs this man has given, with scriptural references, to sustain your doctrine. They are unanswerable, I maintain."

I had the privilege of meeting with President Grant and Mr. Shibley in New York on two or three occasions. Mr. Shibley impressed me as a man of great ability and wisdom.

The experience of a visit to the King of Sweden was related by President Grant on the occasion of the visit of the Crown Princess and Prince of Denmark in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on April 16, 1939.

On behalf of the Presidency of the Church we are very glad indeed to have this very fine auditorium to tender to the committee that is welcoming our distinguished visitors. I say to our distinguished visitors here that we have a very warm place in our hearts not only for their country, but for the other Scandinavian countries, and I might add Holland also, seeing that my mother is Pennsylvania Dutch. . .

It fell to my lot on the Fourth of July to be in Stockholm, and I said to my wife and daughters, the President of the Swiss-German Mission, the editor of our Star and our fine singers, Arvilla Clark and Spencer Clawson, "What would you like to do to celebrate our natal day?" I said, "I would like to call on King Oscar." They said, "So would we." I said. "Go in and put on your best clothes and I will write His Royal Highness a letter and take you over," (I understood that he was on a little island and it would take about a half hour to get there), "and I will introduce you to the king."

I wrote a letter to the King telling him I was from Utah and that I hoped he would waive formalities, that I had letters of introduction from senators asking that I be given an audience and that I had not time to have those letters presented in regular form, and this being the day of all days to Americans I hoped he would waive formality and give us an audience.

We went to the little island and there was a soldier with a gun over his shoulder walking back and forth. I said to our party, "We will wait until he gets right close to us and then turns around and by the time he gets to the other end of his walk and turns around I will have made arrangements for the interview. I am not afraid at all that he will shoot me, because he will feel sure that I would not dare be there if I hadn't authority to be there." I told them that when I had arranged the interview I would motion for them to come in.

I knocked at the door and a man came who undoubtedly talked Swedish. I did not understand him. I talked English. He shut the door and turned the key. I feel sure he thought there was some crazy man outside. Pretty soon a gentleman came who talked perfect English, and he said, "What can I do for you?"

I said, "I desire to see King Oscar."

He said, "You cannot see King Oscar. No one can see the King unless properly presented."

I said, "Did the King tell you he would not see me?"

He said, "No."

"I do not take any answer from you, sir, I sent a letter of introduction to the king from the Governor of the great State of Utah." I told Governor Heber M. Wells who wrote the letter to make it as strong as his conscience would let him, and to be sure that his signature was attested by the Secretary of State, and also to be sure to put the seal of the State on it with a long red ribbon attached. I told him I was sure that would get me an introduction anywhere I went. I decided that I would be willing to lose that letter if I could get to see King Oscar. I had sent the letter in and told him I hoped this letter would answer the purpose, waiving formalities. When this man refused me admittance I said: "You bring my letter back; I am not going to take any message from you. The letter I sent in to the king was from the Governor of the great state of Utah"—and I emphasized the GREAT STATE OF UTAH.

He came back and said: "The king will receive your party. Invite them to come, and he will receive you here on the lawn." I motioned to them and they came.

After we had asked two or three questions back and forth, the king said, "Mr. Grant, how many of your people here (there were about sixteen of us) speak Swedish?" There were only three, so he changed to perfect English. He was a magnificent specimen of humanity; he stood over 6 ft. high, as straight as an arrow. He was very, very courteous indeed. He asked many questions about our people, what they were doing there, etc. And then he said, "I want to tell you something, Mr. Grant. I have sent my representatives to different parts of the United States of America, to inquire how the former citizens of my country were getting along in Wisconsin and in other parts of the United States, and I want you to know, Mr. Grant, that in no other part of the United States of America are the former citizens of my country as prosperous, as happy, and as contented as in Utah. All the various churches here have petitioned me time and again to have you Mormons refused the privilege of preaching in this country, but having received this report, I want you to know that as long as I am the King of Sweden and Norway, perfect and absolute liberty shall be granted to you Mormons."

I felt pleased about that, and I consider King Oscar one of the great kings in Europe.

I met many great and notable people with President Grant. This was a rare privilege.

I enjoyed very much the privilege of meeting Edgar A. Guest, the poet, when President Grant and I called on him at his home in the outskirts of Detroit, Michigan. Mr. Guest had a very comfortable and attractive home, and we spent some little time visiting with him and his young daughter. He was a very genial host, and we thoroughly enjoyed spending an hour or two with him in his home.

Mr. Guest appeared to have a high regard for President Grant, and I feel sure that he did have, although much of that regard may have stemmed from the fact that President Grant purchased and distributed thousands of copies of Mr. Guest's books A Heap O' Livin', The Path to Home, etc. In addition to being a writer of popular verse, he was in constant demand as a lecturer.

Some people claim that Mr. Guest was not a true poet, just a rhymer, but I must admit that his sentiments reach the heart and impress the hearer or the reader with a better understanding of the important things in life. His poem entitled "True Nobility" is one of the many poems that President Grant loved.

Carl R. Gray, who for some years was president of the Union Pacific Railroad, was a gentleman in every sense of the term, and it was a pleasure to visit with him on various occasions with President Grant. His home was in Omaha, Nebraska, but the head offices of the railroad were in New York. Mr. Gray's wife was a very fine woman of high principle and of great faith. She was not a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but she was a prominent speaker on religious subjects. I have met few, if any, men, non-members of the Church in high political or industrial positions, who impressed me more favorably as a man of character and integrity than Carl R. Gray. Needless to say, Mr. Gray held President Grant in high esteem and the president had a real affection for him.

An interesting person on whom President Grant frequently called was Charles G. Dawes, a former vice-president of the United States. Mr. Dawes was president of the First National Bank of Chicago, and President Grant frequently called on him at his office in the bank. Mr. Dawes had the highest regard for Reed Smoot, an apostle of the Church and U.S. Senator from Utah, and also for Wilson McCarthy, also a member of the Church with whom Mr. Dawes had been closely associated while in Washington.

I was very much intrigued by one of Mr. Dawes' mannerisms. He loved to smoke a pipe, and we never called on him that he did not take his pipe in his hand, open one of the drawers in his desk, take out a tin of pipe tobacco, load the bowl of his pipe, and strike a match as if to light the pipe. But never did I see him light the pipe or smoke it. He would hold the tobacco-filled pipe in one hand and the lighted match in the other as he conversed with the president. The match would go out, and he would light another, but always. with the same result. I presume he failed to light the pipe and smoke it out of deference to President Grant, but each time we called he went through the same ceremony.

It was my pleasure on one occasion with President Grant to call on George Sutherland, who at that time was one of the Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States. Our visit was in one of the prominent dinner clubs in Washington. The following story was related by President Grant, but Judge Sutherland repeated it on this occasion more or less the way it is set down here.

Justice Sutherland told of how upon one occasion when the boys at the Brigham Young University were ridiculing him because he did not study the Book of Mormon, he got mad and used language that was such as could have caused him to be expelled from school. He expected the next day to be expelled. Brother Maeser got up in the assembly the following day and instead of expelling him quoted the Article of Faith that we allow all men the privilege of worshiping how, where, or what they may, and chastised the boys who had been abusing a student who had been invited to come to the school and who had asked for the privilege of coming and had said he wanted to be excused from studying the Book of Mormon and other religious subjects. He said that you do not believe in your own faith when you ridicule a man for not studying what he does not want to study.

Justice Sutherland said, "Immediately after the morning devotional service was over I rushed up to Brother Maeser's desk and said, `Dr. Maeser, I take Book of Mormon from this day, and I will pass as good an examination, if not better, than any of the other boys'." And he did.

Sutherland never became a member of the Church, but he was always a staunch supporter, and on the occasion referred to when President Grant and I visited with him he remarked that he believed that he had done and was doing more for the Church than if he were a member. There was no question that his heart was with the Church and that he was indeed converted to its truths.

A very interesting friend and acquaintance was Dr. Henry C. Link, author of The Return to Religion and other books. Dr. Link seemed to have a very high regard for President Grant, and I had the privilege of being with them on several occasions when President Grant called on him at his office. He was a man of high principles, and while he never joined the Church—he passed away a few years ago—the truths of the gospel seemed to find a responsive cord in his life.

An interesting story by President Grant relates to Karl G. Maeser.

Brother Franklin D. Richards came over to Germany from England to be present at the baptism of the first convert in Saxony where Brother Karl G. Maeser resided. Brother Richards presided over the European Mission, and he felt he would like to be present at the gathering of the first fruits of the gospel in that land.

Brother Willam Budge, subsequently the president of the Bear Lake Stake of Zion, and who finally ended his life as the president of the Logan Temple, was then in charge of our missionary work in Switzerland where there was liberty, and missionaries were sent occasionally into the German empire.

They went out at midnight to perform the baptism and while coming back from the place where Brother Maeser was baptized, together with his wife, brother-in-law, and other members of the family, Brother Maeser was conversing with President Franklin D. Richards. After a few questions had been asked and interpreted by Brother Budge, Brother Maeser asked Brother Budge not to interpret the answers, that he understood them perfectly. And then Brother Franklin D. Richards said, "Do not interpret the questions. I understand them." They walked for miles, Karl G. Maeser asking questions in German, Franklin D. Richards answering them in English, neither understanding the other's language, and yet, under the inspiration of the Lord, both understanding each other perfectly. They finally came to the River Elbe. There was a bridge there that they had to go over to get into the city of Dresden . . . when they got on the opposite side of the bridge—they had been separated as they crossed the bridge—when they came together again, Brother Maeser asked a question and Brother Richards turned to Brother Budge and said, "Brother Budge, I do not understand a word of that question. Please interpret it." And then Brother Maeser said, "Brother Budge, interpret the answer, I do not understand a word of it," and he did so.

The next question was, "Apostle Richards, why have we been able to understand each other for miles, and now all of a sudden we cannot understand a word?" And the answer was, "Brother Maeser, one of the fruits of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the true gospel of Christ, is the interpretation of tongues. The Lord has permitted you to partake of one of the fruits of the gospel. No tree without leaves and without fruit is of any value, but a tree that has the leaves and the fruit growing upon it—if you and I can walk up to that tree and reach out our hands and pluck the fruit and partake of it, nobody on earth could convince us that the tree was not alive." Brother Maeser in this particular case had had the privilege of reaching out his hand and plucking one of the fruits that grow upon the gospel tree, namely, the interpretation of tongues, which had also been given to Brother Franklin D. Richards.

Brother Richards said to him: "Brother Maeser, the Lord has given to you a new witness and testimony that you have found the truth; he has allowed you and me this night to have a complete interpretation of tongues; God has given to you, Brother Maeser, a witness that you have really found the gospel of his Son, Jesus Christ."

Brother Maeser told me that he trembled like a leaf, and that he looked up into heaven and he said to the Lord: "Father, thou hast heard and answered my prayer, and I once more dedicate to thee, if need be, my life for this gospel."

As President Grant said, those who knew Brother Maeser know that he gave his life to the Church. "No man within my acquaintance was ever more faithful, more diligent, more unselfish in his labors and more consistent and persistent in working for the salvation of the youth of Zion than was Karl G. Maeser."

It was my good fortune while in Germany with President Grant in 1947 to visit the old home of Brother Maeser in Meissen. As I recall the experiences now, a woman perhaps in her sixties was living there and was kind enough to show us through the home, which was a very fine little place and was in first-class condition at the time.

I think one of the most unique, and yet one of the most inspirational, experiences I had with President Grant occurred Sunday, September 5, 1937, as we were returning home from Europe, the president having completed a tour of the missions in Europe. We shared the same cabin on the ship. It was the S.S. Empress of Australia. It being the first Sunday of the month, and a fast day, he decided that he and I would hold a testimony meeting of our own. At the time he lacked only two months of being 81.

Accordingly, the two of us sang the hymn "God Moves in a Mysterious Way, His Wonders to Perform," after which I offered prayer and he bore his testimony. I wrote the testimony in shorthand as he gave it, and the following are excerpts therefrom:

I feel that I would like to read what I have already marked in the first essay in the book, The Power of Truth, by William George Jordan.

The following particularly finds a wonderful response in my heart:

"Truth is the rock foundation of every great character. It is loyalty to the right as we see it; it is courageous living of our lives in harmony with our ideals; it is always—power.

"Truth ever defies full definition. Like electricity it can only be explained by noting its manifestation. It is the compass of the soul, the guardian of conscience, the final touchstone of right. Truth is the revelation of the ideal; but it is also an inspiration to realize that ideal, a constant impulse to live it. . ."

How I do thank the Lord for the restoration of the true gospel of Jesus Christ. No words of mine can express my gratitude for an absolute knowledge of the divinity of the restored gospel through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith the Prophet.

I was very happy to make the acquaintance of Mr. Jordan, and spent many hours in his home in New York conversing with him. I wrote him a letter in 1909, and received the following reply:

172 W. Clark Street

New York

November 9, 1909

Dear Mr. Grant:

I thank you for the Book of Mormon, the tracts and the booklet on `Utah' which have just come to hand, and for the special number of the Era which will probably come by a later post. I shall read them with pleasure and interest. From what I know of your church, I believe it is doing live, practical work for the betterment of humanity and that, more than any other church's, your creed is transferred into living; it is not a theory of life service but a simple faith manifested in works.

No religion is worth anything unless it yields dividends—dividends of finer individual lives of truer brotherhood, of higher uplift in the affairs of everyday life. I trust some time it may be my privilege, and it would surely be my pleasure, to visit your people and view the work at close range. I wish there were more tolerance between the sects and denominations, and that the world's walls of tolerance and ignorant criticism were torn down. It is not necessary that we should accept each other's faith in order to respect it and to have reverence for that which is inspiring men to finer living.

Believe me,

Very gratefully and sincerely yours,

(signed) William George Jordan

Mr. Jordan is the author of very many books, every one of which that I have read has made a very profound impression upon me.

I can truthfully say this morning that never in my life have I had a greater desire to grow in the light and knowledge of the gospel, in capacity to live it, and in capacity to inspire others to live it, and in capacity to accomplish more for the redemption of the wayward and to bless those that are in distress in the Church, than I do this day. And I thank God from the bottom of my heart on this fast day for an absolute testimony of the divinity of the work in which I am engaged, and for a knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of the world, and that Joseph Smith is a prophet. . .

I have read in the scripture that when two or three assemble in the name of the Lord, "there will I be also." I believe that the Lord has been with us here today, although there are only two of us.

President Grant offered the following prayer at the close of the meeting:

O God, our Heavenly and Eternal Father, we thy servants, in dismissing this little meeting, approach thee in gratitude for our knowledge of the divinity of the work in which we are engaged, and pray that our minds may never become darkened, and that we may grow in the light and knowledge and testimony of the gospel to the end of our lives, and this we ask in all humility in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Others, too, had special feelings toward President Grant with perhaps a greater skill at expressing them, but with no greater sincerity and appreciation. I quote two of these which I have kept in my scrapbook as special tributes to a great man.

The following is from President J. Reuben Clark, a counselor and faithful, loyal friend to President Grant:

God fashioned him in heart and mind and body, in ability, in experience, and in wisdom, just as he has fashioned every man whom he has ever called to lead his people, even from Moses of old till now. No man ever comes to lead God's people whom he has not trained for the task. . .

He so lived his life that it had no dark places across which he must draw a curtain. His life had nothing to embarrass, nothing to hide, nothing of which he must be ashamed.

He was completely fearless. Sin and corruption could not be so highly placed as not to meet his rebuke.

Truth was the sole guide of his life; error never led him down the wrong track.

He had the pure and undefiled religion of James: he visited the fatherless and the widows in their affliction and kept himself unspotted from the world.

Another was from Noble Warrum, who wrote the following editorial in the Salt Lake Tribune:

Tall, slender, bearded, gray and grave, of striking appearance and patriarchal bearing, President Grant might have stepped forward from an illustrated page of the Old Testament. Had he lived in those far distant days he would have seemed, and no doubt felt, at ease and at home in the tents of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

He would have taken high rank among the potentates and prophets of olden times as a shrewd and sagacious director of temporal affairs, a rigid disciplinarian in spiritual matters, a methodical chronicler of passing events, an indulgent but observant father to his people, and a valiant crusader against the mockers of Jehovah and his commandments.

Modern minded, well groomed, and up-to-date, he will be remembered, yet it would have required no great stretch of the imagination to picture him leading the Children of Israel through the wilderness, counseling with the tribesmen of Canaan about their flocks and herds, hurling anathemas at idolators from the foot of Sinai, driving the chariot of Jehu toward Jezreel, swinging the sword of Gideon against the Midianites, smiting the walls of Jericho in righteous wrath, or marching at the head of a triumphant legion singing hosannas to the Highest.

Now I find this closing thought appropriate at this time. I had an interesting visit with President Heber J. Grant a day or two before he passed away. Among other things, he said, "Joseph, have I ever been unkind to you?" And I was happy to be able to say, "You never have been." I realize that as time passes we are inclined to forget the unpleasant things and remember only that which is pleasing, but I am sincere in saying that President Grant never said an unkind word to me during the 23 years I worked with him. No two men could have been closer to each other than we were. There was nothing in his life that he withheld from me, and I knew the innermost desires of his heart. He was a great and noble spirit, truly one of God's chosen noblemen.
