Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

3

Counselors to President Grant

President Heber J. Grant had an array of extremely strong and competent counselors during the nearly 27 years he was president of the Church. His length of service was exceeded only by that of President Brigham Young, who served 30 years as Church president.

When President Grant became president on November 23, 1918, he retained the same two counselors as his predecessor, President Joseph F. Smith. These counselors were Anthon H. Lund, first counselor, and Charles W. Penrose, second counselor. Since President Lund died in March 1921 and I did not go into the First Presidency's office until 1922, I did not become acquainted with him in his office as first counselor, though I was aware of his great leadership and service to the Church and had heard him speak on numerous occasions.

As I have previously mentioned, the First Presidency at the time my service in the office began consisted of President Grant, President Penrose as first counselor, and President Anthony W. Ivins as second counselor. Thus the counselors to President Grant during my long and intimate association as

When the author began his service with President Grant, the counselors were Charles W. Penrose and Anthony W. Ivins. Charles W. Nibley came into the First Presidency at the death of President Penrose in 1925.

his secretary and as secretary to the First Presidency were as follows:

Charles W. Penrose—first counselor, March 1921 to May 1925

Anthony W. Ivins—second counselor, March 1921 to May 1925—first counselor, May 1925 to September 1934

Charles W. Nibley—second counselor, May 1925 to December 1931

J. Reuben Clark, Jr.—second counselor, April 1933 to October 1934—first counselor, October 1934 to May 1945

David O. McKay—second counselor, October 1934 to May 1945

As can be seen, I served longer with President Clark and President McKay than with the other counselors, since they also were counselors to President George Albert Smith. It is my desire in this chapter to help my readers to become briefly acquainted with the above named counselors. However, I have taken the liberty to go much more extensively into my association with President Clark than with the others, and I feel justified in doing so because of the closeness I felt to that great man. I have often said that the two most influential men in my life, who were to me as a father would be, were President Grant and President Clark. President McKay will be more extensively introduced in the chapter of this book which deals with his nearly 20 years of service as president of the Church and my work and close association with him during the time he was a counselor to two presidents and then president of the Church—a total of about 36 years.

PRESIDENT CHARLES W. PENROSE

Even though he was advanced in age—he was past his ninetieth birthday when I started to work in the office of the First Presidency—I quickly found President Charles W. Penrose, an alert and capable man, had well earned the reputation applied by his friends as "one of the ablest and best informed men among the leaders of the Church."

He had a rapid style of preaching, and his use of plain language in effective expression made a lasting impression on all who heard him. Essentially a journalist and missionary, the English convert rose to great heights of church leadership, as a preacher of the gospel and defender of the faith through the spoken word and the might of his pen. Though called to the apostleship in 1904 at the age of 72, he became at once a pillar of strength to the Church and the brethren with whom he associated.

At the time he was chosen an apostle, President Penrose was already well known throughout the Church, perhaps more through his extensive writings than any other way. When called to the Twelve, he was serving as editor-in-chief of the Deseret News, the Church's official newspaper, published in Salt Lake City. He had held that position since President Lorenzo Snow called him home in 1899 from England, where he had been serving his third mission in his native land. Not only was he a dedicated journalist and missionary, but also as a preacher, writer, and debater he had few equals.

Perhaps one can better understand the achievements of this dedicated Mormon leader when he knows something of his earliest years. He was born on February 4, 1832, at Camberwell, London, England. In very early life he was known by his family and associates as a boy of studious and inquiring mind, quick in perception and having a remarkable memory. He read the scriptures when he was only four years old and thus laid an early foundation for what was to be a remarkable career as a missionary and religious leader.

He was attracted to the teachings of the first Latter-day Saint missionaries he heard in London—especially to the logic of their reasoning and their teaching from the scriptures with which he was so familiar. At the age of 18 he joined the Church, the only member of his family to do so. He left almost immediately on a mission, actually without purse or scrip, having only the clothes he wore. He walked the distance from London to Maldon in Essex County with bleeding feet and began a labor of love that lasted for seven years. He met with unusual success, enjoyed frequently the gift of healing, and left an indelible mark on the missionary history of Great Britain to which he was to add considerably in the years to come.

He was then called to preside over the London Conference (district). During these years his pen was also very busy. His thorough understanding of the gospel and his skill at writing were combined to produce numerous articles for the Millennial Star, Church organ published in Britain for the European missions. One of his biographers wrote: "Out of the silken and golden threads of his poetical thoughts and emotions, [he] wove the fabric of those beautiful thoughts of Zion which have cheered the hearts and fired with patriotism and holy zeal the drooping souls of thousands."

After a total of ten years as missionary and writer in the ministry in his own land, he was released in 1861 and came to Zion. He drove his ox team across the plains with his family, being 11 weeks on the trip. Imagine the rejoicing in his soul when he at last reached the Zion of his dreams, the Zion of which he had written beautiful poetry put to song several years before he saw it in person!

Few Latter-day Saint hymns are sung today with more fervor, appreciation, and frequency than his "O Ye Mountains High." I reprint here the first stanza only to show the longing of President Penrose for Zion and the miracle of his "vision" of the place, since he wrote this song in 1854, while on his mission in Essex, five years before coming to America:

O ye mountains high, where the clear blue sky Arches over the vales of the free, Where the pure breezes blow and the clear streamlets flow, How I've longed to your bosom to flee! O Zion! dear Zion! land of the free, Now my own mountain home, unto thee I have come— All my fond hopes are centered in thee.

This song, as were all others by Charles W. Penrose, was a favorite of President Heber J. Grant. On the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, President Grant and his wife hosted all the General Authorities of the Church and their wives in a cottage in Brighton at the head of Big Cottonwood Canyon, a few miles east of Salt Lake City. Songs composed by President Penrose were sung on that occasion, and he responded readily when asked to explain the circumstances of the origin of his hymns. Of the writing of "O Ye Mountains High" he said that evening:

"O Ye Mountains High" was written somewhere along about 1854, published in 1856. I was walking on a dusty road in Essex. My toes were blistered and my heels too. I had been promised that if I would stay in the mission another year I should be released. That was the cry every year: "Brother Penrose, if you will stay and labor another year, we will see that you are released to go to Zion." But it kept up for over ten years. Of course I had read about Zion, and heard about the streets of Salt Lake City, with the clear streams of water on each side of the street, with shade trees, and so on. I could see it in my mind's eye, and so I composed that song as I was walking along the road, and set it to a tune—the Scotch ditty, "Oh Minnie, Oh Minnie, Come O'er the Lea." Those were the opening words. When I got to the place called Mundon, in Essex, we held a cottage meeting, and in that meeting I sang it for the first time it was ever sung. Of course the words were adapted to a person who had never been to Zion then, but it was afterwards changed in a very slight respect or two, to fit people who had gathered with the Saints. It was inspirational and seemed to please President Brigham Young. (George D. Pyper, Stories of Latter-day Saint Hymns, p. 15.)

From the day it was first published in 1856, while its author was still a missionary in England, the song, often referred to as "Zion," was instantly one of the favored hymns of the Church.

Other songs in our present-day hymnbook by President Penrose include "Beautiful Zion for Me," "God of Our Fathers, We Come unto Thee," "Up Awake, Ye Defenders," and "School Thy Feelings, O My Brother." There were many other poems and songs written by this author, whose love of the gospel was often expressed in poetic language.

Because it tells within itself the inner struggle of this kindly but fearless defender of the faith and tireless missionary, it would be well to tell the story behind the writing of "School Thy Feelings, O My Brother." This story also was often related by President Grant, who loved the message and the lesson taught in this composition. Again I turn to Brother Pyper's book and quote extensively a story once well known, but not now nearly so familiar:

School thy feelings, O my brother Train thy warm, impulsive soul; Do not its emotions smother, But let wisdom's voice control. School thy feelings, there is power In the cool, collected mind; Passion shatters reason's tower, Makes the clearest vision blind. School thy feelings, condemnation Never pass on friend or foe. Tho' the tide of accusation Like the flood of truth may flow. Hear defense before deciding And a ray of light may gleam, Showing thee what filth is hiding Underneath the shallow stream. Should affliction's acrid vial Burst o'er thy unsheltered head, School thy feelings to the trial, Half its bitterness hath fled. Art thou falsely, basely slandered? Does the world begin to frown? Guage thy wrath by wisdom's standard, Keep thy rising anger down. Rest thyself on this assurance: Time's a friend to innocence; And the patient, calm endurance Wins respect and aids defense. Noblest minds have finest feelings, Quiv'ring strings a breath can move, And the Gospel's sweet revealings, Tune them with the key of love. Hearts so sensitively moulded, Strongly fortified should be, Train'd to firmness and enfolded In a calm tranquillity. Wound not wilfully another; Conquer haste with reason's might, School thy feelings, sister, brother, Train them in the path of right.

Brother Pyper explains that "in considering the poems of Charles W. Penrose one is impressed with the varying moods and emotions under which the author penned them." Brother Pyper quotes from President Penrose the trying circumstances related to the writing of this song, as related at the same social gathering when the General Authorities were guests of President Grant:

This hymn was not intended for singing. It was written for myself, about 1860, when I was in Birmingham, England, before I immigrated. I had been insidiously accused, not openly, but certain things had been said about me and my presidency of the Birmingham Conference, and particularly in relation to my family affairs and possessions. One thing connected with it might make the matter plain to you. When I went to Birmingham from Cheltenham—having previously been laboring in London—I had taken there a good deal of furniture and stuff belonging to my family that did not belong to the conference. It was intimated by one of the Elders from Zion that I was endeavoring to lay claim to the property that belonged to the Birmingham conference, and it touched me to the quick. I had labored then over ten years in the ministry, most of the time as traveling elder, literally without purse or scrip. I started that way and had continued, suffering a great many hardships and difficulties and trials that I need not refer to now, and this touched me right to the heart. I did not know how to bear it. Weltering under these feelings I sat down and wrote that little poem, right from my soul, and intended it for myself.

After I got it written my folks thought it ought to appear in the Millennial Star. So I sent it up to the Star and it was published. It was not set to any tune; I did not think about it being sung; in fact, I did not intend it for anybody but myself. However, I found it was quite applicable to others who had passed through similar experiences, and I thought it would be comforting to them. I was very pleased to know that it was a great comfort to President Brigham Young when he was under arrest. He later told me that he had it read to him several times when he had a deputy marshal guarding him in his house.

The words and origins of these two songs reveal the sensitive nature and love of God and his fellowmen of this giant among Latter-day Saint leaders.

President Penrose was an outstanding missionary. He served three missions in his native land during which he was active in assisting editorially with the Millennial Star. He also wrote many articles on the Church for London newspapers. While he was away on these missions, his articles appeared frequently in the Star and at home in Salt Lake City in the Deseret News.

While in Ogden, in 1877, he was asked by President Brigham Young to come to Salt Lake City to become editor-in-chief of the Deseret News. He held that position almost continuously, with a few intervals for missionary service and other editorial work with the Ogden Junction and the Salt Lake Herald, until 1907, three years after his call to the apostleship. At that time he returned again to England to succeed President Grant as president of the European Mission. Again his wide influence as preacher, teacher, editor, and writer was felt strongly not only in England but throughout all of Europe where he traveled constantly. He was the first apostle of the Church to visit any part of the world above the Arctic Circle.

President Penrose came home in 1910 and the next year was named second counselor in the First Presidency to President Joseph F. Smith, the prophet who had called him to be an apostle in 1904. He was sustained as second counselor also to President Grant in 1918, and advanced to first counselor in 1921 at the age of 89. When he died in May 1925, he was several months past his ninety-third birthday, having lived longer than any previous General Authority of the Church. His age was later exceeded only by the ages of President David O. McKay and President Joseph Fielding Smith. President McKay was four months past his ninety-sixth birthday when he died in January 1970, and President Smith died just two weeks before his ninety-sixth birthday, in July 1972.

PRESIDENT ANTHONY W. IVINS

I have often said that I considered President Anthony W. Ivins one of the most unusual men I have ever known. He was literally a product of the rough and harshly demanding life of the pioneer west, but in every way he was a refined and true gentleman. He had very little scholastic learning, and yet he had unusual learning and scholarship. An educated man is described as one well rounded on every side of his nature. He exemplified this definition.

President Ivin's training came from personal experiences and from reading. He sometimes made the remark that there was not a mountain of any consequence that he had not climbed, nor a river of any size whose banks he had not traversed; there was not a country he had not visited, nor a city of any size he had not toured—all in books! He was a great student, and reading and study were a constant pursuit.

His language and speech were the best. He was at home with the millionaire, the aristocrat, the pioneer, and the Indian. As a boy growing up in southern Utah and northern Arizona, he played with the Indian boys and could most often beat them at horseback riding, shooting the bow and arrow, and other games.

The Indian people had the highest regard for President Ivins both as a friend and as an influential associate. To demonstrate their regard, a group of Indians came to Temple Square dressed in their finest regalia and between general conference sessions met President Ivins on the grounds south of the Tabernacle. As their friend stepped forward, one of the braves came from the circle and placed upon President Ivins a beautifully beaded buckskin vest. Their true regard for him was manifest in the beaded inscription on the back of the vest: "Tony Ivins, he no cheat."

When President Grant called President Ivins into the First Presidency as a counselor in March 1921, he not only paid tribute to a worthy cousin, but also brought to his side a trusted lifelong friend, confidant, and associate. On one of his frequent trips to St. George, Utah, President Grant was reminiscing before his dictaphone, as he frequently did. He said:

When President Brigham Young was in St. George on a particular trip, he picked out a site to build a cotton factory at nearby Washington. My uncle, Israel Ivins, who was a surveyor and who had surveyed all of the southern Utah country, surveyed for a canal—or more properly speaking a large creek—to carry the water to run the water wheel at the cotton factory. My cousin, Anthony Ivins, was at one end of the surveyors chain at thirteen years of age, and I was at the other end at nine years.

Whenever opportunity presented over the many years, as youngsters, as business associates, as fellow members of the Council of the Twelve, and then in the First Presidency, these two cousins were the greatest of true friends. President Grant had explicit trust in his cousin "Tony."

President Ivins was a man of varied abilities and interests. He was, first of all, a churchman, but he was also a farmer, a stockgrower, a businessman, and, at the same time, one who understood wildlife, animals, and human beings. He loved the out-of-doors, and he had a great love of sports. Ofttimes, when Salt Lake City was a part of the Pacific Coast Baseball League and games were being played in Salt Lake City, President Ivins would disappear from his office in the afternoon without leaving any word as to where he could be found. We in the office, however, knew that he was at the baseball park.

He loved and understood horses better than anyone I ever knew. On one occasion I spent some hours with him and David P. Howells in Los Angeles, visiting the stables where the best collection of thoroughbred horses was being taken care of. As we visited the many different horses with their owners and the name of the horse was mentioned, without hesitation President Ivins would name the ancestors—the sire and the mother, or dam.

Much of President Ivins' life was spend in the area about the Grand Canyon, including the Kaibab Forest. In 1928, when the Union Pacific Railroad built its huge Grand Canyon Lodge on the north rim of the canyon, it was fitting that President Ivins, then a counselor to President Grant, should be one of the principal speakers on the occasion of the formal opening. Two things resulted from that occasion. One was the introduction of his beloved counselor by President Heber J. Grant, in which the Church leader opened his heart and gave vent to his true feelings, and second, the response by President Ivins which will likely never be forgotten by those who heard it, or had occasion to read it in printed form as it was printed and distributed widely by the railroad officials.

Of President Ivins, President Grant said:

His life has been devoted to the highest ideals. In everything he has striven to do his best. In many things he has excelled.

As a young man he was the best baseball player, an adept with boxing gloves and the leading member of the local dramatic society. At one time he was acknowledged to be the best judge of horses and cattle in southern Utah. He was one of the most successful farmers, if not the most, in his section of the country. In civil affairs he has served the people in many capacities, always with distinction and integrity.

Not only is he a man of high moral courage, but he has proved himself on more than one occasion as a man of great physical courage and when serving as deputy sheriff he exhibited the fearlessness of his nature by arresting some of the most desperate characters in the country. He served several terms as a member of the Territorial Legislature, where he was regarded as one of the outstanding leaders. He was one of the framers of the state constitution. At one time his party offered him the nomination for governor of Utah, which he declined in order to accept a call to preside over the Mormon Colonies in Mexico.

While in Mexico he was on friendly terms with President Diaz, and in the last interview they had together President Diaz said to him, "There is no man in all the Republic of Mexico that I could enjoy doing business with more than you, Mr. Ivins."

In Church affairs he has also held many positions of honor, until today he stands second only to the president of the Church. Besides occupying these positions in the civil and religious life of the community, Mr. Ivins has developed into a successful business man, banker and merchant.

He is withal one of the most tender-hearted, forgiving and charitable men that it has ever been my good fortune to associate with. He is a lover of nature, of flowers, of beauty. He loves his fellowmen. He loves his horse, his dog, his gun, his fishing rod and the mountains and forests, and the great outdoors.

The railroad officials, printing his speech for distribution, made this brief written account.

Mr. Ivins first saw the Grand Canyon country more than fifty-three years ago, and he has been a resident of it or neighbor to it ever since. He knows it—its people and their history, its wild life, its many colorful aspects—as few men do, and in his speech there on the brink of the canyon in the assembly room of the new lodge, this knowledge was distilled into prose poetry which gave a rare insight into the country.

Some of the comments of President Ivins show the true nature of the great leader as well as reveal his love for the great outdoors, which did so much in the sculpturing of his character. He said:

Roads made by men thread the world. We travel over them now on bands of steel, in luxurious motor cars, or through the air. Only yesterday our roads were mere trails, blazed by fearless intrepid men through unknown forests, over snowclad mountains, and across trackless deserts. The romance and tragedy of these old trails will never be told or written. It cannot be because the men who made unrecorded history over these devious ways have long since gone to tread the paths of another world, leaving little or no recorded history behind them.

Later in the same address he said:

It was in this environment that my early life was spent. I, too, became a tender of flocks and herds, first for others and later for myself, and it was under these circumstances, in constant association with men of like occupation, that the ideals and aspirations which have governed my life were formed. They were men of few words, these silent riders of the hills and plains, men of unsurpassed courage, but with hearts as tender as the hearts of women where acts of mercy and service were required, as often was the case. Profoundly religious, they held in reverential respect the religions of others. Not many audible prayers were said by them, but when the day's work was finished and the blankets spread down for the night, many silent petitions went up to the Throne of Grace in gratitude for blessings received and others desired.

Speaking of his beloved canyon he said:

The canyon below us and the mountain above have witnessed scenes more pathetic, more tragic than those told by any book maker. The trees, the grass, the animals, and the living springs of water teach lessons which cannot be taught in any university where the student has not had personal contact with them.

Such a man was this spiritual giant—so strong, yet so tender of heart and so compassionate with his fellowmen. Many a person came to see President Ivins and walked away with a small loan. None of them did he turn away.

President Ivins liked to sit at his own typewriter and compose his own letters and notes for sermons. It was with difficulty that we could get him to let us help. On one such occasion he wrote about the United Order in Orderville, Utah. It was a situation and experience with which he was familiar, and his comments have great historical significance.

I think the history of the United Order in Orderville ought to be preserved. It is the most remarkable history of the kind that will be in the records of the Church. It was the most successful effort of that kind that has ever been made since the Church was organized, and it was not a failure—it was a success. I went to Orderville with Erastus Snow when he disorganized the Order. They owned the entire Kaibab mountain and were securing all the farms in that country. They had their own sheep herds, their own factories to make their wool into cloth; they had their own cattle and tanneries to tan the hides from which to make shoes. It looked as though they would absorb the whole country if something was not done to stop it—the people of other communities became jealous of them. I asked President Snow the reason for discontinuing the order there, and he said they were ahead of the times, that we could not have the United Order in one community of the Church when everybody else was out, and everybody could not get in there. That was the argument. I worked in it and I want to say I never regretted a moment the hard work I did in the United Order. It came the nearest to the ideal plan which is bound to be established in this Church and which is just as sure to come as that we are here. It may not be the same plan, but it will be the same general thought; and when I think of Orderville and hear of it, I think that the record of what was done by that people should be preserved.

President Ivins was a constant student of the scriptures and was perhaps as well informed about the Book of Mormon, especially, as was anyone in the Church. His many sermons are real contributions to the literature and doctrinal discussions of the Church. In them he has left a rich heritage. It has been said that "it is intellect and emotion expanded in every direction that give the true title to greatness." Judged by this measure, President Ivins was a great man. It is one's conduct in life that gives a correct indication of one's education, not the colleges in which he has matriculated nor the degrees he has received. Life was this man's master teacher.

Anthony W. Ivins was ordained an apostle on October 6, 1907, during the presidency of Joseph F. Smith. President Grant called him as second counselor in March 1921, and in May 1925 he was called to be first counselor in the First Presidency.

As further affirmation of my oft-repeated claim that the Lord knew and called these great men to their positions long before they were born in mortality, I repeat in closing a typical, practical comment from President Grant, concerning the call to Mexico of President Ivins:

I was feeling as "blue" financially as I ever did in my life when my cousin, Anthony W. Ivins, was called to go to Mexico. He had been marvelously successful in operating ranches. He had a little ranch worth $50,000 which we owned between us, which for years had paid 25% dividends every year regularly, and the panic had come on and institutions that I had money in and in which I had borrowed money failed. That ranch was paying 6% interest on $50,000 of my debts. I was sitting in the temple, heart-broken, although I was one of the committee that nominated him, because I felt impressed that he was needed in Mexico and that the Lord wanted him to be there. It came to me as plainly as though the voice of the Lord had declared it, "You need not feel sad because your cousin is going to Mexico; he is going exactly where the Lord wants him to go, and you shall have the exquisite joy of welcoming him back into this room of the temple as an apostle of this last dispensation."

PRESIDENT CHARLES W. NIBLEY

The often-heard characterization of being a self-made man was probably more rightfully earned by President Charles W. Nibley than by any other who achieved high leadership as a member of the First Presidency of the Church. Born in a coal mining town in Scotland and living almost in the depths of poverty, Charles W. Nibley achieved the distinction of being one of the powerful and most capable spiritual, industrial, and financial leaders of western America of his day.

This all came about because of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and President Nibley never lost sight of that fact. He was born in Hunterfield, about six miles south of Edinburgh, Scotland, on February 5, 1849. When the gospel found his folks in Scotland, they were living in a two-room rock house. His father was working in the coal mine nearby, earning three shillings a day and carrying coal out of the mine on his back.

President Nibley said that he never knew the day when he lived there in that rock house that he had enough to eat, mostly porridge and the like. On one occasion many years later, President Nibley, speaking to his children in front of that two-room rock home, said, "I want you to know that the only thing in the world that would have pulled us out of this condition was the gospel. If it had not been for the Church we would no doubt be living in that house today. All that we are and all that we ever will be we owe to the Mormon Church, and do not forget it."

It is said of Thomas Carlyle that he loved Ecclefechan, the little village in Scotland where he was born and reared; that he preferred to be buried there rather than in Westminster Abbey. I am sure that President Nibley also had a great love for the land of his birth, and he loved the writings of Carlyle and Sir Walter Scott, but I am sure he never had the longing to return to that land to make his home or to be buried. Instead he had an oft-expressed appreciation to the Lord that the gospel had found his parents and himself in that humble village of hardworking coal miners and made it possible for him to come to Utah and America and enjoy the blessings of freedom and opportunity.

After hearing the gospel in 1844, the Nibley family took several years to achieve, with hard struggle and sacrifice, their goal of coming to America. Meanwhile a branch of the Church had been organized in Hunterfield, and the father, James Nibley, had served as the branch president. In 1855 they finally left Scotland, crossing the Atlantic in the steerage of a sailing vessel. Their finances would take them no farther than Rhode Island, where they remained for the next five years working in woolen mills.

Charles W. was a lad of eleven years when the family started in 1860 on their trip across the plains to Salt Lake City. They settled almost immediately in Wellsville, Cache County. The Scottish immigrant boy herded cows to help the meager family income, and he later related that his parents did not have the means to buy clothes for him; he managed with a piece of burlap wrapped around him instead of pants.

I relate these few experiences of his early life to show the humble beginning of the career of one who became one of the noble and great among the leadership of the Church. He became a man of great wealth, literally an industrial giant, with his holdings and influence reaching throughout Utah, Idaho, Oregon, and California. Yet never did he falter in his devotion to the Church. He gave liberally of his talents and means to promote the work of the Lord. He was an organizer of railroads and became a rail-road president. He was one of the principal founders and organizers of the LeGrande Sugar Company, which later merged into the Amalgamated Sugar Company. The lumber business that he helped to organize extended into many parts of Oregon and into California.

As a result of these varied enterprises, President Nibley was a man of affluence as well as wide influence. When the Saints in eastern Oregon and western Idaho were organized into the Union Stake in 1901, Charles W. Nibley became a counselor in the stake presidency.

In 1906 President Nibley, with others of his family, traveled to Europe with President Joseph F. Smith. This was the first of numerous travels to many parts of the world that President Nibley was subsequently to make with presidents of the Church, both President Smith and President Heber J. Grant. Some of these trips were made in connection with selecting sites for temples in Hawaii, Arizona, Canada, and for dedications of these temples when they were completed.

However, these subsequent trips were made by President Nibley in a new official assignment of Church leadership. He had become Presiding Bishop of the Church, appointed to this important post in December 1907 by President Smith. Perhaps in no other Church position could the business acumen and financial experiences of President Nibley be used more effectively than as Presiding Bishop, wherein he had control of the tithes and funds of the Church. It was under his administration that the tithing system of the Church was changed to a cash basis and the use of tithing scrip became a thing of the past.

Many things could be written of President Nibley's long and effective service as Presiding Bishop of the Church from 1907 until his call as second counselor to President Grant in May 1925. At that time, President Anthony W. Ivins was moved to first counselor to succeed the late Charles W. Penrose, and President Nibley filled the vacancy. This was the first change in personnel of the First Presidency I had experienced, and I soon learned that the Lord always has in preparation someone to appoint to fill a vacancy among the General Authorities. The appointment of President Nibley was further evidence to me of the divine influence of the Lord in inspiring his prophets to make these selections. It was well known by their close associates that, while President Grant and Bishop Nibley were united in their church relationship and presiding positions, they were frequently in conflict in their business relationship, particularly in regard to the sugar industry. This conflict arose from the leadership the two had in competing companies, President Grant with the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company and President Nibley with the Amalgamated Sugar Company.

During the more than six years that President Nibley served as a counselor to President Grant, however, there was never a question of his loyalty and devotion to his prophet-leader, and his contribution to this high office was of great magnitude. He was a wonderful counselor, and he and President Grant and President Ivins always worked together with the utmost harmony and love.

President Nibley, while serving as one of the three high priests who presided over the Church, never did become one of the Twelve Apostles. In this respect he ranked with several others in Church history, including Sidney Rigdon, Daniel H. Wells, and John R. Winder.

I have always had a personal admiration and love for President Nibley. He was a noble character. He never had the opportunity for formal schoolroom education, but he became a very well-informed man, educated in the important things of life. He had a strong familiarity with the writings of Shakespeare, and he loved them as he did the writings of Thomas Carlyle. His life reflected a refinement of character second to none. He was a great organizer and a very astute and successful businessman.

One thing I remember most fondly of President Nibley was his outstanding sense of humor. He became known and appreciated as one of the most able of speakers, his talks always practical but punctuated with humorous stories and incidents to illustrate his points. I have known few if any men who had such a wonderful supply of stories and who used them so appropriately as did President Nibley.

Although Scottish by birth, he was never "scotch" in the sense that we sometimes think of people of his nationality as far as money is concerned. On one occasion when his finances were good, he gave Nibley Park to the Church. This now popular Salt Lake City golf course was at that time considered to be worth a great amount of money. On another occasion, which demonstrated his practical sense of humor, he gave once—and I cannot remember the year—to his friends and associates an attractive Christmas card that was good also for the next two years. It read, and I'll have to substitute the years, "Merry Christmas for 1928, 1929, and 1930." The card was covered with colorful Scotch plaid.

There came a time when President Nibley's finances declined very greatly, but he was never heard to complain in the least because of it.

I shall always be grateful to him for his kindness and consideration of me personally. President Grant was a very active man in those years, and seldom, if ever, did he spend a Sunday at home. He was always visiting wards and stakes, where he dedicated meetinghouses and preached to the people. It had become my lot to drive the car for him nearly always when he made these trips. President Nibley would occasionally say to President Grant, "Heber, don't you think you should leave Joseph at home with his family tomorrow?" And, of course, the suggestion having been made, President Grant always followed it and someone else drove him on those occasions, and I did enjoy the weekend with my family.

I remember on the occasion when my third child was born, President Grant suggested (I was told) that I be given a twenty-five dollar raise in monthly salary. President Nibley suggested, in which President Ivins immediately enjoined, that I be given instead a fifty-dollar-a-month increase. That was approved unanimously. In those days a fifty-dollar-a-month increase was a mighty big raise.

As a man of many accomplishments, of unusual personal enterprise, of exceptional devotion and dedication to the Church, President Nibley was always humble, practical, and very approachable. He had a great love for his family, and there was nothing he would not do for them—sometimes perhaps, as is the case with many of us, overdoing the matter. I respected him for all his achievements and service, but I appreciated him most of all for his genuineness, humanness, loyalty, and friendship.

PRESIDENT J. REUBEN CLARK, JR.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., came into the First Presidency as second counselor to President Grant in 1933, when he succeeded Charles W. Nibley in that position. President Anthony W. Ivins, who was the first counselor, remarked to President Grant a few days after President Nibley's passing, "I don't know who in the world we can get to take President Nibley's place." President Grant answered immediately, "I know just the man." "Who is it?" asked President Ivins. President Grant replied, "J. Reuben Clark, Jr." President Ivins said, "Just the man!"

President Clark was a native of Grantsville, Utah, where he was born on September 1, 1871. Grantsville was once described by a biographer of President Clark as one of those pioneer Utah towns which "were also melting pots of many nationalities . . . and where representatives of many lands rubbed shoulders in the toil of subduing the desert. Everyone had to work from childhood up or starve. . . . Grantsville and the towns like it produced men great before God and powerful before their fellowmen."

Such a man I found J. Reuben Clark, Jr., to be. He loved to work and accepted readily the ever-present challenge to achieve. It was said of him that "he was taught the dignity and necessity of work and had practiced it all of his life. He loved learning. He would have knowledge and would pay the price for it."

This thirst for knowledge, coupled with an intelligence and ability well above the average, eventually took him into high places in the government of his country. It was in these circles that he was best known when the call to the First Presidency came. He had acquired fame as an international lawyer and was the author of legal documents and decisions that still formulate national and international policy.

Before he went to the East to pursue his higher educational degrees, he was a schoolteacher, first in Heber City, then at the Salt Lake Business College, and for one year he was the principal of the Branch Normal School (now the College of Southern Utah) at Cedar City. But the thirst for knowledge and the challenge to achieve took him to Columbia University. With his wife, the former Luacine Savage, and two small children, he went off to New York to study law. The coveted LL.B. degree was won in 1906 when he was 35 years of age.

His achievement at school was such that he stepped from the campus to the United States State Department as assistant solicitor under Elihu Root. Achievements at the height of his professional career brought him such posts as Undersecretary of State and as a major in the army during World War I, assigned to the office of the Judge Advocate General. In recognition of his war service he was awarded three silver chevrons and the Distinguished Service Medal. Among other notable services he rendered was his service as an assistant for several years to Ambassador Dwight W. Morrow in Mexico. Then for several years he was himself ambassador.

Such was his national and international service that he filled with distinction special commissions and assignments from seven presidents of the United States.

Withal his remarkable career in government and world affairs, his loyalty to the Church was his foremost characteristic. In New York, Washington, D.C., Mexico City, or wherever his assignments took him, his home was a center of church activity, not alone for his family, but for other Latter-day Saints of his acquaintance as well. His associates knew of his devotion to the Church and of his great faith. He was ever loyal under all circumstances to the principles of the restored gospel. Little known was his profound study of the gospel and especially of the life and teachings of the Savior.

When President Grant called him into the First Presidency, Brother Clark was serving as U.S. Ambassador to Mexico. President Grant communicated his wishes to Brother Clark by correspondence, and the call to the First Presidency was accepted. However, it was some months before President Clark could make the necessary adjustments to come to Salt Lake City. I recall that he had been offered very lucrative employment in the East, but he declined and always said that he never had any ambition to make a lot of money.

Too much cannot be said of President Clark's great experience and ability as a servant of the people in civil, governmental, and diplomatic affairs. That experience gave him training that proved of unlimited benefit to the Church. His knowledge and understanding of the English language was unusual. It can truly be said of him that he knew the meaning of words and how to use them. He had a brilliant mind, and his memory did not seem to dim with age.

President Grant had but very limited acquaintance with Brother Clark when he chose him to be a counselor, but certainly time proved that he made no mistake and that his selection was inspired of the Lord.

During the last five years of President Grant's life, he was in ill health, and President Clark was required to carry a great deal of responsibility, as first counselor in the First Presidency. No one could have been more considerate of his superiors than was President Clark. At no time did he take upon himself the responsibility of making decisions or taking actions of importance, but always he consulted with President Grant and the other counselor, President McKay, to ascertain their feelings in the matter. President Grant had implicit confidence in President Clark's judgment, and they had a deep love for each other. When President Grant passed away and the First Presidency was reorganized, President George Albert Smith chose the same counselors to assist him that served President Grant: J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay. President Smith also had the utmost confidence and love for President Clark and leaned heavily upon his support.

When President McKay became president of the Church, he chose as his counselors Stephen L Richards and J. Reuben Clark, Jr. President Clark had served two presidents, President Grant and President Smith, as first counselor in the First Presidency and had given an invaluable service in that capacity to those great men. With a courage that has seldom been equaled, I am sure, in Church administration, he now accepted the position of second counselor with the statement, "It is not where one serves but how." At President McKay's request he presented, to the various divisions of priesthood assembled in the Tabernacle, the General Authorities of the Church for their sustaining vote, in each instance reading the names of the First Presidency in the new order, and he did a masterful job of it. Be it said to his credit, no man could have been more loyal, faithful, and devoted to his file leader than was President Clark to the day of his death. There was a deep bond of affection between those two men.

Upon the death of President Stephen L Richards in 1959, President Clark again became the first counselor in the First Presidency of the Church.

Perhaps few men have been closer to each other than were President Clark and I. He many times orally and in writing spoke appreciatively and affectionately of me. He was a true friend, one from whom I learned great and valuable lessons and one for whom I had the utmost admiration and affection. He trusted me with his confidences; in fact, he revealed to me the innermost thoughts of his heart. Similarly, I kept very little, if anything, from him. True friends are rare indeed, and such a friend was President Clark. It is a matter of happiness and satisfaction to have a friend like him. I am sure that when the time comes for us to meet beyond the veil, that friendship will continue, and I hope it will be everlasting.

"Perhaps few men were closer to each other than I was to President J. Reuben Clark, Jr."

No one can testify more than I to the great service this man performed for the Church. He truly magnified his position in the First Presidency and vitalized the statement he made in conference at the time of the death of President Smith and the reorganization of the First Presidency, that it is not where one serves, but how he serves, that is important.

As is perhaps quite generally known, President Clark served as second counselor to President Grant for a year and a half as a high priest and was not ordained an apostle until October 11, 1934, when, at the time of filling the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve caused by the calling of David O. McKay to be the second counselor in the First Presidency, President Grant called President Clark to be an apostle, and he was so ordained by President Grant and set apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Inasmuch as President Grant wished him to continue as his first counselor, Brother Alonzo A. Hinckley was chosen to be a member of the Twelve, filling the vacancy thus created.

President Clark had a remarkable sense of humor, and always had a story or experience to tell to illustrate a point.

He was also very generous. His hobby was his farm in his native Grantsville, Utah, and he owned large farm interests. When he had time to spare, he loved to spend it on the farm. His farm was not intended to be a money-making business, but he seemed to have an innate love for the country and things connected with farm life. He took great joy in using the products of his farm to bless his friends. Never did a year pass that he didn't arrange to have meat prepared, such as beef, pork, or lamb, to give to his friends. He seemed always to receive much enjoyment from contributing to the happiness of others. He took pride in a tribute paid him by Dwight Morrow, who at the time was U.S. Ambassador to Mexico and by whom Brother Clark was employed as counsel. "Mr. Clark," he said, "I have never known a man who thought less of the dollar than you." The tribute was well deserved—he was a man with a proper understanding of values, and with him the material things of life sank into oblivion when compared to the eternal values.

In answer to my question as to how well he knew President Grant at the time he was called to be second counselor in the First Presidency, President Clark told me the following:

I do not know that he knew me at all except that I had met him perhaps a half dozen times in my life. Sister Clark and I came into the office before I went to Mexico, and I asked him for and received a blessing. This was when I went as Ambassador to Mexico in October 1930. I had no acquaintance with him practically. I asked him once how he came to choose me, and he said, "Oh, I had heard you speak." I said, "Where?" Well, he was indefinite. He said, "Well, I knew your grandfather," and after I came into the Presidency he said, "As long as you live, your grandfather will never be dead." He then repeated the previously mentioned conversation with President Ivins relative to his selection for the First Presidency.

President Clark was an ordained seventy at the time he was chosen and had been for a number of years. He was also a member of the YMMIA general board.

President Clark also said:

When I was a very young child lying in bed in the room where my mother and father were, President Grant was present, he at the time being the president of Tooele Stake, and he was in the room talking to father and mother. This was in Grantsville.

A few of us kids (there were Oscar Johnson, Orlando Barrus, Jimmie Williams, and two or three others) used to go out either on the 4th or 24th of July (I have forgotten which) in the morning and celebrate. On one occasion we had a lumber box wagon and a four horse team. We got up before daylight and went around serenading. Jimmie Ratcliffe was the drummer, and the rest of us had flutes or some sort of instrument, and we played a few tunes—I do not remember what—mostly by ear. On one occasion I was chosen as the reader of the day, which meant that at the celebration (I suppose it was the 4th of July) I would read probably the Declaration of Independence and then read the toasts. They would hold a morning meeting. On this occasion I was up there and had done my initial reading, and then it came my turn to read the toasts. I was about 14, I assume. I was up there—just imagine a 14-year-old kid—and I stood there waiting for the toasts to come to me to be read. Francis M. Lyman was there on the stand participating in the celebration. When it came time for his toast he said, "I always read my own toasts," and that ended my toast reading, and I stood there, country-bumpkin as I was. I remember my father saying afterwards, "I would have given anything if I had been near enough to you to pull you down from that stand." That is the only experience I had with a General Authority all during my youthful life.

The day Brother Grant was appointed President of the Tooele Stake he was in my father's home, but I do not remember it.

As previously mentioned, it was in December 1931 that President Grant wrote Brother Clark telling him of his calling to be a counselor in the First Presidency. Brother Clark left Mexico in February 1933, went to Washington and made his report as ambassador, and then came to Salt Lake City where he was sustained second counselor on April 6, 1933. He remained in Salt Lake City until October 1933, when he went back to Washington to serve on the Foreign Bondholders Council, and then in early 1934 he went to Uruguay to the seventh Pan-American Conference of all American Nations in Montevideo. Cordell Hull was the head of the United States delegation, but he did not remain all the time, and President Clark became the head of the U.S. delegation.

The New York Times of Sunday, October 23, 1923, said of President Clark, when he was appointed Undersecretary of State under President Coolidge:

He has had a part both officially and as an unofficial advisor to American leaders, in the formulation of our international relations. He was at the elbow of Knox (Senator of Penna.) during the historic conflict in the Senate over the League of Nations.

Mr. Clark was assistant to Charles Evans Hughes during the Washington Conference for the Limitation of Armament and as such sat with Hughes during the many private discussions with the heads of the delegations representing the two other major sea powers—Great Britain and Japan.

[He] went to Mexico with Dwight Morrow as his special counsel.

Thus Mr. Clark had a share in preparing the way for the settlement which Morrow finally made with President Calles. This was on a controversial oil problem.

In the Taft administration, Taft and Knox took the load in applying a new principle to the conduct of our foreign relations. Under this principle the U.S. was prepared to use its diplomatic machinery, so far as it legitimately could, to protect American property and interests abroad. The question was "what right have Congress and the President, either under the Constitution or under the accepted practices of international law, to land troops or marines on foreign soil when American lives and property are jeopardized?" This question confronted President Taft and his Secretary of State, and they proceeded to formulate the foreign policy of the Administration.

Knox asked Clark to make an historical study of our intervention policy. The result was an exhaustive memorandum on the "Right of the U.S. to Protect its Citizens in Foreign Countries by Landing Forces."

The survey he made was the first and only thorough analysis of the kind ever made.

President Woodrow Wilson appointed him general counsel for the U.S. before the American-British Claims Commission.

When the U.S. entered the war Provost Marshall Crowder, the man charged with the administration of the Selective Draft act, employed Clark who had been commissioned an officer in the Judge Advocate General's department as one of his assistants. As a special assistant to the Attorney General he also made an analysis of all the war legislation passed by Congress. In 1922 he received the D.S.M. for his service.

He was offered $100,000 a year by one of the great corporations of America when he left Mexico as Ambassador.

Mr. Morrow paid him as his advisor almost as much as Mr. Morrow received from the government as Ambassador, and he received $75,000 a year.

He was told by the chairman of one of the great banks in New York that if he came to New York he could write his own ticket.

But instead, this great and good man chose to honor his priesthood, to enter a yet greater avenue of service to his fellowmen by devoting the remainder of his life to building up the kingdom of God.

My association with President Clark was one of the sweetest and most enjoyable that two men could have together. Seldom did a day pass that we weren't together for hours, giving attention to correspondence and taking care of matters of importance to the Church. He was like a father to me, and he often said he looked upon me as a son. I knew his sorrows and his joys. Everyone seems to have need for someone with whom to share his thoughts, his joys, his disappointments, his successes, and his sorrows. Those experiences were very frequently confidential and of a nature that are held in memory but cannot be revealed to others. Too much can never be written nor told about the greatness and goodness of this man.

President Clark was always very solicitous of the personal welfare of his many friends, and I often became aware of his feelings toward me. Frequently these expressions were put in writing, especially as he responded, as he always did, to a Christmas or birthday remembrance. These notes of his are among my treasures, and I select the following one as typical and present it in humility just to demonstrate the boundless capacity of this good man to show gratitude and encouragement. This note my wife and I received under date of December 26, 1959, just two years before his death in October 1961:

Dear Joseph and Norma:

Your remembrance of me at this Christmas Time was, of course, something that made me very happy. But you have always remembered me, which made me happy in the past, and I would have been disappointed if I had not been remembered this time, and yet I know the affection, the loyalty, and the devotion, Joseph, which you have manifested over the years, and without which I could not have done what I have done, and I have been most grateful to know that Norma was always behind you, helping in all ways that she could in the great work which you are doing there in the Presidency's office.

God bless both of you abundantly and give you always a full portion of the health and the strength which you wish and which you deserve, and give you peace of mind and comfort of body. . .

May the many endowments which the Lord has given to you, Joseph, never fail you so long as you live, and may you always be able, as I am sure you will, while there is still strength in your body, to perform the duties of the great office which is yours.

The office will miss you, Joseph, when you are gone, but I hope and pray that that missing will not come for many, many years.

As I have said to you in the past, so I say to you again, there is nothing that I can say in commendation more than I have tried to say in the past and more than you deserve.

God bless you both always, and yours, and give you happiness and joy in your family relationship and be with you with His Spirit and His testimony and the knowledge that you have, so long as you live.

With love,

[Signed] J. Reuben Clark Jr.

P.S. I got so concerned in trying to tell you once again a little of what I thought of both of you that I forgot to thank you for the beautiful assortment of jams which you sent me. They will prove to be delicious. Thank you so much, they are of the finest quality, I am sure.

P.P.S. And for the Swedish cake that Norma sent to me, I am looking forward to its sampling.

In yet another note, two years earlier, he had this to say about our treasured association:

I have well-nigh exhausted the good adjectives I know in trying to express to Joseph my appreciation for his work. Joseph is a humble but great soul. He has worked over the years with great and unselfish devotion, taking no thought of himself, but only of those with whom he works, and of his work itself. I am more his debtor than I can ever repay in this life, and I must wait until Eternity to try to show him my gratitude, my respect, and my love.

Joseph, may the Lord be with you in the future as in the past, and He has blessed you greatly in the past. And Norma, you are good for helping to keep him well and strong and carrying on. May the Lord bless you in your great labors for the Church, too.

I cannot resist the temptation to record what to Norma, my wife, and me, was a very sacred occasion.

It was a Christmas party during the Christmas season. President Clark had invited us to come to his home and spend the evening with him and members of his family, as also some close friends. This was at a time when he was advanced in years; in fact, not very long before his passing, and he was showing the effects of weakness and poor health.

We were happy to go and it was an evening that impressed itself upon our memories in a manner that we shall never forget. He spent the evening in his library upstairs, was unable to come downstairs to mingle with his guests. Sister Anderson and I, with his secretary, Rowena Miller, and one or two other friends, visited with him in his library. He asked his secretary to bring to him from his safe a pen written letter that President Grant had written him asking him to serve as his counselor in the First Presidency. As he read the letter to us, tears ran down his cheeks and his voice choked with emotion. He explained that he did not reveal the contents of this letter to his wife or other members of the family for two or three days as he pondered its contents. He was at the time American Ambassador to Mexico.

He of course answered in the affirmative, but his duties in connection with his government service somewhat delayed his assumption of complete responsibility in the office of the First Presidency, but when he did give his full attention to his new duties he most certainly more than made up for any restrictions on his time previously.

On the occasion above referred to we were with him for a couple of hours as he reminisced and told the story of his life. He wanted to share these treasured experiences with his closest friends.

President Clark was an assiduous worker. When others played, he was burning the midnight oil, studying, writing, or otherwise devoting himself to the service to which he had been assigned. I remember on one occasion visiting a businessmen's club in Washington where he had spent many hours in his earlier years while in the government service. He showed me the tables where men who lived there as he had done spent many hours playing cards. He did not criticize them, but he said he had had no time for such things. I think that all his life he worked and read and studied during the late hours of the night and the early hours of the morning.

President Clark had an extensive library, collected over the years of his schooling and professional activities. Prominent in his library were books on international law, but he also had one of the largest collections of books and writings on the life of the Savior. Study of the scriptures and particularly the life and teachings of the Master were of the utmost interest to him, and he acquired many valuable and rare books in the field.

This theme predominated most of his many sermons and writings, including published books, during his many years in the First Presidency.

Since much of his life prior to the time he was called to assist President Grant was devoted to governmental and diplomatic service, his talents and abilities along those lines manifested themselves to a great degree in his Church work. Statements that he wrote, letters that he dictated, and sermons that he preached were masterpieces of wisdom, inspiration, and rhetoric.

President Clark had a great love and admiration for President Grant as an individual, as well as a prophet, and this respect was made evident in the following tribute paid by him to President Grant on May 10, 1941, when the latter was introduced into the Union Pacific Railroad Old Timers' Club:

What the world most needs today are the qualities he so richly has for his own; a knowledge that God lives and directs the affairs of men; that the lowly Carpenter of Nazareth is indeed the Messiah, the Savior of the world; that the righteous life is the way to joy here and to salvation hereafter; that honor and truth are beyond price; that honesty, industry, thrift, charity, generosity, chastity, love for fellowmen, unselfishness are the precious pearls that strung together make the noble character; and that avarice, greed, immorality, ambition, idleness, false witness corrupt the people and debase the men. All these virtues, every one of them he has. They are part of the warp and woof of his life. The vices he cast aside while he was yet a mere boy.

President Grant has been a most successful man of affairs in a large sense; he is a builder of commonwealths. In business he has had his feet always on the ground. He has been hard headed but not selfish. His mind has never entertained the area of impracticable plans and schemes of the theorists or the so-called idealists. He has known true economic values. He has been bounteously generous but he has never been blinded to the true value and purpose of the time.

And all this has been but a part, the smaller part of his full to brimming life. So, I want to speak tonight of the other, the larger part of his life, for along with all this dealing in matters temporal he has been a God-fearing man of the loftiest spirituality, believing even as the little child believes in the power of the Lord and the Lord's willingness to answer prayer. It is this spirituality which has led and dominated this man of affairs through his whole business career. He boldly asserts that time and time again the Lord has blessed him, has answered his prayers in his own behalf, in behalf of his family, of his friends, and of his people. He knows those things with all the certainty that he knows that he lives. There is no doubt anywhere in his soul.

President Clark was a man possessed of greatness of character. He was one who exemplified true Christian ideals, and at the same time he was a great American. We often discussed America's problems, and he understood and spoke out often in warning about the dangers of concentrating too much power in a central government. He once made a patriotic radio address on the subject "Why I Am an American." His message found its way into the Congressional Record. His faith in the divine source of American principles is summarized in the last two paragraphs of that message, which read:

I am an American because I firmly and earnestly believe that the Constitution is an inspired document designed by our Maker to set up a government which would make sure and secure the rights set forth in the Bill of Rights, and particularly the right of freedom of conscience and worship.

I am an American because I believe that the destiny of America is to be the abiding place of liberty and free institutions, and that its own practice and enjoyment of these blessings shall be to the world a beacon light which shall radiate its influence by peaceful means to the uttermost parts of the world, to the uplifting of all humanity.

His great role as a defender of the American Constitution was recognized in these words of tribute to President Clark in a resolution of respect from the board of directors of the Equitable Life Assurance Company on which he had served so long and well:

To him the Constitution of the United States was as sacred in safeguarding the liberties of this nation, as the Holy Scriptures are a guide to eternal life. He was considered as one of the ablest defenders of the Constitutional government and with forthright statesmanship never hesitated to condemn modern trends which have seemed to violate the basic concepts as written into the Constitution by the founding fathers.

On one occasion President Clark gave a Washington's Birthday dinner speech in Salt Lake City, sponsored by the Utah Society of Sons of the American Revolution. I conclude this chapter with the last paragraph of that address, which I find not only adds to the great Americanism of President Clark, but shows his ability to express himself in a wonderful display of rhetoric and the commingling of his great faith in God and outstanding patriotism. To him the two were never separated.

On this occasion he said:

But my time is past. When the spirit of Washington broods over our thoughts, we can but wish to crush out the treason to our liberties, and free institutions, to human rights, which seeks to find place in our fair land. We would become Crusaders as of old, seeking to preserve from despoilment the holy dwelling-place of our sacred treasure and heritage, our Federal Constitution. Washington's kneeling in prayer in the crusted snow at Valley Forge, with his freezing, starving men on every side, may be but a fiction, but it typifies the spirit that held aloft the torch of human rights and liberties through all those trying years, the spirit that sifted out unholy ambition, materialism, theft, covetousness, and civic selfishness from the hearts of men, that made heroes of common clay. That spirit had its counterpart in Franklin's proposal for prayer after days of fruitless wrangling at the Constitutional Convention. Belief in and understanding of the relationship between God and man, of man's dependence on God, are the great needs of today, that the living spirit of Washington's America shall be fed, not starved. God grant that in his infinite mercy, in his love for his erring children, that spirit of Washington's America shall be fed, not starved. God grant that in his infinite mercy, in his love for his erring children, that spirit of belief and understanding may come to us of America ere it is too late, and again enkindle in our souls the love of truth over error, of freedom over slavery, of independence over dependence, a reverence for human rights and free local self-government over despotism and tyranny, that shall carry on this free people through the gamut of unnumbered centuries yet to come.
