Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

4

President Smith, A Man Who Loved All Men

President George Albert Smith was often characterized as the apostle and prophet of love. As I was privileged to know him for nearly 30 years, both as a member of the Council of the Twelve and as the president of the Church, I found this to be a most appropriate designation. Though he was president for but six years, they were eventful years, marked by unusual accomplishments seemingly involving to the utmost his love for all mankind and a spirit of goodwill.

As I look back on his accomplishments in his presidency, I am again, more than ever, impressed with the fact that the Lord raises up the right man to become his earthly prophet and leader to accomplish the special mission appropriate to the day and time.

The death of President Grant and the selection and sustaining of President Smith brought this humble secretary face to face with a new and awesome spiritual experience that I was to go through on other future occasions. With the death of the president, the First Presidency was then dissolved and the leadership of the Church throughout the world was assumed

President George Albert Smith, center, selected as his counselors the two who had served President Grant. Left is President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. and right is President David O. McKay.

by the Council of the Twelve, even though for a few short days. The manner in which the membership of the Twelve rallied behind George Albert Smith, their quorum president, sustaining him in every way during the funeral services of the deceased president, and the subsequent reorganization of the First Presidency permitted me to observe and sense the spirit of revelation as it rested mightily upon these brethren.

When that hour came during the solemn council meeting of the Twelve in the sacred atmosphere of the Salt Lake Temple, President Smith selected as his counselors the two men who had been serving as counselors to President Grant: J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay. They served him faithfully and devotedly throughout his full administration. These were faithful, dedicated, and strong men, men of inspiration—a great First Presidency.

I not only witnessed the unusual power of the unanimity of these brethren of the Twelve as they proceeded with the reorganization of the First Presidency, but I found myself rejoicing personally in what had been done. These two faithful counselors had served long and well in the previous presidency, and I had learned to love and appreciate them. I had known how heavily President Grant had leaned upon these two spiritual giants, and especially during the last years of his presidency when his health was not as robust.

I was to learn during the next six years also how much trust and confidence President Smith was to place in his counselors. Neither ever took advantage of that trust.

President Smith brought a rich personal heritage with him into his office of prophet, seer, and revelator—a heritage of birthright and of long and faithful service by his ancestors in the restored kingdom of God. He was born in Salt Lake City on April 4, 1870, a son of John Henry Smith. His father and grandfather, George A. Smith, had also served in the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and the two had also been counselors in the First Presidency.

Grandfather George A. Smith was a cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith and was chosen one of the Twelve Apostles in 1839 during the lifetime of the Prophet. He later served as a counselor to President Brigham Young in the First Presidency. Father John Henry Smith was named a member of the Twelve in 1880 and later became a counselor to President Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church.

President George Albert Smith was always proud of his ancestry, not alone for their service to the Church since its founding in 1830, but for their part in the founding of the American commonwealth and participation in the American Revolutionary War and as defenders of the Constitution. President Smith traced his ancestry to Edward Winslow, governor of Plymouth Colony, who came to this land on the May-flower in search of freedom and religious liberty. His great-grandfather, John Smith, who was an uncle of the Prophet Joseph, was Patriarch to the Church and also the first president of the Salt Lake Stake.

President Smith said of his own father, "I have never met a greater man." However, the fact that he carried his grandfather's name also meant a great deal to him. He knew this grandfather only as a child some five years old before George A. Smith's death. Bearing that name helped greatly in the forming of President Smith's life's pattern. "That has meant much to me to have that sacred name to take care of," he said often as he described what to him was a sacred experience:

One day while being seriously ill, I lost consciousness of my surroundings and thought I had passed to the other side. I found myself standing with my back to a large lake, facing a great forest of trees. There was no one in sight, and there was no boat upon the lake or any other visible means to indicate how I might have arrived there. I realized, or seemed to realize, that I had finished my work in mortality and had gone home. I began to look around, to see if I could not find someone. There was no evidence of anyone living there, just those great, beautiful trees in front of me and the wonderful lake behind me.

I began to explore, and soon I found a trail through the woods which seemed to have been used very little, and which was almost obscured by grass. I followed this trail, and after I had walked for some time and had traveled a considerable distance through the forest, I saw a man coming towards me. I became aware that he was a very large man, and I hurried my steps to reach him, because I recognized him as my grandfather. In mortality he weighed over three hundred pounds, so you may know he was a large man. I remember how happy I was to see him coming. I had been given his name and had always been proud of it.

When grandfather came within a few feet of me, he stopped. His stopping was an invitation for me to stop. Then—and this I would like the boys and girls and young people never to forget—he looked at me very earnestly and said: "I would like to know what you have done with my name."

Everything I had ever done passed before me as though it were a flying picture on a screen—everything I had done. Quickly this vivid retrospect came down to the very time I was standing there. My whole life had passed before me. I smiled and looked at my grandfather and said: "I have never done anything with your name of which you need be ashamed."

He stepped forward and took me in his arms, and as he did so, I became conscious again of my earthly surroundings. My pillow was as wet as though water had been poured on it—wet with tears of gratitude that I could answer unashamed.

I have thought of this many times, and I want to tell you that I have been trying, more than ever since that time, to take care of that name. So I want to say to the boys and girls, to the young men and women, to the youth of the Church and of all the world: Honor your fathers and your mothers. Honor the names that you bear, because some day you will have the privilege and the obligation of reporting to them (and to your Father in heaven) what you have done with their name. (George Albert Smith, Sharing the Gospel with Others [Deseret Book Co., 1948], pp. 111-12.)

There were many during President Grant's administration who believed that he, being the seventh, would be the last president of the Church. The number seven had always played a significant role in ecclesiastical history, and this caused much comment in relation to the presidency of the Church.

But the Church not only sustained its eighth president in 1945 at his age of 73; it also found that he had an immediate important work to perform, which, because of his special abilities, he did exceptionally well. He was a man with a great heart of love, and his spirit and influence seemed important immediately after the conclusion of World War II. People's hearts were bleeding because of the loss of loved ones who had given their lives on each side of the great struggle for freedom and liberty. The faith of many was severely tested; they couldn't understand how a just and loving God could permit such things to happen as occurred during that terrible conflict. It is doubtful if during any previous war such terrible atrocities had occurred, at least to the same degree as the awful treatment accorded human beings at Dachau.

It was immediately following the conclusion of that war that President Smith, man of love—love of God, love of fellowmen, be they Mormon, or Jew, or Gentile, friend or enemy—became president of Christ's earthly church and kingdom.

The most critical need of the people of war-torn Europe was for fuel and for means to keep warm during the cold winter ahead. Fuel was needed for running trains and factories, for cooking and heating of homes. In many countries there were not even sufficient pots and pans, or stoves, since these had been confiscated by the Nazis to use in making munitions. Unless people could be clothed warmly, great suffering loomed in the months ahead.

People of the country and especially members of the Church were brought at that time to a realization that the now well-established Church welfare program was truly a revelation from God. During the war years the Relief Societies of the Church, directed by inspired leaders, had been making and storing quilts and blankets. With full realization of what the need would eventually be, each ward Relief Society had been asked to make and store at least 12 quilts and blankets over and above their own needs. Now the emergency had come, and all these quilts were called into the welfare program and many sent in 11-pound parcel post shipments to Saints abroad. Included in the packages sent were needles, thread, darning cottons, dehydrated soups, and other needed items. Canned goods were also available for shipping; sorely needed vitamins were being produced in the welfare program, and Churchwide clothing drives were being conducted.

It was on the occasion of a visit to Welfare Square in Salt Lake City to inspect the results of these clothing drives that President Smith demonstrated his true love for his neighbor. He made the visit with several of the welfare leaders, and the weather being somewhat cool, he was wearing a topcoat. As he stood before the open boxes where clothing was being gathered to be shipped to Europe, he removed his coat and laid it on one of the piles. Despite the protests of his associates, he insisted and returned to the Church offices without his coat.

The sending of these small packages of food, clothing, medicines, and such to Europe through the Red Cross and other agencies was felt by President Smith and his associates to be only scratching the surface. He took it upon himself to visit Washington, D.C., to find a solution to sending in carloads and shiploads the available stores of food, clothing, bedding, and other goods to needy sufferers of Europe.

With him were Elder John A. Widtsoe, Elder Thomas E. McKay, and myself. President Smith and his party called on President Harry S Truman and urged that ships be made available at once to carry welfare materials to the Latter-day Saints and others in the desolated countries of Europe.

President Truman listened sympathetically to President Smith's appeal and then inquired how long it would take to get together the items needed by the war victims. He was literally shocked and could not believe his own ears when President Smith said these items were available in large quantities for immediate shipment. President Truman then gave assurance of every possible help.

The party also called on members of President Truman's cabinet and the various ambassadors and representatives of nations in the interest of opening the doors for the receipt and distribution of the welfare items to the suffering people of Europe. Thus

The author pictured with President George Albert Smith at the start of one of many important journeys by railroad.

thousands of people were blessed by preparation that had been made under divine guidance, avoiding unnecessary delays in getting supplies to those in urgent need.

The following is quoted from the Improvement Era of December 1945, regarding this experience:

Little did the Prophet Joseph Smith realize when the Lord revealed to him the storehouse program for taking care of those in need that a hundred and fourteen years later it would mean the temporal salvation for his people in Europe. And little, too, did the members of the Church realize when the First Presidency announced in 1936 the organization of the Welfare program to assist the bishops and the branch presidents in the discharge of their duties . . . in searching after the poor to administer to their wants that their work on welfare projects in the production and storage of the necessities of life, would, in less than a decade, help to bring relief to a war-torn world.

President Smith always took occasion to give a religious message wherever he went and with whomever he met. He extended to President Truman best wishes for his success and assured him that the Latter-day Saints would pray constantly that God's blessing might attend him in his administration. Mr. Truman expressed his appreciation and said that he very much needed the faith and prayers of the people.

It was always President Smith's desire that the message of the restored gospel be shared with others. Besides his own missionary activities, he was always alert to tell the message of the gospel and to demonstrate by his life the love of the Master. President McKay said of him at his funeral services, "Our beloved leader has lived as nearly as it is humanly possible for a man to live a Christlike life."

President George Albert Smith said on more than one occasion the following:

Oh, how I wish that the good people of all organizations, all churches, might know what we are seeking to share with them. I meet members of the Catholics, the Presbyterians, the Methodists, the Baptists, and many other churches. I find in these men and women virtues that are most beautiful to me. But, I find that they are so rooted in the organizations with which they are identified that when I try to explain to them what we are doing, what we have in the Restored Gospel, they seem mystified; they are not able to understand. One man said, "Would you have us give up all that we have had, all these blessings that we have enjoyed, to join your church?" I replied, "Not a blessing, not one good thing would we ask you to give up. But, we do say to you, we will be glad to share with you, if you will permit us to do so, without cost to you, some of the rich blessings of our Heavenly Father, that you have not received and which are available to you now at your very door."

Think what a marvelous opportunity we have. Think what a great blessing it will be to us, if we do our part here, and then as we stand on the other side of the Great Divide and our Father shall summon his family together, as he will, to have these wonderful men and women, hundreds of thousands of them who have been our neighbors and who have watched our lives, stand there and say, "Father in Heaven, we owe it to these thy children, of the humble organization that bears the name of thy Son, that we understand the truth and that we are here at the supper of the Lamb."

That is our privilege and blessing.

It was the great humility and humanness of President Smith combined with his tremendous love for all men that enabled him to accomplish an important and not much heralded mission to Mexico in the first year of his presidency. Its results were among the most important of any in his ministry. Because of the very nature of the mission, it had seemed wise that it be undertaken by the president of the Church. It was the first time in the history of the Church that a president had visited the members in the Mexican Mission.

A rather large faction had broken away from the Church in Mexico and established their own church. They had the feeling that the Mexicans should take charge of the branches and the mission in Mexico, and they had other ideas that were not proper. They were giving the Church a great deal of trouble. The purpose of President Smith's visit was to encourage these people to return to the Church and to welcome them into church activity. Some hundreds of members had been out of harmony for the past ten years. His mission was successful and there was great rejoicing. (It was at that time that he dedicated the Ermita Ward chapel building in Mexico City, which was a very fine, commodious building.) These Mexican people participated in the services held by President Smith, who spoke in humility and sincerity. One of the leaders of the now reconciled group said, "There is only one president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and he is here today."

While in Mexico City in 1945, President Smith; Arwell L. Pierce, president of the Mexican Mission; Harold Brown, who later became the first president of the Mexico City Stake; and I called on President Manuel Avilla Camacho of the Mexican Republic in the Government Palace. President Smith preached the gospel to President Camacho for about 20 minutes, and among other things told him about Joseph Smith's first vision, when he saw the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ.

President Smith on that occasion presented the Mexican president with a leather-bound copy of the Book of Mormon. The Mexican leader said, "My curiosity has been aroused considerably over that book; I would like to have one."

President Pierce said, "You are probably too busy to read it," and President Camacho answered, "No, I am going to read this."

President Smith also gave him the little book A Short History of the Church in English, and President Camacho inquired if we had a copy of that book in Spanish. President Pierce said, "No, but we are going to have it translated into Spanish."

In the course of the interview President Smith mentioned our recent visit with President Truman at the White House in Washington, and President

President George Albert Smith presents Book of Mormon to President Manuel Avilla Camacho of Mexico in 1946. With him are Joseph Anderson, Harold Brown, a missionary, Gustavo T. Serranno, Mexico's Secretary of Economics, and President Arwell L. Pierce of the Mexican Mission.

Camacho asked President Smith to send President Truman his greetings and his compliments on his success. Before we left Mexico President Smith wrote President Truman conveying to him as promised the greetings of the president of Mexico.

As we were leaving the palace following our interesting and historic visit, President Camacho said we might be assured that in him we had a friend in Mexico. He said that one of his government officials had been at our colonies in Chihuahua recently and had reported to him what we were doing there. He was aware that we had a fine school, the Juarez Academy, and were doing good work in agriculture. He shook hands with each of us as we left his reception room. President Smith asked the Lord to bless him and his people and expressed appreciation for the interview. President Camacho appeared to be greatly pleased.

As we entered the outer waiting room, we met Herbert Hoover, former president of the United States, who was waiting to keep an appointment with the Mexican president. We were pleased to shake hands with and greet Mr. Hoover, who asked that we remember him to President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., for whom he had real affection.

Though it is not generally known today, it was President Smith who took the lead in getting started the present-day work of the Church among the Lamanites. It was Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Council of the Twelve, himself one of the foremost "servants" of the Indian people, who drew the attention of the Church to President Smith's part in initiating the missionary work among the Indians, when Elder Kimball said at the President's funeral services:

As his great love for his fellowmen began to grow into a great compassion, he saw in vision a certain whole people who went down from the proverbial Jerusalem to Jericho and they fell among thieves. He saw them stripped of their raiment and sorely wounded. He saw them deserted and deprived. He saw priests come by who saw their plight and passed by on the other side. He saw modern Levites who came and looked and passed by on the other side. President Smith determined it was time to do something constructive for these Indian people who had fallen into misfortune. He determined that it was time to bind up their wounds, and to pour thereon the oil.

He went to President Heber J. Grant [President Smith was then in the Council of the Twelve] and asked him for permission to do work among the Indian people, which was granted. A committee was organized and the work began in a small way as many programs do.

These words he said in one of his talks: "I have been intensely interested in doing something for the American Indians. I have traveled through several of the reservations; I have seen the need of something more being done for these children who are growing up. It remains for us who know and feel that these Indians, as we refer to them, are our Father's children.

"These Indians are descendants of a prophet of God who left Jerusalem 600 years before the birth of Christ. I have been in their homes, in many places, and have seen their poverty, their patience, and their forbearance." And then he went on and said: "I have had an interest in those Indians, and felt the urge to help, and only within the last two or three years have I had this opportunity and power to do something." He lived to see this work grow, from an infant organization, the Navajo-Zuni Mission, to the full fledged Southwest Indian Mission with more than a hundred missionaries.

Never before, in modern days at least, has there been in a conference or at a funeral such a large aggregation of Latter-day Saint Indians, and I know that if President Smith could see them here today his heart would go out to them in compassion, love, and appreciation.

About four years ago, President Smith made a visit to the Navajo Indian Reservation, taking Elder Cowley and myself with him. It was a missionary meeting, there being priests and ministers present from many of the sects and denominations. A hundred and fifty men and women were there. There were some disputations. Apparently some missionaries had gone to the hospital patients of other sects to bring relief and succor, and heated suggestions were made to restrict missionaries to visit only their own people.

President Smith in majesty stood up, and obtained the floor and said: "My friends, I am perplexed and shocked. I thought it would please me very much if any good Christian missionary of any denomination would be kind enough to visit me and bind up my wounds and pour on the sacred oil."

And then President Smith went on to tell them that this Church not only believes in tolerance, but also in understanding, and expressed the thought that long years ago Father Scanlan, a Roman Catholic Priest, conducted mass in the St. George Tabernacle at the suggestion and with permission of one of the Council of the Twelve and the president of the stake, who were there.

That happened on May 25, 1879. The priest had complained that he had no place in which he could conduct a mass for his people in southern Utah. The suggestion came from our brethren, and the mass was held. He had said, "We have no one to sing the Mass." The brethren had said, "You furnish the score; we will furnish the singers." And Catholic mass was conducted in a tabernacle.

He also told the group of ministers that the Church had also assisted some of the Protestant denominations to get started in Salt Lake City and in Utah.

There was general applause from these church dignitaries and it was as though a magic word had been spoken, like the Master spoke when he said "Peace, peace, be still." The waves of suspicion and antagonism became calm and placid.

I quoted as freely as I have from Elder Kimball to firmly establish the interest, of which I was fully aware, that President Smith had in the work of the Church for the Indian and all other Lamanite people including the Polynesians in the Pacific Islands, whom he visited and for whom he demonstrated his great love.

It was Elder Matthew Cowley, the first apostle named to the Council of the Twelve by President Smith after he became president of the Church, who had recounted the great love of President Smith for the Polynesians and the love they returned to him. Said Elder Cowley:

On my first visit to Tonga . . . I called at the office of the Prime Minister, Mr. Ata. The first thing he asked me was, "How is my good friend, George Albert Smith? I have never met a grander man in all my life than that man." When I called on the crown prince, the Honorable Tungi, he brought from the drawer of his desk an Improvement Era which he had just received from President Smith.

At President Smith's funeral, Elder Cowley also said:

In all the islands of the sea he is loved and revered, and on his last visit to Hawaii during the centennial of that mission, in his last testimony to those people, he said, "It is an honor to have my name numbered among yours upon the membership records of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

So great was President Smith's capacity to love and to help his fellowmen, especially the poor, the discouraged, the underprivileged, the sick, that no one ever knew or will ever know how often he went out of his way to assist financially, to give comfort, cheer, and encouragement. On his way home from the office during his many years as a General Authority and while he was president of the Church, he would go by way of the home of a friend or someone who needed the kind of comfort this humble, kindly, Christlike man could give. He would never talk about these visits, but somehow those who were the beneficiaries would let it be known among their friends.

A special group in the Church and in the state of Utah that had his constant help and interest were the blind. Said one of these who knew of his interest and service:

Through the loving spirit of President George Albert Smith, the work for the blind in the Church has expanded, and reached out to touch the lives and enrich the lives of Latter-day Saint blind and gentiles. He believed in us and, because of that faith, we have learned to believe in ourselves and have been brought by a way we knew not.

It was at the funeral services for President Smith that this same blind sister, Irene Jones, said, "Wednesday, April 4, 1951, was a dark day in the lives of the blind, for we feel that we have lost one of the dearest friends we will ever know, one of the greatest humanitarians that ever lived. . . . He is not dead. Such men forever live in the boundless measure of the love they give."

Being a talented woman, Sister Jones had written a special poem honoring President Smith at a reception given him on his seventieth birthday, 11 years earlier. She had entitled it "An Understanding Heart," and at the request of the family, she read it at his funeral services:

An Understanding Heart When life beats hard with stormy hands And bitter teardrops fall, When friendless winter chills my soul And empty echoes call, `Tis then I turn with eager hope, My steps though spent and lame, To find an understanding heart Where burns a friendly flame. A heart where gentle wisdom dwells Compassionate and kind; Whose faith in God and man has taught A like faith to the blind. I lay my troubles at his feet, Each trial, each bitter loss, The burdens of a hundred more He helps us bear the cross. Consecrated by our Lord with apostolic light, Consecreated in his soul, He makes our darkness bright. A loving radiance he sheds That comes from God to man. And we who walk in life-long night Can see as others can. Although his tender, loving face From us is shut apart, We see the gracious wisdom Of his understanding heart. We feel the peace within his soul And know a peace our own; We hear his silent prayer that tells: We do not walk alone. His faith in us will give us strength, As unseen paths we plod, Our souls uplifted by a man In partnership with God.

I am aware as I review these pages that I have referred much to the funeral services for President Smith. This is not unusual, because those who spoke were his close associates in and out of the General Authorities of the Church and knew him as no others except perhaps his own immediate family. Most frequently spoken of was his great capacity to love—to love God, to love his fellowmen, and to love the gospel, which he desired to share with each of God's earthly children.

A selected few of these comments are yet needed to round out the word picture of this great, humble, approachable man, as I was privileged to know him.

Elder Cowley said:

He loved the people in the old 17th Ward, but he had so much love that he could not spend it all in that small area, and so God called him from the Seventeenth Ward and gave him to the world, and he went about the world among all nations giving his love and the love of God to his fellowmen. . . . His last message and instruction to me was, "Remember, young man, all the days of your life that you can find good in everyone if you will but look for it." . . . He loved everyone because he could see the good within them. He did not look upon sin with the least degree of allowance, but he loved the sinner because it is God's love that regenerates souls and may, by that process, transform the sinner into a saint. . . . Truly he forgave all men. He was aware in all of his life of the commandment of God: God will forgive whom he will forgive. As for us, we must forgive all men. He could do that, and then refer the matter to God. As he forgave I am sure he forgot.

Elder Kimball said:

Whenever I thought of our beloved President, I have always felt he was very, very near to the Kingdom of God. It seemed to me that every act, every thought of our President would indicate that with all of his heart and soul he loved the Lord, and loved his fellowmen. Is there a mortal being who could have loved them more? . . . The Lord Jesus Christ told us, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." And so to compare President George Albert Smith with our Lord and Master I do not count a sacrilege, for perhaps he came nearer than the great majority of his contemporaries to that perfection. . . . The Savior said, "When ye come into a house, salute it, and if the house be worthy let your peace come upon it." And President Smith was much like that. There are homes from ocean to ocean and then from ocean to ocean again who have felt the peace that a great prophet has left in their homes.

On yet another occasion, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., said of President Smith:

Throughout our association together, which has been close and intimate, and under various and trying circumstances, I have never known him even to indicate that he was impatient, that he had lost his temper, or even that he was under the necessity of controlling it. Evil slunk away from him at all times. It could not abide the presence of his righteous living. He was one of those few people of whom you can say he lived as he taught. I think that no man that we have had in the Church ever had a greater love for humanity than President George Albert Smith.

This is not intended to be a biography of this president of the Church with whom I was associated. I have endeavored through these pages to portray a man I learned to know and appreciate for the kind of leader he was and for the great love and compassion he had for me and for all of those about him. Without undue further detail, I should just call attention to the great service this man gave to the youth of the Church for many years in his capacity of general superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. In his MIA leadership he also rose to some of the highest positions of prominence in the national and Church Boy Scout programs of any Church leader.

Though never robust in health, having been somewhat sickly as a youth and young man, President Smith drew on almost unbelievable reserves of physical strength as he performed the labors of his office for long hours, being constantly in the discharge of his duties of his high office without regard for his own welfare.

To accomplish all he did in his long lifetime, to develop the characteristics so aptly described in these preceding quoted comments, and to rise to the highest office in the Holy Priesthood of God upon the earth, President Smith lived strictly by a creed he adopted early in life. With a recital of this creed, which I can attest was truly and faithfully the pattern of his life, I close this chapter.

Creed of President George Albert Smith

I would be a friend to the friendless and find joy in ministering to the needs of the poor.

I would visit the sick and afflicted and inspire in them a desire for faith to be healed.

I would teach the truth to the understanding and blessing of all mankind.

I would seek out the erring one and try to win him back to a righteous and happy life.

I would not seek to force people to live up to my ideals, but rather love them into doing the thing that is right.

I would live with the masses and help to solve their problems, that their earth life may be happy.

I would avoid the publicity of high positions and discourage the flattery of thoughtless friends.

I would not knowingly wound the feeling of any, not even one who may have wronged me, but would seek to do him good and make him my friend.

I would overcome the tendency to selfishness and jealousy and rejoice in the success of all the children of my Heavenly Father.

I would not be an enemy to any living soul.

Knowing that the Redeemer of mankind has offered to the world the only plan that will fully develop us and make us really happy here and hereafter, I feel it not only a duty but a blessed privilege to disseminate this truth.
