Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

5

President McKay, A Man of Worldwide Vision

I have often said that I have had two great teachers in my life—my own mother and President David O. McKay. I think that my acquaintance with President McKay dated as far back as, if not farther than, that of any of the living General Authorities. I knew him from the time I was a boy of 14 when I attended the Weber Academy in Ogden.

I was just a country boy living in Roy, Utah, when I attended the Weber Academy and during most of the school season rode horseback to Ogden. My folks were not successful farmers and were very limited in means. It was not possible for them to assist me, to any great extent at least, in meeting the expenses of an education. Accordingly I worked at the canning factory in Roy each year while attending the academy to get sufficient money to pay tuition and other expenses. Therefore, I was about six weeks late each year in enrolling in the school.

David O. McKay was at that time a young man in his early thirties, and yet was principal of the academy. He was also the English teacher. He was then, as he remained during his entire life, a tall, handsome man with an outstanding personality, and was easily the greatest schoolteacher I remember. The lessons I learned in his English classes remained with me all my life.

When President David O. McKay, left, became president in 1951, he selected Stephen L Richards, center, and J. Reuben Clark Jr. right, as his counselors.

Being a country boy, naturally bashful and backward, and always a few weeks late in starting, I had a difficult time in the classes to begin with. I shall never forget my embarrassment when this great teacher-principal would call me to the blackboard to demonstrate before the class the diagraming of sentences. He also won the love and admiration of the students by the way he taught us some of the English classics. He taught them in such a way that showed his great love for them and made them so come to life for us that few of us ever forgot them. I shall never forget the beauty of such literature as "The Lady of the Lake" and "The Princess," as taught to us by him.

He made the classes in such literature so interesting that they were never dull. In fact, he became so interested in his subject that he frequently failed to hear the bell that indicated the hour was up.

On various occasions in later years, President McKay and I discussed at some length our relationship in the schoolroom many years previously. He remembered very well the time when I was one of his students. On one occasion when he was in the hospital two or three years before he passed away, we were discussing the past, and I reminded him of the influence his teaching had had upon me and repeated to him some of the verses of "The Lady of the Lake," which I still remember, and reviewed with him the manner in which he had taught us to repeat these verses. He seemed very pleased, as any teacher might be, to know that the things he taught so many years previously were still fresh in the mind of his student.

As a matter of fact, President McKay was my teacher most of my life. He was one of the Council of the Twelve when I started working for President Grant. When my duties first required that I attend the weekly meetings of the First Presidency and the Twelve in the Salt Lake Temple, he was one of this circle of great men. He later became a counselor in the First Presidency and subsequently president of the Church. With each of these moves my association with him became closer and more intimate, and I have often thought that seldom did I have the privilege of association with him in any capacity that I did not learn something from him either by precept or by example.

I often recall the intensely piercing eyes of President McKay and how, as he was interviewing me or discussing matters of importance, they seemed to be looking right into my soul. He never dropped his gaze, and it seemed as if my very mind and thoughts were being laid bare before him.

I think that I seldom, if ever, called on President McKay in his office or in his home or apartment in the Hotel Utah—and such contacts were numberless—that I did not learn something from him. He was a man who had great control over himself. I have seen him under extreme pressures when under such conditions he could easily have lost his temper, but I never knew him to say an angry word. He may have felt annoyance, and rightly did on certain occasions, but he had great control over his speech, his language, and his attitude.

President McKay was always a remarkable specimen of physical manhood. From the very earliest days I knew him, long before his hair had begun to turn white, he wielded a remarkable influence among his fellowmen. Throughout his life his inspiring personality, sense of humor, and sparkling demeanor won many friends for himself and for the Church.

As president of the Church, David O. McKay stood out as a remarkable leader and as a prophet and teacher of his people. He was never afraid to make decisions when he felt those decisions were inspired of the Lord. Often as I listened to discussions he had with his counselors and with the Council of the Twelve, I heard him give his decision after first saying, "I feel impressed." There was never a time when decisions were rendered by him in such a manner that I was not certain that this great prophet had sought the inspiration to which he was entitled and the Spirit of the Lord had dictated the answer.

President McKay was a man of action. Whenever a question was before him, he did not hesitate to act regarding it if he was satisfied that it was his responsibility and duty to act and when he felt that the inspiration of the Lord was directing him. I have never known a man who was more inclined to make decisions on matters requiring decision. He was a true prophet of the Lord, and many was the time, of a weighty discussion, in the course of which I heard him make a pronouncement that seemed like a revelation direct from the Lord and which, as a matter of fact, was the word of the Lord through his prophet. When the statement was made, in the manner indicated, those present had no further argument regarding the matter. They recognized that the Lord had spoken.

President McKay recognized that he was entitled to the inspiration and revelation of the Lord, and during his administration he accomplished great things as the Lord's earthly representative. The Church made wonderful progress during the 20 years of his leadership. It was during these years that the Church grew to become recognized as a worldwide organization, with the full blessings of the restored gospel being made available to members of the Church in many parts of the world. It was his worldwide vision that directed that temples be built abroad for easier access by the Saints and that stakes be created in foreign lands to strengthen the organizations and activities of the members. Now in many lands and in many languages the blessings of temple endowments, sealings, and marriages for the living and the dead are performed. The first stakes in Europe and in other parts of the world, such as Australia, New Zealand, and South America, were organized during his presidency. This set a pattern for the Church, and now almost monthly a new foreign-language stake is organized, presided over by natives of the various countries and island empires, giving evidence that Zion is being strengthened in her stakes on a worldwide basis.

Perhaps the foundation for this worldwide vision President McKay developed in relation to the Church was laid years before he became president. In 1921, as a young and vigorous apostle, he undertook, by direction of President Grant and his counselors, the first worldwide tour of all the missions of the Church by a General Authority. With his companion, Hugh J. Cannon, he spent the whole of the year visiting the far-flung missions, getting acquainted with the people of many nations, meeting the Saints and gaining first-hand knowledge of their lands, customs, and traditions, and finding assurance of their great faith and devotion to the Church. The published accounts of this world mission tour reveal many faith-promoting and spiritual experiences that could only come to one who lived close to the Lord and was guided and prompted by the Holy Spirit. These accounts of speaking in tongues, being directed among strange people in strange lands, and being saved from harm and even impending death, give us to know that the age of miracles is far from past in the kingdom of God today.

President McKay should always be remembered as one under whose leadership were built meetinghouses, temples, schools, and other Church buildings throughout the world. But who can possibly deny that his predecessors should have their share of recognition for helping to prepare the way. As have all the presidents of the Church, President McKay built well on the solid foundations laid by the prophets who preceded him.

The presidents I have known have all been great friend-makers for the Church. When President McKay dedicated the temple in London, he declared that a new era had commenced. How prophetic and true that has been! There has since been a great upsurge of missionary converts, and the spirit of missionary work has grown tremendously. It is marvelous how the Lord is pouring out his Spirit upon the people. The time is short, and the little stone that was cut out of the mountain without hands is rolling forth and filling the earth.

As I look back, I feel gratitude for the experience that was mine in partaking of President McKay's judgment, inspiration, and leadership abilities. It was an inspiration to come under the influence of his genial personality, to witness his kindly attitude toward the unfortunate, and to recognize the wisdom and inspiration of his decisions.

As an evidence of the great personal radiation that emanated from him, I quote from an article in the Instructor (March 1956) written by Elder Harold B. Lee:

President McKay is one of the greatest teachers—and I use that word great without any hesitancy. I wish every teacher could realize what power he may wield upon all with whom he comes in contact even as President McKay makes an impression upon all who come into his presence. Some years ago a feature writer came here to write a magazine story for a national publication. President McKay was kind enough to give him a little time. After two or three hours, President McKay called and asked if I would take this man to Welfare Square.

On the way there this man said to me, "I've had today the most unusual experience of my life."

He said, "My editors assigned me to write a story, and of course it's always written around some personality. They flew me up from South America here. I'll fly back east and go to Europe and Asia. And always I'm meeting personalities—the great personalities of every country. But this morning I have met a man who has made a greater impression upon me than any other man I have ever met."

He continued, "You know, as President McKay sat across his desk and looked at me with those great eyes, he actually made me feel as if I wanted to be a better man. I actually thought I ought to quit smoking after I'd been in President McKay's company."

Such a thing could be that one might have felt in his heart some sense of resentment against President McKay because of an imagined injury, but when he looked at you with those wonderful, impressive eyes, and that heartwarming smile came across his face, one could only have a feeling of love for him. Any feeling of resentment would disappear like snow before a summer sun.

Man is without doubt God's greatest creation. Like his predecessors and those who have succeeded him as presidents of the Church, President McKay was born great. He no doubt inherited a remarkable degree of greatness from his ancestors, but one's personality is what one makes of it. He developed a magnetic personality by living a clean, exemplary life, a life of unselfish service, and by devoting himself to those virtues which make for character and personality. To influence others for good is to grow. The influence of these divinely inspired prophets throughout the Church, wherever their services have taken them, has brought increased righteousness to all who have been touched by their influence.

President McKay understood fully and exemplified in his life the true spirit of gratitude. He was graciously appreciative of everything that was done for him. During most of the nearly 20 years he presided over the Church, on the occasion of his birthdays the employees of the First Presidency's office gathered together to wish him a happy birthday, enjoy some light refreshments, and give him a small gift. On one of these occasions we gave him a pair of shoes, and he in return gave us a great lesson on the meaning of gratitude. He said:

Brother Murdock, Brother Herrick, brothers and sisters all, these occasions and others that you have held similar to this one make one realize the difference between thanks and gratitude. Thank you is of lips, the tone of the voice; gratitude is from the heart, and it is with gratitude that I accept your tribute. It does not seem much probably. The occasion is a simple one, a birthday greeting, but you know these incidents—occasions—go on forever. I was reminded just the other day of that fact. I reached into my library—I was studying for another purpose—and I turned to a volume of favorite poems, and I thought, "That was given to me in school, in the Weber Academy," so before I looked for a poem I turned to the inscription. There were twenty-four names of students in the Weber Academy 49 years ago, 1908, nearly half a century. I read their names. Gray-haired women now, those living, and some on the other side. Well, what memories crowded my mind that hour in the library. I thought of the time when they came as a class and presented that book of favorite poems. How quickly, swiftly the years in that half century have passed, but the very feelings of gratitude that I had when those young girls came and presented that little present were reawakened in my heart.

And so it is with your gifts during these last few years and today. It will not be just the memory of wearing shoes, but your names that I had last year and that I want this year will be filed with my memories, and I wish that fifty years from now I could still read them. That may not be here, but the affection accompanying this gift, the affection with which I receive it will last through eternity. That is what I mean by gratitude coming from the heart. It is easily spoken, but these messages given in concert as you have given today remain in the heart and memory forever.

Thank you and God bless you.

On another occasion, a thank-you letter addressed to me contained not only a typical expression of his appreciation but a bit of his philosophy about growing old. It read:

September 15, 1961

Dear Brother Anderson:

I want to again thank you for your participating in presenting to me that beautiful automatic Swiss watch. I shall never forget the friendly spirit and feeling of brotherhood that existed at that gathering of the employees in the office of the First Presidency on the eve of my eighty-eighth birthday. I shall always cherish the memory of that occasion!

For the past several years, I have been prone to consider old age as a disagreeable, unwelcome trespasser, skulking along to claim any faculty that might show the strain and usage of the passing years; this year at eighty-eight, I look upon him with a degree of compassion akin to appreciation. Indeed if it were not for "Old Age" I should not have been seventy-five, or eighty, or eighty-five, and most assuredly not eighty-eight.

Now I am content to let him walk by my side, but shall continue as long as possible to deny the demands of old age to take from me the good health Kind Providence still gives me.

Sister McKay, thankfully regaining her strength and activity, joins me in this expression of appreciation.

Cordially and sincerely,

David O. McKay.

My imtimate acquaintance and association with President McKay during the last few years of his life, when he was not in good health physically, was an especially interesting and profitable experience. Notwithstanding the weakness of his legs and other physical infirmities, his mind was clear, and the Lord inspired him in the decisions he made and in his direction of the weighty affairs of the Church. The scepter of his leadership did not fall from him, and the Lord sustained him constantly. The problems he was required to wrestle with were heavy indeed, but the Lord sustained him fully in his leadership until the last few weeks.

His remarkable sense of humor never left him, and I will never forget his courageous attitude. He was always very much the gentleman, and his love for the Brethren, his associates, was always as deep and complete as one man can have for another. His was to the very end a great example of the love which can only be found in those who are witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ and devoted to the great cause of the gospel kingdom.

I have always felt that I was on sacred ground when I attended the meetings of the General Authorities in the temple and heard them in humility bear testimony of their love for the work and for one another. I knew their utterances came from the heart. The Spirit of the Lord is always there in rich measure, and those who participate and listen get a true understanding of the spirit of brotherhood and an insight into the thinking that emanates from these men, the purity of their hearts, and the inspiration that guides them.

I relate an experience that shows the great ties of brotherhood and spirituality that bind these Brethren together. It is an excerpt from a talk given by President McKay at the California missionary conference on Saturday afternoon, January 3, 1952. I present it here for two reasons: one, it is a remarkable experience through which President McKay passed that could have prevented his subsequently becoming president of the Church; and two, it is a remarkable evidence of the power of the priesthood as exercised by President Grant in his prophetic blessing. President McKay told the missionaries:

In March, 1916, the Ogden River was a turbulent stream. The road was washed out. My brother, Thomas E., was marooned in Ogden. He was living up in Huntsville, and Wednesday evening he came to our house, picked up the telephone, and telephoned his wife, saying, "Will you please send a horse down with the road supervisor to where they are repairing the road and I will come home."

As he hung up the telephone, he said to my young son, Lawrence: "Will you drive me up tomorrow morning to the canyon, and I will ride the horse from there home?" That afternoon I had taken the children up to see the torrent, and I said, "No, I will drive you, Tommy, if you get up early enough."

Next morning, Thursday morning, when I should have been in Salt Lake to attend Council meeting, for the first time that winter the furnace was out, and I was delayed in starting the furnace. When I came up into the kitchen, the clock pointed to quarter to seven o'clock. That was just the time that I usually got ready to catch the Bamberger train at seven forty-five, and I thought, `I can't go.'

Something said: "Go up to the bridge and back." I said, "Come on, Tommy [Thomas E. McKay], I'll take you up." It was pouring, but the little Ford splashed up 21st Street there, better than it ever ran before. Going up there Thomas E., not knowing anything about that impression, said, "I think you had better not attempt to cross the bridge."

The day before I had seen rocks piled there to keep the bridge from washing out at the mouth of the canyon. But we were there at that bridge so quickly—it seemed less than five minutes—for we drove at a speed through muck and mud and rain, and neglecting the inspiration, or whatever you may call it, and using my experience of yesterday, I said, "I believe I will cross the bridge. Can you swim if the bridge gives way?"

Before he could answer we had crossed the bridge, and I heard him say: "Look out, there's a rope!" Stretched across the road was one of these large derrick ropes. Before I could reach for the emergency brake, we hit the rope which broke the windshield; it came back and struck me, severing my lip and cheek, catching my upper lip, breaking my jaw, and I was unconscious. Thomas E. ducked and was unhurt. I knew no more until we were back in Ogden. Returning, I heard him say, "I think I will take you to the hospital." I looked, and there in my hand were extracted teeth and blood, and I said: "No, take me home."

I will not take time tonight to tell you the whole story. That was Thursday morning. It was not long before I was on the operating table and when I came to in the room, the nurse, to comfort me, said, "Well, you can wear a beard." That I would be disfigured for life was taken for granted. They had taken thirteen stitches putting the jaw back, sewing up the side of the lip and cheek, and my face, of course, was swollen beyond recognition.

In testimony of that I will give the words of Peter G. Johnston, my first missionary companion in Scotland, who, having heard over the radio of the accident, came down from Idaho, an act of friendship which I shall never never forget. The door happened to be open that morning—this was the morning after—and as he passed the room, he did not recognize the man lying there on the bed, but he came back, and the nurse said, "Yes, that is he." He stood at the bed and looked. "Well," he said, smiling as best he could, "the eyes are the same anyhow."

Bishop Olson, Heber Scowcroft, and President Thomas B. Evans were there at my side soon after the operation, and administered to me, and Bishop Olson, my own bishop, said in that prayer: "We bless you that you shall not have pain."

Next day President Heber J. Grant, who was the President of the Twelve then, came, and he said, "David, you are not to talk, but I will give you a blessing." And in his blessing he said, "I bless you that your shall not be disfigured, and that you shall not be scarred."

Later, at a reunion given by President Nibley at the Hotel Utah, President Grant looked at me from a distance, and he said, "David, I do not see any scars, but when I took my hands off your head, I wondered about what I had said, whether I had made a mistake."

One of his great statements, for which President McKay will long be remembered, is "No other success can compensate for failure in the home." In his home and family life he was exemplary. Though he had great love for his fellowmen, he had greater affection for his lovely companion and his children. To them, he was always the exemplary husband and father, and as President McKay and Sister McKay grew older, their great love for each other and the example of their lives in living the principles of the gospel became legendary throughout the Church. To his sweet-heart he was always loving, considerate, and courteous. He was by nature courteous. I have never been with him in his office or home but that he arose to his feet when Sister McKay entered the room. This courteous regard for his sweetheart and companion was so inborn into his nature that when he became physically unable to arise, he was observed at least to make the effort instinctively.

On one occasion—it was their sixty-ninth wedding anniversary and just two or three weeks before President McKay passed away—President Alvin R. Dyer and I visited them in their apartment in the Hotel Utah. Neither of them was well at the time, but they were well groomed, as they always were, and sitting on a couch in the living room holding hands. This too was a McKay tradition. On frequent occasions they were to be seen holding hands.

In the course of our conversation I asked Sister McKay how she was, and she said, "I am all right, but I am concerned about my boy." I said, "He is still your boy, is he?" She answered quickly, "He surely is." To this I said, "He is the best, is he not?" and she answered, "Most certainly."

President McKay would never go to a temple meeting or elsewhere from her presence without kissing her goodbye. When I think of the fact that my acquaintance with both of them went back to the time when they were young and energetic, without physical or other handicaps, and that that acquaintance persisted over those many years, I must express gratitude to the Lord for my acquaintance with such wonderful people and for the lessons I learned from President McKay.

This great man's sermons over the years would fill many volumes. They have appeared in the Conference Reports and Church magazines and periodicals. He was the most widely traveled president of the Church, his journeys estimated to have covered over two million miles. His talks were at conferences, temple and other building dedications, funerals, patriotic meetings, and other important occasions too numerous to mention.

Most of his messages were filled with poetic quotations from the world's best literature and illustrations from life that serve as windows through which the light of understanding is shown, to enlighten the souls of men with the truths of the eternal gospel. Most of the poems he quoted from memory, for he never forgot the lovely literary gems learned in earlier life when he was a student and teacher. His sermons contained doctrinal and ethical discussions and instructions to the Latter-day Saints and to our Father's children generally. They are inspired classics that will never become outmoded. Many of his sermons and life's experiences will be and have been published.

I have made a selection of some of his statements, which are not intended in any way to be complete, but merely as an indication of the nature of his thinking as expressed on various occasions and to reveal the greatness of his philosophy of life, his love of mankind, and his awareness of the world about him.

Here are some of the statements I have chosen:

Man's chief concern in life should not be the acquiring of gold, or of fame. or of material possessions. It should not be development of physical powers, nor of intellectual strength, but his aim, the highest in life, should be the development of a Christ-like character.

* * * * * *

The finest thing for young people and everybody is to live the gospel.

* * * * * *

Young people do not seem to realize that the religious life is the happy life. Doing for others, making others happy, and living the gospel of Jesus Christ is the really happy life for everybody to live.

* * * * * *

The real tragedy in America is not that we have permitted the Bible to slip out of our schools, but that we have so openly neglected to teach it in either the home or the Church.

* * * * * *

Never before was there such need of revitalizing the teaching of faith and repentance on the part of parents. Never before in the history of our country was the State in greater need of young men and young women who cherish the higher life in preference to the sordid, the selfish, and the obscene.

* * * * * *

Teach the boys that it is chastity during youth that gives vigor, strength, and virility of manhood. Teach the girls that chastity is the crown of beautiful womanhood.

* * * * * *

A spotless character, founded upon the ability to say "no" in the presence of those who mock and jeer wins the respect and love of men and women whose opinion is most worthwhile. Drinking and petting parties form an environment in which the moral sense becomes dulled and unbridled passion holds sway. It then becomes easy to take the final step downward in moral disgrace.

* * * * * *

Ten Rules of Happiness

The following responses are some that came from young people to the news of the death of President David O. McKay in answer to the question. What influence did President McKay have on your life?

"He just glowed with love."

"He was like a partner in our home at all times."

"He never chastised anyone—he just put his arm of love around the world."

"When President McKay died, we felt that we had lost someone in our own family."

"We have lost a personal friend."

"If only the young people of today will remember his teachings."

The following is a list of answers that were given to the question, "What teachings of President McKay do you remember best?"

"Love thy mother and father all the days of your lives."

"Be clean in mind and body, always."

"Smile."

"Be reverent every day, not just on Sunday."

"Pray together."

"Read good books."

"Study the scriptures."

"Hate no one."

"Be pleasant and courteous to everyone."

"Dress modestly—our Father in heaven is watching."

"Marriage: the temple way is the only way."

I shall always remember some of his thoughts expressed at the dedication of the Oakland Temple in 1964. In nearly all of his remarks, President McKay mentioned that there were spirits from the other world who were present. And he mentioned too that there are, in the air, waves passing back and forth all the time, but we do not respond to them. He explained that there is the sweet voice of a singer on the other side of the world, but we do not hear it. There are the phrases of a great orator over in one of the other countries passing through the air, but we are dead to those things. However, if we turn on the radio and get in tune and harmony with those infinite moving waves, we hear the singing, we hear the phrases and the tones just as clearly as if we were in their presence. That, he said, is true of the impressions that come to man, through the Holy Ghost, and if we were in tune with the spirit world, we could hear the voices of our loved ones.

Suffice it to say in closing this chapter that the ninth President of the Church, David O. McKay, faithfully accomplished the work that the Lord assigned to him before he left the preexistent world to take upon himself mortality. He served as the mouthpiece of the Lord in the period allotted to him in the dispensation of the fulness of times.
