Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

6

Counselors to President McKay

When President David O. McKay's career as a General Authority ended in January 1970, he had established several records for longevity of service. He had lived to a greater age than any previous General Authority, death coming to him about four months past his ninety-sixth birthday. He had also been a General Authority longer than any other in this dispensation, a total of 63 years and eight months. Only one other had exceeded the total of 35 years as a member of the First Presidency accumulated by President McKay, and that was President Joseph F. Smith, whose total was 38 years.

When President McKay became president of the Church in April 1951, he had completed more than 16 years as second counselor in the First Presidency, serving with both President Heber J. Grant and President George Albert Smith. During these same years President J. Reuben Clark Jr., had served as first counselor in the First Presidency.

At the Solemn Assembly in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on April 9, 1951, President McKay announced to the Church his choice of counselors—President Stephen L Richards as first counselor and President Clark as second counselor. He made the explanation to the

Following the death of President Richards and later, President Clark, others who served as counselors to President McKay were Henry D. Moyle, Hugh B. Brown, and Nathan Eldon Tanner.

Church that the reason for sustaining his counselors in that order was based on their seniority in the Council of the Twelve. It was on that occasion also that President Clark made his now historic statement that it mattered not where but how one served in the kingdom of God, and he pledged his full loyalty and support to President McKay and President Richards.

Thus the counselors to President McKay during the nearly 20 years of his service as president of the Church were:

Stephen L Richards—first counselor, April 1951 to May 1959

J. Reuben Clark, Jr.—second counselor, April 1951 to June 1959

—first counselor, June 1959 to October 1961

Henry D. Moyle—second counselor, June 1959 to October 1961

—first counselor, October 1961 to September 1963

Hugh B. Brown—second counselor, October 1961 to October 1963

—first counselor, October 1963 to January 1970

Nathan Eldon Tanner—second counselor, October 1963 to January 1970

Since I have previously given an extensive account of my long service with President Clark, he will not be further introduced in this chapter, but I will endeavor to introduce the others named above, for I have had a close, intimate association with each of them and sincerely acknowledge their devotion and loyal dedication to their illustrious file leader.

During his presidency, President McKay called others into service as counselors in the First Presidency. President Brown had such a position from June 1961 until October of that same year when he became second counselor. Two others were called as counselors in the First Presidency on the same day, October 28, 1965. They were Joseph Fielding Smith, then President of the Council of the Twelve, who continued in that position, and Elder Thorpe B. Isaacson, then an Assistant to the Twelve. Elder Alvin R. Dyer, also an Assistant to the Twelve, was called by President McKay as a counselor in the First Presidency, in April 1968. He had previously been ordained an apostle by President McKay on October 5, 1967.

Following President McKay's death and the reorganization of the First Presidency in January 1970, President Hugh B. Brown was returned to his position of seniority in the Council of the Twelve, and Elders Isaacson and Dyer again resumed their places among the Assistants to the Twelve.

I feel impressed to add at this point that with each new change in the First Presidency I have witnessed during these many years, I have marveled at the blending of the wills of strong and capable men of varied experiences and achievements into a unity of purpose—the building of the kingdom of God on earth. It is further evidence of the divinity of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

PRESIDENT STEPHEN L RICHARDS

When Stephen L Richards became a counselor in the First Presidency, he rose to a position once held by his illustrious grandfather, Willard Richards, who was an associate of Joseph Smith and a fellow prisoner in Carthage Jail at the time of the martyrdom. Willard Richards remained true and faithful to the memory of the first Prophet of this dispensation and was among the stalwart pioneer leaders, later becoming a counselor to Brigham Young when the First Presidency was reestablished in December 1847.

President Stephen L Richards had already had the honor of following in his grandfather's footsteps in his ordination as an apostle and member of the Council of the Twelve. In this respect he was one of a large number of descendants of early stalwart associates of the Prophet Joseph Smith who, in second, third, or fourth generations, honored the names of their forebears by rising to positions of prominence in Church leadership. A few of them with whom I have had the privilege of associating these past 50 years include President Grant, George Albert Smith, George F. Richards, Joseph Fielding Smith, Joseph F. Merrill, Sylvester Q. Cannon, Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson, and LeGrand Richards.

Stephen L Richards attracted my admiration from the time I first met him in the Council of the Twelve meetings in the temple. I soon learned to watch his reaction to questions under discussion and discovered that not only was his opinion sound, given after thorough, analytical thinking, but that the recommendations that he frequently made after summing up the discussions very often became the sentiment of the group and the action of the Council.

I found that this man had the happy faculty of being able to analyze a problem thoroughly, seemingly not overlooking any possible contingency. He had an astute, analytical mind, great wisdom and capacity, and his judgment was dependable. Perhaps he had attained these skills by a native intelligence highly trained in the legal profession. During his professional life before being named to the Council of the Twelve in 1917, he had been a successful practicing attorney and member of the University of Utah Law School faculty.

As both an apostle and a member of the First Presidency, President Richards was not easily swayed from a decision once he had reached a conclusion that his analysis of the problem at hand was right. This I found, however, did not deter him from deferring to the decisions and feelings of the prophets he served, because of his great faith that the Lord's inspiration was manifest through them. He was forthright and fearless in expressing his feelings, usually in a voice of quiet persuasion and thorough consideration of the opinions expressed by others.

The sermons of President Richards, in my estimation, portrayed deep and profound thinking and were literary classics in their construction and composition. While in his later years his talks were generally written beforehand and read by him on the occasion of their delivery, yet, when in earlier years he spoke without the written manuscript before him, his language was practically word perfect when spoken. His corrections on the shorthand reporter's copy were very few indeed.

President Richards was a deep thinker and scholar. One need only read his many sermons to appreciate the truth of this statement. While his demeanor toward the employees and clerical staff seemed somewhat reserved, yet few, if any, have been so generous and kind in their commendation of my reports of council meetings as was President Richards. Such commendation naturally was greatly appreciated as I attempted to make proper and complete, yet concise, minutes and notes of discussions and actions upon which are based the conduct and history of the divine church of our Redeemer. Particularly has this been the case when among those assembled in these councils were men such as President Grant, President McKay, President Joseph Fielding Smith, President Richards, President Clark, James E. Talmage, Orson F. Whitney, and President Harold B. Lee, to name only a few of the outstanding ones during my many years of service.

My experiences and travels have brought me into contact with many of those whom we look upon as the great men of the world in business, finance, industry, and politics. I have been highly and favorably impressed by their judgment, wisdom, ability, and courtesy. There have been among them many of the great and noble men of the earth, honorable and good men, and they have played and are playing important roles in their particular fields, but enduring peace can never come to the world nor can men find true happiness until they accept and abide by the teachings of our Lord and Master. Nowhere can they find these teachings better exemplified than in the lives of true, faithful, devoted Latter-day Saints, such as the life of Stephen L Richards.

He always had a strong conviction that a man's contributions to society were all important and that they were by no means always determined by educational achievements. I have always remembered for the lesson it taught me and others the speech he gave at a Brigham Young University devotional in February 1957. His message and illustration used in these excerpts were the true sentiments of this profound thinker:

I suppose that there may be a large proportion of our student-body who have already determined upon their vocations, and that they are working to the end of qualifying themselves to carry forward a legitimate vocation in life, and there may be others who are awaiting the determination until after they shall have had the education, and after they have appraised the opportunities which are available. Of course, the choice of a vocation is an individual matter. I have no doubt in this modern day that you take advantage of some of these estimates that are made of aptitude—I suppose they are helpful—to determine whether you are best fitted for a lawyer, an engineer, a teacher, or some other vocation.

It doesn't take, necessarily, one of these high-sounding, so-called aristocratic professions to give a person the opportunity to do a great service in the world. I have great respect for a professional life and professional contribution, but I have likewise a very great respect for the so-called humbler vocations which in themselves make high contributions to our society. No matter how humble, if the job is well done, it will be of value, and it will be of value to the people. To help others is, after all, the end of our service.

Two things are essential for success in any vocation, I would say: character and ability. I have seen people with one without the other, and I have seen some moderate success come. But I wouldn't hire anybody with the utmost ability without some character, and of course I wouldn't want to hire anybody without the ability to help me. Character and ability—and I believe we can secure that character and that ability by the inculcation of the ideals that the Church of our Lord holds out to us.

Speaking of the humble calling—maybe I have told you this story before—but years ago, when the pioneers were coming west, there was maintained at the office of the President of the Church a big book called the "Register." Every immigrant was expected to go to that office, sign his name, and put oppostite his name his vocation or his trade. They wanted to know who were blacksmiths, who were carpenters, etc. Well, there came a man who went to the offices of the President, and he signed his name "William Fowler, laborer." He had no trade. But in the heart of that man was a great sentiment which, as you will recognize, found expression in that marvelous hymn, the most popular among our people for now nearly a century of time. That sentiment in that humble man's heart performed for the Church a service the like of which few have ever performed:

We thank thee, O God, for a prophet

To guide us in these latter days.

We thank thee for sending the gospel

To lighten our minds with its rays.

We thank thee for every blessing

Bestowed by thy bounteous hand.

We feel it a pleasure to serve thee,

And love to obey thy command.

One of the most important features of that verse is, "We love to obey thy command." Well, that sentiment so endeared that man to the heart of the Church that, when he died, the Church caused a monument to be placed above his grave down in Manti.. . . On the monument are inscribed these simple words: "To the memory of William Fowler, author of the hymn, We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet."

So, one doesn't need a great vocation to offer the opportunities for wonderful service.

It was no surprise to any of President McKay's associates when the newly sustained president of the Church named Stephen L Richards as a counselor. Theirs had often been referred to as a "Damon and Pythias relationship," for they were true personal friends, confidants as well as associates, among the General Authorities.

Sunday School leadership was no small part of the life of President McKay, and at his side for most of these years of leadership in this worldwide gospel teaching auxiliary of the Church was Stephen L Richards. President Richards had had considerable Sunday School experience. His first official position was as a secretary and teacher in the Sugar House Ward Sunday School. Among other positions were those of assistant stake superintendent in the Salt Lake Stake and later a member of the Granite Stake Sunday School board. In 1906 he was named to the general Sunday School board. This was the same year that President McKay was called to the apostleship and named as second assistant general superintendent of the Sunday Schools.

In April 1909, President McKay was advanced to first assistant superintendent and was succeeded as second assistant superintendent by Stephen L Richards.

Thus began a close association and friendship that ripened with the years. In November 1918 Elder McKay, then an apostle, was named general Sunday School superintendent, and his assistants were Stephen L Richards, also an apostle, and George D. Pyper. In the meantime, in January 1917, Elder McKay was privileged to welcome his beloved friend and Sunday School associate into the Council of the Twelve Apostles. Speaking to the general board a few weeks later, Elder McKay said of Elder Richards' appointment to the Twelve, "On that occasion, every mind assented and every heart testified that the Lord had spoken, and that he had indeed called into the service of the apostleship a `chosen vessel.'"

At that same time, paying tribute to his associate, President McKay continued:

His sincere interest in the great Sunday School cause has been an inspiration to his fellow-workers. His clear judgment and sound reasoning have commanded the respect particularly of the general board, with whom he is closely associated. His loyalty to them and to the cause has won their loyalty to him; his gentlemanly and courteous consideration of their thoughts and feelings, his unselfish devotion to the truth, and his invincible determination to choose the right have merited their abiding confidence and high esteem.

President Richards' health was not the best for many years while he was serving as a member of the Twelve. He suffered greatly at times because of a heart ailment, and we feared at times that his end was near. But following his appointment to the First Presidency he worked harder than ever before, although he occasionally found it necessary in the interest of his health to go away for a brief rest and relaxation. He had the ability to know how to relax when the need seemed the greatest.

This man gave to President McKay and to his position as a counselor in the First Presidency his every ounce of energy, even frequently when he was not well. He was completely devoted to his old friend and to the Church. President McKay relied wholeheartedly on his judgment, particularly in financial and missionary matters, and he leaned heavily upon him.

One of President Richards' favorite themes was the home and family, and he left to posterity and the Church some truly classical discourses on that subject, full of wise counsel and inspiration. He contended that the strength of the community and of the Church depended upon safeguarding the family and the home.

It could be said of President Richards that he literally gave his life in the service of the Church. For many days he had been regularly at the office, when all his friends and the Church were shocked and saddened by his sudden passing from a heart attack on May 19, 1959.

The great respect and love President McKay had for his long-time counselor and confidant was evidenced when he, with much emotion, took final leave of President Richards in these few brief heartfelt words: "Goodbye for the present, Stephen L, my beloved friend and associate. We shall miss you—Oh! how we shall miss you!—but we shall continue to carry on until we meet again."

These words found echo in the hearts of all of us who heard this loving farewell.

PRESIDENT HENRY D. MOYLE

When President David O. McKay moved to fill the vacancy in the First Presidency occasioned by the death of Stephen L Richards, he chose Henry D. Moyle, one of the dynamic and forceful members of the Council of the Twelve, who had proven abilities of leadership, loyalty, dedication, and faithfulness.

President Moyle's call to the First Presidency on June 13, 1959, was as second counselor. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., who had faithfully served President McKay as second counselor for more than eight years, once more became first counselor in the First Presidency. Thus President McKay again had two strong, wise counselors at his right and left hands.

It is interesting to note that President McKay, himself a noted educator and teacher, had called to his side as his first three counselors men who, in addition to their long and faithful Church service, were trained in and had reached notable heights in the legal profession. Even his next choice as a counselor in the First Presidency followed the same pattern when another noted attorney and churchman, Hugh B. Brown, was called as a counselor at the time of the death of President Clark.

The appointment of President Moyle to the First Presidency was a climax to a noteworthy life's career as student, missionary, lawyer, professor of law, army officer, eminently successful business executive, national executive in the petroleum industry, stake president, general chairman of the Church Welfare Committee, and member of the Council of the Twelve.

President Moyle was a man of dynamic personality as well as unwavering faith. His remarkable background, training, and experience as well as his faith in, devotion to, and understanding of the gospel and Church procedures qualified him for the mission he performed as a counselor in the First Presidency. He was an able and influential speaker, and his persuasiveness and example went far in making a success of most every assignment and responsibility given him or in which he took the initiative.

This man brought a welcome vigor and vitality into his new position, permitting him to give valuable assistance and counsel to his associates. His organizational abilities, coming from his legal training and wide business experience, helped him to succeed especially in three areas of responsibility that were, among others, given him by President McKay.

One of these was the missionary program. This had been an area of responsibility very dear to President McKay, who had held it himself for nearly a score of years and in which President Richards had followed through so devotedly. President Moyle had been an energetic and successful missionary in Germany in his younger years. After his missionary service he had remained on for a year to pursue his education at the University of Freiberg, studying geology. Even during this year his missionary work did not cease, and he frequently joined the missionaries in their activities. He was in Germany from 1909 to 1912, years before World War I, and he and his companions often faced persecution and threats of imprisonment.

Now, as a counselor in the First Presidency responsible for missionary work of the Church throughout the world, President Moyle entered into this assignment with the same zeal and dynamism he gave to every phase of his life. When he took the direction of the missionary program, the Church had about 5,000 missionaries in the field. Four years later the number had increased to 12,000. He had the personality and capacity to enthuse and inspire mission leaders and through them imbue the missionaries with confidence and a positive attitude that brought outstanding results. Convert baptisms began to reach impressive, almost unheard-of totals. He frequently visited with mission presidents and missionaries in seminars in Great Britain, on the European continent, and throughout the United States. His personal influence and testimony were contagious. He made the missionaries feel that whatever they set their minds to do, they could accomplish if they had the Lord on their side.

Second, President Moyle brought into the First Presidency a firsthand knowledge of the welfare program and all its ramifications. For 20 years he had been the general chairman of the program. His first identification with Church welfare was when it had its small beginning in several stakes of the Salt Lake Valley. He was presiding over the Cottonwood Stake at the time of the early depression years. At the same time President Harold B. Lee was presiding over Pioneer Stake, and some of the first bishop's storehouse activities were set up by them in their respective stakes on a pioneering basis.

President Moyle remained as stake president for ten years beginning in 1927 and was released when he was appointed by the First Presidency to serve as the welfare program's second general chairman. In this office he succeeded Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Council of the Twelve, who had passed away after serving the first year. This new appointment brought President Moyle into close association with President Lee, who the year before had been named the program's first managing director. Four years later, a third prominent Salt Lake churchman was to join with them in giving wise, persistent, and energetic leadership to Church welfare. This third man was Elder Marion G. Romney, who today is a counselor in the First Presidency. President Romney was named one of the first Assistants to the Twelve in April 1941 and almost immediately became the assistant managing director of Church welfare. History has shown that beginning at that time, and for the next score of years, these three were the guiding forces of an inspired program of taking care of the needy and developing initiative and independence among the Church membership. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., was also closely allied with these three apostles in laying the groundwork and charting the course of the great welfare program.

I am sure the loss of President Moyle's dynamic and confident spirit and dedication to this program was felt keenly by his associates when his early passing came in 1963.

In yet a third area President Moyle's influence and life's training were to be a powerful asset to President McKay. A man of considerable business acumen and experience through association with large industrial and financial concerns, he was entrusted by President McKay with much of the Church's business and financial affairs. These he assumed with his usual dependability, forthrightness, and energy.

One example of his thinking and farsightedness is the Church's large ranch and cattle holdings in Florida. The Deseret Farms of Florida began under his personal direction and supervision, wherein hundreds of thousands of acres of swamp lands and unproductive areas were drained and reclaimed and became one of the great undertakings and assets of the Church.

In everything, President Moyle thought big and had the energy, vision, and determination to follow through. It was during the period of his service in the First Presidency that plans were developed and carried forward initially for the present, newly completed and occupied 28-story high-rise General Church Office Building on the block east of Temple Square in Salt Lake City. It will long remain as a memorial to the enterprising dynamism that characterized this prominent Churchman.

President Moyle was a successful, affluent business executive and lawyer, with influence reaching throughout the Intermountain West, when he was called into the Council of the Twelve in 1947 by President George Albert Smith. From that time on, his entire attention and dedication was to the Church. He traveled widely and was a familiar and well-loved figure throughout the stakes and missions. He was a forceful and interesting speaker, radiating an air of confidence and optimism combined with deep spirituality, humility, and faith that deeply influenced the lives of all who heard him. He was a man most highly respected by all who knew him in the varied circles in which he moved.

His financial wealth was not inherited. He had the ability to fully capitalize on his high educational attainments, for he had on the wall of his office degrees obtained from several noted institutions of higher education, beginning with the University of Utah, from which he was graduated in 1909 with a degree in mining engineering. As previously stated, he studied geology for a year at the University of Freiberg, following his mission. He returned home to reenter the University of Utah, where he received a degree in science and studied law. In 1915 he was awarded a law degree from the University of Chicago. Later he studied for a year at Harvard. For 25 years he was on the law faculty of the University of Utah.

Naming just a few of his industrial achievements will help to portray the great capacity and varied interests of President Moyle—the same abilities to succeed that he brought with him into the First Presidency, making him an able, experienced, and energetic counselor. At one time he was president of the Inland Empire Oil Refinery and the Troy Mining Company and vice-president of the Wasatch Oil Refinery and the Idaho Oil Refinery. He was also president of the Deseret Livestock Co. and a consultant to Phillips Petroleum. He was a member of the board of trustees of the Consolidated Freightways, Inc., and a founder of the Utah Truck Owners' Association, for which he served many years as general counsel. He earned the reputation of being one of the best authorities in the field of transportation in the Mountain West, and during World War II he served his country as one of the government directors of the oil industry. He later became a director of the Petroleum Industry Council and chairman of refining for District Four—the Mountain West states. Following this war-time emergency organization, his abilities were recognized further with his appointment as a director of the more permanent National Petroleum Council

Such were the high temporal achievements of this man who filled such an important place in the presiding councils of the Church. But great as were his business and financial successes, they did not, nor would he ever let them, supersede in interest and devotion his ecclesiastical responsibilities. He used his wealth wisely in service to his fellowmen. The extent of his contributions to worthy causes and to aid his closest friends will never be known, for always he had so stipulated.

To me, perhaps, as I sat so often in the council meetings, the outstanding characteristics of President Moyle were his faith in God, his unquestioned testimony of the latter-day work in which he was engaged, and his unwavering, unquestionable loyalty to President McKay. Of his prophet-leader he often testified that he was indeed inspired of God.

I have been impressed with the manner in which President Moyle passed from this life. It was indeed a peaceful ending, befitting a man who literally wore himself out in the service of the Master. Though afflicted with a heart ailment for several years, this dynamic leader did not spare himself in spending his energy to the very last for the building up of God's kingdom on earth.

But even more impressively, his peaceful end came in his sleep during the night while in a home and place dear to his heart, the church-owned farm-ranch home at Deer Park, Florida. This project was largely of his vision and planning, and he visited it often in the course of his official duties. He had died as he would have wished, in the harness and heavily involved in the greatest of causes, serving the people he loved.

Two nights before his quiet passing he had addressed a meeting in the nearby Ellsworth Ward chapel. Those of the official party who accompanied him said he spoke feelingly of his love of the Church and gave once again, for the last time, his powerful personal testimony of the "divine calling of President McKay as a prophet of God."

So this man of achievement died, as he had lived, full of faith, love of the gospel and his fellowmen, loyal to his leaders and associates. He had an undoubting faith and knowledge that this is the work of the Lord and that the Master opens the way and guides his chosen servants in the accomplishment of his purposes, if they do their part, seeking the inspiration and guidance of the Holy Spirit.

I have been humbly grateful that the life of such a fearless and untiring worker has touched my life so closely. I felt of him that he was such as would give his all, even his very life, for the advancement of the cause he so dearly loved. This he did as few men are privileged to do.

PRESIDENT HUGH B. BROWN

As the reader is by now aware, I have seen many men come into high Church service as counselors in the First Presidency. However much I have learned to love and appreciate these men for themselves and for the contributions they have made to the Church, I can say that none came into such position for whom I had a greater personal affection and friendship when his appointment came than President Hugh B. Brown.

I had known him for many years and admired his spiritual fervor and ability to inspire others with his special gift of oratory. But, more than that, he had been, and still is, my very dear friend. My acquaintance with President Brown began many years before he became a General Authority of the Church.

This association and friendship was intensified during 1937 when he was called to preside over the British Mission and in that year President Heber J. Grant went to Europe and I had the pleasure of accompanying him. As we traveled about Europe, President Brown and I became close companions, and since that time my feelings for him have been of love and appreciation. My admiration for him still continues. He is a man the people love and one who loves the people of the Church.

President McKay had had a long acquaintance with Hugh B. Brown during the latter's long and prominent service to the Church as missionary, president of two stakes, twice president of the British Mission, youth leader and Church Servicemen's Coordinator. It was President McKay who called his trusted friend and associate into the ranks of the General Authorities to be an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve in 1953. He was then advanced to be a member of the Council of the Twelve in 1958 at the age of 74 years. It was also in June of that year that President Brown and his sweetheart, Zina Card Brown, a granddaughter of Brigham Young, celebrated their golden wedding anniversary.

During the presidency of President McKay, at a time when President Clark was advancing in years and the demands upon the First Presidency were growing heavier and heavier as they have over the years, Hugh B. Brown was called from the Council of the Twelve to serve as an additional counselor in the First Presidency. This was in June 1961, and a few months later, in October, when President Clark passed away just after his ninetieth birthday, President Brown became second counselor in the Presidency. President Moyle was advanced to first counselor to succeed President Clark.

All who know President Brown know of his humble faith and the strength of his testimony. Among my acquaintances in the General Authorities during the past 50 years, President Brown has been outstanding in his ability to preach the gospel and influence his listeners. His is a special gift of oratory, and he has always been a mighty preacher of the gospel, as he seeks to share his knowledge and testimony through sermons given throughout the world and through the messages that have come from his gifted pen.

Of course, the power of his exemplary life and his example of Christian virtues have added to the persuasive force of his spoken messages. He has been an outstanding friend-maker for the Church, and these friends include people of nobility and in high places as well as those in lowly walks of life, both members and nonmembers. His great love and devotion for those with whom he has associated cannot be measured, nor can his faith in and appreciation of his fellowmen generally.

As I have been fortunately permitted to do, many people in the Church today have come under the refreshing spell of his delightful personality. His warmth and friendship, his keen sense of humor, his progressive nature and awareness of that which is going on about him make it ever more exciting to listen to him or just to be in his presence.

Typical of his alertness to a changing world about him was his comment when asked by a newsman what his reactions were to being called as a counselor in the First Presidency. He said, "It is quite a shock to be so launched as a missile and thrown into dizzy orbit." Another experience which showed that this man, then at the age of 77 years, was keeping apace of the jet-age world about him was a speech he made about the same time to students of Brigham Young University, which he entitled "Eternal Flight." He said:

You are astronauts . . . launched from another sphere and temporarily on this little space island preparing to continue an endless flight. . . .

You have been provided with a very miraculous space suit or capsule. Each of you has been given a divine spark, which will continue to ignite that super-fuel which we call truth and knowledge—and of this there is an inexhaustible supply. A constant refueling will enable you to continue this second stage of your journey. Then you will launch an indestructible missile, yourself, and propel it into outer space. The amount of the fuel—knowledge—which you acquire and utilize will determine and in a sense delimit your flight.

The advice President Brown gave the students on that occasion was but a page from the formula of his own life. He continues to keep abreast of the world about him by continuing a program of constant reading of the great books of the world. His published sermons and writings of well over a half century of Church service attest to his firm belief in a balanced mental diet. They display a vast knowledge of life and a realistic approach to the gospel that has constantly appealed to young and old alike.

One of his former colleagues, the late Elder Richard L. Evans, in writing a foreword to one of President Brown's several books of sermons and writings, gave a word picture of the author, which reveals the real Hugh B. Brown as I have known and admired him. Said Elder Evans:

His power to touch intimately and forgettably the hearts and lives of young people includes encouragement to question freely and sincerely—but with faith and with respect for facts, and for authority, and for eternal truths.

He is an uncommon man—approachable, lovable, human, courageous, forthright, dedicated to lifting lives with a warmth that comforts, that encourages, that gives real and solid hope to the repentant, the wayward, the wandering; to those who have made mistakes, and to those who are sincerely searching and seeking.

Truly the eloquence of his sermons and the power of his testimony have been a strong influence in my life as well as in the lives of all who have heard him, whether from the pulpit, in the classroom, or in the intimate councils of the brethren. He will always be remembered by me as one of God's noblemen. His has been a noble service over a period of many years, beginning as a missionary to Great Britain in his early youth. This began a tie between Hugh B. Brown and the British people that was to endure for many years.

Though born in Salt Lake City, he moved early with his family to Alberta, Canada, where he spent his earlier years working on farms, ranches, canals, and railroads. Always giving faithful service to the Church, he was named in 1921 as president of the Lethbridge Stake, this appointment coming after service in the bishopric and on the Alberta Stake high council. He moved to Salt Lake City with his family in 1927 to take up the practice of law, for which he had completed legal training at the University of Alberta. The services of this experienced leader were soon to be required by his Church, when the next year he became president of the Granite Stake in Salt Lake City.

It was in 1937 that he left to preside over the British Mission, remaining there until 1940, when he aided in the evacuation of missionaries from Europe at the start of World War II.

Because of his experiences and capacity to reach young people, President Brown was named Church servicemen's coordinator during the war years, directing their spiritual training and counseling hundreds of men and women in uniform. He continued this activity until 1944, when he was again called to preside over the British Mission in the immediate post-war-years.

Returning home to Salt Lake City in 1946, he joined the faculty of Brigham Young University, where he became one of the most popular teachers of religion and also continued to coordinate servicemen's activities.

He had returned to Canada to resume his law practice and was just beginning a successful business career when the long arm of inspired Church authority, as it so often does, reached out to again call him into service. He was summoned by President McKay in 1953 to be an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, and in 1958 was advanced to be a member of the Council of the Twelve.

He served President McKay loyally and devotedly with wise counsel born of a life rich in experience, devotion, righteousness, and faith. When President McKay passed away in January 1970, President Brown graciously resumed his former place of seniority in the Council of the Twelve, where he continues to enjoy the love and appreciation of his associates, though ill health and advancing years do not permit him to be as active as his faithful spirit would dictate.

It should be said of President Brown that he has taken an extremely active part, under President McKay's leadership, in moving forward the construction of the Washington, D.C., temple. He dedicated the temple site in 1969, breaking ground at the same time, and worked closely with the Church leaders in the nation's capital to begin the fund drives and construction work of the temple. At this writing it is one of his fondest hopes that he will be able to attend the temple's dedication scheduled for sometime in the summer of 1974. This, he feels, would be a fitting climax to his life of service in the work of the Master.

As I think of the influence on my life of President Brown and of the many, many lives he has touched in his long, rewarding service to his fellowmen, especially the youth, I think of words penned by him in 1948 and appearing as a preface to his book Continuing the Quest. Entitled "Raw Materials," this message reveals the heart and soul of a devoted servant:

As the violinist tunes each string until it responds with an individual tone, capable of harmonious response to a master's hand;

As Handel and Mendelssohn placed symbols on paper which, when combined with poetic images, became oratorios:

As Cicero and Demosthenes used words with such discriminating skill as to make each one do its best and express an exact meaning and then wove them into great orations;

As Milton and Shakespeare arranged incidents into immortal dramas and poetry;

As Lincoln and Churchill held aloft ideals and inspired their countrymen to save their nations;

So let us try to touch the lives of young men and women; to inspire each to do and be his best, to know that he is unique in God's handiwork and that his contribution is required in the immortal symphony—thus may we help create from life's raw materials something beautiful and everlasting and do it with the throbbing, pulsating, malleable souls of God's children and help him to achieve his avowed purpose—immortality and eternal life for all.

—H.B.B., Provo, 1948.

PRESIDENT NATHAN ELDON TANNER

I count myself very fortunate indeed to have had President Nathan Eldon Tanner come into my life as he did 13 years ago. I knew of him and the successful leadership he was giving to the Calgary Stake in Canada, but I had no personal acquaintance with him until he was named an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve in October 1960 and moved to Salt Lake City.

His appointment as a General Authority and subsequent remarkable contribution of inspired leadership in the presiding councils of the Church is but further evidence to me that the Lord has in constant preparation men to call into these high positions at the right time. As I have become personally well acquainted with President Tanner and know of his background and life's experiences, I am well aware of how thorough was that preparation. From very humble beginnings he molded a career in Canada that brought remarkable achievements in varied fields, including public service, industry, finance, education, and business. These heights he achieved without sacrifice of his spiritual ideals and standards or his dedicated, devoted service to the Church.

I have become even better acquainted with President Tanner since his call into the First Presidency ten years ago. In these few years he has wielded a wonderful influence upon my life. He is a man of great faith and testimony, of dedication to the highest principles of integrity and honesty, a man of practical and inspired vision, blessed abundantly with common sense and the courage of his convictions.

President Tanner's advancement within the presiding councils of the Church has been rapid indeed. He served but two years as an Assistant to the Twelve, and much of that time as president of the newly created West European Mission with headquarters in London. This mission comprised all the areas of England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, two missions in France, and the Netherlands. His call to this assignment came only four days after he had traveled to England in company with President McKay and President Brown for the purpose of dedicating the Hyde Park Chapel in London and organizing the London Stake.

In 1962 he was named to the Council of the Twelve, and a year later President McKay selected him as second counselor in the First Presidency. His public response on being sustained to this position was typical of the humble dedication of his life. He said, "I humbly thank you all for your confidence and sustaining vote, and pledge to you and to God himself everything with which the Lord has blessed me for the building up of the kingdom of God."

In the First Presidency, President Tanner succeeded to the vacancy occasioned by the death of President Moyle.

For the next seven years Hugh B. Brown and N. Eldon Tanner served as first and second counselors to President McKay. During that time, and many times since, both of these great, sincere men have extended to me their confidence and love in a remarkable manner. Had I been an associate counselor with them, they could not have treated me with more kindness and deference. I have been with President Tanner on many occasions when he has demonstrated his sincere love of the gospel and his love for and devotion to the president of the Church. Both President Brown and President Tanner have indicated to me on various occasions, and I know they have been sincere, that they would gladly have given their lives, if necessary, for President McKay.

Knowing President Tanner as I do, I am aware that he manifested the same love and loyal devotion to President Joseph Fielding Smith, whom he continued to serve as second counselor, and today he is a tower of strength with the same loyalty, devotion, and dedication as first counselor to our beloved leader, President Harold B. Lee.

President Tanner is one of only four men in the history of the Church who have served as a counselor to three or more presidents of the Church. To each of these presidents he has been and is extremely loyal. Possessed of unusual abilities and qualifications for his high position, he has been and is today a trusted, devoted, and wise counselor.

I shall always hold President Tanner in the highest esteem because of his steadiness in service, his humble faith in the Lord, and his oft-expressed sincere, yet simple, testimony of the gospel. I have great respect for his strength of character. My experiences with him have revealed him to be a man of honor and integrity, trustworthy in every aspect of his life. He is kind, considerate, and approachable, with a love for his fellowmen regardless of their position in life. He has a forthright, fearless, practical approach to the problems of life and to the responsibilities of his high office. He possesses a keen sense of humor and an innate friendliness that draw people to him.

He has a deep interest in and love for the youth of the Church. Having associated much of his life with young people as a schoolteacher, as a Boy Scout leader, and for many years as a branch president and bishop, he understands them and their problems. They find him easy to approach and willing to listen and to help solve their problems. Typical of his effectiveness with youth is an incident related about him in a recent issue of the Ensign, written by his associate and revered uncle, President Brown. After telling of Eldon Tanner's first experiences as a schoolteacher in a three-room school in Hill Spring, Canada, President Brown wrote:

President Tanner next took a position as high school teacher in Cardston and moved his family there. During his eight years in Cardston he was on the town council, principal of an elementary school, scoutmaster, bishop's counselor and later bishop of the Cardston First Ward.

His humility and leadership ability were shown by his actions while serving as a counselor in the bishopric and adviser to the deacons quorum. Some of the boys were not attending their meetings. He soon discovered the reason as he visited them in their homes. They had no Sunday clothes and were embarrassed to wear their overalls. The following Sunday, according to agreement with the boys, he met with them at priesthood meeting in overalls. Needless to say he won the love of those young boys and they were soon 100 percent active.

He still maintains a similar rapport with the young people as he speaks to them and as they visit him frequently in his office.

Dependability is another of the outstanding characteristics of President Tanner. From his early youth, being the oldest child in the family, he learned to accept responsibility. As a young boy he drove a fourhorse team hauling grain. He learned to work hard and grew to manhood with the strength of character and independence so often resulting from a close relationship with nature and the out-of-doors and the constant struggle to win a livelihood from the soil.

He had a great love and respect for his pioneering parents. Nathan William and Edna Brown Tanner, who homesteaded in the area of Aetna, Canada, having gone there from Salt Lake City by covered wagon. His mother returned to Salt Lake City to give birth to her first child and then took him back to Canada when he was about six weeks old, where his first home was a dugout, a one-room home cut out of a hillside on the family's homestead.

In addition to being taught the value of work and the lessons of dependability and honesty, President Tanner recalls often the lessons of spirituality, love of the gospel, and appreciation for the powers of the holy priesthood that were learned well from these hardworking, deeply religious parents. He was permitted to participate in religious experiences in his home and witnessed the miraculous healing of the sick in answer to his youthful sincere and humble prayers.

On the foundation of these early teachings and experiences, he built a life of successful achievement. He rose to unusual heights of leadership and influence in the Province of Alberta. From the humble position of the town council in Cardston he rose politically to become speaker of the Alberta legislature during his first term, and to appointment of cabinet position as Minister of Lands and Mines for the province, which was later expanded to include the portfolios of Minerals and Forests.

He met the many challenges of conservation and legislation resulting from this high government responsibility, and then several years later he resigned his government position to become president of Merrill Petroleum, Ltd., moving his family to Calgary. Two years later he was induced to become head of the Trans-Canada Pipelines, Ltd., which was in the process of building a 2,200-mile-long pipeline across Canada from Alberta to Montreal. One of the considerations of his acceptance of this responsibility was that he remain in Calgary to establish his headquarters instead of going to Toronto as was intended. The reason was his recent appointment as president of the new Calgary Stake. Since the Church was always first in his life, he was not willing to leave his new assignment of spiritual responsibility. No matter where his frequent travels took him, he always returned to his stake responsibilities on weekends.

After the successful completion of the huge pipeline project, he resigned as the chairman of the company's board in 1958, and for the next two years he served as president of the Canadian Gas Association. He was holding these two important positions—president of the Calgary Stake and of the gas association, when called by President McKay to be a General Authority in 1960.

I have purposely not listed all of President Tanner's business, educational, and industrial achievements, because this is not intended to be a biography. I have included only enough to show the extent of his achievements in community, religious, financial, and industrial affairs to emphasize his qualifications for his present position in the First Presidency and the special leadership he is now giving under assignment of President Lee to the financial and business affairs of the Church.

I have always enjoyed being in the presence of President Tanner. He is unassuming, friendly, frank, and open and draws from a vast well of practical experience and down-to-earth wisdom and understanding. There has passed through my hands a little booklet entitled Tannerisms. It is a compilation of sayings of President Tanner that was compiled by his missionaries in England to remind them of the practical wisdom of their inspired leader. A few of these taken at random reveal the secret of success of President Tanner, for as he taught, so he has lived:

"Rivet your mind to the task at hand."

"If you want your dreams to come true—wake up."

"Discipline—To progress, to become what you want to be and to serve the Lord the way you should, requires that you discipline yourself constantly. Discipline yourself while in your youth so that it will become a habit that will sustain you in later years."

"Every problem is another step upwards. It is a privilege and opportunity to overcome these problems and move upward."

"If you want to be happy, do what the Lord asks you to do."

"The people who object to rules are people who don't obey them."

"Thinking big is thinking that which is important."

"You should take home the very best person your suit will hold."

"Don't depreciate yourself—the Lord will make you equal to your calling no matter who you are if you will put yourself in his hands."

"We have the spark of divinity that enables us to reach unlimited heights."

"The greatest thing that stops the Lord's work is our fear of what other people think."

"When we are in tune with the Lord we have great spiritual experiences."

"The world is divided into two groups—you and the rest of the world; and of the two you are the most important because it is you that works out your salvation, your exaltation, and your eternal life."

"If you follow the authorities' advice in the Church, you will never go wrong."

"Overcome fear by doing what you are afraid to do."

"Learn how to give up as much as you take."

"Have you ever seen a tomorrow? Today is the only day you have to work with."

"Be unselfish. Do not work for credit."

There are many more such statements of wisdom born of experience and understanding, but these are sufficient to reveal the humanness and sound practical approach to life of a great leader. I shall always be humbly grateful for the inspiration that directed President McKay to reach out into southern Alberta and bring into my life and into the important affairs of God's kingdom a man such as President Tanner. He is making and will continue to make, in his position next to President Lee, an outstanding contribution to the fast-growing kingdom of God. May the Lord continue to bless and inspire him for many years yet to come.
