Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

7

President Smith, A Man Of Powerful Testimony

No one I ever knew among the General Authorities of the Church in the past 50 years bore a more impressive and certain testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ than did President Joseph Fielding Smith, tenth president of the Church. It was a testimony always borne in simplicity and conviction. Its simplicity matched his life, as also did its humbleness of expression. It was a testimony rich in a heritage of priceless family tradition.

Of a surety it was his own testimony. The conviction that God lives and that he was engaged in the true and everlasting gospel of Jesus Christ as restored in the earth in our day was in his own heart. This knowledge influenced his whole life and manner of living. He lived the principles of the gospel in his life because he truly believed them to be the true pathway to exaltation. He fearlessly proclaimed them from the pulpit, far and wide, because of the divine admonition so to do as a "special witness of Jesus Christ to all the world."

President Smith was one of those noble men of God who were numbered among the Twelve Apostles when I began my work for the president and the First Presidency in 1922. He had already served one-fifth of the time he was to be a member of the Council of the Twelve—a total of 60 years.

That his call to the apostleship and eventually to the position of president of the Church was a

President Joseph Fielding Smith called as his counselors in the First Presidency in 1970 President Harold B. Lee, left, and President N. Eldon Tanner, right.

part of the Lord's plan for his earthly sojourn before he was born is amply evident. When he was 19 years of age, his uncle, John Smith, gave him a blessing in which he said, among other things:

It shall be thy duty to sit in counsel with thy brethren, and to preside among the people. It shall be thy duty also to travel much at home and abroad, by land and water, laboring in the ministry . . . and the blessings of the Lord shall rest upon thee. His spirit shall direct thy mind and give thee word and sentiment, that thou shalt confound the wisdom of the wicked and set at naught the counsels of the unjust.

As I think back, I recall that many years ago Sister Noah S. Pond, who was a relative of Joseph Fielding Smith, told me that on one occasion when she was a young girl and was at a party where Brother Smith was also present, a voice very distinctly told her that someday that young man would be the president of the Church. I recall that when she related this to me, I also had the burning assurance in my own soul that this would be the case. As I associated over the years with President Smith, learned to know the purity of his heart, heard his burning testimony, and felt the majesty of his soul, this assurance not only remained but grew stronger and stronger. I was certain that he was destined to become our prophet and president. I must confess, however, that when he became 92 years of age and then 93, I wondered if I was mistaken.

I rejoiced with the rest of those who knew and loved this humble, worthy leader when the call came in the first month of 1970, in the same year when, on July 19, he would observe his ninety-fourth birthday. Though he presided over the Church for only two and one-half years, they were eventful years; many great things were accomplished under his presidency as the horizons of the Church's influence and responsibility were pushed farther and farther on the earth, and important and far-reaching changes were wrought.

President Heber J. Grant told me of the conditions surrounding the selection and appointment of Joseph Fielding Smith to become a member of the Council of the Twelve in April 1910.

He said Joseph Fielding Smith, son of President Joseph F. Smith, who had nominated him for the position, was unanimously approved by the Council of the Twelve without reservation. Inasmuch as one of President Smith's sons, Hyrum M. Smith, was already a member of the Twelve at the time, and another son, David A. Smith, was a member of the Presiding Bishopric, there was considerable discussion among the people about this matter. Some claimed that Joseph was called by relationship rather than by revelation, but his life and his work verified that he was most certainly called of God to this high position.

President Smith was a vigorous and courageous defender of the truths of the gospel. His forthrightness in speaking and teaching and fearless denunciation of false doctrines expounded by men stemmed from his unexcelled knowledge of the word of the Lord in the holy scriptures. One visiting his office over the many years would invariably find him reading the scriptures or discussing the gospel with a visitor sitting across the desk from him, or he would be seated at his own typewriter composing answers to the many questions on doctrine and Church history received by him.

He said at a general conference soon after being named as president of the Church:

All my life I have studied the scriptures, and have sought the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord in coming to an understanding of their true meaning. The Lord has been good to me and I rejoice in the knowledge he has given me and in the privilege that has been and is mine to teach his saving truths. . . . What I have taught and written in the past I would teach and write again under the same circumstances.

He was perhaps the most prolific writer on Church doctrine, history, and policy that we have had. He was a great scripturalist and an able and qualified preacher of the gospel. He spoke at all times as one having authority and complete understanding. His writings and sermons stressed the basics of the gospel. His was most frequently a call to repentance. He did this with a seriousness and intensity that often brought criticism that he was brusque, severe, and abrupt in manner. It was always evident to him that preaching the gospel was a serious matter. But this apparent brusqueness covered up a very natural shyness, warmth, understanding, and sympathetic nature, always evident to those who knew him well.

I knew President Smith when he was a rather young man, and I listened to him almost with awe at various times in the council meetings discussing with others of the Council of the Twelve matters of doctrine about which there was a difference of opinion. His statements carried with them at all times the ring of authority and of truth. He was, in very deed, a tireless worker and a devout and thorough student and defender of the truth.

To me, President Smith was a man without guile. In his entire life he surely avoided the very appearance of evil. He hated evil, but he was truly and remarkably considerate of the sinner if he showed any signs of repentance. I have heard people who knew him well say that if they were to be judged for any transgression or error by any of the General Authorities here or in the hereafter and could have their choice, Joseph Fielding Smith would be the man they would choose. He was always fair and honest, above reproach in his own life, kindly, sympathetic, and loving. He was untiring in urging people to repent and live righteous lives.

His sense of humor was contagious and spontaneous, but his laughter was never boisterous. He felt that the gospel was a source of real happiness and joy to mankind, but he had some fundamental views on amusements, expressed once in his writings as follows:

I believe it is necessary for the Saints to have amusements, but of the proper kind. I do not believe the Lord intends and desires that we should pull a long face and look sanctimonious and hypocritical.

I think he expects us to be happy and of cheerful countenance, but he does not expect of us the indulgence in boisterous and unseemly conduct and the seeking after vain and foolish things which amuse and entertain the world. He has commanded us to the contrary for our own good and eternal welfare. We should not get the idea from scripture that the Lord is displeased with us when we laugh, when we have merriment, if it is on the right occasion.

President Smith possessed a modern, questing spirit and had a love of life right up to the end of his mortal existence. One writer said, "President Smith's life began in the 19th century and ended in the 20th century, and his outlook and insights grew with the times to span nearly 100 years of progress."

It was well known that President Smith was adopted by the Utah National Guard, becoming an "honorary brigadier general," and that in his adventurous spirit he delighted to fly as a passenger in a jet fighter plane. It is told of him that on one occasion when other appointments made it seem likely that he would miss a conference assignment on Sunday in the San Francisco area, a young jet pilot friend in the National Guard learned of this

The author, right, pictured with President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve, at laying of cornerstone of Oakland Temple. Elder O. Leslie Stone, chairman of the temple district, and later an Assistant to the Twelve, is at the left.

and told President Smith that his plane crew was lacking some air time for the month and that the trip to the Bay Area and back was about the distance they needed. President Smith accepted the invitation without hesitation, and the appointment was kept. President Smith even rounded up most of the plane's crew and took them with him to Sunday conference in San Francisco.

While he enjoyed relaxation and recreation, sports in particular, both as a fan and participant, his devotion to the basic principles that governed his life kept him from countenancing recreation on Sunday. He said as Church president, "The modern problem of our day that stands out in my mind is keeping the Sabbath day. When we fail to keep the Sabbath, we tend to neglect other principles and practices of the gospel."

I have always been keenly aware of President Smith's love of life. He had a zest for living and appreciation of the world about him. Perhaps one of the best expressions of his love of life was written by the late Elder Richard L. Evans, one of his colleagues among the General Authorities. He wrote:

We see Brother Smith as the father and grandfather and husband of many talents and of much devotion—as the father who attends the bedside of the sick, who performs early and late, at. all hours, many kindly services, who counsels with his own and others on personal problems, school problems, social problems, spiritual problems.

There are also those who know him as a confiding friend and counselor in his office. There are those who know him as a storyteller of impressive sincerity. And there are even some who know him as the `baby sitter', which he has been for his children and his children's children. There are those who know the quickness of his humor, the tenderness of his heart, the sympathy of his soul.

He loves life, and he has shown by his life that he loves truth, that he loves the Church, and that he loves his Father's children. And he is, in turn, . . . admired and respected . . . for his sterling qualities of character, and for himself.

President Smith assumed the presidency of the Church in January 1970 upon the death of his lifelong friend and associate, President McKay. The first opportunity he had to address the Church was at the April conference of that year. In his opening address he sounded what might well have been considered the platform of his period of leadership. He told the world at this conference:

We believe in the dignity and divine origin of man. Our faith is founded on the fact that God is our Father, and that we are his children, and that all men are brothers and sisters in the same eternal family.

As members of his family, we dwelt with him before the foundations of this earth were laid, and he ordained and established the plan of salvation whereby we gained the privilege of advancing and progressing as we are endeavoring to do.

The God we worship is a glorified Being in whom all power and perfection dwell, and he has created man in his own image and likeness, with those characteristics and attributes which he himself possesses.

And so our belief in the dignity and destiny of man is an essential part both of our theology and of our way of life. It is the very basis of our Lord's teaching that "the first and great commandment" is: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind", and the second great commandment is: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matt. 22:37-39)

Because God is our Father, we have a natural desire to love and serve him and to be worthy members of his family. We feel an obligation to do what he would have us do, to keep his commandments and live in harmony with the standards of his gospel—all of which are essential parts of true worship.

And because all men are brothers, we have a desire to love and bless and fellowship them—and this too we accept as an essential part of true worship.

Thus everything we do in the Church centers around the divine law that we are to love and worship God and serve our fellowmen.

In this initial address, President Smith, with quiet dignity and firm fearlessness, spoke out against some of the evils of the day, including social and cultural trends in immorality, and against the spirit of disruption typified in riots and campus upheavals. He expressed great concern for the spiritual and moral welfare of the youth everywhere, saying, "Morality, chastity, virtue, freedom from sin—these are and must be basic to our way of life, if we are to realize its full purpose."

At the time of his appointment, he selected two stalwarts as his counselors, Harold B. Lee as first counselor and Nathan Eldon Tanner as second counselor. At this same conference, which included the solemn assembly in which the First Presidency, Council of the Twelve, and Patriarch to the Church were sustained by special voting procedure, which follows the naming of a new Church president, President Smith paid special tribute to his counselors, saying:

When my father, President Joseph F. Smith, was called to serve as the sixth president of the Church, he expressed gratitude for his devoted counselors and declared his intention to counsel with them in all matters pertaining to the Church, that there might be a oneness and unity among the brethren and before the Lord.

Now may I say that I have complete confidence in my counselors. They are men of God who are guided by the inspiration of heaven. They enjoy the gift and power of the Holy Ghost and have no desires other than to further the interests of the Church and to bless our Father's children, and perfect the work of the Lord on earth.

President Harold B. Lee is a pillar of truth and righteousness, a true seer who has great spiritual strength and insight and wisdom, and whose knowledge and understanding of the Church and its needs is not surpassed by any man.

President N. Eldon Tanner is a man of like caliber, of perfect integrity, of devotion to truth, who is endowed with that administrative ability and spiritual capacity which enables him to lead and counsel and direct aright.

There are many, many other facets of the life of President Smith that I might continue to describe with profit, such as his great church service in genealogy and temple work, with which he was prominently identified since the beginning of the Genealogical Society, and his great service, since serving as a young returned missionary from Great Britain, to the Historical Department. He was named an assistant Church Historian in 1906 and in 1921 became Church Historian and Recorder, which position he held for half a century. No one has contributed greater service to compiling and writing Church history. His Essentials in Church History, published in 26 editions since its first printing in 1922, has become one of the most widely used volumes of Church literature outside the standard works. His 24 published books on Church history, doctrine, and scriptural interpretation established him as one of the most prolific writers of the Church.

I feel it important as I near the close of this chapter to write of the great heritage of this beloved leader. In his veins flowed the blood of martyrs for the kingdom of God. It was his grandfather, Hyrum Smith, and his great-uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith, who gave their lives to seal their testimonies of the divine restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ in this dispensation.

When the Lord revealed by revelation the divine call of Hyrum Smith to be a "prophet and a seer, and a revelator unto my Church, as well as my servant Joseph," he said, in D&C 124, verse 96, of the Doctrine and Covenants, that "my servant Hyrum may bear record of the things which I shall show unto him, that his name may be had in honorable remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever."

President Smith's father, Joseph F. Smith, was one of the sons of Hyrum Smith, and after surviving the hardships and persecutions of Nauvoo, he came as a boy of nine with his widowed mother across the plains to the Great Salt Lake Valley. This young boy who drove an ox team across the plains became the sixth president of the Church and one of the greatest exponents of the gospel of Jesus Christ in this dispensation.

The son, President Joseph Fielding Smith, who became the tenth president of the Church, had great love for his father. He often said that he learned the principles of the gospel and a great appreciation of the lives of Joseph and Hyrum Smith at the feet of a loving father. He ever remained true to his noble heritage.

During the closing years of his administration, President McKay called Joseph Fielding Smith to serve as one of his counselors, at the same time retaining his office of President of the Council of Twelve. Most of this time as we went to the Hotel Utah apartment of President McKay, it was my pleasure almost always to accompany President Smith from the Church Administration Building to the Hotel Utah. He would call for me or I would call for him.

Personally, I had a sincere love and affection for President Smith. I feel sure he reciprocated that love, for he expressed it to me on various occasions. He was the president of the Church, the mouthpiece of the Lord, when I was chosen in April 1970 to serve as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, and I know that he was a man of God who served under the spirit of inspiration and revelation. His life and service have been a constant assurance to me over the years that the Lord knows whom he wants to preside over his Church, and he never makes a mistake.
