Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

8

President Harold B. Lee—The Man of the Hour

As this book is published Harold B. Lee, eleventh president of the Church and the fifth Church leader under whom I have served, is completing his first year in this high office. Already the Church feels the impact and force of his dynamic and inspired leadership, of which I have been personally aware for the past 32 years.

President Lee is the first one I was privileged to observe come into the Council of the Twelve and then rise to the position of seniority where he became a year ago the senior apostle of the Church and the successor of Joseph Fielding Smith as "Prophet, Seer and Revelator, and President of the Church."

Privileged as I have been to serve as secretary to the Council of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve it is but natural to become well acquainted with these brethren, form personal opinions, and make my own judgments on their special abilities, qualifications and attitudes. Almost weekly I heard their reports, listened to their comments and discussions, and marveled at the expressions of their wise viewpoints on the wide variety of subjects that are considered.

On becoming the eleventh Church President in 1972, President Harold B. Lee called as his counselors, President N. Eldon Tanner, left, and President Marion G. Romney, right.

As I have thus listened to and observed President Lee over the years he has impressed me as being a man of great physical and moral courage. He has always had the courage of his convictions and is not fearful of expressing them. He has always demonstrated great faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ and in the leadership of the Church. He has a remarkable memory. His retention of things that have happened in the past, of actions taken, expressions made by the brethren is almost uncanny.

President Lee is a thorough student of the scriptures. He has a great knowledge and understanding of them, and his memory pertaining thereto is unusually remarkable and reliable.

As the title of this chapter expresses, I truly regard President Lee as the man of the hour where the Church and its present needs are concerned. For the Church it is a day of world growth with all its demanding challenges, and President Lee, with his abundant personal strength, wisdom, experience, and deep spirituality, is one who can meet the leadership requirements of the time.

Perhaps it is not so unusual to have me say this, for I have felt strongly over the past half century that the Lord always has the right man at the right time as the earthly head of his church, one whom he has prepared and proven through years of experience and who has come through trial and tribulation and is tested and not found wanting.

The Lord's preparation of his present-day prophet-leader has been thorough, covering the period of President Lee's lifetime. First he was born of humble circumstances, to parents who exemplified the highest and truest of Christian virtues, who were deeply spiritual and placed before all else the principles of the gospel and the work of the Lord.

President Lee was born in a small Idaho community—Clifton—and grew to manhood on the family farm where he assumed his full share of responsibilities while pursuing his education in the small country schools, one of which he later was to preside over as a young principal-teacher. This worthy son of the soil learned well the lessons of independence, thrift, hard work, fair play, and honesty which seem to go hand-in-hand with the rugged individualism of farm life, strong family ties, and religious upbringing.

Then came the missionary years which were crowned with successful activities and the beginnings of leadership training.

Further years, which included presiding over a stake of Zion, serving as a civic official and as a school principal in Salt Lake City, were to add to that preparation for greater things to come. During these years, President Lee was also developing his leadership qualities and organizational abilities. For the past several years President Lee has also had the rare privilege of close acquaintance and association of some of the nation's foremost industrial, financial, and business leaders. As he served with these men on boards of directors and national committees and, while making his own contributions in these assignments, the Church leader has acquired much from the wisdom, experience, and vision of these men. He has earned their respect for his own wisdom and sound principles, but even of more value he has given these men in high places of business and government a greater respect for our Church and its principles and tenets.

The Church today is reaping the rewards of President Lee's preparation and skills as an organizer. His practical wisdom is being applied in perfecting reorganizations and strengthening processes which make more effective the overall Church leadership in meeting the needs of a fast-growing, greatly expanding world organization. The calling of Regional Representatives of the Twelve and organizing the far-flung reaches of the Church into regions where every member of the Church, whether in wards of stakes or branches of missions, will have available to them the same programs and opportunities for leadership training, are programs which today are monuments to the vision and organizational abilities of President Lee.

I shall always be grateful for the blessed privilege I have had over the many years to associate with President Lee. This association has also often been outside my official capacity and has touched the social and intimate. We and our wives have belonged to a Church social and study club for many years which greatly increased our personal friendship.

In our study hours all of us have always had the highest regard for the opinions, explanations, gospel interpretations, and dissertations of this man of understanding. His answers to questions have always been enlightening, inspiring, and convincing, leaving no room for doubt or disagreement.

President Lee has always manifested a willingness to discuss gospel principles and at the time of this writing he accepts with inspired confidence the challenge of a doctrinal question or the discussion of religious philosophy. These become evident in his responses as he addresses youth groups of the Church or holds press interviews or conferences. He demonstrates his unusually broad understanding of the gospel as he still continues with an almost weekly question and answer session with companies of new missionaries. He meets them on Monday mornings in the Assembly Room of the Salt Lake Temple just minutes after they have completed their first endowment session and have questions concerning the temple ceremonies and other related points of doctrine. I hope the missionaries fully appreciate this sacred privilege of an intimate appearance before them of God's chosen servant and the inspired wisdom of his timely advice and counsel.

At the risk of sounding repetitious I say that President Lee has always manifested the qualities of true leadership. Those privileged to know him as have I, have marveled at his wisdom and at the strength of his testimony of the truth and validity of the work entrusted to the church of Jesus Christ, of which he is now the earthly head. We have been awed by his great courage, his remarkable memory, his unusual abilities, and particularly his deep spirituality and thorough dedication to the work of the Lord and Master.

President Lee not only has a great love for the Church, but manifests an abundance of love for his fellowmen. He has said and indicated in his own life that "the great power that will save us is the power of love." It is his philosophy that "there is always some way to a man's-heart." He is untiring in the service he renders and does not hesitate in helping those in need of his assistance and blessings. Many who have come to him for administration have had occasion to feel of his deep spirituality. He lives close to the Lord and the Master recognizes his ministrations in a remarkable way.

Out of President Lee's love for his fellowmen has developed an unusual spirit of unity and love among the authorities of the Church. All of us sense this as he has assumed leadership responsibilities and all of us have been brought more and more into his confidence. One of his innovations has been a monthly meeting in the Salt Lake Temple of all of the General Authorities of the Church. These meetings become heart-warming, spiritual experiences, and an opportunity for all to be instructed and counseled uniformly in the current programs, goals, and challenges of the Church.

I personally can testify to the great spirit of unity and oneness which exists among the presiding authorities and of their great love for the membership of the Church. No one among them manifests that love for the members everywhere more than does President Lee. He gave particular expression to such feelings in his closing remarks at the October, 1972 general conference, the first conference over which he presided as president of the Church. He said:

And so I come to you in these closing moments; and as one who is as a patriarch to the Church holding this position, I have a right to extend a blessing to you. I am not concerned about how much you remember in words of what has been said here. I am concerned about how it has made you feel. What are you going to take back with you when you go? What are you going to give to your members and to your wards and stakes and missions?

If you can catch the spirit of what has gone on here during this conference and can feel that great unity now, then take to them my love and blessing. Assure them that the presidency of the Church and the General Authorities really love the members of the Church everywhere, the lowly, the mighty, the educated, the uneducated, wherever they are. Will you please assure them of our love and our concern about them and their welfare.

There has come to me in these last few days a deepening and reassuring faith. I can't leave this conference without saying to you that I have a conviction that the Master hasn't been absent from us on these occasions. This is his Church. Where else would he rather be than right here at the headquarters of his Church? He isn't an absentee master; he is concerned about us. He wants us to follow where he leads. I know that he is a living reality, as is our Heavenly Father. I know it. I only hope that I can qualify for the high place to which he has called me and in which you have sustained me.

I know with all my soul that these sayings are true, and as a special witness I want you to know from the bottom of my heart that there is no shadow of doubt as to the genuineness of the work of the Lord in which we are engaged, the only name under heaven by which mankind can be saved.

My love goes out to my own family, to my associates, to all within the sound of my voice, even the sinners; I would wish that we would reach out to them, and those who are inactive, and bring them into the fold before it is too late.

God be with you. I have the same feeling as perhaps the Master had when he bid goodbye to the Nephites. He said he perceived that they were weak, but if they would go to their homes and ponder what he said, he would come again and instruct them on other occasions. So likewise, you cannot absorb all that you have heard and that we have talked about, but go to your homes now and remember what you can, and get the spirit of what has been done and said, and when you come again, or we come to you, we will try to help you further with your problems. (Ensign, January 1973, p. 134.)

In his lifetime President Lee has undergone trials that would severely try the faith of men of weaker fiber, but he has always kept close to the Lord, sought his help in prayer, and indicated an assurance on his part that all things work together for the good of him who serves the Lord. These trials have included the loss of loved ones. For their lives he has pleaded long and fervently, but in the end, he has found the courage and faith to accept the divine verdict that has taken them from him.

Attention of the First Presidency and others of the General Authorities was first attracted to the leadership and abilities of this man when he was a young stake president facing some of the greatest trials and problems of his life. At 31 years of age he had become the president of Pioneer Stake in Salt Lake City—the youngest stake president in the Church. This was in 1930, when this nation and the world were experiencing the great depression.

He presided over a stake whose membership consisted primarily of the families of wage earners, men who worked for railroads, smelters, refineries, factories. He found that more than half of his stake families were totally or partially unemployed.

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley of the Council of Twelve caught the full pathos of the young stake president's feelings and experiences in a recent article on President Lee appearing in the Ensign of November 1972:

Here was a challenge, a terrifying challenge for the young stake president. He worried, he wept, he prayed, as he saw men, once proud and prosperous, reduced through unemployment to a point where they could not feed their families. Then came inspiration to establish a storehouse where food and commodities could be gathered and from which they could be dispersed to the needy. Work projects were undertaken, not only to improve the community, but, more importantly, to afford men an opportunity to work for what they received. An old business building was demolished and the materials were used to construct a stake gymnasium to provide social and recreational facilities for the people.

Elder Hinckley went on to explain that other stakes were engaged in similar projects, and in April 1936, under the leadership of President Grant, these were coordinated to form what was first called the Church Security Program, now known as Welfare Services.

As secretary to the First Presidency I sat in most of the meetings pertaining to the organization of the welfare program, and was among the first to know of the call of the Pioneer Stake's young president to head the Churchwide program as its first managing director. For a quarter of a century President Lee served actively in the direction of this program. He can rightfully be recorded in Church history as the "father of the welfare program," though he would be the first to give others their full credit and recognize the sustaining powers and direction of the Almighty in formation of the vast program existing today throughout the Church.

True to his nature as a spiritual giant, with the overwhelming burden of responsibility for organizing the welfare program and implementing it squarely on his shoulders, President Lee turned first to the Lord for direction. On occasion he has related the following incident as an impressive spiritual experience:

I shall never forget April 20, 1935. I was a city commissioner in Salt Lake City. I was a stake president.

We had been wrestling with this question of welfare. There were few government work programs; the finances of the Church were low; we were told that there was not much that could be done so far as finances were concerned. And here we were with 4,800 of our 7,300 people who were wholly or partially dependent. We had only one place to go and that was to the Lord's program as set forth in the revelations.

It was from our humble efforts that the First Presidency, knowing that we had some experience, called me one morning, asking me if I would come to their office. It was Saturday morning; there were no appointments on their calendar, and for hours in that forenoon they talked with me and told me that they wanted me to resign from the city commission, and they would release me from being stake president; that they wished me now to head up the welfare movement to turn the tide from government relief, direct relief, and help to put the Church in a position where it could take care of its own needy.

After that morning I rode in my car (spring was just breaking) up to the head of City Creek Canyon, into what was then known as Rotary Park; and there, all by myself, I offered one of the most humble prayers of my life.

There I was, just a young man in my thirties. My experience had been limited. I was born in a little country town in Idaho. I had hardly been outside the boundaries of the states of Utah and Idaho. And now to put me in a position where I was to reach out to the entire membership of the Church, worldwide, was one of the most staggering contemplations that I could imagine. How could I do it with my limited understanding?

As I kneeled down, my petition was "What kind of an organiation should be set up in order to accomplish what the Presidency has assigned?" And there came to me on that glorious morning one of the most heavenly realizations of the power of the priesthood of God. It was as though something were saying in me, "There is no new organization necessary to take care of the needs of this people. All that is necessary is to put the priesthood of God to work. There is nothing else you need as a substitute."

As President Lee related this experience at a recent general priesthood meeting in the Tabernacle, to emphasize the applications of the priesthood, he made this additional comment:

With that understanding, then, and with the simple application of the power of the priesthood, the welfare program has gone forward now by leaps and bounds, overcoming obstacles that seemed impossible, until now it stands as a monument to the power of the priesthood, the like of which I could only glimpse in those days to which I have made reference.

That all was not easy in the task ahead, that there was rough sailing and obstacles, including opposition, to overcome, was indicated by President Lee a decade after this experience when, as a young apostle, he spoke of the welfare program during a series of weekly radio addresses. He said:

In harmony with that counsel [referring to Brigham Young's statement, "It is never any benefit to give out and out to man or woman, money, food, clothing or anything else, if they are able-bodied, and can work to earn what they need, when there is anything on earth for them to do,"] and obedient to the Lord's commandment, the Church in our day has developed a great movement known popularly or otherwise as the Church Welfare Program. Its purpose is to restore the unity, courage, faith and integrity of our pioneer fathers. We are like the ancient Israelites rebuilding the walls of our "fathers' sepulchres" that were broken down by the bondage of debt and public relief. In that task we have powerful aid from wonderful friends not members of the Church who have given us, as it were, "safe journey across their lands and permits to cut timber from the king's forests." Some of the governors of the land "were grieved when they heard that a man was come to seek the welfare of these modern children of Israel." The faithful among our membership have said, "Let us rise up and build and be independent from public gratitudes." So they strengthened their hands for the good work. We have had enemies who have scorned and ridiculed our efforts, and those who have argued that we ought to compromise our standards of independence. Others have resorted to threats of blackmail and still others have been hired to become traitors to their own people by the lure of worldly honors or public offices. These were the same methods of the enemy in the days of the Master when he was betrayed by his own people. They were likewise employed when the saints were driven from Nauvoo and when Johnston's Army came to Utah in 1857 because of false rumors that had been carried to the president of the United States by traitors and blackmailers. Success has always crowned the efforts of the children of the Lord whenever "the people had a mind to work." (Youth and the Church, 1970 ed., p. 204.)

As I relate these experiences and comments in the words of President Lee, I recall during the years that followed the many evidences that the First Presidency had full confidence in this young stake president whom they called upon to lead out in the welfare program. The First Presidency then consisted of President Heber J. Grant and his counselors, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and President David O. McKay. That their confidence was well placed and that successes followed the devoted, courageous and energetic leadership of this inspired man is evidenced not alone in the solid foundation upon which the program now operates, but also in the fact that six years later this same Presidency called Harold B. Lee to fill a vacancy in the Council of the Twelve, bringing him into the position where he could rise to his present leadership of the Church.

I feel I would be correct if I made the assertion that in yet another field of responsibility President Lee has made another contribution to the Church in every way as monumental as his welfare activities. This has been in inspired leadership of the correlation program of the past decade. Given assignment by the First Presidency and especially inspired by President McKay, President Lee became the general chairman of the Church Correlation Committee. Again I am certain that President Lee would want full credit to be given to all others who assumed responsibilities, contributed ideas, and worked dilligently to bring success to the program, but once again he arose to great heights in fulfilling an assignment which came from the Lord through inspired leaders.

The need for the program was fully impressed upon President Lee, not only by the First Presidency, but from his own observations and experiences in the multiple assignments and responsibilities that were his as a member of the Twelve.

Here again was an assignment which required courage, practical wisdom, spiritual discernment. It was no small task he and his committee confronted in bringing into full correlation the vast curriculums, programs, and objectives of the various priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations. The movement went forward to accomplish many changes and achieve remarkable successes. I am sure it was with deep satisfaction when, as president of the Church, he was privileged a few months ago to announce what was probably the final major correlation step, and the one which he felt held promise of being the most far-reaching and important of the entire program. It was bringing the youth and young adult programs of the priesthood and Mutual Improvement Associations into full correlation. Thus, under his leadership, was created the Melchizedek Priesthood Mutual Interest Association and the Aaronic Priesthood Mutual Improvement Association. These programs are meeting with unusual success as they are now being implemented in the wards and stakes and missions and branches of the Church everywhere.

President Lee still retains a close association with the Church correlation program as a father watches over and rejoices in the successes of his offspring.

My position over the many years that President Lee has been an apostle has given me unquestioned assurance that he was and is a leader of great magnitude among his associates and is one to whom they long have looked for advice, counsel, and leadership.

His remarks at an M Men-Gleaner summer fireside in the Tabernacle on August 13, 1972, little more than a month after becoming president, manifest his wonderful spirit, his humility, and realization of the responsibilities that were his at this early date in his administration. I quote the following excerpts from his talk on that occasion:

Pray for me, young people. I plead with you to pray for me and I promise you that I will try to so live, that the Lord can answer your prayers through me. I'll try my best to be your servant.

The past few weeks have been overwhelming weeks of experience. A number who have interviewed me have said, "You are the head of the Church, aren't you?" I have answered, "No, I'm not the head of the Church. The Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, is the head of this church. I happen to be the one who has been called to preside over his church at the present time here upon the earth."

The true Church is the most powerful weapon against evil philosophies and false ideas, President Lee explained to the young people. "There is no more powerful weapon that can be forged than the powerful teaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ."

Always a powerful champion for righteousness, President Lee also said on that occasion:

There are two things that, when fully applied, would save the world. The first is to put the full might of the priesthood of the kingdom of God to work, and the second is the powerful teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

No truly converted Latter-day Saint can be dishonest, or lie, or steal. That means that one may have a testimony as of today, but when he stoops to do things that contradict the laws of God, it is because he has lost his testimony and he has to fight to regain it. Testimony is not something that you have today and you keep always. Testimony is either going to grow to a brightness of certainty, or it is going to diminish to nothingness, depending on what we do about it. The testimony that we recapture day by day is the thing that saves us from pitfalls of the adversary. . . .

The Lord is nearer to us than we have any idea. Keep in mind that the Holy Ghost is one of the Godhead. The Lord said about his nearness: "Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me, ask and ye shall receive, knock and it shall be opened unto you." Now this means that the Lord is not keeping himself away from us; it is we who keep ourselves away from him.

As Latter-day Saints we should be aware of and always keep in mind the instructions given by the Lord relative to the president of the Church, whoever he may be, as contained in D&C 21 of the Doctrine and Covenants. These are the words of the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith on the day the Church was organized, April 6, 1830:

Behold there shall be a record kept among you, and in it thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the Church through the will of the Father, and the grace of your Lord, Jesus Christ.

Being inspired of the Holy Ghost to lay the foundation thereof, and to build it up unto the most holy faith.

Which Church was organized and established in the year of your Lord eighteen hundred and thirty, in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the month, which is called April.

Wherefore, meaning the Church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them and walking in holiness before me:

For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith;

For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory.

President Lee seeks always to walk by the Spirit. He lives in thought and deed to be worthy of the manifestations of the Spirit of the Lord, and that they come and he is receptive is evident on all sides. As an example, I cite from the account President Lee wrote recently of his visit to the Holy Land, including Jerusalem. He wrote, at the beginning of the article printed in the Ensign in April 1972:

As we approached the Holy Land we read together the harmony of the four gospel narratives so beautifully put together by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and then as we left our room each time, we prayed that the Lord would deafen our ears to what the guide said about historical places but would make us keenly sensitive to the spiritual feeling so that we would know by impression, rather than hearing, where the sacred spots were.

Then President Lee recounted some of his choice spiritual impressions, wherein in some places, "we felt none of the spiritual significance that we felt at other places."

I came away from some of these experiences never to feel the same again about the mission of our Lord and Savior. I had impressed upon me, as I have never had it impressed before, what it means to be a special witness. I say with all the conviction of my soul, I know that Jesus lives. I know that he was the very Son of God. And I know that in this church and in the gospel of Jesus Christ is to be found the way to salvation.

The Lord has called Harold B. Lee to lead the Church at this time, and he is the representative of the Lord, and I testify that he is entitled to and does receive revelation from God for the blessing and guidance of this people. He has but one thought and that is to know the mind and will of the Lord and to convey it to the Latter-day Saints. He is just as much a prophet of God as were his predecessors. Let us be submissive to counsel and advice from him whom the Lord has thus appointed. Strong men in the past, who have even stood in the presence of the Lord, have apostatized from this church because they were not willing to follow the living oracles, the leadership of the Church.

This is indeed a time when the Church and the world need strong and inspired leadership. President Lee is the man who is fully capable of and does provide that leadership. He is in very deed and by divine right the man of the hour.
