Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

9

Counselors to President Lee

I am certain that all of the General Authorities of the Church, with whom I am now numbered, as well as the membership of the Church generally were universally highly thrilled with the two counselors chosen by President Harold B. Lee.

Even though the appointments were not really unexpected, yet I feel I know President Lee well enough to be sure that he would not make such an important decision without knowing the mind and will of the Lord in the matter. It is satisfying to know that both President N. Eldon Tanner and President Marion G. Romney were so favored of the Lord that one would be invited to continue his faithful service in the First Presidency and that the other had so magnified himself in his apostolic calling that he could be summoned to higher responsibilities.

President Lee became the eleventh president of the Church on Friday, July 7, 1972, just a few days following the death of President Joseph Fielding Smith, whom he had served faithfully and loyally as a counselor for two and one-half years.

President Tanner had served along with President Lee as second counselor to President Smith, which position he also held with President McKay. He had so proven himself and his capabilities had been recognized by President Lee to the degree that he was appointed first counselor.

All of us had known of the long friendship and close association of President Lee with Elder Romney and of the remarkable parallel in their service to the Church. Their close association began when they were both named General Authorities the same day in April 1941. At that annual conference President Lee, who had been serving for several years as the managing director of the welfare program, was named to fill the vacancy in the Council of the Twelve occasioned by the death of Elder Melvin J. Ballard, a much-loved apostle.

That conference also saw the appointment of the first five Assistants to the Council of the Twelve, who are designated as "High Priests and Assistants to the Twelve." Elder Romney, then presiding over the Bonneville Stake, was the first of the five so named. The others were Elders Thomas E. McKay, Clifford E. Young, Alma Sonne, and Nicholas G. Smith.

It was in June of that year that Elder Romney was appointed as assistant managing director of the welfare program, and thus began the closest of associations between President Lee and President Romney as they united in a service to their fellowmen through this divine program, which lasted well beyond a score of years. President Lee had the privilege ten years later to welcome his close associate into the ranks of the Twelve Apostles, and together they have shared assignments and responsibilities in directing the priesthood and carrying forward the extensive and somewhat revolutionary program of Church correlation.

The three—President Lee, President Tanner, and President Romney—make as strong a First Presidency as any I have been privileged to associate with. There is among them a unity of purpose, a strength of leadership, and an inspired vision of the role of the Church as it expands worldwide. Theirs is a virile leadership with a dedication and devotion to highest purposes that is contagious throughout the Church. Under their inspired leadership the Church will move steadily forward in its accomplishments of the Lord's purposes.

I love these brethren and fully accept them as the Lord's anointed. To me they are in every way worthy of their high office, and I sustain them as prophets, seers, and revelators.

PRESIDENT MARION G. ROMNEY

Of all the brethren who have become members of the First Presidency since I entered my service in President Grant's office 50 years ago, there is none with whom I was better acquainted personally before the call to such high office came than Marion G. Romney.

President Marion G. Romney was the author's former bishop and stake president before becoming a General Authority in 1941.

One of the greatest blessings the Lord has granted me is the friendship of good and noble men. Each one has greatly influenced my life for good, not only because of what he has said or done or achieved, but because of what he is personally, his personal radiation. For years before he became a General Authority in 1941, I felt highly honored to count President Romney as one of my very dear friends. He had been first my bishop and then my stake president.

I have most sincerely admired him over the years as I have seen his devotion and growth in the Church as a leader and exemplar. He has grown in eminence in the Church day by day. Like so many others who have risen to such prominence in the Church, his beginnings in life were of a humble nature. He has reached prominence in his chosen law profession and in his church service largely through his own determination and strong desires to succeed. From his sturdy faithful parents and grandparents, who were among the pioneers to the Salt Lake Valley, he inherited not wealth and affluence, but love for his fellowmen, faith in God, the value of determined struggle and hard work even for his very existence, and a desire to know and achieve the true purposes of life. He was not unacquainted with hardship and some privation in his youthful years.

Marion G. Romney was born of American parentage in Mexico toward the end of the last century—September 1897, in Colonia Juarez, one of the Mormon colonies. His parents had gone to the Mexican colonies in 1885 when they and other Latter-day Saint families received permission from that government to settle in northern Mexico.

The youths who grew up in those Mexican colonies were well trained and highly disciplined in the ways of the gospel. They came from rugged stock, characterized by deep faith and a will to win in the battle of life against sometimes seemingly insurmountable odds. They were honest and independent, and their concern about the temporal and spiritual welfare of those about them built a strong spirit of brotherhood.

Out of this atmosphere came Marion G. Romney, while only a youth in his teens, yet entrusted with the responsibilities and work of a man. His family members were forced from Mexico during the exodus, and the father, George S. Romney, entrusted his 15-year-old eldest son, Marion, with the task of caring for the family during the trek northward, while the men of the colonies remained behind to look after as best they could their property and bring out as many cattle as possible.

President Romney has often told the story that when his family came out of Mexico, the wagon contained as provisions mostly sacks of beans. He explained that they had beans for breakfast and lunch, and dinner, and his mother knew as many ways to cook beans as anyone. As he grew to manhood, he was accustomed to privation and the necessity to work hard to eke out an existence.

After attending schools in Mexico and in Idaho, where his family eventually settled, President Romney had a strong desire to go on a mission. He had been working and had saved some money, and when he approached his father on the matter, it seemed even then an impossible achievement. He told his father that he had saved some money and asked if the father would go with him to the bank and sign a note for enough money for the mission. This was done, and the call came to go to the Australian Mission. When he returned from his mission, he obtained employment and repaid the loan.

It was this same independent spirit that helped him to provide for a family and at the same time gain an education and win a law degree. For a dozen years President Romney practiced law in Salt Lake City, holding prominent positions, and also served as a member of the legislature. His was a constant quest for knowledge, and with that knowledge came wisdom and understanding.

He was not left alone to achieve learning and wisdom. A grandfather, who was a patriarch, had laid his hands on Marion's head before he had reached his twelfth birthday. From this blessing, the young lad knew that if he remained worthy of it and met the requirements, he would have the Spirit and power of the Lord ever to be his guide. He was warned that if he was to achieve his desire to perform a great and mighty work, there was necessity to seek wisdom in the morning of his life. This has always been President Romney's goal—to achieve wisdom through his studies, through the experiences of life, and through knowing the word of the Lord and seeking his guiding hand.

One of his favorite and oft-repeated passages of scripture is found in the Book of Mormon and contains the instructions of the prophet Alma to his son, Helaman:

O, remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God.

Yea, and cry unto God for all thy support; yea, let all thy doings be unto the Lord, and whithersoever thou goest let it be in the Lord; yea, let thy thoughts be directed unto the Lord; yea, let the affections of thy heart be placed upon the Lord forever.

Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good; yea, when thou liest down at night lie down unto the Lord, that he may watch over you in your sleep; and when thou risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto God; and if ye do these things ye shall be lifted up at the last day. (Alma 37:35-37.)

Not only has President Romney preached sermons on this theme over the pulpit, but there have been many silent sermons, more impressive, more effectively taught by the example of his life. I have never known a man who was more spiritual than President Romney, nor one who lived closer to the Lord.

His prayers are always impressive. He approaches the Lord in full faith, with sincerity and a humility that testifies that here is one man who knows the Lord and that He directs the lives of men who faithfully serve him. There is always a warmth and earnestness about his prayers as if he is speaking directly to his Father in heaven and knows that the words coming from his heart are being heard.

Another outstanding quality of President Romney that has always impressed me so much is his thorough knowledge of the gospel, of the holy scriptures, and his ability to preach sincerely and interpret the word of the Lord. His brethren always listen intently and respectfully when he speaks of the doctrines of the kingdom.

Significant in his discussions of the gospel and of the problems and challenges facing the Church today is his keen intellect, his ability to analyze situations and present his decisions and conclusions with a clarity of thought that reveals a profound wisdom and understanding that must be heaven-inspired. Such knowledge can only be acquired by constant study and prayerful contemplation, both of which are integral parts of his own life. His sermons are given in a calm, deliberate, and contemplative manner, and on occasion it has been with great emotion that he has borne his sure witness of the divinity of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. There is never any question about the certainty of that testimony as it touches the hearts of his listeners.

I was inspired as I read recently in the Ensign a few quotations from President Romney's patriarchal blessings. They were in an article on his life by his beloved associate, President Spencer W. Kimball of the Council of the Twelve. Because they so effectively portray the man I know President Romney to be, I include the quotation from the blessing and the few words of comment by President Kimball that immediately followed. President Romney was told:

You will be held in high honor and respected by the people, beyond your comprehension; your counsel will be sought; your posterity will honor you; your faith will carry you through. Thy faith shall unfold to you the mysteries of the Kingdom, and things which are not understood or comprehended by people shall be made plain to you. Visions of the future shall be opened unto your mind and you shall see the handiwork of the Lord in all things, for faith similar to that enjoyed by the Brother of Jared shall be yours to enjoy. . . . Thou shalt be called to labor further in positions of trust and leadership in the interest of the Lord's work.

Then commented President Kimball:

To those of us who have known President Romney long and intimately, we have seen these long-promised blessings in fruition and have come to realize that the making of a Marion G. Romney was not the work of a few decades, but has been an eternal thing bringing together all the great qualifications and opportunities and tests, privileges, challenges, and times into a whole to prepare this great soul for the opportunities he now has. The name of Christ and his gospel is not merely mentioned but is ploughed deep in his consciousness.

Oh, how my heart echoes response to the words of this blessing and President Kimball's comments. I know them to be true.

I have previously commented elsewhere in this book on President Romney's long association with President Lee and President Moyle in launching and perfecting the great welfare program. It is not necessary to repeat, but only to say that he devoted many years of his time to this program, in which service he has visited most of the stakes and missions. He shall always be remembered for his untiring efforts and unlimited energy in carrying this message throughout the Church.

He is a builder. He learned the carpenter trade when a young man, and I can remember when he built his own home in Salt Lake City. But he has been primarily a builder of souls and has had an influence in building character and faith in thousands of people with whom he has come in contact in his positions of leadership and as a humble servant of the Master.

In his various appointments of leadership he has taken deep satisfaction in the opportunities that have come to him to forward the destiny of the Church. He is a man of great inspiration, and the Lord has magnified him in a marvelous way. To me it seems only natural and proper that President Lee, through the inspiration of the Lord, should call Marion G. Romney to be one of his counselors in the First Presidency.

From my own experience and association with the brethren over the years I have recognized that President Romney has had the love and confidence of his associates as. they have called upon him with assurance to carry the torch in many responsibilities pertaining to the work of the Lord. Along with his many other characteristics, he has a remarkable sense of honor. He is approachable and inspires confidence and love. It has always been a joy to be in his company to partake of his counsel, his humor, his wisdom and inspiration. He loves the people of the Church. He understands the divine principle of the brotherhood of man. He understands the purpose of life and devotes himself unselfishly to the service of others and is untiring in his efforts to share the gospel with others. The missionary program, worldwide, has felt his influence, especially in areas to which he has been assigned supervision.

He, like his beloved associates, understands and proclaims throughout the world the divine mission of our Lord and Savior, which is to assist in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man in the celestial kingdom of our Heavenly Father. Their mission is to all mankind.
