Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

10

Church Growth and the Passing of Time

Perhaps nowhere else does one recognize the changes wrought by the passing of time more than at the Church offices, especially when one spends so many years working with the brethren of the General Authorities. Men who were young when I commenced working there have become old with the passing of years and others who were older—and some who were not so old—have passed on, while others have taken their places. With these changes have come changes in methods also.

Of course, one cannot fail to recognize also that the years are making an indelible impression upon himself, and that while he is not advancing in seniority so far as quorum position is concerned, he too is changing with the passing of the years.

The Church never stands still, nor does it move backward at any time. It marches steadily on under the inspiration of the Lord, who is the author of our salvation and whose church it is. Fifty years ago there were about 89 or 90 stakes, whereas today, at the time of this writing, there are more than 600.

Fifty years ago two of us as secretaries—Sister Bertha Irvine and I—could take care of the clerical work for the First Presidency. Now it requires nine or ten secretaries and stenographers to serve in this capacity. A similar—in fact, a much greater—change has taken place in the finance, accounting, and other departments of the First Presidency's office, and the same is true of other departments.

Whereas years ago the branches in many missions particularly had to be satisfied to hold their meetings in lodge halls and other rented quarters, now the mission branches throughout the world are fast building their own edifices. Wards are multiplying so rapidly that buildings cannot be erected fast enough to accommodate them.

The faith and devotion of the people also are increasing. Some years ago about 15 to 20 percent of the members attended their sacrament meetings. Today the average is more than 38 percent. The same significant and commendable change has taken place in other areas of church activity, such as tithe-paying, ward teaching (now called home teaching), youth programs, priesthood activities, etc.

The Church has grown in numbers from 560,696 in 1922 to 3,217,790 at the close of 1972.

Divine Guidance

I have been thrilled and my faith greatly strengthened as I have had opportunity and occasion to read the records of the past, dating back to the time of Brigham Young, and to learn that the same divine spirit of inspiration and revelation is guiding the leaders of today that guided those of former times. The Church has not found it necessary at any time to say, "We made a mistake in those days and have learned better since." It is true that it has become necessary to discontinue, for the time being at least, certain practices—not because a mistake was made, but because people and laws made it necessary to do so; but the fundamentals of the gospel have never changed.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings.

And the iniquity and transgression of my holy laws and commandments I will visit upon the heads of those who hindered my work, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord God.

Therefore, for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those whom I commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in Jackson County, Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith the Lord your God.

And I will answer judgment, wrath, and indignation, wailing, and anguish, and gnashing of teeth upon their heads, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord your God.

And this I make an example unto you, for your consolation concerning all those who have been commanded to do a work and have been hindered by the hands of their enemies, and by oppression, saith the Lord your God. (D&C 124:49-53.)

I have found the Church to be the greatest service organization in the world. It has no selfish purposes. It has, however, fabulous rewards to offer to those who accept its divine teachings and live in accordance therewith, the ultimate reward being eternal life in the kingdom of our Heavenly Father. The reward of righteous living, in accordance with God's eternal plan, is not confined to the hereafter, for no man can follow the inspired teachings revealed for his guidance without obtaining a richer and happier life than one who fails to take advantage of these things.

The Lord has said, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Our Savior laid down his life that this might be accomplished, and he also gave us the plan whereby we can individually achieve this goal. It is the mission of the Church to serve as the vehicle by which this great work can be accomplished. From the very beginning of this dispensation men have been called and set apart by our Father's representatives here on earth to carry the glad tidings of great joy, the plan of life and salvation, to our Father's children wherever they can be reached. Sometimes men are called upon to make what appear to be sacrifices in order to serve as missionaries of the truth or to preside over missions in various parts of the world. However, no one who has given his life for this cause—devoting himself unselfishly and sincerely thereto—has failed to reap rewards that cannot be measured in dollars and cents. Money cannot buy salvation, but the true treasures are those which are laid up in heaven, where moth and rust do not currupt nor thieves break through and steal.

The brethren who stand at the head of the Church give unstintingly and unselfishly of their time and their talents, under the inspiration of the Lord, for the advancement of his kingdom upon the earth and for the blessing of others. Sometimes it would seem that they give of their strength to such an extent as might seem unwise so far as proper concern for their health would suggest. However, it is almost the general feeling among them that the work is so important and so urgent that they will serve with all their heart, might, mind, and strength so long as life permits, they being fully assured that they are engaged in the work of the Lord.

Observations Regarding Prayer

I am convinced that one can obtain a proper opinion of a person's character, and especially of his faith and sincerity, by listening to him pray. I am sure that no people pray more earnestly and more frequently than do the Latter-day Saints. As is undoubtedly the case with all religious people, our little children learn to call upon their Heavenly Father on bended knees and otherwise and are encouraged to take their turn in family prayer. I appreciate that it is not the words that are spoken, although the words betray the feelings of the heart, but it is the faith and sincerity that the Lord recognizes.

President Grant occasionally told of his experience as a child, living as he did just across the street from Brigham Young. Upon hearing the bell calling Brigham Young's family to prayer, he would run across the street, enter the president's home, and kneel with the family in their evening devotion. He has also told us that Brother Brigham talked to the Lord as though he were present, and that he, the boy, at times opened his eyes, expecting to see the Lord standing there.

Amulek, a brother of Alma, said regarding prayer:

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies.

Yea, cry unto him against the evil one, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your field, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. (Alma 34:20-27.)

It has been my good fortune to be with the brethren of the General Authorities when they have prayed while traveling with them, on trains, in hotel rooms, in the homes of the Saints, in meetings, and wherever we have been together. I have heard them express their innermost desires and gratitude to our Heavenly Father, and I have joined in their prayers and taken my turn with them. No one can tell me these humble prayers were not from the heart and that they did not ascend to the throne of our divine Father.

On literally thousands of occasions I have heard the brethren pray in council meetings, particularly in the temple, as on bended knees they have pleaded with the Lord for his blessings, and again as they have surrounded the holy altar. Those prayers have not been mere words, but humble petitions for our Father's blessings and guidance, and they have been answered in blessings upon the people individually and collectively and upon the Church. The spirit of prayer has been evidenced and the presence of our Lord has been recognized, although perhaps not visible.

I question that one can approach nearer to the throne of grace and feel more vividly the influence of the Holy Spirit than in the meetings of the First Presidency and the Twelve in the temple of the Lord. This is particularly true when these brethren are engaged in calling upon our Father, expressing gratitude for his blessings and humbly and sincerely appealing for his help and guidance. The power of the priesthood is manifest; God's highest authority upon earth is there present. As the servants of the Lord, they humble themselves before him, testifying in prayer of his goodness to them, pleading for his inspiration to assist them in their labors, and beseeching his blessings upon the Church, the world, and his children generally.

Such prayers include sincere expressions of gratitude for the gospel and for the Lord's blessings unto his servants. They plead for inspiration to attend each of them as they fulfill the duties assigned to them and appear before the people to give them the word of the Lord. They ask that the General Authorities as well as stake, ward, and quorum authorities set proper examples, not only before the members of the Church, but also before the people of the world. They seek aid for the missionaries and officers in organized wards and branches, that they may be led to the honest investigators and that the influence of Christ's church may be spread throughout the world for good. They pray for the whisperings of the Holy Spirit and the revelations of the Lord's mind and will, and for help so to live hourly and daily, constantly, that they may merit the Lord's guidance and be responsive to his inspiration and voice.

They pray for the priesthood everywhere, for men who hold it and are somewhat indifferent, that they may realize what it means to hold the priesthood, to be the Lord's representative in the assignments that may be given to them.

They call for blessings upon the president of the United States, his cabinet, the Congress and the judiciary, and all who hold government office; that the Lord will frustrate the plans of the enemy of freedom, and particularly those who are opposed to the gospel of Jesus Christ; that the influence of truth and righteousness may be strengthened.

Remembered always are the down-hearted and sad, that their worthiness may be increased, that they may receive the guidance and blessing of our Heavenly Father.

They pray for the sick—those who are suffering and distressed; for the world, that war might be averted, if it is in harmony with the purpose of the Lord; that people may trust one another more than they have here-tofore done, and eventually accept those principles which will bring peace on earth and goodwill toward men.

They plead for strength to live in such a way that they may never be left a moment without the guiding and prompting influence of our Heavenly Father.

In their prayers they make covenant with the Lord that they will keep his commandments and that they will do their duty daily in order that they may gain strength and thus become worthy of the Lord's blessing and guidance.

His Servants Magnified

It has always been an added source of testimony to me to witness the growth, spiritual and mental, of men who have been called to positions of authority in the Church, particularly men who have been selected to fill vacancies in the councils of the General Authorities.

On one occasion, after President Heber J. Grant had delivered an address on the sugar beet industry before the National Chemurgic Conference in Detroit, Michigan, I expressed to him my astonishment that his address had received such a great ovation from those present, they being among the outstanding scientists, educators, and industrialists of the nation. The remarks of no one of all the other speakers had received the reception that President Grant's had received, and he was the only one who was invited to speak a second time at this conference, the second occasion being the banquet given the guests the following evening.

In answer to my comment on the subject, President Grant made the remark, the truth of which I have subsequently recognized perhaps more than I had theretofore done, "Joseph, one of the great testimonies of the truth of this work is that the Lord magnifies his servants."

As men have been called through the inspiration of the Lord to positions of responsibility in this church, if they have magnified their callings and subjected themselves to the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord—and it has been my experience that this has generally been the case—it is my testimony that they have grown in spiritual and mental stature in a remarkable way, in a miraculous way, in a manner far beyond the possibilities of human attainment.

These men have never become commonplace to me—I have never looked upon them as merely remarkable men. To me they have always been servants of the living God, honored by him; and the Twelve are special witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ. It has been my great fortune and privilege to be as near to them—if not more so—as other men, and yet I have never looked upon them with anything other than a spirit of reverence and love. I have not found among them any that I have not loved and admired. I testify to these things because I know from my experience with these men that such conditions just could not be if the Church were false or were merely a sect or denomination led by men of good intentions but not recognized of the Lord. Our Master, the Redeemer and Savior of mankind, is our leader. It is his church, and his inspiration and revelation that guide and direct those who have been called to represent him. And yet, with it all, they are human and subject to human frailties.

Each one has made his individual impression for good upon my life, and each has been very different from the others. No two of these brethren have been alike. As a matter of fact, no two individuals are alike. The Lord in his great wisdom has prepared these men for the service they have performed and are rendering. I am satisfied that their training is not limited to this world, but that they were selected and ordained before they came here for the work they were to perform.

In my discussion of these brethren, I have selected only a certain few whose lives and service are merely illustrative of all who have been called to serve as special witnesses of the Lord in this day and age. The Lord has magnified them and blessed them with special talents and abilities for the particular time in which they served, and he has inspired them by his Holy Spirit. I have found them different in a sense from other men—they have a keen sense of duty, and they are attended by a spirit superior to that which other men possess.

Notwithstanding my nearness to them over the years and their expressed confidence in and love for me, they never impress me as being other than special servants of the Lord, inspired by him, and men who carry with them an influence and power peculiar to their high callings. I have-never felt inclined to speak lightly or unkindly of any one of these men, recognizing as I do that the Lord has honored them with this special calling. To me they are apostles of the Lord and have the same power and authority as did the apostles of the Master in the meridian of time. Then too, each is a potential president of the Church, the mouthpiece of the Lord to this people. Experience has definitely indicated to me time and time again that they are prophets of the Lord and that they serve under his inspiration and guidance in the work they are called upon to do, in choosing men to preside over stakes, in selecting patriarchs, in pronouncing blessings when setting apart men and women for general positions and also for positions of responsibility and leadership in stakes, wards, and missions, and in all other activities.

Consideration for the Repentant Transgressor

It has been my experience that the brethren of the General Authorities are men of judgment, or discretion, and of compassionate consideration. These men—and I speak particularly of the brethren of the First Presidency—are not fanatical or narrow-minded; they have perhaps more concern and consideration for the sinner, if he shows a disposition to repent—and they are always anxious that he does repent—than have the great majority of the members of the Church. Like the Savior, they are not inclined to condemn harshly those who have made mistakes and show by their conduct that they have sincerely repented. They have a love for mankind, and would that all might hear and accept the truth and thus obtain the joy that comes into the hearts of faithful Latter-day Saints in the knowledge of the truth of the restored gospel of Chirst.

As President Brigham Young once said, they recognize that the gospel is merely the truth—

—That it includes all truth wherever found, in all the words of God and man, and that man to be truly educated must know of things on the earth, above the earth, and under the earth; that all men are subject to error and have ample room for improvement; that one of the great principles of the Gospel is repentance; that we are all our Heavenly Father's children; and that he is pleased when his erring children turn from their evil ways and seek to serve him. We are all as little children in a certain sense, and we grow by overcoming, by humbling ourselves before the Lord, acknowledging our faults to him and to his chosen representatives, turning away from sin, thus learning the true secret of growth by attempting to live in accordance with the true and high principles of joy and happiness that our Father has given us in his glorious Gospel.

These principles were so beautifully exemplified in the life and teachings of President George Albert Smith, who sincerely looked upon all mankind as "our Father's children"—members of the Church and nonmembers alike—and who so generously and wholeheartedly sought to help people of every faith and of no faith with whom he came in contact, to improve their lives, that they might be made partakers of the blessings that our Heavenly Father has vouchsafed unto all who will render obedience to him.

The words of Nephi in the fourth chapter of Second Nephi in the Book of Mormon have had an influence on my life, and I know the thoughts therein expressed are true: "Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, God will give me if I ask not amiss."

I thank the Lord for faith; and like Nephi of old, I know that the Lord will give me if I do not ask amiss.

Repentance

I have learned over the years that the great Scottish poet Robert Burns understood human nature well when he said, "Man's inhumanity to man makes countless millions mourn." On the other hand, man's kindness to man, especially when it comes from the heart, brings happiness to the soul of many a disheartened and discouraged individual. It is deeply regrettable that everyone cannot learn and put into practice the teachings of the Master that we should love our neighbor as ourselves.

Experience has demonstrated very clearly and definitely that the secret to happiness lies in service to others, in kindness and love extended to others, and especially to those who are in distress, discouraged, and disheartened, whether that condition is brought about by sin or by misfortune. My soul has often been made to rejoice and I have seen people touched by the spirit of kindness and forgiveness extended by the brethren to whom they have brought their problems.

On the other hand, it has also been necessary that the requirements of justice should be measured out to those who have fallen from the path of rectitude, in their own interests as well as the interest of the Church. It is always easier to grant than refuse the appeal for forgiveness of the individual who has transgressed when that pleading comes with tears. It requires a firm determination and the guidance of the Holy Spirit to insist upon justice rather than undue mercy. Justice must have its rightful portion also if the scales are to be fairly balanced, even though at times unhappiness, sorrow, and remorse must punish the transgressor. One gains strength to overcome evil and to live righteously by forsaking his evil tendencies, and if after being forgiven he resorts to his former impure practices, his condition is not improved but made worse. The Lord has said: "By this ye may know that a man has forsaken his sins, behold he will confess and forsake them."

Forsaking is an important element in repentance and generally requires a period of some considerable time to make sure that the individual can live righteously thereafter, notwithstanding he may feel in his heart that he has fully repented.

When one has truly overcome his transgression and has proven his ability to live righteously in the future, joy and happiness come into the soul and a peace that passeth understanding. Repentance, of course, is far more than sorrow for the sin, although that is a necessary element. One must do all in his power to make amends for the wrong he has done and manifest by a righteous life that he has truly forsaken his sin.

One principle that has made an indelible impression upon me, and one that I too have striven to exemplify in my life, is that we should not form opinions blindly nor should we find fault with our fellowmen, but should always seek for the good in one another. My brethren have taught me well that man is God's greatest creation, and it should be our constant endeavor to improve ourselves, that our own lives may be a light to others and that by following that light, they may be led to glorify our Father who is in heaven.

Employees

No treatise of this kind would be complete without a reference to my fellow employees. These men and women have partaken of the spirit of the brethren of the authorities, and those whom I have known intimately over the years were and are as noble and fine as human beings can be. I shall mention only a very few who have passed from this life. An entire volume could be written about these faithful people, those now living and those who have gone to their reward.

Outstanding in my memory is Arthur Winter, who, while not carrying the title, was financial secretary, or treasurer, of the Church. He had commenced his services in the Church offices when a very young man, having come here as an immigrant boy from England. There just are no better men, in my judgment, than was Arthur Winter—a man of great wisdom and ability whom the First Presidency trusted implicitly, and who never betrayed that trust in the slightest. If when I pass on I can have the friendship and association of Arthur Winter and men like him, I shall feel that I have not lived in vain. He did not aspire to position, he did not seek the plaudits of men, but in my judgment he was worthy of the association of our Father's choicest servants, and I am sure he has earned the encomium of his Lord, "Well done, good and faithful servant; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."

Space will not permit mentioning all of the wonderful persons with whom I have served over the years. They are many. I cannot, however, fail to mention Bertha Irvine, with whom I worked so many years, and who commenced working for the First Presidency in the days of President Wilford Woodruff. She performed an outstanding service to the brethren. She gave me every consideration when as a young man I became the president's secretary and secretary to the First Presidency. We worked together over the years.

Sister Agnes Rutherford, an old Scottish lady who dusted the First Presidency's offices, was a humble, sweet, and high-class lady. She loved to be in the offices of the Church leadership and to counsel with the office help. I am not prepared to say what her reward in the hereafter will be, but I am assured in my own thinking that wherever she is she will be thinking of and trying to help others. Her kindly solicitude and friendliness were worthy of a true Saint, and I am certain the Lord will reward her accordingly.

Henry O'Gorman spent several years as guide in the Church Office Building. He was a genuine English gentlemen who had been assistant postmaster in Liverpool before coming to Utah. Sweet memories crowd upon me as I think of that wonderful gentleman, for gentleman and Saint he was in the truest sense. Seldom, if ever, did a morning pass that Brother O'Gorman did not come into my office, shake hands with me, and express his love for me. When I asked him how he was, his ready answer was, "If I can only be faithful to the end!" I often remarked, "Brother O'Gorman, there should be no question in your mind on that score." He would reply, "One never knows." Needless to say, Brother O'Gorman did prove faithful to the end, and the Lord made known to him when his passing was to be, and he was prepared to go and welcomed the call when it came.

Carl A. Carlson was employed in the accounting department and served the Church for over 50 years. When I commenced working for the president, I frequently had some spare time, which I occupied working on the general books of the Church, assisting Brother Carlson. No man could have been kinder to me. My slightest desire was quickly fulfilled by him in the matter of office supplies, equipment, or whatever it might be. He loved the brethren, and his greatest joy was in serving them.

I cannot say that I have known a man who lived a perfect life. If I have known such, I am unaware of it, and if there be or has been such a person, save only the Savior of the world, he, I am sure, would be the last to make any such claim; for were he to do so, it would be but an indication of imperfection.
