Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known ( 1973)

11

What a Wonderful Work!

The strong testimonies borne by the brethren over the years impress me with the fact that it is not possible for us to pay enough attention to the importance of having an individual testimony of the gospel. Every Latter-day Saint needs to know for himself that this is the work of the Lord, and that this is the only true church of Christ. Yes, other churches have much truth and much that is good, and I am sure many are doing a great work as far as they go. But there is only one true church that is recognized of God as his church. Everyone should know, as I know with all my heart and soul, that the Lord has conferred his divine authority upon men in our day.

What a wonderful work this is when we analyze it—that we have the authority from God to act in his name, that we have the authority in his church to seal on earth and it will be sealed in heaven. No other church claims that authority. We have the responsibility and the authority of doing the work for our kindred dead, that they too may enjoy the blessings of eternal life. There is nothing selfish about the nature of work in this church. We are not working "just for me and my wife and my son John." We are working for them and all our ancestral dead—yea—but we are working also for all of our Father's children.

". . . this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man," all men—and this is our work and glory too, I am sure.

As a church we seem to have reached a point where we do not have the severe persecution we once had, but that does not mean that the evil one is not alert. He may not use the same tactics, but one of the most difficult trials we have to face is prosperity. We must have a testimony of the truth of the gospel. We must live near to the Lord if we expect to have his favor, if we expect to obtain his blessings. We must have in our hearts a knowledge of the truth of this work. The Lord said that he who heard his sayings and complied with them was like the wise man who built his house upon a rock.

The great commandment is that we shall love God, and the second is like unto it, that we shall love our neighbor as ourselves. If the love of God has taken root in our hearts, and if we are demonstrating that love in our lives, it will bear fruit and will cause us to come to a knowledge of God, whom to know is life eternal.

There are many people who profess to believe in Christ, the Redeemer of the world, who do not believe in that vital principle of the gospel, the principle by which Peter knew that Jesus was the Christ—the principle of revelation. They have said in their hearts that God does not reveal himself from heaven. Many people would be willing to accept the Mormon plan if they could eliminate the Joseph Smith story. But, of course, without that great manifestation there would be no church. We would be no different from any other church or organization, and without the principle of continuous revelation we would be in much the same condition. Without that principle the church of Christ cannot exist upon the earth. Not only does this principle pertain unto the leaders of the Church, but it pertains to all the sons and daughters of God.

It devolves upon us to gain the favor of God. Too frequently men and women are seeking the favor of their fellow creatures, and if they can obtain that to the extent that they will be exalted in the eyes of men, that is their ambition. Too frequently we are seeking the wealth of the world, thinking thereby to gain the favor of men. Yes, we may gain man's favor thereby but we cannot obtain the favor of God by devoting our thought and energy to the things of this world and neglecting the things of the spirit. We must be willing to give all that we have, and I cannot help but believe that someday when the books are opened and we stand before the great Judge, we shall find that some who have not made great impressions perhaps upon us, but who have been sincere and honest and have striven hard to live humbly before the Lord, will receive the greater rewards.

These men with whom I have been associated, and whose lives have been more or less an open book to the world, were men who had in their hearts first the kingdom of God, even though it meant not only the sacrifice of earthly wealth and the acclaim of their fellowmen, but ofttimes accepting and fulfilling assignments that were anything but desirable, that required a separation from their loved ones for long periods of time, and that involved the forsaking of ambitions and the endurance of what otherwise would have been very unhappy experiences. If one is to be a true follower of the Master, he must be willing to forsake all in order to do the Lord's work. He may have the peace of which the Master spoke shortly before leaving his disciples: "My peace I give unto you, not as the world giveth give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid."

He may also have the assurance that the Lord will fulfill his promises, that he will leave him not alone, and that "whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name that is right, believing that ye shall receive, it shall be given unto you."

In perhaps the most glorious revelation given by the Lord to man regarding the exercise of the priesthood we read:

Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—

That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man. (D&C 121:34-37.)

So far as it is possible for men to conform their conduct to the law laid down by the Lord in the above scripture, these brethren of the General Authorities have endeavored to eliminate from their dispositions and from their conduct "pride, vain ambition," and they have avoided the exercise of "control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness."

As mentioned at various times in this book, these men are not, nor do they claim to be, perfect men. They have been and are men of great ability, men of experience, and men of inspiration. But their ambitions and desires have been the welfare and progress of the Church, the righteous living of the members, and the strengthening of their testimonies; and their desire and supplication have been and are that the powers of heaven might be subject only to their righteous desires. If conditions otherwise have prevailed, I am sure that the Spirit of the Lord was not pleased. My experience has been such that I know of no such cases, although it is possible that in individual instances such may have occurred.

It is not only the General Authorities of the Church, but the priesthood generally, who should keep in mind the further instruction given:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever. (D&C 121:41-46.)

If all men in the Church could and would place themselves in harmony with this instruction given by the Lord, the time could not be far distant when the Savior would come again and the reign of peace would prevail upon the earth. Certainly that should be our desire; that should be our goal; and that time will eventually come. It contemplates the love of God and the love of neighbor, of fellowman. It contemplates a correct understanding of the priesthood and a determination to exercise it for the benefit and blessing of mankind. By so doing, our faith in God and his love for us will grow and increase. Our lives will be subject to the direction and guidance of the Holy Ghost. The priesthood will become what it was intended to become, the power of God given to man to serve righteously among his children.

God Moves in a Mysterious Way

I bear personal witness that God moves in a mysterious way, "his wonders to perform. He plants his footsteps on the sea and rides upon the storm."

In his book Stories of Latter-day Saints Hymns George D. Pyper gives the following regarding William Cowper's writing of the hymn "God moves in a Mysterious Way."

In the histories, biographies and memoirs of William Cowper, examined by the writer, there is nothing to indicate just when "God Moves in a Mysterious Way" was written. One story related that "once upon a time" when he felt his weakness coming on, he yielded to an impulse to drown himself in the river Thames; that he called a cab and asked the cabman to drive him to the river; that a heavy London fog suddenly gathered and the cabman lost his way; that after driving aimlessly round and round for some time, the cabman refused to continue and ordered his passenger out; that Cowper stumbled to the walk and found himself in front of his own door; that when he recovered his senses, he sat down and wrote "God Moves in a Mysterious Way His Wonders to Perform." There is some justification for the survival of this story. One writer said: He "had an intense delusion that it was the Divine will for him . . . to drown himself, but the driver of the vehicle missed his way and Cowper was diverted from his purpose." Then, too, Cowper's own memoirs state that he was driven to the Thames with suicidal intent but was prevented from carrying out his purpose by the appearance of a wharf porter sitting on a pile of goods.

However, there is no doubt that the hymn was written in view of his own dreadful experiences, and the hand of Providence is plainly seen in preventing the consummation of an evil design. The hymn was included in the Olvey Hymns . . . which were published in 1787.

God Moves in a Mysterious Way God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform; He plants his footsteps in the sea And rides upon the storm. Deep in unfathomable mines Of never failing skill He treasures up his bright designs And works his sov'reign will. Ye fearful Saints, fresh courage take; The clouds ye so much dread Are big with mercy and shall break In blessings on your head. Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, But trust him for his grace; Behind a frowning providence He hides a smiling face. His purposes will ripen fast, Unfolding every hour; The bud may have a bitter taste, But sweet will be the flower. Blind unbelief is sure to err And scan his works in vain; God is his own interpreter, And he will make it plain.

It was the favorite song of Abraham Lincoln as well as of President Wilford Woodruff. When Brother Woodruff was president of the Church, at his request the council sang it more than any other.

We are finite; our Heavenly Father in infinite. His ways are not man's ways, and in many respects man would not understand them if they were made known to him. The apostle Paul said, "All things work together for the good of him that serves the Lord."

And in our day the Lord has said, "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another." (D&C 90:24.)

The prophet Lehi, in speaking to his son Jacob (2 1 Ne. 2), gave a discourse on the need for opposition in all things. He mentioned to him that he, Jacob, had suffered much sorrow and much affliction because of the rudeness of his brethren. Yet Lehi said, "Nevertheless, Jacob, my first-born in the wilderness, thou knowest the greatness of God, and he shall consecrate thine afflictions for thy gain."

He further said:

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad.

And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there is no righteousness. . . . And if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not there is no God. And if there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore, all things must have vanished away.

And now, my sons, I speak unto you these things for your profit and learning; for there is a God, and he hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are, both things to act and things to be acted upon.

And to bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man, after he had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created, it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter.

Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself, Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other. . . .

But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy.

And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given.

Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself. (2 Ne. 2:11, 13-17, 24-27.)

Man naturally would prefer that misfortune, sickness, failure, and such things should pass him by, but if we had not trials or troubles, we could have no development, no progress, no faith, no salvation or exaltation.

The tree that stands to the windward side in the forest unprotected from other trees becomes firm and strong, and its roots sink deep into the soil that the tree may meet the onslaughts of the storm.

The man who has known no sickness or trouble cannot sympathize properly with the one who has met such trials. Severe sickness may be the ground from which the seed of faith sprouts and grows. Such things normally humble the person so suffering and draw him close to God, upon whom frequently he has no other reliance. What a joy comes into the heart of the individual who has proven to his own satisfaction that the Lord is with him through his Holy Spirit.

When the Lord decided to build an earth whereon we might dwell, he said, "And we will prove them herewith to see if they will do all things which the Lord their God shall command them." It was not merely to prove us, however, but that through the experiences of life, the proving yes, we might be made strong, we might be able to overcome and thereby become more and more like our Father, the Father of our spirits, that we might be "added upon," that we might be prepared to take on the responsibilities and blessings that would come through immortality and eternal life in our Father's kingdom.

This is a wonderful work. Those who have led this church have been blessed with the gift of faith and the inspiration and guidance of the Holy Spirit. Were this not the case, the Church could not have made the progress it has made. It is of the utmost importance that we learn to recognize the promptings of the Holy Spirit, and this, in a large measure, the leaders of the Church have learned in their positions, because they have had to rely upon the Lord and they have exercised faith in the Lord in the guidance of his Spirit. Were this not a fact, the Church could not have made the progress it has made. The work of the Lord would not have unfolded as it has done, and our Father's purposes would not have been accomplished. Mistakes would have been made very often, resulting in embarrassment and confusion to the Church.

The heavens were opened in the beginning of this dispensation through the faith of a boy. He asked in faith, "nothing wavering," and the Father and the Son appeared to him in answer to his humble but sincere prayer. Other heavenly messengers later came and gave their messages in response to the same power. The foundation of the Church was laid, and its principles and doctrines were given in response to the same kind of faith. The Lord is today making known his purposes in response to the faith of those who are called upon to preside over the Church and its destinies. This is the Lord's church; he is at the helm. The work of this dispensation, the dispensation of the fulness of times, must go on. The time is short, and if the work of this dispensation is to be accomplished, the Master, the Redeemer and Savior, must make known his will to his representatives here upon the earth. The work is speeding up and must of necessity do so in order that it may be completed in the desired time.

How important it is that every individual member should through prayer and faith obtain an unfaltering testimony of the gospel and so conduct his life that faith may grow stronger day by day, doing nothing to displease the Lord, that his Spirit may not withdraw from him. If this were an accomplished fact, the knowledge of God would grow in the earth and the time of the Lord's second coming would be greatly hastened. As stated by Moroni, quoting the words of Christ, "If ye have faith, you can do all things which are expedient unto me."
