Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Preface

Happy is the man who finds himself doing that in which his heart delights and which harmonizes with his natural ability and desires; but unhappy is he who through force of circumstances, over which he has no control, is compelled through his sojourn in mortality, to do something that is in opposition to his nature and ability. A man who enjoys his work finds life sweet and pleasant and every moment of it gives him joy and satisfaction, while the man who is forced to do things which he dislikes finds life a drudgery indeed.

With this conviction in mind I think that I, after sojourning in mortality ninety years, have a right to express an opinion.

Being of foreign birth, and having to learn a new language, and study the manners and habits of the people inhabiting my adopted country, I was handicapped in various ways early in life, and circumstances compelled me to perform labor that was distasteful to me; but when, finally, through the blessings of God and the exercise of my own will-power, associated with hard work, I "broke the ice" I found that my handicap counted more to my advantage than disadvantage. It qualified me to become a historian with the privilege of recording the actions of a God-fearing people, including many nationalities and races-a people destined to present the restored gospel of Jesus Christ to an unbelieving world.

I did not realize at first why I found myself doing the work, which a kind Providence seemingly had destined me to do, yet that work has filled my soul with joy and satisfaction.

I have become convinced that historians, like poets, are born as such, and that this enables them to make their life's labor successful.

With this belief I can think of the beginning when God stood in the midst of the intelligences or His spiritual children and found among them many who were noble and good. So, in connection with the creating of an earth on which to place His offspring, God chose these noble spirits as leaders and rulers. Abraham, who in mortality became the Father of the Faithful, was chosen as one of them; Jeremiah also was chosen to be a prophet before he was born, and many others, undoubtedly, were chosen for different positions on the earth. I am impressed with the thought that certain spirits were selected to come down and mingle with these leaders and rulers in mortality as poets and historians to record the work to be done by these great and noble ones.

My dreams and imaginations carry me still further, and I can conceive of the Lord, who saw and understood the workmanship of His hands from beginning to end, knowing beforehand what his sons and daughters would do. He, no doubt, planned the different gospel dispensations which from the beginning have connected the heavens with the earth, and in possession of that knowledge He chose Joseph Smith as an instrument in His hands to restore unto the earth the dispensation of the fulness of times, in which the true plan of salvation should be proclaimed to every nation, kindred, tongue and people. A special message was sent to the House of Israel, which is mixed with the gentiles in different lands and climes and speaking different languages in various parts of the world.

In the course of time one of God's chosen Apostles, in the last days, was called to open the mission among the Scandinavians in northern Europe, and I was chosen and sent down to record the doings of that servant of God, Erastus Snow, and the thousands of missionaries who followed in his wake, in founding the most successful mission established by the Church among a non-speaking English people. Is this a dream only, or is it a fact?

When I was filling my first mission to Scandinavia, in 1873-1875, I found myself writing a history of the conference in which I was laboring. This, later, prompted me to write the history of the Scandinavian Mission, and still later to write the histories of all the missions of the Church and the organized stakes of Zion, with their wards and branches.

My original thought of writing an introduction to the Encyclopedic History of the Church was to preface it with a brief general history, but realizing that several such general histories have already been written and published, it has been suggested by the Church authorities that the "Essentials of Church History", written and published by Joseph Fielding Smith, Church Historian, might be consistently used in connection with my historical works, such as Church Chronology, the "Historical Record", the Biographical Encyclopedia, and now the Encyclopedic History of the Church. In these works most of the students and writers of Church history will find the material needed for research work. The general history of the Church and the manuscript histories of the stakes and missions can, by permission, be consulted for additional helps.

With the publication of the Encyclopedic History of the Church I feel that my life's work is nearly done, so far as the writing of books and historical articles are concerned. I shall soon pass on to the great beyond, leaving behind a great work yet to be done and plenty of able men and women to do it. I have done my best to contribute to the history of the Church, covering the first century of its existence, but a greater work will be done by future historians as the Church grows.

While my labors have been a labor of love throughout, I have, however, one selfish thought in mind: I desire to live after I am dead. In this connection I think of the righteous Abel of whom the Apostle Paul said: "He being dead yet speaketh". Now I humbly but earnestly apply the words: "He being dead yet speaketh" to myself when I shall say good-bye to mortality.

ANDREW JENSON. Salt Lake City, Utah, March, 1941.

Letter of Commendation

Andrew Jenson, Assistant Church Historian, was born in Torslev parish, Hjörring amt, Denmark, December 11, 1850, the son of Christian and Kirsten Andersen Jenson. When he was four years of age his parents joined the Church, being among the first converts from that country. In May, 1866, he left his native land for America, arriving in New York, July 17, of that same year. He crossed the plains in Captain Andrew H. Scott's ox train arriving in the Salt Lake Valley in October 1866. After spending seven years in hard labor on farms, the railroads and in other occupations he was ordained a Seventy by President George Q. Cannon and went on a mission to his native land, where he labored for two years. Elder Jenson's mind had a natural historical turn, and in 1876, he began the compilation of a Danish translation of the history of the Prophet Joseph Smith. In 1879-1881, he filled another mission to Denmark and there commenced a monthly paper which continued for eight years. Returning home he commenced the publication of a monthly periodical in Danish called "Morgenstjernen," the name was later changed to "Historical Record" and the publication continued in the English language. His interest in the history of the Church led to his appointment in the Historian's Office in April 1891, and in this capacity for four years he visited nearly every settlement of the Church gathering historical information. It was through his efforts that a copy of John Whitmer's history, which had been stolen, was secured for the Church. In 1895-1897 he filled an important mission to all the missions of the Church and gathered many records and a vast amount of historical data, and later a similar mission in all parts of the world. One of his important works was the compilation of "Church Chronology," the value of which has never been properly appreciated. The historical information gathered by Elder Jenson during his many years as an Historian in the service of the Church forms the foundation of this very valuable work the Encyclopedic History of the Church.

As associates of Elder Andrew Jenson, we heartily recommend this volume to the members of the Church and those who are interested in Church development and history.

JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH, A. WM. LUND. Salt Lake City, Utah, March 19, 1941.

A

Aalborg Branch

AALBORG BRANCH, Danish Mission, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the city of Aalborg, which, in point of population, is the fourth city in size in the little kingdom of Denmark. The city had about 20,000 inhabitants in 1850, and 50,000 in 1930.

Soon after Apostle Erastus Snow and his associates had established themselves permanently as the founders of the Scandinavian Mission, and the first branch of the Church had been organized in Copenhagen Sept. 15, 1850, attention was paid to the city of Aalborg, where there was a large branch of Baptists. To these Elder George P. Dykes commenced to preach the gospel in October, 1850, baptized his first converts (all Baptists) Oct. 27, 1850 and organized them into the second branch of the Church in Denmark, Nov. 8, 1850, with Hans Peter Jensen, later a resident of Brigham City, Utah, as president. This branch has had a continued existence ever since, and has produced thousands of Latter-day Saints, among whom was the late Pres. Anthon H. Lund. The missionaries in Aalborg met with considerable opposition in the beginning and in 1851-52 the saints in Aalborg were subject to much persecution and mobbing. On one occasion their meeting hall was almost destroyed and many of the local saints were ill-treated by the mob. Nearly all the windows in the private dwellings of the saints were broken. From Aalborg missionaries were sent into all the surrounding country districts, where a number of branches were established. When the Aalborg Conference was organized in 1851, the city of Aalborg was made its headquarters, and the branch was for many years one of the most flourishing branches of the Church in Europe.
