Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Aberdeen Ward

ABERDEEN WARD, in Blackfoot Stake, Bingham Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a growing settlement of that name in the Snake River Valley. Aberdeen is the terminus of a branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad and is located in the midst of a rich and fertile farming district, 14 miles north of American Falls, 39 miles southwest of Blackfoot and 42 miles northwest of Pocatello, Idaho. The farms are irrigated from the Aberdeen-Springfield Canal, which taps the Snake River about eight miles above Blackfoot. Aberdeen is one of the largest wool-shipping points in the West.

In 1915 there were only about eight or ten Latter-day Saint settlers in the newly surveyed town of Aberdeen and vicinity, namely, Samuel Neville, Nils A. Pehrson, Alma Rigby, John F. Monson, Wilhelm Carlson and Leonard H., Elias and Roy Phillips, with their respective families and for the benefit of the children of these settlers a Sunday school was organized July 11, 1915, with John Frederick Monson as superintendent. These families were members of the Sterling Ward, but on Oct. 3, 1915, they were organized as the Aberdeen Branch of said ward with Nils A. Pehrson as presiding Elder, and regular meetings were commenced in private houses. On Dec. 3, 1916, the branch was organized as a so-called "independent" branch (reporting directly to the presidency of the Blackfoot Stake) with John F. Monson as president. He acted until Feb. 3, 1918, when the Aberdeen Ward was organized with Marion Clinger as Bishop. Bishop Clinger was succeeded in 1925 by John F. Monson, who was succeeded in 1929 by David A. Stone, who presided as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Aberdeen Ward had 528 members including 135 children. The total population of the Aberdeen Precinct was 1,761 in 1930; of these 646 resided in the town of Aberdeen.

Soon after the organization of the Sunday school, the saints in Aberdeen purchased a building site and a frame building which had previously been used as a store. This was moved on to their land and served as a meeting house until 1928, when a modern brick chapel was erected at a cost of $25,000. This edifice has an auditorium capable of seating 300 persons, a baptismal font, eight class rooms and other conveniences.
