Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lava Hot Springs Ward

LAVA HOT SPRINGS WARD, Portneuf Stake, Bannock Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on the Portneuf River about twelve miles east of McCammon, and extending from Topaz up said river to a point 3 1/2 miles above where Fish Creek empties into the river. The center of the ward is Lava Hot Springs on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, where the saints own a small meeting house. Lava Hot Springs is a sanitarium, where thousands of people annually visit to enjoy bathing and treatments beneficial to health at the springs which are gaining in popularity.

Lava Hot Springs owes its existence to the hot springs, which even in the days of the trappers were well known and occasionally utilized in the interest of health, and when the Oregon Short Line Railroad was built through Portneuf Canyon these springs became easy of access to many people who camped occasionally by them to enjoy the benefits to be obtained from their healing qualities. Yet, as late as 1914, there were only two or three houses where the town of Lava Hot Springs now stands. Edwin Morgan Gittins, a Latter-day Saint, kept a store there. A regular sanitarium was opened at the Springs in 1914, and in 1917 a first-class hotel was built at a cost of $40,000. It contains 30 rooms for guests, and many patients have been cured from the effects of rheumatism and other diseases. In 1908, when Augustus F. Blaser was made Bishop of the Dempsey Ward, the lower part of that ward was organized as a separate ward named Topaz with Arthur M. Fullmer as Bishop. When the town of Lava Hot Springs was founded and later grew in importance, the headquarters of the Topaz Ward were established there, and the name of the ward changed from Topaz to Lava Hot Springs. Bishop Fullmer, who left the ward in 1915, was succeeded as Bishop by Fred M. Campbell, who in 1916 was succeeded by George H. Maughan, who in 1917 was succeeded by William R. Godfrey, who in 1919 was succeeded by James C. Allen, who in 1920 was succeeded by Theodore M. Monroe, who in 1927 was succeeded by Arthur R. Rowsell, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Lava Hot Springs Ward had 407 members, including 98 children. The total population of the Lava Hot Springs Precinct was 1,068 in 1930.
