Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lava Ward

LAVA WARD, Portneuf Stake, Bannock Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints living in a scattered condition up and down Portneuf Creek in Portneuf Canyon for a distance of seven miles. Some of the farms are irrigated, but most of them are dry farms. Considerable wild hay grows in patches on the river bottom. There is some good fertile land, most of Which is rolling. The center of the ward, or the place where the Lava school house is located on the left bank, or east side, of Portneuf Creek, is 17 miles east of McCammon, and 32 miles northeast of Downey, the headquarters of the Portneuf Stake. It is also four miles above, or north of the Lava Hot Springs, or 14 miles by main traveled road southwest of Bancroft, in Portneuf Valley. The Dempsey, or Lava, school house stands about half a mile east of where Dempsey Creek empties into the Portneuf River. Dempsey Ward (now Lava Ward) originally embraced all that part of the country which afterwards became Lava, Lava Hot Springs and Topaz wards. Lava Hot Springs in 1930 occupied the original center of Dempsey Ward, Lava the upper or northeast part and Topaz the lower or southwest part of the original Dempsey Ward.

Dempsey was thus named in honor of Bob Dempsey, a trapper or mountaineer, who built a little rock dugout in the lava rock, near the point where Dempsey Creek empties into the Portneuf River, Among the early Mormon settlers who located in that part of the country later included in the Dempsey Ward were Charles F. Potter (who came about 1881) and Noah Reese. They located at different points along the Portneuf River and its tributaries, between the years 1888 and 1891. These first settlers were organized into a branch of the Church called the Dempsey Branch as a part of the Garden Creek Ward Oct. 18, 1890, with Charles F. Potter as presiding Elder. On Nov. 19, 1891, the Dempsey Branch was organized as the Dempsey Ward, with Charles F. Potter as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1897 by Washington McClellan, who in 1909 was succeeded by Augustus F. Blaser, who in 1914 was succeeded by Charles M. Byington, who presided in the Lava Ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 37 members, including 11 children. The name of the ward was changed from Dempsey to Lava in 1909.
