Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Layton Ward

LAYTON WARD, North Davis Stake, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Layton and vicinity, in Davis County, Utah. The center of the ward is about 25 miles north of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City, and about 12 miles south from the center of Ogden.

Layton Ward, an outgrowth of Kaysville Ward, was organized Sept. 1, 1889, and named in honor of Christopher Layton, one of the pioneers of Davis County; Daniel B. Harris was appointed Bishop. One of the first settlers in that part of Kaysville Ward now included in Layton Ward was Elias Adams, sen., who settled on what is known as Holmes' Creek (also called Adams Creek) in the fall of 1850. He was followed by John Thornley, Enoch M. and Thomas King, Thomas Finley and John and James Forbes and some others. John Thornley was among the first men in Utah who raised a crop of grain without irrigation. As early as 1869 he raised both corn and wheat on his land without irrigation and obtained good crops, although he was told that he would not raise enough grain to feed a goose. Being successful, however, others followed his example, and the dry land on the "Sand Ridge" was homesteaded. Among those who took up land there was George D. Watt, the first man baptized in England. Bro. Watt also is claimed to have been one of the first men in Utah to raise lucern on his farm. Layton, which has running through it three railways, namely, the Oregon Short Line, the Denver and Rio Grande Western and the Bamberger Electric, is a favorite point for the exportation of fruits and vegetables raised and canned in Davis County.

As the population in the north part of Kaysville increased, it was found necessary, as early as 1870, to build a school house. In this building also Sunday school sessions were commenced in 1877, with Alexander Dawson as superintendent. The Layton Ward was organized in 1889 with Daniel B. Harris as Bishop. Immediately after the organization of the ward steps were taken towards the erection of a meeting house, and this enterprise was pushed with such vigor that meetings were commenced in it at Christmas the same year. In 1908 this building was replaced by a more modern chapel and amusement hall. Layton Ward belonged to the Davis Stake of Zion until 1915, when that stake was divided into the North Davis and the South Davis stakes and Layton Ward then became part of the North Davis Stake.

Bishop Daniel B. Harris was succeeded in 1910 by Marion F. Adams, who was succeeded in 1915 by James E. Ellison, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 982 members, including 204 children. The total population of the Layton Precinct was 2,037 in 1930; of these 597 resided in the town of Layton.
