Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Basin Ward

BASIN WARD, Cassia Stake, Cassia Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a valley called Spring Basin which is about 4 1/2 miles long and four miles wide. It is watered by four streams, namely, Basin Creek, Spring Creek, Warm Spring Creek and Summit Creek and the land is fertile and productive. The center of the ward, where the meeting house and recreation hall (a fine brick building) is located, is 5 1/2 miles east of the center of Oakley.

The first Latter-day Saints known to have been associated with Spring Basin were James Daley and his three sons, Thomas J., Heber C., and Elisha B., who arrived in the valley June 1, 1878, and staked out 160 acres of land apiece. But they left four days later, as the Indians in the district were reported to be on the war path. In November, 1878, Thomas J. and Heber C. Daley brought their families to the location and Heber C. Daley and his family spent the winter of 1878-1879 there in a log cabin. Thomas J. and James Daley and their families commenced a permanent residence in the valley in 1879. Enoch R. Daley, sen., Moroni Fairchild, Hyrum W. Egan and Solomon P. McIntosh followed, and these seven purchased the right to all the water of Basin Creek with all its tributaries from Frank Riblett who owned a large ranch, called the Harp Ranch, located on the present site of Oakley, and who claimed all rights to the water of Basin Creek. Six hundred dollars were paid for the claim and the transfer was made April 26, 1880. Other settlers joined these pioneers and were organized as a branch of the Church May 9, 1880, with Enoch R. Daley, sen., as presiding Elder. A Sunday school was organized in Spring Basin in 1881 and a day school later in the fall, these being the first organizations of the kind in Cassia County, Idaho. In the meantime, more settlers located just beyond the Basin (Spring Basin), in Goose Creek Valley, and the town of Oakley sprang up under the direction of Francis M. Lyman, president of the Tooele Stake of Zion, who set apart William C. Martindale to preside over all the saints in Goose Creek Valley. In September, 1882, the Oakley Ward was organized, of which Basin then became a branch with Enoch R. Daley as presiding Priest, who continued to act in that position until the organization of Cassia Stake in 1887, when, on Nov. 22, the Spring Basin Branch was organized as a ward with Enoch R. Daley as Bishop. Bishop Daley died Nov. 13, 1892, after which Basin again became a branch of the Oakley Ward, and thus remained until 1900, but as the records of the branch were destroyed by fire, the names of the presiding Elders of the branch during this period are not available. On Sept. 23, 1900, Spring Basin Branch was again organized as a ward with Adam S. Sagers as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1919 by Seth F. Harper, who was succeeded in 1923 by Moses S. Martin, who was succeeded in 1929 by John S. Martin, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time the Basin Ward had a membership of 104, including 14 children. The Basin Precinct at that time had a total population of 154. Basin Ward belonged to Box Elder Stake of Zion until 1887, when the district became part of the Cassia Stake.
