Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lee's Ferry

LEE'S FERRY, Kanab Stake, Coconino Co., Arizona, was an important place isolated on the desert at the crossing of the Colorado River. John D, Lee established his ferry on said river in 1872, first by using one of the boats which had belonged to the Powell Expedition, and later by building a raft of driftwood and cottonwood trees. Still later, a better boat was built from pine timber obtained from the Kaibab plateau, also known as the Buckskin Mountains. John D. Lee had a part of his family with him. The early missionaries called by Pres. Brigham Young to settle Arizona crossed the Colorado River at Lee's Ferry, and in May, 1876, Bishop Lorenzo D. Roundy of Kanarra, Utah, was accidentally drowned at the ferry. After the execution of John D. Lee March 23, 1877, for participation in the Mountain Meadows Massacre in 1857, his widow, Emma Lee, operated the ferry for several years. She finally sold the ferry to the Church, and Warren M. Johnson from Glendale, Kane Co., Utah, was placed in charge of the ferry.

In June, 1884, a branch of the Church was organized at the ferry with Warren M. Johnson as president. Bro. Johnson had charge of the ferry and branch for 20 years or more. In 1928 the cable by which the ferry was operated broke, and let the boat down the river with the result that one of the Johnson boys and another white man and a Navajo Indian were drowned in the river. After this accident there was no ferry at this crossing of the Colorado for some time. A ferry was again operated there later by the Grand Canyon Cattle Company, which afterwards sold it to Coconino County, at which time the farm at the ferry was purchased by the Johnson boys of whom Jeremiah Johnson was the oldest. He occupied the premises in 1930. The fine, modern bridge across the Colorado River, built at a cost of $350,000, about five miles west of the ferry, was opened for traffic June 14, 1929.
