Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Batesville Ward

BATESVILLE WARD, Tooele Stake, Tooele Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a scattered condition somewhat centrally in Tooele Valley. The center of the ward, or the place where the meeting house stands, is about seven miles north of Tooele City, the county seat, and the headquarters of the Tooele Stake, seven miles by nearest road east of Grantsville and 28 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. Most of the people are engaged in farming and stockraising, but as water is very scarce most of the farming is done without irrigation, yet there are numerous artesian wells watering gardens and farms. Considerable lucern is raised.

The Batesville Ward, which includes the original Bates Branch and Rose Springs, is also known as Erda, which is the name of the precinct.

Ormus E. Bates, who had crossed the plains in 1851, located a ranch at the so-called Tule Springs, about six miles south of where Ezra T. Benson and company at that time had erected a sawmill at Richville. Brother Bates brought some stock into the valley, some of which belonged to himself and some to Apostle Orson Pratt. He claimed a tract of country for a herd ground in the neighborhood of the springs mentioned, where he, in the fall of 1852, built a house and commenced the erection of a fort as a means of protection against the Indians. This fort, built near a spring, was the first fort erected in Tooele Valley, and for sometime the Bates family was the only white family in that part of the valley. By action of the county court Nov. 1, 1855, this part of Tooele Valley was designated by the name of Rose Spring Fort district. A few more settlers located soon afterwards in the neighborhood, claiming land adjacent to Bates' Fort.

After the so-called "Move" south in the year 1858 both Batesville and Richville were re-occupied. Other people moved in, and in 1873 a school house was erected, and a branch organization effected with Orson Pratt Bates as president. He presided until April 2, 1899, when the Batesville Branch was organized as a ward with Charles Alvin Orme (who had been called from Tooele) as Bishop. Brother Orme was succeeded in 1904 by Edwin Marshall Orme, who in 1906 was succeeded by Ormus A. Bates, who in 1908 was succeeded by Edwin C. Ekman, who in 1912 was succeeded by John C. Bryan, who in 1924 was succeeded by Lawrence T. Liddell, who in 1919 was succeeded by William Henry Bryan, who in 1924 was succeeded by Lawrence T. Liddell (serving a second term). He presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Batesville Ward had 157 members, including 22 children.
