Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lehi Ward

LEHI WARD, Maricopa Stake, Maricopa Co., Arizona, originally called Fort Utah, or Utahville, and later Jonesville, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district lying northeast of Mesa. The farms and gardens, which are very fertile and productive, are irrigated from the Utah Canal, which taps Salt River about three miles above the center of the ward. The history of Lehi Ward includes the history of the beginning of Maricopa Stake. In 1880 the saints petitioned the government of Arizona for a school district, which request was granted and they set to work to erect a school house, using adobes already made in anticipation of the erection of a meeting house. This building was also used as a meeting house until 1892, when this privilege was withdrawn by the school trustees, and the saints then erected a lumber structure to be used as a chapel. In 1929 a new church building was erected in the Lehi Ward. It is built of brick. The basement is used as a recreational center and the second floor as a chapel. The building also contains several commodious class rooms.

Daniel W. Jones presided over the settlement as presiding Elder from 1877 to 1878 when he was succeeded by Jesse N. Perkins. When the Maricopa Stake of Zion was organized Dec. 10, 1882, Thomas E. Jones was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over the Jonesville Ward by Apostle Erastus Snow. In November, 1883, on the occasion of a visit to Jonesville by Apostle Brigham Young, Jr., the settlement of Jonesville, which had also been called Fort Utah, was named Lehi, on the suggestion of Elder Young, as the people were applying by a petition for a post office which was granted under the name of Lehi. Bro. Jones acted in that capacity until 1894, when he was succeeded by Søren Christian Sørensen, who was succeeded in 1905 by Hyrum G. Davis, who was succeeded in 1908 by Wright P. Shill, who was succeeded in 1914 by Isaac H. Rogers, who was succeeded in 1919 by John W. Jones, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Lehi Ward had 265 members, including 46 children. The total population of Lehi Precinct was 1,184 in 1930.
