Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lethbridge Stake of Zion

LETHBRIDGE STAKE OF ZION, Alberta, Canada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the south central part of the Province of Alberta with headquarters at Lethbridge, where there is a fine tabernacle which affords accommodations for both stake and ward meetings. The Lethbridge Stake consists of 10 organized wards, namely, Barnwell, Calgary, Claresholm, Diamond, Frankburg, Lethbridge, Orton, Starline, Stavely and Taber, and three independent branches, namely, Burdett Champion and Rosemary. Nearly all the Latter-day Saints in Lethbridge Stake are farmers and stock-raisers. Among the farmers are several who own thousands of acres of some of the best land in Alberta. The wards or settlements of the saints are scattered over a great area of country and much of the farming is done without irrigation.

The Lethbridge Stake was organized Nov. 10, 1921, at a meeting attended by Apostle Rudger Clawson, Heber C. Iverson, president of the Northwestern States Mission, and the presidencies of the Alberta and Taylor stakes. On this occasion a new stake of Zion was organized in Canada by taking the Barnwell, Burdett, Lethbridge and Taber wards from the Taylor Stake and Claresholm, Frankburg, Orton, Pine Coulee (Stavely) and Starline wards and Calgary, Champion, Gleichen and Rosemary branches from the Alberta Stake and organizing these wards and branches into a new stake which was named Lethbridge. This stake was to include all Latter-day Saints residing in Alberta, Canada, north of the boundaries of the Alberta and Taylor stakes. Hugh B. Brown was chosen as president of the new stake with George W. Green (formerly Bishop of the Lethbridge Ward) as first and Asael E. Palmer as second counselor. Pres. Brown moved to Salt Lake City, Utah, and on Oct. 31, 1926, he was honorably released, together with his counselors, and Asael E. Palmer, who had acted as second counselor to Pres. Brown, was chosen as president of the Lethbridge Stake with George W. Green as first and Peter Drew Clarke as second counselor. This presidency stood intact Dec. 31, 1930. John H. F. Green was the first clerk of the Lethbridge Stake. He was succeeded in 1924 by Peter Drew Clarke, who in 1928 was succeeded by John F. H. Green (serving a second term), who acted at the close of 1930. On Dec. 31, 1930, the Lethbridge Stake had a total membership of 2,729, including 679 children.
