Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lewiston Ward

LEWISTON WARD, Benson Stake, Cache Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in that level, fertile country lying between Bear River on the west and Cub River on the east. Northward the ward extended to the boundary line between Utah and Idaho, and its southern boundary followed the two streams mentioned. The Lewiston flat comprises some of the best agricultural land in Utah, and the locality is specially known for its successful sub-irrigation. Lewiston center is about 1 1/2 mile south of the Utah-Idaho boundary line and six miles northwest of Richmond, the headquarters of the Benson Stake.

There are three school houses in Lewiston, and a sugar factory, belonging to the Amalgamated Sugar Company, is situated on Cub River. Lewiston contains three bishop's wards.

For a number of years after the founding of Franklin and Richmond in 1860 the tract of country lying between Bear River and Cub River was utilized as a grazing country and used as such by the people of these settlements. The first effort to found a settlement in that locality proved unsuccessful through the failure of bringing water for irrigation upon some 25,000 acres of land which had been surveyed, but a second attempt, made in 1870, proved successful, when water for irrigation purposes was brought in from Worm Creek and later, also, through a long canal, tapping Cub River. The locality was, in the beginning, referred to as "Starvation Corner," "Poverty Flat," "Hardscrabble" and other such pet names, but Lewiston finally became one of the best grain-growing districts in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, notwithstanding the loss of crops by grasshoppers, and other drawbacks. The raising of sugar beets and potatoes is one of the chief industries.

As the settlers increased in numbers, they were organized as a branch of the Church in 1873, named Lewiston, in honor of William H. Lewis, one of the first settlers and the first presiding officer of the settlement. He was made a Bishop in 1877, when Lewiston was organized as a ward, and presided as such until 1901, when he was chosen as the first president of the Benson Stake of Zion. He was succeeded as Bishop of Lewiston by William Waddoups, who in 1906 was succeeded by Andrew L. Hyer, who presided until 1907, when Lewiston was divided into two wards, namely, the Lewiston 1st Ward and the Lewiston 2nd Ward. In 1909 Lewiston 3rd Ward was created by the division of Lewiston 1st Ward. On Dec. 31, 1930, the Church population of the three Lewiston wards was 1,690, including 370 children, out of a total population in the precinct of 1,783. Lewiston belonged to Cache Stake up to 1901, since which it has been an important part of the Benson Stake.
