Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Liahona, the Elders' Journal"

"LIAHONA, THE ELDERS' JOURNAL" is a periodical published in magazine form in the interest of all the missions in the United States, Canada and Mexico. It was commenced with the amalgamation of the "Elders' Journal," published at Chattanooga, Tennessee, in the interest of the Southern States Mission, and the "Liahona," published at Independence, Missouri, in the interest of the Central States Mission. The first number of the amalgamated paper, entitled "Liahona, The Elders' Journal" was issued at Independence, Missouri, June 22, 1907, and has had a continued existence ever since.

The first volume is numbered Volume 5, it being considered a continuation of the former "Elders' Journal," of which 4 volumes had been published at Chattanooga, Tenn., in the interest of the Southern States Mission.

"Liahona, The Elders' Journal" serves as a historical record for the missions of the Church in the United States, Canada and Mexico, and one of its other main features is its publication of discourses delivered by the authorities of the Church and others. From 1907 to 1919 the periodical was published as a weekly and since 1919 as a bi-weekly paper, each number containing 24 pages, printed on large octavo sheets. In 1930 the periodical was running in its twenty-eighth year.

Benjamin F. Cummings, jun., who was called by the Church authorities to edit the "Liahona" in Jackson County, Mo., was continued as editor of the "Liahona, The Elders' Journal" until 1909, when he was succeeded by D. H. Fowler, who in 1910 was succeeded by Nephi Anderson, who was succeed ed later the same year by Joseph A. McRae, who was succeeded in 1914 by Joseph E. Cardon, who was succeeded in 1916 by Hugh Ireland (editor in 1930). All these brethren labored under the immediate direction of the president of the Central States Mission, and the business details of the periodical have always been handled at the Central States Mission head quarters at Independence, Mo.
