Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Bath Conference

BATH CONFERENCE, British Mission, organized April 7, 1845, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Bath, Somersetshire, England and vicinity. On Nov. 30, 1847, the Bath, Bristol and Trowbridge conferences were discontinued and organized into the South Conference.

BATTLE OF NAUVOO-In the summer of 1846 many of the saints who had traveled westward from Nauvoo were pursuing their toilsome journey through Iowa, while others were engaged in making temporary settlements and clearing farms in the wild and unreclaimed districts of the western frontiers (now parts of Iowa and Nebraska) for the accommodation of their brethren who should follow. Hundreds of the most able and serviceable men belonging to the Church were responding to the call of the government, to march as soldiers in the Mormon Battalion to defend their country, and while all the exiled saints were suffering more or less from their hardships and exposure, hostilities on the part of the mob were renewed against those of the saints who were left at Nauvoo. These saints who were generally of the poorer class-families who had not sufficient means to secure the necessary outfits to commence the westward journey-were attacked by an organized mob. A three days' battle ensued, during which the few men among the saints capable of bearing arms (numbering less than 130) defended the city as best they could, and as one of the means of defense they improvised two steamboat shafts into cannons. At last, however, their heroic resistance was overcome by the mob, who outnumbered the defenders perhaps ten to one. During the battle William Anderson and his son, Augustus, and David Norris, were killed in the ranks of the saints, and many others were wounded. The battle resulted in the remnant of saints being driven at the point of the bayonet from Nauvoo, across the Mississippi River into Iowa. (For details see under the caption "The Battle of Nauvoo," in the "Historical Record," Volume 8, page 845, etc.)
