Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Little Colorado Stake of Zion

LITTLE COLORADO STAKE OF ZION, Arizona, consisted of a few small temporary settlements founded by Latter-day Saints on and near the Little Colorado River in Navajo County, Arizona. The main settlements were Brigham City and Sunset, situated on the river bottom near the present Winslow, Arizona, and St. Joseph, Obid and Taylor further up the river and also the temporary saw mill settlements of Heber and Wilford in the Mongollon Mountains, besides Moencoppy or Tuba City. Through the constant overflow of the Little Colorado River and the washing away of the dams erected in the river for irrigation purposes, the settlements all proved a failure with the exception of St. Joseph, originally known as Allen's Camp, which in 1930 belonged to the Snowflake Stake. During the short existence of the Little Colorado Stake, nearly all the people who constituted its membership lived in the United Order. The headquarters of the stake were at Brigham City, Arizona.

That part of the United States now constituting the state of Arizona became known to the Latter-day Saints in 1846 when the famous Mormon Battalion traveled through the country on their westward march from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, to southern California. But no attempt was made to establish settlements of saints in Arizona until 1865, when the small settlement of Beaver Dam (now Littlefield) was founded in the extreme northeast part of Arizona. In 1873 a number of families were called from Utah to establish L. D. S. colonies in Arizona. These settlers traveled by way of Kanab, Utah, crossed the Colorado River at Lee's Ferry and arrived on the Little Colorado River in 1873, but finding conditions for making settlements unfavorable, they returned to Utah without accomplishing their object, except leaving a family or two at Moencoppy. In 1876 the second attempt on the part of the Latter-day Saints to colonize Arizona was made through another call from the authorities of the Church. A number of families left Utah in the beginning of that year, traveling in different companies under the direction of Lot Smith and Daniel W. Jones until they reached the Little Colorado River. Determined to carry out the instructions of the presidency of the Church, these settlers founded four settlements on the Little Colorado River, namely, Sunset, Brigham City, Obid and St. Joseph. Sunset was orginally known as Lot Smith's Camp, Brigham City as Ballenger's Camp, Obid as George Lake's Camp, and St. Joseph as Allen's Camp. These four infant settlements were organized by John W. Young Jan. 27, 1878, as the Little Colorado Stake of Zion, with Lot Smith as president, Jacob Hamblin as first and Lorenzo H. Hatch as second counselor. The United Order was introduced into these settlements from the beginning, and the people of Sunset and Brigham City worked in unison and carried on their work successfully through the united and determined effort of these sturdy pioneers, although they found it almost impossible to control the water of the treacherous Little Colorado on which they had settled.

In 1879 the Little Colorado Stake was divided and the eastern part organized as the Eastern Arizona Stake. These two stakes existed until 1887, when the Eastern Arizona Stake was divided into two stakes, named respectively the St. Johns Stake and the Snowflake Stake. The Snowflake Stake absorbed the few remaining saints in the Little Colorado Stake, who on Feb. 25, 1887, were reported to number 604 members, including 176 children.

Lot Smith presided over the Little Colorado Stake during its entire existence. First Counselor Jacob Hamblin was succeeded in 1879 by William C. Allen, who was succeeded in 1884 by John Bushman. Second Counselor Lorenzo H. Hatch was succeeded in 1879 by John Bushman, who was succeeded in 1884 by Thomas Brockbank. Joseph H. Richards, Bishop of St. Joseph's Ward (Joseph City), acted as president of the stake, pro tem, in 1885-1887, under the direction of Apostle Erastus Snow as Lot Smith, with his counselors, were in exile on account of polygamy.
