Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Logan Stake of Zion

LOGAN STAKE OF ZION, Cache Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Logan and adjacent country districts lying south of 1st North St. This stake extends north to 1st North St., east to the mountains, south to a line separating Providence 2nd Ward from the Millville Ward of the Hyrum Stake, and west to and including College Ward. The headquarters of the stake are in Logan, where the fine Logan Tabernacle is used by the stake for the holding of stake conferences and other large gatherings. The Logan Stake in 1930 consisted of the following fully organized bishop's wards, viz., College, Logan 1st, Logan 2nd, Logan 6th, Logan 7th, Logan 8th, Logan 11th, Logan 12th, Providence 1st, Providence 2nd, and River Heights.

At a meeting held in Logan June 4, 1920, attended by Apostle George F. Richards, the Cache Stake was divided and all that part of the same lying north of 1st North St., Logan City, was continued as the Cache Stake, and that part of Logan City lying south of said street was organized as a new stake, named the Logan Stake. On the same occasion College Ward was transferred from the Hyrum Stake to the Logan Stake. The wards transferred from the Cache to the new Logan Stake were the following: Logan 1st, Logan 2nd, Logan 6th, Logan 7th, Logan 8th, Logan 11th, Providence 1st, Providence 2nd, and River Heights. Oliver H. Budge was chosen as president of the new Logan Stake, with Joseph E. Quinney, jun., as first, and Hans A. Pedersen as second counselor. Second Counselor Hans A. Pedersen died Oct. 5, 1921, and on Oct. 25, 1921, Charles Martin Christensen was chosen as his successor. On April 22, 1923, First Counselor Joseph Quinney, jun. (who was called to preside over the Canadian Mission), was released, and Charles M. Christensen was promoted from second to first counselor, and Anthon E. Anderson chosen as second counselor in the stake presidency.

First Counselor Christensen died Dec. 1, 1929, and on Jan. 19, 1930, Joseph E. Quinney, jun., who had returned from his mission to Canada, was chosen as second counselor, succeeding Anthon E. Anderson, who was promoted to first counselor. Pres. Oliver H. Budge, who was called to preside over the German-Austrian Mission, was released, together with his counselors (Anthon E. Anderson and Joseph E. Quinney, jun.), and Anthon E. Anderson was chosen as president of the Logan Stake, with Joseph E. Quinney, jun., as first, and Charles W. Dunn as second counselor. These three brethren constituted the stake presidency at the close of 1930. John E. Olson was the first clerk of the Logan Stake; he still acted in that capacity Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Church membership of the Logan Stake consisted of 6,188, including two patriarchs (John E. Carlisle and Joseph A. Quibell), and 1,073 children.
