Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Logandale Ward

LOGANDALE WARD, Moapa Stake, Clark Co., Nevada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district surrounding a cluster of houses lying adjacent to a station of that name on the St. Thomas branch of the Los Angeles & Salt Lake Railroad, 11 miles southeast of Moapa station. Most of the inhabitants of Logandale are farmers and stock-raisers and nearly all Latter-day Saints. The ward owns a small meeting house.

Logandale Ward comprises practically the same part of the Moapa Valley which formerly was included in the St. Joseph Ward, which ward represented considerable activity from 1865 to 1870 or until the saints vacated the Muddy Valley. A few families remained at St. Joseph, hence that part of the valley has never been without Latter-day Saint settlers since 1865, when the Bowman family, former residents of Minersville, Utah, located in the Muddy Valley in 1903, the place was still known as St. Joseph, and there was at that time only one family of Latter-day Saints living within the limits of the old St. Joseph Ward, but when the St. Thomas branch of the Salt Lake and Los Angeles Railroad was built through the Moapa Valley in 1912, a station called Logan was established, and also a post office by that name. Later the name was changed to Logandale, in order not to confuse the name with Logan in Utah. In 1906 Samuel H. Wells and family (Latter-day Saints) bought property and settled near the Bowmans. Other L. D. S. settlers, who bought out non-Mormon claims, followed, and in due course of time a Sunday school and finally a branch was organized. On April 3, 1922, an independent branch was organized at Logandale with Elmer S. Bowman as presiding Elder. This branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward Jan. 25, 1925, with Elmer S. Bowman as Bishop. He presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930, and on that date the membership of the Logandale Ward was 106, including 29 children. The total population of the Logandale Precinct was 154 in 1930.
