Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Los Angeles Stake of Zion

LOS ANGELES STAKE OF ZION, Calif., consists of the southeast part of Los Angeles and the country lying contiguously thereto. It is divided from the Hollywood Stake on the north by 6th St. part of the way, and on the west by Vermont Avenue. The Los Angeles Stake consists of nine wards, viz.: Adams, Belvedere, Compton, Home Gardens, Huntington Park, Long Beach, Manchester, Matthews, San Pedro and Virginia. The headquarters of the stake are at Huntington Park, where a magnificent stake tabernacle is built in connection with the Huntington Ward chapel. In this building there are ample accommodations for both stake and ward purposes, including rooms for the stake presidency and the High Council.

When the Latter-day Saints first located in Salt Lake Valley in 1847, and some of the Utah Pioneers expressed a desire to continue the journey to California and locate on the Pacific Coast, it was against the policy of the Church at that time to do so, as it had been decided that the headquarters of the Church should be established in the heart of the Rocky Mountains. However, a settlement of the saints was founded in southern California called San Bernardino, which, from 1851 to 1858, existed as a stake of Zion; but when San Bernardino was broken up because of the Johnston Army troubles in 1857-58, California was not even continued as a mission field for many years. In 1892 successful missionary work was again commenced in California, and in due course of time many of the saints left Utah, Idaho and other states to make new homes on the Pacific Coast. This greatly increased the membership of the Church in California, and after a number of flourishing branches had been established belonging to the California Mission, it was considered wise on the part of the Church authorities to organize a stake or stakes of Zion in California, which was subsequently done.

Thus at a special conference at Los Angeles Jan. 21, 1923, attended by Pres. Heber J. Grant and others of the General Authorities of the Church, and about 3,000 other members of the Church, the Latter-day Saints in the city of Los Angeles and vicinity were organized into a stake of Zion with George W. McCune, formerly president of the Eastern States Mission, as president, with Leo J. Muir as his first, and George F. Harding as second counselor. The new stake included all of Los Angeles County, embracing the cities of Los Angeles, Ocean Park, Long Beach, and San Pedro, and it was announced that wards would be organized in Ocean Park, Long Beach, Los Angeles proper, San Pedro, Huntington Park, Boyle Heights, and Hollywood, which was done soon afterwards. Thus at the close of 1923 there were 13 organized wards in the Los Angeles Stake, namely, Adams, organized March 11, 1923; Alhambra, organized June 10, 1923; Belvedere, organized Aug. 26, 1923; Boyle Heights, organized March 11, 1923; Florence (later Matthews), organized in 1923; Carvanza, organized June 10, 1923; Glendale, organized Nov. 11, 1923; Hollywood, organized March 4, 1923; Huntington Park, organized in 1923; Inglewood, organized Nov. 21, 1923; Long Beach, organized May 22, 1923; Ocean Park, organized in 1923, and San Pedro, organized April 22, 1923.

At an important meeting held May 22, 1927, a part of the Los Angeles Stake was organized as the Hollywood Stake, with the following wards, which had previously constituted a part of Los Angeles and vicinity: Alhambra, Belvedere, Boyle Heights, Carvanza, Glendale, Hollywood, Inglewood, Ocean Park, Lankershim, Pasadena, and Redondo. This left the following wards in the Los Angeles Stake: Adams, Florence (Matthews), Huntington Park, Long Beach, San Pedro, and Home Gardens and the Virginia Branch. After the organization of the Los Angeles Stake, Manchester and Compton wards were organized and headquarters of the stake were established in the Hiberian Building on the corner of 4th and Spring streets, Los Angeles. A stake tabernacle, which had been in course of construction for some time at 365 South Middleton St., in Huntington Park, was formally opened to the public May 27, 1928, on the occasion of a quarterly conference of the stake being held that day. The building with furnishings cost about $100,000.

When the Hollywood Stake of Zion was organized in 1927, George W. McCune, who became a resident of the new Hollywood Stake, was released as president of the Los Angeles Stake, together with his counselors (Leo J. Muir and George F. Harding), and Leo J. Muir, who had acted as first counselor to Pres. McCune, was chosen as president of the Los Angeles Stake, with Everard L. McMurrin as first and Fred S. Hatch as second counselor. In 1928 Richard E. Caldwell succeeded Fred E. Hatch as second counselor. William G. Brown was the first clerk of the Los Angeles Stake; he was succeeded in 1927 by Octave F. Ursenbach, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date Leo J. Muir acted as president of the Los Angeles Stake, with Everard L. McMurrin as first and Richard E. Caldwell as second counselor. The total membership of the Los Angeles Stake on Dec. 31, 1930, was 6,187, including 1,468 children.
