Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Los Cerritos Branch

LOS CERRITOS BRANCH, San Luis Stake, Conejos Co., Colorado, consisted of a few families of Latter-day Saints residing in the immediate vicinity of the Mexican town of Los Cerritos, situated on the Conejos River, three miles southeast of Manassa. Los Cerritos is the cradle of the San Luis Stake of Zion. A company of emigrating saints from the Southern States located near the Mexican village of Los Cerritos in 1878 on land purchased through the Church for their accommodation. Soon afterwards (in 1880) the townsite of Manassa was located and most of the settlers moved there. The southern saints in Los Cerritos were joined in 1879 by a company of saints from New Mexico in charge of Elder Lawrence Marcus Peterson, who after the founding of Manassa had charge of the remaining saints at Los Cerritos. Bro. Peterson (a Dane by birth), as an emigrant boy, eleven years old, had the misfortune to lose both his parents on the voyage to America, and while waiting with the company of L. D. S. emigrants near Kansas City for an opportunity to cross the plains, he strayed away from the camp and meeting some Spanish traders went with them to New Mexico, where he became proficient in the English and Spanish languages, married a Spanish lady and became county recorder in the district where he resided. Some time later he visited Utah, having found his brother, Bishop Hans Jensen (Hals) in Manti, and joined the Church. Being ordained an Elder after his return to New Mexico, he did much quiet missionary work and translated choice selections from the Church works into the Spanish language. In 1877, having made a number of converts, he brought them to Colorado in twelve wagons and established them at Los Cerritos. Afterwards some of them were among the founders of Manassa. Later Bro. Peterson became probate judge of Conejos County, Colorado, and was helpful to the saints in their colonization enterprises. He presided at Los Cerritos for several years and was succeeded in 1886 by John H. Beecroft, who was succeeded about 1890 by Samuel Jackson, who, being called to act as Bishop of Manassa in 1896, was succeeded by James Patterson. Before the close of the century (Dec. 31, 1900) the branch at Los Cerritos had been discontinued. A temporary branch organization was effected later, but the members preferred membership in the Manassa Ward. Hence, at the close of 1930 the Los Cerritos settlement was entirely occupied by Catholics.
