Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lost River Stake of Zion

LOST RIVER STAKE OF ZION, consists (1930) of Latter-day Saints residing in Butte and Custer counties, Idaho, and embraces principally a farming and stock-raising community covering Big and Little Lost River valleys. The headquarters of the stake are at Moore, which is situated on the Mackay branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad, and is about 70 miles northwest of Blackfoot. The stake consists of six wards, namely, Arco, Darlington, Leslie, Lost River, Mackay, and Moore.

As the Latter-day Saint population increased in numbers in Lost River Valley, and the Lost River country being so far and distinct from the other wards in the Blackfoot Stake of Zion, located in the great Snake River Valley, it was deemed wise on the part of the authorities of the Church to divide the Blackfoot Stake by separating the settlements on Big Lost River from said stake and organizing them into a new stake of Zion. This was done at a conference of the Blackfoot Stake held Aug. 18, 1919, by taking the wards of Arco and Moore from the Blackfoot Stake and the branches of Leslie, Darlington, Pass Creek (later Ballard Ward) and Chilly, from the Northwestern States Mission and organizing them into the Lost River Stake. The organization was effected by Apostles Rudger Clawson and Melvin J. Ballard. The south and east boundaries of the stake were made co-extensive with the Butte County boundary. William N. Patten was chosen as president of the new stake, with William T. Tew, jun., as first and Roy R. Duke as second counselor. In 1922 First Counselor William T. Tew, jun., was released and Roy R. Duke promoted to first counselor; Walter Anton Jensen was chosen as second counselor. In 1923 Pres. Patten was released, together with his counselors (Roy R. Duke and Walter A. Jensen), and Henry N. Mickelsen was chosen as president of the stake, with Walter A. Jensen as first and Royal Waddoups as second counselor. Pres. Mickelsen and counselors were released April 20, 1930, and Walter A. Jensen was chosen as president of the stake, with Royal Waddoups as first and John L. Bills as second counselor. This new presidency acted in the positions named Dec. 31, 1930. John L. Bills was the first clerk of the Lest River Stake; he was succeeded in 1925 by Ralph O. Waddoups, who in 1930 was succeeded by Mark K. King, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the membership of the Lost River Stake was 1,039, including 220 children.

Big Lost River, from its head in the Copper Basin Mountains to where it sinks into the desert, is nearly one hundred miles long, and the valley through which it flows averages in width from a mere canyon to about seven miles. The valley commences in the mountains on the north and opens wide into the desert on the southeast. Big Lost River first takes an easterly course, and then flows in a southeasterly direction until it sinks into the desert. One of the main tributaries of Big Lost River is Antelope Creek coming in from the west about 20 miles below Mackay.
