Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Bear River Stake of Zion

BEAR RIVER STAKE OF ZION embraces the northeastern part of Box Elder County, Utah, and extends to the Malad Stake (Idaho) on the north, to the Wasatch Mountains on the east, to the Box Elder Stake (Utah) on the south and to the Curlew Stake on the west. It embraces the most important part of the so-called Bear River Valley, also called Bear River Flat. Most of the farmers in Bear River Valley irrigate their gardens and farms from the Bothwell Canal (now called the Bear River Canal) which taps Bear River as it enters the so-called lower Bear River Canyon from Cache Valley. The headquarters of the Bear River Stake are at Garland, where there is a fine modern stake tabernacle, and accommodations for the stake presidency, the High Council and others. The stake consists of the following wards: Beaver, Bothwell, Deweyville, East Garland, Elwood, Fielding, Garland, Howell, Penrose, Plymouth, Riverside, Thatcher and Tremonton, and Centerdale Branch.

The Bear River Stake of Zion was created Oct. 11, 1908, by taking the north part of the Box Elder Stake and the south part of the Malad Stake, and organizing a new stake. The following wards had all belonged to the Box Elder Stake: Beaver, Bothwell, Deweyville, East Garland, Elwood, Garland and Thatcher, and the following wards to the Malad Stake: Fielding, Plymouth and Riverside. At a meeting previously held at Malad, Sept 5, 1908, the south boundary line of the Malad Stake was changed, so that the three wards (Fielding, Plymouth and Riverside) were taken from the Malad Stake to form a part of the contemplated Bear River Stake, and on the same occasion it was decided that the two wards, Snowville, Box Elder Co., Utah, and Stone, Oneida Co., Idaho, both situated in Curlew Valley, and both belonging to the Box Elder Stake, should be added to the Malad Stake. Thus at its organization, the new Bear River Stake consisted of ten wards with a total membership (including children) of 2,800. Milton H. Welling was chosen as president of the new Bear River Stake with Peter M. Hansen as first and Joseph Jensen as second counselor. Pres. Welling, who had been elected to the U. S. Congress to represent the First Congressional District of the state of Utah, was released Nov. 17, 1917, together with his counselors (Peter M. Hansen and Joseph Jensen), and Peter M. Hansen was chosen as president of the Bear River Stake with Arthur R. Capener as first and Clarence E. Smith as second counselor.

Pres. Peter M. Hansen died Sept. 10, 1925, and at a stake conference held Nov. 22, 1925, Milton H. Welling was chosen to serve a second term as president of the Bear River Stake of Zion; Arthur R. Capener was chosen as his first and Clarence E. Smith as his second counselor.

In 1928 a pipe organ was installed in the stake tabernacle at Garland at a cost of $12,000.

Pres. Welling, who had been elected secretary of the state of Utah, was honorably released at a stake conference held Nov. 10, 1929, and a new stake presidency was chosen consisting of Clarence E. Smith (who had acted as second counselor to the two preceding presidents) as president and John J. Shumway (formerly stake clerk) as first and Knud H. Fridal as second counselor.

Heber C. Foulger was the first stake clerk; he was succeeded in 1909 by James R. Kennard, who in 1915 was succeeded by John J. Shumway, who in 1929 was succeeded by James Delos Thompson, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Bear River Stake had 5,378 members, including 1,091 children.
