Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lund Ward, Nevada Stake

LUND WARD, Nevada Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Lund and surrounding district, in the east side of White River Valley, White Pine Co., Nevada, and near the Egan Range of Mountains. The district has an elevation of 6000 feet above sea level. All kinds of cereals and fruit are raised successfully at Lund.

Lund is one of three original settlements founded by the Latter-day Saints in White Pine County, Nevada, on ranch land ceded to the Church in 1897, in lieu of other property escheated to the Federal Government of the United States in 1887. Bishop Thomas Judd of St. George, Utah, was appointed to supervise the locating of settlements on this land and chose sites for two (Lund and Preston) in the White River Valley and one (Georgetown) in the Steptoe Valley. Lund was named in honor of Apostle Anthon H. Lund. Most of the early settlers hailed from St. George and other places in southern Utah. Bishop Judd had general jurisdiction over the three settlements, but while he appointed local brethren to take charge of the other two, he personally presided at Lund. In August, 1901, the whole district, containing the three settlements, was organized as the White Pine Ward, with Thomas Judd as Bishop, but in October of the game year the White Pine Ward was divided into three wards, namely, Lund, Preston and Georgetown. Thomas Judd was retained as Bishop of the Lund Ward. At this time these wards belonged to the St. George Stake of Zion. Thomas Judd was succeeded as Bishop of Lund Ward in 1902 by Orrin H. Snow (who had acted as clerk of the Lund Ward since its organization). He was succeeded in 1910 by Adolphus H. Whitehead, who was succeeded in 1922 by George W. Fawcett, who was succeeded in 1926 by Hugh A. Reid, who presided as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930. On that date Lund Ward had 272 members, including 60 children. The total population of the Lund Precinct was 257 in 1930.

In 1910 the settlements in White Pine County, Nevada, were transferred from the St. George Stake to the North Weber Stake, where they remained until 1926, when Nevada Stake was organized, to which they have since belonged.
