Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lyman Stake of Zion

LYMAN STAKE OF ZION, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Uinta and Sweetwater counties, Wyoming, and Daggett County, Utah, and embraces six organized bishop's wards, viz., Green River, Lyman, Manila, McKinnon, Millburne and Rock Springs, and two independent branches, viz., Mountain View and Winton. The headquarters of the stake are at Lyman, where a stake house and seminary building recently erected, furnish accommodation for the stake officers and for the teaching of religion to the children attending the district schools. This building, a frame structure, with stucco finish, contains the stake office, a High Council room, a seminary room, a baptismal font and two dressing rooms. The building stands immediately south of the Lyman Ward chapel.

Lyman Stake came into existence July 18, 1926, at a stake conference of the Woodruff Stake held at Randolph, and attended by Apostles Rudger Clawson and Richard R. Lyman, at which the Woodruff Stake of Zion was divided and the east part of the same organized into a new stake named Lyman in honor of the late Apostle Francis M. Lyman. The new stake consisted of the following wards and branches, which all formerly belonged to the Woodruff Stake: Green River Branch, Lyman Ward, Manila Ward, McKinnon Branch, Mountain View Branch, Millburne Branch, Reliance Branch, Rock Springs Ward, and Superior Branch. The headquarters of the stake were established at Lyman, Uinta Co., and at the time of its organization the stake had a Church population of 2,000 souls, including children. Henry Melvin Rollins, the Bishop of the Lyman Ward, was chosen as president of the new stake, with John Calvin Walker as first and James E. Eyre as second counselor. This presidency still had charge on Dec. 31, 1930. Albert C. Reinsch was the first stake clerk; he was succeeded in 1926 by Vernal Willie, who still acted as stake clerk Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Lyman Stake had a membership of 2,244, including 702 children.

While Lyman is a new stake, the country which it includes has an interesting history dating back to the early pioneer days. Old Fort Bridger, founded as early as 1834 by James Bridger, is within the limits of Lyman Stake, and so also is the site of Fort Supply, the first Anglo-Saxon settlement founded in Wyoming, which existed from 1853 to 1857. Lyman, originally named Owen, was founded in 1890 and the increase of saints in that locality finally led to the organization of the Lyman Stake.
