Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lyman Ward, Lyman Stake

LYMAN WARD, Lyman Stake, Uinta Co., Wyoming, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Lyman and vicinity, on a stretch of bench land lying between Smith's Fork and Black's Fork of Green River. It includes the sites of old Fort Bridger and Fort Supply. The townsite of Lyman is about eleven miles southeast of Carter station on the Union Pacific Railroad, and five miles east of old Fort Bridger. It commands a beautiful view of the whole upper country with the majestic Uinta Mounains in the background. Only the hardier cereals and fruits can be grown in Lyman, the country being cold, as the altitude is 6,700 feet above sea level.

The first Latter-day Saint known to have settled in the Fort Bridger country since the days of Fort Supply was Hyrum Strong, who, together with his family, arrived at Fort Bridger Sept. 13, 1890, and soon afterwards located on Smith's Fork, about six miles from the present Lyman townsite.

A non-Mormon by the name of Joseph South made in 1891 a small ditch conveying water from Black's Fork onto the upper bench. In 1892 Samuel R. Brough, Theodore Durrant, and other Latter-day Saints, hailing from different parts of Utah, settled on the bench on and near the present townsite of Lyman. Other settlers followed; houses were built, and water canals dug, and a branch of the Church was organized in December, 1894, by Pres. William W. Cluff of the Summit Stake, with Lars E. Johnson as president. A Sunday school was organized in 1897, and on June 8, 1898, at a meeting attended by Apostles John Henry Smith, Heber J. Grant and Abraham O. Woodruff, the branch was organized as a ward, named Owen, in honor of Apostle Abraham Owen Woodruff, with Samuel R. Brough as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1916 by H. Melvin Rollins, who in 1926 was succeeded by Lorain Rollins, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Lyman Ward had a membership of 685, including 176 children. The total population of the Lyman Precinct was 869 in 1930, of which 377 resided in Lyman town. In 1901 the name of the settlement was changed from Owen to that of Lyman, the latter name being suggested in honor of the late Apostle Francis M. Lyman.
