Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lynne Ward

LYNNE WARD, North Weber Stake, Weber Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in a fertile farming district lying immediately north of Ogden. The ward extended northward beyond the corporate limits of that city, east to the mountains, south to 7th St., and west to the road locally known as Perry's Lane, which runs north and south about half a mile west of the west corporation limits of Ogden. The center of the Lynne Ward was Five Points, 2 1/2 miles north of the court house in Ogden. Five Points in due time became an important business center and is now (1930) the business part of the Ogden 15th Ward. The meeting house, a brick structure, is located on a triangle formed by the junction of two roads at Five Points; this edifice was erected in 1915 at a cost of $20,000.

Lynne, as a settlement, dates back to 1849, and became known as Bingham's Fort when that fort was built as a protection against Indians in 1853. Thomas Richardson of Slaterville presided over the saints at Bingham's Fort until 1863, when a branch or district of the Weber Stake was organized with Robert Irvin Beard as president, and on May 28, 1877, the Lynne District, or Branch, was organized as a regular bishop's ward with Daniel F. Thomas as Bishop. Bishop Thomas died suddenly July 30, 1890, and was succeeded by George Smuin, who presided until 1908.

When the Weber Stake of Zion was divided in 1908 and two new stakes, namely, the Ogden Stake and the North Weber Stake, were organized, that part of the Lynne Ward lying east of Washington Avenue was organized as the Ogden 8th Ward and made a part of the new Ogden Stake, while that part of the original Lynne Ward lying west of Washington Avenue was continued as the Lynne Ward and became a part of the North Weber Stake, with Carl Oscar Turnquist as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1916 by Lawrence W. Sherner, who presided until the close of the year 1923, when the Lynne Ward became the Ogden 15th Ward. (See Ogden 15th Ward.)
