Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Madras

MADRAS, East Indian Mission. In 1852 L. D. S. missionaries extended their labors to Madras, Bombay, Poonah, Karatchi and other cities and provinces of India.

Madras is the third largest city of India and the ocean gateway for the southeastern part of the country. It has no natural harbor, but the British have made an excellent one by building great breakwaters.

Richard Ballantyne and Robert Skelton were the first L. D. S. missionaries who labored in Madras. They arrived there July 24, 1853, and immediately commenced to preach among the Plymouth Brethren in the locality. On Aug. 8th Elders Ballantyne and Skelton, and another Elder, John Charles, organized themselves into a branch of the Church at Madras. Soon afterwards a few natives were baptized. The Elders also published an edition of Lorenzo Snow's pamphlet "The Only Way To Be Saved," and of Parley P. Pratt's "Proclamation." In the beginning they obtained a house to preach in from a Portuguese priest, but had some difficulty in getting permission to stay in the cantonment at all. They were also warned against leaving tracts in any of the public schools. In addition to all this some of the newspapers made vicious attacks on the brethren and circulated worn-out American lies. For some time the brethren held meetings twice a week, but only to small congregations. In the meantime a few converts were baptized, among whom was a Mr. McCarthy, formerly a Baptist minister, who was also ordained an Elder, and the branch had a membership of seven. Elder Ballantyne commenced the publication of a small periodical, containing four pages octavo, called the "Latter-day Saints Millennial Star and Monthly Visitor." The first number of this periodical was dated April, 1854; four other numbers were published dated May, June, July and August, 1854. Elder Ballantyne left Madras July 6, 1854, to return to his home in Utah, leaving Robert Skelton in charge of missionary work in Madras. In May, 1856, Robert Skelton sailed from India, homeward bound. With his departure missionary labors seemed to have ceased in Madras.

Elder Ballantyne had labored twelve months and Elder Skelton 17 months in Madras. Twelve persons had been baptized, two of whom were proficient in theology and had been preachers of the Baptist persuasion. Six members were added to the Church by baptism after Elder Skelton's departure. After the American Elders left, the little branch in Madras and the missionary labors in that vicinity were left in charge of J. Mills and John McCarthy, two of the local brethren, who had been ordained Elders.
