Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Beaver

BEAVER, Beaver Stake, Beaver Co., Utah, is the principal town and seat of Beaver County, Utah. It is pleasantly situated on the Beaver River at an altitude of nearly 6,000 feet. It is a business center for all the surrounding settlements. Most of the people are farmers and stockraisers and nearly all Latter-day Saints. Beaver can boast of two fine L. D. S. chapels, one in each of the two wards. There are also modern school houses, a number of stores and shops and a great many fine residences, mostly modern brick buildings. The residents of Beaver are mostly well-to-do people and constitute an industrious and prosperous community.

Beaver Creek was well known to the early pioneers of Utah, although the first pioneers scarcely became acquainted with Beaver Valley proper in the beginning, the line of travel being farther west and the stream crossing not far from where Minersville now stands. Parley P. Pratt's exploring party in 1849 missed Beaver Valley as their route of travel was up through Sanpete, Sevier and Panguitch valleys and then across the mountains into Little Salt Lake Valley (Parowan). But the party in returning from their exploration passed through Beaver Valley. For some years after that the Beaver Valley proper was utilized for grazing purposes. The pioneers of Parowan passed through Beaver Valley in January, 1851, and after that nearly all the travelers between Salt Lake City and the south passed through the valley, crossing the Beaver where Beaver City now stands. Finding water more plentiful in the Beaver Valley than in the Little Salt Lake Valley, a number of the settlers in Parowan and Cedar City desired to locate there, and Church influence had to be used to prevent a general exodus which would have broken up the older settlements. Beaver River was so named on account of the numerous beaver dams found in the stream.

In 1856 Apostle George A. Smith selected a few families from Parowan to go to Beaver Valley, and the population was further augmented in 1858 when the settlement of San Bernardino, Cal., was broken up and a number of settlers from there located permanently in Beaver Valley.

The settlers on Beaver Creek were organized by Apostle George A. Smith as a branch of the Church Feb. 10, 1856, with Simeon F. Howd as presiding Teacher. He was succeeded later by Lorin W. Babbitt, who was chosen to preside as Bishop. In December of the same year, Philo T. Farnsworth of Fillmore was called to Beaver to preside as Bishop.

Beaver County was created in 1857 and a military organization effected. Meeting houses and school houses were erected at an early day, and the town soon showed industry and progress. Pres. Brigham Young, on his annual visit to the southern settlements, always stopped and preached at Beaver, giving encouragement and support to the people. Philo T. Farnsworth was succeeded in 1864 by John R. Murdock, who presided until March 12, 1869, when the Beaver Stake of Zion was organized. On this occasion Beaver was divided into two wards, namely, the Beaver 1st and the Beaver 2nd wards, all that part of the town lying east of Telegraph Street being designated as the Beaver 2nd Ward and all that part lying west of said street as Beaver 1st Ward. These two wards existed side by side until 1890, when they were amalgamated and George Mumford chosen as Bishop of the Beaver Ward. He was succeeded in 1903 by John M. Murdock, who acted as Bishop until 1905, when Beaver City was again divided into two wards, namely, the Beaver East Ward and the Beaver West Ward, which two wards are still in existence.

Beaver Precinct (including the city of Beaver) had 785 inhabitants in 1860, 1,732 in 1880, 1,822 in 1900, and 2,152 in 1930.
