Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Magna Ward

MAGNA WARD, Oquirrh Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Magna, located at the east base of the Oquirrh Range of mountains, about 16 miles southwest of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City. Magna is the terminus of a branch of the Garfield and Utah Railroad. The ward extends northward to the old Tooele Road, east to the Pleasant Green Ward, south to the mountains, and west to the Garfield Ward.

The site of Magna and surrounding district was formerly covered with productive farms, owned originally by Frank W. Chambers, Osmond and Peter LeCheminant, Hiram T. Spencer, George A. Read, Joseph J. Shields and others. The town of Magna owes its existence to the Utah Copper Company, which built a copper mill in the mountains above the town in 1906 and commenced milling and mining operations. Soon afterwards the Boston Consolidated Mining and Milling Company erected a stamp mill in the vicinity, which was later purchased by the Utah Copper Company.

At Magna and at Arthur, adjacent to it, are located two of the largest concentrating mills in the west, at which ore is prepared for further reduction at the smelters. About 300 small cabins were erected at the foot of the mountain, to which settlement the name of Ragtown was given, but as business at the mills increased a town sprang up, substantial houses took the place of many of the cabins and the town became known as Magna, the name previously chosen for the mill. Soon after the mills commenced operations the San Pedro and Los Angeles Railroad was built and a railroad station located at a place which was named Riter, about a mile northeast of Magna. The town was named in honor of William W. Riter, financier and a Utah pioneer of 1847. But the town did not live up to its name and employees of the Utah Copper Company who resided there were instructed to move to Magna, and Riter was finally deserted as a residential district.

For the benefit of the Latter-day Saints employed at the mills, a branch of the Church was organized at Magna in 1911, as part of the Pleasant Green Ward, with Joseph J. Shields as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in this position in 1913 by John H. Bawden, who, when the branch was organized as a separate ward Feb. 27, 1916, was sustained as Bishop of the Magna Ward. He acted in this capacity until 1920 when he was succeeded by Ronald M. Woolley, who was succeeded in 1923 by William T. Harkness, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 1,034 members, including 292 children.

Even before the organization of the Magna Branch the saints residing there erected a lumber building in which meetings and Sunday school sessions were held under the jurisdiction of the Pleasant Green Ward bishopric. In 1925 the saints of the ward erected a fine brick chapel, having an auditorium with a seating capacity for 350 people, a baptismal font, a Relief Society room with kitchen attached, and six class rooms. Magna Ward belonged to the Pioneer Stake until 1923, when it became part of the newly organized Oquirrh Stake.
