Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Magrath

MAGRATH, Alberta, Canada, the headquarters of the Taylor Stake of Zion, is situated in an open prairie country, about 20 miles south of Lethbridge, 26 miles northeast of Cardston, and 29 miles north of the boundary line between the United States and Canada. The town of Magrath is divided into two bishops' wards, namely, the Magrath 1st, and the Magrath 2nd wards.

Magrath owes its first existence to the construction of a canal extending from the St. Mary's River to the railroad station of Stirling on the Alberta Railway and Canal Company's road. The leaders of the Church being desirous that more of the saints should locate in Alberta, entered into an agreement with the Alberta Irrigation Company to construct such a canal with the stipulations in a contract to the effect that work should begin no later than the 1st of September, 1898, that the contractors should agree to accept as part payment for their labors two equal blocks as nearly square as possible, one block to be in Township 5, Range 22 west, of the 4th Meridian west, and the other to be located in the vicinity of Stirling station; that a townsite should be surveyed within each of these blocks of land; that by the 31st of Dec., 1899, there should be at least 250 inhabitants on each of these townsites and that by the 31st of Dec., 1899, the contractors should have earned at least $100,000 in cash and land. Work on the canal commenced in September, 1898, Pres. Charles O. Card holding the plow that turned the first furrow. The Church then subcontracted the work at the same terms they were getting from the company. Pres. Card had immediate charge of the work until 1899, when the management was transferred to M. D. Hammond. In order to make the undertaking a success the Church authorities called men and their families to work on the canal and also to become settlers in one of these new towns. This had the desired effect, the required number of inhabitants was secured and the required sum earned by the Church. The townsite of Magrath was located in the fall of 1898, and named in honor of Mr. Charles Alexander Magrath, a member of the Northwest Council of the Canadian Government from the Lethbridge District, which included Cardston. The survey of the townsite of Magrath was commenced in March, 1899. Blocks of ten acres, each divided into eight lots, were laid off at right angles with streets 100 feet wide. Thus 92 ten-acre blocks were laid off.

The first permanent settler on the Magrath townsite was Charles Heber Dudley, who arrived on the townsite and located on Pot Hole Creek April 20, 1899. The first families to reside on the townsite were those of Rasmus Rasmussen and Parley Pratt Carter. The first house erected in Magrath was built by James Evans and three associates. The labors done on the canal the first season were very satisfactory and a number of comfortable dwelling houses were built.

The saints who had settled at Magrath were organized into a ward June 12, 1899, with Levi Harker as Bishop. This ward was soon in a flourishing condition and had all of the auxiliary associations. In 1900 improvements were continued and some of the brethren were employed to do work as graders on the St. Mary River Railroad, which was that year built as far as Spring Coulee. The first railroad train entered Magrath Oct. 17, 1900. At the close of the century there were 313 saints at Magrath. About 10,000 bushels of grain were raised in the settlement in 1900, and commencement was made for the erection of a meeting house.

When Magrath was first settled in 1898, some objections were raised by the saints to make a settlement so far away from a railroad, but Apostle John W. Taylor, who listened to the objections, prophesied that in less than two years a railroad would be built through that county, a prediction which was literally fulfilled. In the meantime the canal was completed and water for irrigation purposes was brought upon the land. The canal, which later became the property of the Alberta Railway and Irrigation Company, tapped the St. Mary River at Kimball, near the boundary line between the United States and Canada, and after water has been carried in said canal about eight miles it drops into Spring Coulee, which is used for conducting the water another ten miles. Then another dam forces the water up from Spring Coulee over a low ridge and drops into a tributary of the Pot Hole Creek, which is then used as a conductor as far as Magrath, where another dam is built and the water taken into a canal once more and conducted to the so-called Nine Mile Coulee, which after that serves as a conductor of the water for another five or six miles. Then the water is finally taken out in a canal near Welling and conducted in that canal over a prairie country as far as Taber (about 50 miles), furnishing water for irrigation purposes to a number of settlements. It is interesting to note that St. Mary River and Lee's Creek, a tributary of said river on which Cardston is built, both have their sources in the United States (in Montana). The St. Mary River empties into Old Man River, near Lethbridge. Old Man River is a tributary of the South Saskatchewan, which becomes a tributary of the main Saskatchewan River which empties into Lake Winnepeg, whence the Nelson River conveys water in a northeasterly direction to Hudson's Bay, the mouth of the Nelson River being in 43 degrees north latitude. Bishop Levi Harker acted as Bishop of the Magrath Ward until May 15, 1922, when Magrath was divided into two wards named the Magrath 1st Ward and the Magrath 2nd Ward. The total population of the two Magrath wards Dec. 31, 1930, was 1,116, including 287 children.
