Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Malad Stake of Zion

MALAD STAKE OF ZION comprises a part of Oneida County, Idaho, and a small part of Box Elder County, Utah. The headquarters of the stake are at Malad City, Idaho, where there is a fine tabernacle, used conjointly by the stake and Malad 2nd Ward, and also a stake house in which there are accommodations for the stake presidency, the High Council and stake boards, and also for the 2nd Ward bishopric. Most of the stake conferences and other large gatherings convene in Malad City, which is the terminus of the Malad branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad. Malad is situated near the north end of Malad Valley, 52 miles north of Brigham City, 72 miles by nearest road north of Ogden, and 108 miles north of Salt Lake City, Utah. Malad Stake, which comprises a rich and productive farming country, consists of ten organized wards, and three independent branches. The names of the wards are Cherry Creek, Daniels, Malad 1st, Malad 2nd, Pleasant View, Portage, Samaria, Saint John, Washakie and Woodruff. The branches are Reynolds, Ridgedale and Wheatland.

Malad Valley was used as a herd-ground in early Utah days, and the first attempt made to settle it was in 1855 when Ezra Barnard of Farmington, Utah, and others (about 15 families altogether) located a settlement on the east side of the Malad River, nearly opposite the present Washakie. During that and the following years these settlers built an adobe fort enclosing about an acre of ground inside of which they dug cellars and erected log houses. The first attempt at farming in Malad Valley was unsuccessful, as the growing crops were destroyed by grasshoppers. The little settlement referred to was broken up in 1858 because of Indian troubles. A few years afterward, however, the settlements of Malad and Samaria were founded further north.

The settlements in Malad Valley originally constituted a part of the Box Elder Stake of Zion, but they were organized into a separate stake Feb. 12, 1888, with the following wards: Plymouth, Washakie, Portage, Rockland and Neeleyville, which had belonged to Box Elder Stake, and Samaria, Malad, Saint John and Cherry Creek, which had belonged to the Oneida Stake. Oliver C. Hoskins was chosen as president of the new stake, with Abraham Zundel as first and William Henry Gibbs as second counselor. In 1891 John M. McCrary succeeded Abraham Zundel as first counselor. On March 22, 1902, Oliver C. Hoskins and his counselors were released and Milton H. Welling was chosen as president of the Malad Stake, with William H. Gibbs as first and Moroni Ward as second counselor. When the Bear River Stake was organized in 1908, President Welling was chosen as president of that stake, and William H. Richards succeeded him on Sept. 25, 1908, as president of the Malad Stake, with William Henry Gibbs as first and Lewis D. Jones as second counselor. This presidency stood intact until Oct. 21, 1928, when they were all released and Thomas Williams Richards, a son of the former president, was chosen as president of the Malad Stake, with Daniel Peters Woodland as first and Edward N. Crowther as second counselor. This presidency stood intact Dec. 31, 1930. William H. Anthony was the first clerk of the Malad Stake; he was succeeded in 1900 by Thomas P. John, who in 1902 was succeeded by J. Edward Gibbs, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Church membership of the Malad Stake was 4,116, including 951 children. William H. Richards was the stake Patriarch.
