Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mancos Ward

MANCOS WARD, Young Stake, Montezuma Co., Colo., consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on the Mancos River. Most of the saints who constitute the ward reside in a neighborhood known as Webber, thus named after the first settler, a non-Mormon, who located at a point 1 1/2 mile south of where the first L. D. S. meeting house in Mancos was later erected. The first L. D. S. settlers lived in a sort of string town extending north and south about six miles. The Webber Valley is about six miles long from north to south with a width of two miles at the north end and tapering off to a mere canyon on the south. Mancos River is a tributary of the San Juan and rises in the La Plata or Parrot Mountains, northeast of Mancos. Adjacent to Mancos is the famous Mancos Canyon which is justly noted for its cliff dwellings (Mesa Verde). In some of the rooms occupied by the ancient inhabitants there are many things in a good state of preservation, such as mummies and other articles of historic value. These ruins are 25 miles from Mancos. Only a small percentage of the population on the Mancos are Latter-day Saints, but their non-Mormon neighbors are friendly. Apostle Francis M. Lyman, who passed through the San Juan country on his way to visit the L. D. S. settlements in Arizona in September, 1880, refers to the Mancos country as a desirable place for saints to make homes. Joseph Sanford Smith with his family settled on the Mancos in September, 1880. These were the first L. D. S. settlers on the Mancos and they spent the winter of 1880-1881 there. More settlers followed in 1882 and commenced farming after making a ditch which tapped the Mancos River about two miles east of the town. During a visit by Pres. Joseph F. Smith and Apostle Erastus Snow Sept. 9, 1884, the saints on the Mancos were organized as a branch of the Church with James Harvey Dunton as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1885 by Bert H. Farnsworth, who in 1886 was succeeded by Thomas Halls, who presided until March 21, 1887, when the Mancos Branch was organized as the Mancos Ward with George Halls as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1911 by William E. Ellis, who in 1920 was succeeded by Alvin Morris Decker, who in 1928 was succeeded by David Halls, who on Nov. 9, 1930, was succeeded by J. Lewis Halls, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Mancos Ward had 237 members, including 50 children. The total population of the town of Mancos was 646 in 1930.
