Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mantua Ward

MANTUA WARD, Box Elder Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the so-called "Little Valley," which is merely an opening in the Wasatch Range of Mountains east of Brigham City. This valley is nearly three miles long from north to south, with an average width of about 1 1/2 miles. It abounds in springs and the lower part of the valley consists of natural meadow lands. The village of Mantua lies on the west side of the valley and consists principally of a string of houses built along a highway running north and south through the valley. Mantua is only three miles east of Brigham City, 12 miles southwest of Wellsville, in Cache County, and 18 miles southwest of Logan.

The majority of the inhabitants of Mantua are natives of Denmark, or their descendants. Farming is the chief occupation of the people and nearly all are Latter-day Saints.

The so-called Box Elder Valley, or "Little Valley," was well known to the early trappers or hunters in the Wasatch Mountains, and as soon as the settlement of Box Elder (now Brigham City) was founded in 1851, Box Elder Valley became a favorite herd ground for the stock belonging to the settlers. In November, 1856, Eli H. Peirce and others were appointed a committee to manage and control Box Elder Valley and Devil's Gate Canyon, for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of Brigham City. By an act of the Utah Legislature, approved Jan. 18, 1858, Box Elder Valley was granted to Lorenzo Snow and others for a herd ground. The Indians made a raid on the "Little Valley" May 8, 1863; none were killed in the fray, but several were wounded.

In the spring of 1863 about a dozen Danish families were called by the Church authorities to settle in the "Little Valley" in charge of Hans Peter Jensen. He presided until 1877, when the saints in "Little Valley" were organized as a ward called Mantua, with Peter Christian Jensen as Bishop. Bishop Jensen died May 20, 1899, and was succeeded as Bishop by Michael J. Schow, who in 1908 was succeeded by Martin M. Jensen, who in 1910 was succeeded by Peter Christian Johnson, who in 1917 was succeeded by Conrad Jeppesen, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Church membership of the Mantua Ward was 318, including 60 children. The total population of Mantua Precinct was 316 in 1930.
