Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mapleton Ward, Kolob Stake

MAPLETON WARD, Kolob Stake, Utah Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a fertile farming district locally known as the Union Bench or South Bench, lying immediately south and southeast of Springville, near the mouth of Maple Canyon, and adjacent to the mouth of Spanish Fork Canyon. Within the limits of the ward there is a good meeting house and three substantial school houses. Nearly all of the inhabitants are L. D. S. farmers, who live in a scattered condition on their respective farms. The ward extends north and south about seven miles and east and west about three miles. The Mapleton meeting house is about four miles southeast of the center of Springville.

The fine, level, flat country, or upland, lying southeast of Springville, was originally used by the people of Springville and Spanish Fork as a herd ground, but about 1856 a number of men opened a farm in that part of Utah Valley, subsequently known as the Union Farm which later suggested the name of Union Branch. The Union Farm Company made a ditch from Hobble Creek to their lands and thus obtained water for irrigation.

Cyrus Sanford and John S. Fullmer were among the first settlers. The number of settlers increased and owing to some maple trees growing in Maple Canyon (which had already been named) the name of Mapleton was suggested by some of the early settlers and adopted. At a meeting held Aug. 21, 1888, attended by Apostle Francis M. Lyman and Stake Pres. Abraham O. Smoot, the saints who had settled on the Mapleton Bench, and who had hitherto belonged to Springville, were organized into a separate ward named Mapleton, with Edwin L. Whiting as Bishop. He was succeeded in that capacity in 1890 by William T. Tew, who in 1921 was succeeded by Loren A. Nielsen, who in 1924 was succeeded by Richard Mendenhall, who acted as Bishop of Mapleton Dec. 31, 1930. The Mapleton Precinct had 686 inhabitants in 1930, nearly all Latter-day Saints.
