Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Marsh Center Ward

MARSH CENTER WARD, Portneuf Stake, Bannock County, Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the central part of Marsh Valley. It extends north and south about six miles and is bounded on the west by the mountains, and on the east by the Oregon Short Line Railroad tracks. The Marsh Center meeting house stands about half a mile above the confluence of Marsh and Hawkins creeks, three and a half miles southwest of the Arimo station on the O. S. L. Railroad, six miles south of Garden Creek, 11 miles southwest of McCammon, 36 miles south of Pocatello, and 10 miles northwest of Downey, the headquarters of the stake. Most of the settlers are L. D. S. farmers who live in a scattered condition on their farms bordering on Marsh and Hawkins creeks.

The saints in Marsh Valley originally belonged to one ward (Marsh Valley) consisting of all the saints residing in the valley, which is about 30 miles long from north to south and from seven to 15 miles wide. Marsh Creek rises in the south end of the valley in the mountains on the east and courses its way through the valley, taking in Nine Mile Creek from the east, Cherry Creek, Birch Creek, Hawkins Creek and Garden Creek from the south and west, and finally empties into the Portneuf River at a point seven miles below McCammon. Marsh Valley contains rich soil and is, as a rule, easy to irrigate.

The first L. D. S. settler in Marsh Valley was William W. Woodland, who in 1864, together with his brother Henry and four others, located on Birch Creek in the south end of the valley. (See Woodland.) The Woodlands, assisted by other settlers, built a house that fall, which was the first dwelling ever erected by white people in Marsh Valley. Later a Wells & Fargo mail station was established about a mile south of Woodland's claim, and another mail station was built in the north end of the valley. During the following years the population in the valley increased steadily, and about 1872 David Reese Davis was appointed to preside over the saints in Marsh Valley, a branch of the Church being organized at that time and placed under the jurisdiction of the Malad Ward bishopric. Meetings were held in private houses until 1877, when a small log school house was erected. In 1879 Melvin L. Gruwell succeeded David R. Davis as president of the Marsh Valley Branch. He acted in that capacity until Nov. 16, 1879, when the saints in Marsh Valley were organized as a bishop's ward, with Melvin L. Gruwell as Bishop. About this time the saints in Marsh Valley were transferred from the Malad to the Cache Stake of Zion, and in 1884 to the Oneida Stake. Bishop Gruwell was succeeded in 1887 by Charles M. Squires, who in 1891 was succeeded by Lehi Wright, who in 1903 was succeeded by Nathan L. Coffin, who in 1919 was succeeded by A. James Shumway, who in 1924 was succeeded by Wilford H. Sorensen, who still presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Marsh Center Ward had 107 members, including 20 children. The saints in Marsh Valley became a part of the Pocatello Stake in 1898 and of the Portneuf Stake in 1915.
