Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Marysvale Ward

MARYSVALE WARD, South Sevier Stake, Piute Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Marysvale, which is situated on the Sevier River in a romantic little valley surrounded by lofty mountains, immediately east of Mt. Baldy. It is the terminus of the Marysvale branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, 16 miles by mountain road southwest of Monroe, the headquarters of the South Sevier Stake, and 28 miles by rail south of Richfield, the county seat. It is also 16 miles north of Junction, the county seat of Piute County. While Marysvale proper consists of a small nook in the mountains, the valley in which the settlement is situated is about ten miles long and from one to three miles wide, the Sevier River passing through it from southeast to northwest. The valley terminates in a canyon cutting through a range of mountains which separates Marysvale Valley from Sevier Valley. While the majority of the people in the Marysvale Precinct reside in the town of Marysvale there are quite a number of farms at different points along the Sevier River.

Marysvale was thus named by Parley P. Pratt, who passed through that part of the country with his explorers in the fall of 1849. Since that year the place has been well known to the Latter-day Saints, as well as to the later prospectors and miners seeking for precious metals in the mountains. In 1864 a few families of Latter-day Saints settled in the little valley for the purpose of making homes there, and in the spring of 1865 sixteen families had located at Marysvale, where a small townsite consisting of 24 lots was surveyed. When the Black Hawk War broke out in 1865 the settlers hurriedly built a fort enclosing eight acres about half a mile above the junction of Pine Creek (Bullion Creek) with the Sevier River. The Indians made a raid on the little settlement April 22, 1866, killing Albert Lewis and running off nearly all the horses, cattle and sheep belonging to the settlement.

Others of the brethren were wounded, among whom was Christian Christensen of Richfield, who died from the effects of his wounds shortly afterwards. In the latter part of June, 1866, the settlers vacated the place and moved to Circleville seeking safety against further Indian attacks. Soon after that, however, General Daniel H. Wells came out from Salt Lake City with a force of military men and moved all the settlers from Piute County, taking most of them to the settlements further north. During the short existence of Marysvale as a Mormon settlement, Brother Andrew Hendrickson acted as presiding Elder and also as captain of the militia during the Indian War of 1865-1866. After the evacuation of Marysvale in 1866, the little valley was not occupied for two years, but in 1868 a number of miners took possession of the valley and made improvements. Soon afterwards precious metals were discovered in the mountains west of Marysvale, which caused quite an excitement for a short time. Soon after the resettling a few Mormon boys located ranches at different points along the Sevier River.

On April 15, 1883, the few families of saints residing at Marysvale were organized into a branch of the Church, constituting a part of the Panguitch Stake with Hugh D. Lisonbee as presiding Elder. Elder Lisonbee died June 1, 1890; he was succeeded as president of the branch by Jared Taylor, who presided until March 24, 1895, when the saints at Marysvale were organized into a ward with Charles C. Pinney as Bishop. About this time the Marysvale Ward was transferred from the Panguitch Stake to the Sevier Stake. The ward organization was discontinued in 1900 and Isaiah J. Haws was appointed presiding Elder at Marysvale. He was succeeded in 1904 by Charles Thomas Black, who in 1909 was succeeded by Søren Christiansen, who in 1910 was succeeded by Allen Cameron, who presided until 1916, when the Marysvale Branch was again organized as a bishop's ward, with Allen Cameron as Bishop. Bishop Cameron moved to Widtsoe, Garfield Co., and on Oct. 8, 1917, Erastus Anderson and Charles T. Black were placed in temporary charge of the ward. They presided until 1920, when the branch once more was organized as a ward with Wallace Johnson as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1921 by Francis Clement Nickle, who in 1923 was succeeded by Ivan L. Foisy, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Marysvale Ward had 298 members, including 60 children. The Marysvale Precinct had 647 inhabitants in 1930, of which 471 resided in the town of Marysvale.
