Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mayfield Ward

MAYFIELD WARD, Gunnison Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the south central part of Sanpete County, and consists of a farming district of which the town of Mayfield, situated 12 miles southwest of Manti, is the center. It is also eight miles southeast of Gunnison, the headquarters of the Gunnison Stake. The town of Mayfield contains a water-power grist mill, a number of stores, modern school houses and many fine private residences. The site of Mayfield is an old Indian location and camping ground and also a place of ancient fortifications. The theory in regard to the latter statement is based on the fact that numerous mounds, varying in size from 10 to 15 feet in diameter and about three feet high or more, are found all along the brink of the bench land bordering on Twelve Mile Creek, particularly on the south side. For many years the place was known as the "Indian Farm," the old Ute Chief Arrapeen residing there for many years. This chief was always friendly to the whites and often visited the settlements in Sanpete Valley.

Occasionally he also addressed the saints in their meetings by means of an interpreter. The white brethren in turn visited Arrapeen's home and cultivated a friendly relationship with him and his tribe. Twelve Mile Creek was also known as the Indian Reservation and again during the Black Hawk Indian War in 1865-1867 as a scene of several murders committed by the savages. It was on the meadow lying immediately north of North Mayfield that Peter Ludvigsen, the first man killed in the Black Hawk War, was murdered April 10, 1865, and Major John W. Vance and Sergeant Heber Houtz were waylaid and killed by Indians on Twelve Mile Creek June 7, 1867. In the fall of 1871 a company of brethren from Gunnison commenced farming on the north side of Twelve Mile Creek, where North Mayfield now stands. Active operations were carried on in 1872 and the brethren continued to farm as a co-operative body until 1874. On June 16, 1872, one of the farmers; Niels Heiselt, was killed by Shiverute Indians near Mayfield. In the spring of 1873 Mads Peter Sörensen and others built houses on the north side of Twelve Mile Creek. Other settlers followed, and a branch of the United Order was organized in 1874, under the direction of the Gunnison Ward bishopric, with Peter H. Hansen as president. At that time the place was named Mayfield, in lieu of Arrapeen, the original name. In the spring of 1875 twenty-one young men from Ephraim, Sanpete Co. (some of them bringing their families with them), settled on the south side of Twelve Mile Creek and founded what was then called South Mayfield. They built a canal tapping Twelve Mile Creek at the mouth of Twelve Mile Creek Canyon and thus obtained water for irrigation purposes. Temporarily this location was called New London. In 1876 a temporary branch was organized by the Sevier Stake presidency with Ole C. Olsen as president; this, however, did not affect the settlement on the north side of the creek. When the Sanpete Stake of Zion was organized July 4, 1877, Mayfield on the north side of Twelve Mile Creek and New London on the south side were amalgamated and organized into a regular bishop's ward named Mayfield, with Ole C. Olsen as Bishop of the new ward, and as a part of the Sanpete Stake.

The townsite of Mayfield was surveyed in 1879, a cooperative store opened in 1880, and a grist mill built in 1882. Bishop Olsen was succeeded in 1890 by Parley Christiansen, who in 1906 was succeeded by Hyrum Christensen, who in 1917 was succeeded by Albertus Willardsen, who in 1920 was succeeded by Edward V. Bunderson, who in 1923 was succeeded by Willard F. Willardsen, who in 1926 was succeeded by C. Clyde Whitlock, who in 1929 was succeeded by Hans C. H. Bogh, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, when the Church membership of the Mayfield Ward was 509, including 88 children. The total population of the Mayfield Precinct was 508 in 1930, of which 467 resided in the town of Mayfield.
