Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Meadow Ward, Millard Stake

MEADOW WARD, Millard Stake, Millard Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Meadow, which is pleasantly situated on Meadow Creek, eight miles southwest of Fillmore, the stake headquarters, and 159 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. Most of the inhabitants are engaged in farming and stock-raising, and the ward has a meeting house centrally located in the town. Nearly all the inhabitants of the district are members of the Church.

Before the advent of Mormon pioneers, Meadow Creek was a favorite camping place of the Indian Chief Walker, and there he died in 1855, soon after the close of the Walker Indian War. Meadow Creek was first settled in the spring of 1857 by ten families of Latter-day Saints from Fillmore. At that time there was hardly sufficient water in the creek to irrigate one farm, but the water has increased steadily ever since. The early settlers located about one mile west of the present townsite. In the fall of 1857 the place was vacated on account of Indians, but most of the people came back the next year. For a time no permanent ecclesiastical organization was effected, but James Duncan was appointed by Bishop Brunson of Fillmore to have general supervision of the saints on Meadow Creek. In 1863 the Meadow Creek Branch was organized with William Henry Stott of Fillmore as presiding Elder; he moved to Meadow Creek in the spring of 1864 with his family. There was a flourishing Sunday school at Meadow in 1871, in whose interest a farm of 40 acres was conducted. The Meadow Sunday school was the first school in Millard County which supplied the school with text books. In 1877 the Meadow Creek Ward was organized with Hiram Bell Bennett as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1901 by Neil Murdock Stewart, who was succeeded in 1909 by John A. Beckstrand, who, being called into the presidency of the stake, was succeeded in 1912 by Jesse J. Bennett, who was succeeded in 1927 by Daniel Dearden Bushnell, who also being called into the stake presidency was succeeded in 1928 by Joseph Leo Stott, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time the ward had a membership of 433, including 82 children. The total population of the Meadow Precinct in 1930 was 429.
