Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Meadow Ward, Pocatello Stake

MEADOW WARD, Pocatello Stake, Power Co., Idaho, consisted of Latter day Saints residing in a part of Bannock Valley, which abounds in meadow land, and is a good grazing country. The ward extended north and south about seven miles, the Indian reservation being the boundary line on the north and the Arbon Ward, of the Curlew Stake, the boundary on the south. From east to west the ward extended from mountain to mountain. The L. D. S. meeting house, a log building erected in T shape, stands on the main road leading through the valley north and south, about eight miles north of the Arbon meeting house, 11 miles southwest of the Crystal school house, about 32 miles by nearest road southwest of Pocatello, and about 33 miles southeast of American Falls. The people in the ward live scattered on their farms, the population being about evenly divided between Mormons and non-Mormons. The irrigated farms obtain water from Bannock Creek and its tributaries. Bannock Valley may be termed one of the beautiful valleys of the mountains, and not only the floor of the valley is brought under cultivation, but the surrounding hills or mountain slopes are also producing grain, mostly wheat.

The first settlers in that part of Power County, Idaho, later included in the Meadow Ward, were Latter-day Saint stock men, among whom were David and Thomas Daniels, who located at different points in Bannock Valley in 1895 and following years. On June 11, 1911, the north part of the Arbon Ward was organized by the Malad Stake presidency into a separate ward named Meadow, with Wilhelm F. Kowallis as Bishop. On June 14, 1913, the ward was transferred from the Malad to the Pocatello Stake, in order to make it easier for the saints in the ward to reach stake headquarters. Bishop Kowallis was succeeded in 1918 by H. Perry Howell, who in 1921 was succeeded by Robert Wheatly, who presided until 1929, when the Meadow Ward was disorganized and the remaining saints in it transferred to the Arbon Ward of the Curlew Stake. The number of members thus transferred was 63, including children.
