Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mesa

MESA, Maricopa Stake, Maricopa Co., Arizona (now constituting four wards) contains the Latter-day Saints residing in the city of Mesa and surrounding country. Mesa is situated eight miles east of Tempe, 2 1/2 miles south of Salt River and 17 miles by road southeast of Phoenix, the capital of Arizona. It has a beautiful location in the midst of one of the finest and most fertile valleys in America, and its fine orchards and extensive fields and gardens are watered from large canals which, at great expense, have been dug through the open level country lying on the south side of Salt River.

The Mesa settlement was founded by Latter-day Saints from Utah and Bear Lake County, Idaho. On Sept. 14, 1877, Francis M., Elijah and John H. Pomeroy, George W. and Warren L. Sirrine, and James Harvey Blair of Paris, and Theodore C. and Parley P. Sirrine, and Charles Mallory of Montpelier, Idaho, left their homes with wagons, teams and supplies to make new homes in Arizona. In Salt Lake City they were joined by William Newell, Charles I. Robson, William Schwartz, Job Henry Smith, William and Charles Crismon of Salt Lake City, and Jesse D. Hobson of Coalville, Utah. Most of these brethren had their families with them. Elijah Pomeroy, with a mule team, was the first to arrive in the Salt River Valley and encampment was made near Camp Utah, about a mile north of the present town of Lehi. The balance of the company, which had a total membership of 76, joined Pomeroy and an attempt was made to join Pres. Daniel W. Jones at Jonesville (Lehi), but failing to make satisfactory arrangements, the new arrivals commenced to make a canal 9 1/2 miles long to bring water to the chosen site. Their canal followed closely an ancient water way known as the Montezuma Canal, constructed, it is believed, by ancient Nephites. These pioneers desired to name the settlement Mesa, but upon making application for a post office the name was refused as there was already a town named Mesaville in Pinal County, Arizona. The L. D. S. settlement was therefore called Hayden because of a ferry adjacent to the townsite being known as Hayden's Ferry, and a post office of that name was established at Mesa. Later the town was called Zenos and a post office of that name was established at Mesa. But in time the town of Mesaville in Pinal County ceased to exist, and the people who still clung to the idea that their town should be called Mesa on account of its location were allowed to change the name of their post office to Mesa.

Jesse N. Perkins was the first presiding Elder at Mesa, with Henry C. Rogers and George W. Serrine as counselors. He, however, moved away and his counselors took charge for a time, but feeling the necessity for a more permanent organization, the saints in 1880 wrote Pres. John Taylor, who sent Bro. Alexander F. Macdonald to preside over all the saints in Salt River Valley. When the Maricopa Stake of Zion was organized Dec. 10, 1882, Alexander F. Macdonald was chosen as president and soon afterwards Mesa was organized as a ward with Elijah Pomeroy as Bishop. Charles I. Robson and Wellington Richins were sustained as his counselors. Bishop Pomeroy moved to Mexico and was succeeded in 1891 by William Passey, who was succeeded in 1894 by James M. Horne, who acted until 1912, when Mesa was divided into two wards. Later two other wards were organized in Mesa. The total Church membership of the Mesa four wards Dec. 31, 1930, was 2,469, including 490 children. The total population of the city of Mesa was 3,711 in 1930.
