Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Beaver Ward

BEAVER WARD, Bear River Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on a tract of land lying east of Bear River and extending eastward to the summit of the mountains dividing Cache Valley from Bear River Valley; south it extends to the Deweyville Ward and west to Bear River. The ward includes the village of Beaver Dam and some families living scattered in the immediate neighborhood. The village is situated on Beaver Dam Creek (formerly Willow Creek), about a mile above the junction of said creek with Bear River, about four miles northeast of Collinston, a railway station on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, and about four miles northeast of what was once the well-known Hampton's Bridge. The people of Beaver Ward are nearly all farmers and stock-raisers and irrigate their land principally from Beaver Dam Creek, which rises in the hills about six miles south of the village. Both the Oregon Short Line and the Utah-Idaho Central railroads pass through the ward. The name Beaver Dam was originally given to the settlement on account of a remarkable beaver dam found in Willow Creek.

The Beaver Dam settlement dates back to 1866, when Benjamin Hampton obtained a charter from the Utah Territorial Legislature to build a bridge across Bear River and collect toll. In partnership with Bishop Alvin Nichols of Brigham City, he built a bridge the same year, on the main road of travel between Salt Lake City and the country lying northward, including what is now Oregon, Idaho and Montana. In the spring of 1867 Benjamin Hampton and Bishop Nichols built a hotel at the bridge and Bro. Hampton and his family took charge of the same for many years afterwards. The first real settler for farming purposes in that part of Box Elder County now included in the Beaver Ward was Francillo Durfey, who together with his family located on Willow Creek in the spring of 1868, near the place where the village of Beaver Dam now stands, and built a house in April of that year. In June, 1869, Crandall Dunn moved into the same neighborhood with his family, together with a few others. Other settlers followed in 1870. In 1871 the Box Elder Co-operative Dairy was established in Cottonwood Hollow, about three miles southeast of the Beaver Dam village, under the superintendency of Christian Hansen. It remained a co-operative dairy for a number of years and was very beneficial to the surrounding country.

About 1872 Francillo Durfey, jun.,was appointed to take charge of the L. D. S. meetings at the Beaver Dam settlement under the direction of the bishopric of Deweyville. The first of these meetings were held at Hampton's Hotel at the bridge. When the Box Elder Stake of Zion was organized in 1877 Francillo Durfey, jun., was continued in charge of the branch at Beaver Dam, which from the beginning constituted a part of the Deweyville Ward, and acted thus until 1892, when the Beaver Dam Branch was organized into the Beaver Ward, with Francillo Durfey, jun., as Bishop. Bishop Durfey was succeeded in 1908 by Race A. Johnson, who was succeeded in 1929 by Robert John Patten, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Beaver Ward had 273 members, including 71 children.
