Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Metropolis Ward

METROPOLIS WARD, Nevada Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on land included in the Metropolis Reclamation Project in Elko County, Nevada. The center of the ward is about 11 miles northwest of Wells (a station on the Southern Pacific and Western Pacific Railroads).

In 1911 the Metropolis Reclamation Company commenced operations in that part of the country now included in the Metropolis Ward, but the uncertainty of the water supply in the district prevented a successful issue to the project, and the town of Metropolis, in which a hotel was erected at a cost of $100,000, was soon afterwards deserted and most of the people left. A number of Latter-day Saints and a few others, however, who had taken up land under the canal, decided to remain and try to operate their land as dry farms. This conclusion so interested the officials of the state of Nevada that the sum of $5000 was appropriated in 1917 to experimentation of dry farming possibilities in that section of country, and John Carlos Lambert, a specialist from the Utah Agricultural College, was sent to investigate conditions and to assist the farmers. But after a term of about five years it was concluded that dry farming in that region would never be successful, and the settlers were advised to engage in dairying and potato-growing, which they did with profit and now have comfortable homes and pleasant surroundings.

For the benefit of the saints at Metropolis, a ward was organized by the presidency of the North Weber Stake of Zion on Feb. 25, 1912, with Wilford A. Hyde as Bishop, and in 1917 there were still about 200 members of the Church in the ward. Bishop Hyde died Feb. 3, 1916, and was succeeded by Simpson M. Woolf, who was succeeded in 1924 by Willis Clifford Jensen, who, being called to the High Council of the newly organized Nevada Stake in 1926, was succeeded by Franklin A. Gerber, who was succeeded May 11, 1930, by Willis Clifford Jensen, serving a second term, who was in office Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 167 members, including 28 children. The total population of the Metropolis Precinct was 182 in 1930.

Metropolis Ward, which at the time of its organization belonged to the North Weber Stake of Zion, became a part of the Nevada Stake in 1926.
