Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Adam-ondi-Ahman

ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN, in Daviess County, Missouri, once a settlement of the saints was situated on Grand River, about 25 miles north of Far West, Caldwell Co., Missouri. It is the place where according to revelation Father Adam three years previous to his death blessed his posterity, when they rose up and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel, and he, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted what should befall his posterity to the latest generation. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 107:53, 56.) After the arrival of the Prophet Joseph Smith in Missouri in the spring of 1838 he began to plan for new locations for the gathering of the saints, whose numbers continually increased in Caldwell and surrounding counties, and on May 19, 1838, in company with other Elders, he visited a place, on Grand River near Wight's Ferry, Daviess Co., Missouri, where they laid claim to a city plat which was surveyed. They called the place Spring Hill, but "by the mouth of the Lord it was named Adam-ondi-Ahman," because "it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet." Later the saints secured considerable land on Grand River and in the region of country lying between the new location and Far West. On June 28, 1838, a stake of Zion was organized at Adam-ondi-Ahman, with John Smith, an uncle of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as president. Immediately after this the saints commenced to gather there from all parts of the country, including Canada, the larger company arriving from Kirtland, Ohio, in the so-called Kirtland Camp, which traveled from Kirtland to Missouri in 1838, and arrived at Adam-ondi-Ahman Oct. 4, 1838. (See Kirtland Camp.) Adam-ondi-Ahman indicated from the beginning success and prosperity, but under the exterminating order of. Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs, the saints who had settled in Caldwell, Daviess and other counties were compelled to leave Missouri in the spring of 1839. The stake of Adam-ondi-Ahman was the third stake of Zion organized in this dispensation. (For details see "Historical Record," Vol. 1:45-48.)
