Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Midvale

MIDVALE (formerly East Jordan), East Jordan Stake, comprised the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Midvale, Salt Lake Co., Utah, and vicinity. Midvale Ward was bounded on the east by the State Road and on the west by the Jordan River; the center of the ward was about eleven miles south of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City.

Among the first settlers who located in the district later comprised in Midvale Ward was David Pettigrew of the Mormon Battalion, who, together with Alonzo and Wallace Raymond and their families, settled in 1851 on the east side of the Jordan River, about a mile west of the present Midvale 1st Ward meeting house. They were followed in the fall of 1852 by Harmon and Royal Cutler and William Bird with their families. A number of Scandinavian families located in the district in 1866 and Scandinavian meetings were held there in an early day, under the jurisdiction of the bishopric of the West Jordan Ward. On Sunday, Dec. 15, 1895, that part of the West Jordan Ward lying east of the Jordan River was organized as a separate ward, called the East Jordan Ward, with Hyrum Goff as Bishop. Soon after this, a building site was secured and the erection of a substantial brick meeting house commenced and finally completed.

In 1917 the name of East Jordan Ward was changed to Midvale; a town of that name, which had already become an important business center, was within the limits of the ward. Soon afterwards (in November, 1920) Midvale Ward was divided, and the East Midvale Ward organized from the east part of the same. In 1928 the remaining part of Midvale Ward was divided into two wards, namely, Midvale 1st Ward and Midvale 2nd Ward.

Bishop Hyrum Golf, the first Bishop of East Jordan Ward, acted until the organization of Jordan Stake in 1900, when he was called to preside over the new stake. He was succeeded as Bishop of East Jordan Ward by Ludvig Larson, who was succeeded in 1902 by Joseph B. Wright, who was succeeded in 1915 by John A. Aylett, who acted until the organization of the East Jordan Stake in 1927, at which time he was called to act as first counselor in the stake presidency and was succeeded as Bishop of Midvale (East Jordan) Ward by Aurelius P. Rasmussen, who acted in that capacity until the ward was divided in 1928. East Jordan Ward belonged to the Salt Lake Stake of Zion until 1900, when it became a part of the Jordan Stake, and in 1927 (as the Midvale Ward) it was transferred to the East Jordan Stake, then organized.
