Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Midway

MIDWAY, the second town of importance and size in Wasatch County, Utah, is situated west and north of the Provo River, in the northwest part of Provo Valley. Its inhabitants are nearly all farmers and stock-raisers, many of them being of Swiss origin. Midway has two fine L. D. S. chapels (modern meeting houses) and many fine residences surrounded by shade trees and orchards. The town is pleasantly situated on Snake Creek, 1 1/2 miles west of the Provo River, and 3 1/2 miles west of Heber City. Otherwise the town is situated near the east base of the Wasatch Mountains, 15 miles south of Park City, and 42 miles by nearest road southeast of Salt Lake City. The townsite is regularly surveyed into 27 five-acre blocks; the streets cross each other at right angles, four rods wide, with the exception of Main Street running east and west and those around the public square which are six rods wide. The soil in Midway is warmer than in any other part of Wasatch County on account of being so close to the warm springs which abound in that neighborhood. The settlement is especially adapted to the raising of wheat and other small grains, and also vegetables of various kinds. There are more shade and fruit trees at Midway than elsewhere in Provo Valley. Within the limits of the town there are two bathing resorts of hot springs, one situated a mile northwest of the center of the town, opened June 24, 1891. Nearly all the inhabitants are Latter-day Saints who are organized into two bishop's wards, namely, the Midway 1st and the Midway 2nd wards. These two wards on Dec. 31, 1930, had a total membership of 822 members, including 152 children. The total population of the Midway Precinct was 921 in 1930, of which 745 resided in the town of Midway.

In the vicinity of Midway there is a collection of thirty or forty water-tanks (called hot pots) that may well be classed among the curiosities of the country. They resemble the frustum of a cone being in all proportional, but of different sizes. The largest of these cisterns known as the Big White Mound is about forty rods in circumference at its base and fifteen or twenty feet at the top, rising from the level of the surrounding country to the height of forty feet and is entirely filled with water. Some of the other tanks are filled with water, and running over at the top in a small stream, while others are only partly filled with water and some are entirely dry. The water in these reservoirs is of different colors. In some it is green, in others blue, and in others various other shades. The famous rattlesnake den is also in this vicinity. In its formation it partakes of the nature of the cisterns named, being 15 or 20 rods in circumference at its base, and 25 feet high with a dry reservoir at the top. The mound is formed of shell rock, full of seams and fissures, which furnish habitations for an innumerable number of rattlesnakes. These reptiles are remarkable for staying at home, being seldom seen over a mile from their den. Very often during the summer season the rocks seem to be alive with them and fifty or more can sometimes be seen crawling together in the trail near the foot of the mound, and in other places near their den.

The first settlers on Snake Creek arrived in the spring of 1859. Among them were Jesse McCarroll, Benjamin Mark Smith and Sidney Harmon Epperson. McCarroll and Smith built the first houses on the east side of the creek, near the place where Van Wagoner afterwards built his mill. Other pioneer cabins were built the same year and four families spent the winter of 1859-1860 in that part of Provo Valley now included in the Midway Ward. In the spring of 1859 Father Mills came up from Provo Valley, wheeling his tools on a wheelbarrow, and located a mill site on Snake Creek, where Mound City afterwards was built. At that time the country was infested with bears to such an extent that Father Mills found it necessary to lock himself up in a box at night to protect himself against the bears and snakes. He erected a frame-work for his contemplated saw mill in the fall of 1859. The first settlers who located on the west side of Provo Valley came from Provo and American Fork in Utah County. They located at different points between the mouth of Snake Creek and White Pine Canyon, but mainly at two points subsequently named Midway and Mound City. The first of these was on Snake Creek, located 1 1/2 miles below or due north of the present Midway. Mound City, or the upper settlement, was situated on both sides of Snake Creek, immediately below the junction of that stream with White Pine Creek, or about two miles above the present Midway.

In 1861 other settlers arrived in Provo Valley, some of whom located on Snake Creek, and the upper settlement soon became considerably the largest. John H. Van Wagoner finished the first flouring mill ever built in Provo Valley that year; it was erected on Snake Creek in the lower settlement. Sidney H. Epperson was appointed presiding Elder at Mound City, which in 1864 contained 36 families of saints-David Van Wagoner was appointed to preside over the lower settlement, which included the mill and the settlers residing at different points above the same. The lower settlement had about twenty families in 1864. The presiding Elder in each of the two settlements acted under the direction of Joseph S. Murdock of Heber. Log meeting houses were built in both settlements, the one at Mound City being erected in 1862, and the one in the lower settlement in 1864. A post office was established at Midway in 1865.

In 1866, when the Indians in the southern part of Utah went on the war-path, the saints on Snake Creek in Provo Valley were advised to move together on the present site of Midway, breaking up both Mound City above and the original Midway below. Hence the present townsite of Midway was selected and called Midway. The place selected was a spot unfit for farming, it being a sort of rocky ledge of limestone formation, created by nature through the agency of warm water. When the people of Mound City and the original Midway moved together, they erected their houses and stables (which they generally moved from their former locations) on the rocky flat in fort style around the block in which the meeting house and other public buildings were erected. Sidney H. Epperson presided in the new Midway settlement at the beginning. He was succeeded in 1870 by Henry S. Alexander, who presided until 1877, when the Midway Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward with David Van Wagoner as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1892 by John Watkins, who died Dec. 23, 1902, after which Alvin J. Alexander took temporary charge of the ward until Feb. 8, 1903, when Midway was divided into two wards, namely, the Midway 1st and the Midway 2nd wards.
