Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mill Creek Ward

MILL CREEK WARD, Cottonwood Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, consists of a fertile farming district centrally located in Salt Lake County, bounded on the north by Hillcrest, Wandamere and Miller wards, on the east by East Mill Creek and Holladay wards, on the south by South Cottonwood Ward and Murray 1st Ward, and on the west by the Jordan River. The ward house is pleasantly located on rising ground near the center of the ward, half a mile east of the State Road and about five miles southeast of the Temple Block in Salt Lake City.

Mill Creek Ward dates back to the spring of 1848 when John Neff located a mill site on Mill Creek, near a little grove, about two miles below the mouth of Mill Creek Canyon, in what is now East Mill Creek Ward. Brother Neff built a mill that year which commenced operations as soon as the grain of 1848 was harvested. With the exception of a small chopping mill put up by Charles Crismon at the mouth of City Creek Canyon, late in 1847, the Neff Mill was the first mill in Salt Lake Valley, and it made the first flour produced in Utah. This mill occupied one of the finest mill sites in the state of Utah. John Neff, by moving his family out to the mill site in the fall of 1848, became the first settler on Mill Creek. A few weeks later Daniel Russell settled near the mouth of Mill Creek Canyon, about a mile above the mill, and the following spring planted an orchard and commenced farming. For a number of years the Neff and Russell families were the only settlers in that part of the country now included in the East Mill Creek Ward. In the early days of Utah that upper bench country was considered unfit for cultivation, but some years later its special adaptation for the raising of fruit and alfalfa was discovered, and for many years the locality was known for its excellent quality of hay, garden vegetables and fruits.

Among the settlers on Mill Creek further down the valley were Mary Fielding Smith, widow of the martyred Patriarch Hyrum Smith, and members of his family. Other settlers, who arrived in 1848 and 1849, including the well-known Gardner family, Reuben Miller, Alexander Hill, Joseph Fielding and others, settled at various points on and near Mill Creek and Big Cottonwood Creek. Archibald Gardner and associates built a saw mill and subsequently a flouring mill, about two miles below the John Neff's mill site. In the winter of 1849-1850, religious services were held in Alex Hill's private residence on Big Cottonwood Creek. During the few following years meetings were held in private houses, and in 1853 the first school house, a small adobe building, was erected on the State Road, immediately north of Big Cottonwood Creek. Another small school house, known as the North School House, was built further east, and still another house, 20 by 30 feet, was built in 1855, near the point where the so-called Big Ditch crossed the County Road leading to Union Fort. A similar school house was built a short distance east of the first school house on Big Cottonwood Creek. Still later the so-called Scott School House was built near the northern limits of the ward. A good and substantial meeting house was erected in 1858. At the time of the general "Move" in April and May, 1858, the Mill Creek saints, who left their homes at the approach of Johnston's Army, located temporarily at Spanish Fork, Utah Co., Utah, and some of them at other places.

Joel H. Johnson was the first Bishop of the Mill Creek Ward, being ordained to that position April 8, 1849. He was succeeded in April, 1851, by Reuben Miller, who acted as Bishop until his death in 1882. He was succeeded in 1884 by James C. Hamilton, who in 1907 was succeeded by Brigham F. Price, who died Jan. 30, 1914, and was succeeded by Richard C. Towler, who in 1916 was succeeded by Edward M. Rynearson, who in 1927 was succeeded by Alma Millen Cornwall, who acted as Bishop on Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Mill Creek Ward had 1,154 members, including 223 children.

In an early day Mill Creek was the largest ward in the Church and covered more territory in Salt Lake Valley than any other ward. But as the population grew it became necessary to divide Mill Creek into several wards, and as such Mill Creek may be considered the mother of the following wards: East Mill Creek (organized in 1877), part of Forest Dale (organized in 1896), Winder (organized in 1904), Miller (organized in 1907), Wandamere (organized 1912), Hillcrest (organized in 1924), and Southgate (organized in 1925).
