Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mills

MILLS in Utah. The first grist mill in Utah was built by Charles Crismon in the fall of 1847, and located on City Creek, on what is now Canyon Road where 3rd Avenue crosses it. This mill had one run of small stones and was erected only in a temporary manner to grind the grain on hand brought by the pioneers. It was merely a chopper and having no bolting cloth, the bran and shorts were mixed with the flour.

In the spring of 1848, John Neff, who had arrived in Salt Lake Valley in 1847, erected a flouring mill on Mill Creek, near the mouth of Mill Creek Canyon. This mill commenced operations in time to grind the first grain raised in Utah, or that part of the crop which was saved by the gulls from the crickets. In September of 1848 the Crismon Mill discontinued operations, being no longer needed, and Charles Crismon operated a saw mill in a nearby canyon.

In February, 1848, Isaac Chase and his son, George O. Chase, in partnership with Pres. Brigham Young, erected a grist mill in what is now Liberty Park, and in the same year Archibald and Robert Gardner set up a saw mill in Mill Creek Canyon and by 1850 saw mills were in operation in City Creek, Mill Creek and the two Cottonwood canyons. The Gardner brothers also erected a grist mill on Mill Creek at an early day.

In 1853 Heber C. Kimball built a flour mill in North Mill Creek Canyon, (Bountiful). This was a substantial edifice with foundations of native rock and walls of adobe with sandstone trimmings. At the time of its erection this was the largest flour mill in Utah.

In 1848 Samuel Parrish dressed a pair of mill stones out of solid rock and erected a mill on Duel Creek (Centerville, Davis County). A little grain was ground in that mill, and Bro. Parrish produced also a kind of molasses from corn stalks, which was eagerly sought after.

In 1851 Thomas Howard, a paper-maker from Wales, made an unsuccessful attempt to construct a paper mill. But in 1854 he manufactured paper with a mill brought into the Valley to make beet sugar. He was able to produce wrapping paper and cardboard and even some white paper, upon which the "Deseret News" was printed during the months of August and September, 1854, but not sufficient raw material being obtainable, the project was abandoned.

As early as 1861, machinery having been imported by Pres. Brigham Young for the manufacture of paper, this machinery was put up at Sugar House, Salt Lake City, and rags of all kinds were asked to be sent to the paper mill. But in 1882 a new plant was erected at the mouth of Big Cottonwood Canyon, to which the old machinery was moved and modern machinery installed, which enabled the operators to produce as much as five tons of paper per 24 hours. This building was destroyed by fire in 1895 but, renovated, the edifice is now used as a club house.

A man by the name of William Gaunt commenced a woolen factory about a mile below the Gardner saw mill at West Jordan in 1851, and manufactured woolen cloth as early as 1852, his machinery being manufactured in Utah. But he left the Territory in 1857.

The Deseret Woolen Mills, located in Parley's Canyon, were built by Brigham Young about 1864, and the Wasatch Woolen Mills were erected in the same vicinity by Abraham O. Smoot, John Sharp and Robert T. Burton in 1867. The Provo Woolen Manufacturing Company, established in 1872, on a co-operative basis, supervised by Pres. Brigham Young and Abraham O. Smoot, had, for many years, the largest woolen mill west of the Missouri River, and has given a reputation to Provo as the center of this industry.
