Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Millville Ward

MILLVILLE WARD, Hyrum Stake, Cache Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the little town of Millville, a station on a branch of the Oregon Short Line and the Utah-Idaho Central railroads. Millville is situated in Cache Valley at the base of the Wasatch Mountains, four miles south of Logan, four miles northeast of Hyrum, nine miles northeast of Wellsville, and 66 miles northeast of Salt Lake City. The farming land in the district is rich and productive and water for irrigation purposes is obtained from Blacksmith's Fork and other mountain streams.

Cache Valley was known to trappers at an early day and so named because many of them "cached" their furs at different points there. In 1855 Pres. Brigham Young influenced John T., William H., Abel W. and Benjamin F. Garr, who lived on Antelope Island in the Great Salt Lake, and owned some stock, to locate in Cache Valley, taking their own stock with them and also to have charge of Church stock which had already been taken there. They built three log cabins about 1 1/2 mile northwest of the present center of Millville. This stock was all, however, transferred to another location at the time of the "Move" in 1858. In 1859 the actual settlement of this part of Cache Valley took place, although the Garr brothers had had some land surveyed by Jesse W. Fox at an earlier date. In the fall of 1859 Isaias Edwards from Tooele County located on the east side of Blacksmith's Fork and built the first saw mill in Cache Valley the following year (1860), which gave the place its name. Other settlers followed, and in 1860 Apostle Ezra T. Benson and Peter Maughan (who had been appointed presiding Bishop in Cache Valley) came to the new settlement and organized the saints there as a branch of the Church with Joseph Grafton Hovey as presiding Elder. About a dozen houses were built that year, erected in two rows opposite each other as a protection against Indians. In 1862 a log school house was built, which was also used as a meeting house until 1866, when a rock meeting house was erected. This was replaced by a more modern building in 1880. Joseph G. Hovey was succeeded in 1863 by George O. Pitkin as Bishop, who, after serving for 33 years, was succeeded in 1896 by John E. Roueche, who was succeeded in 1909 by James Jenson, who was succeeded in 1920 by Ernest R. Scott, who was succeeded in 1929 by Franklin Bitters, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time Millville Ward had a membership of 381, including 81 children. The total population of the Millville Precinct in 1930 was 434. Millville belonged to Cache Stake of Zion until 1901, when it became part of the Hyrum Stake. In 1920 the area of Millville Ward was diminished by the organization of a new ward, named Nibley Ward, honoring Bishop Charles W. Nibley. (See Nibley Ward.)
