Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Milton Ward

MILTON WARD, Morgan Stake, Morgan Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the villages of Milton and Littleton and other scattered saints residing on Deep Creek or Line Creek between or adjacent to these two settlements.

Thos. Jefferson Thurston was the first white settler in that part of Weber Valley which is now embraced in the Milton Ward. Accompanied by Jedediah M. Grant and Jesse C. Little he came into the valley in 1856, with a view of locating a cattle ranch, and these three brethren laid claim to several hundred acres of land lying between Line Creek (where Milton is located) and Deep Creek (where Littleton is situated). Thos. J. Thurston built a cabin and brought his family to the district, which later became Littleton, but in 1860 he moved to Milton. In 1861 a number of Scandinavians came to Milton and located on the townsite, which had been named in honor of A. Milton Musser, and Bro. Thurston gave to each family a building lot and from five to ten acres of land. Hulda Cordelia Thurston, Bro. Thurston's daughter, opened a school, where she taught these foreign-born children (and many of their parents) to read and write the English language. A log school house was built in the fall of 1864, which served for all public gatherings until 1868, when a substantial sandstone building was erected for the same purpose. Thos. J. Thurston had charge of ecclesiastical affairs in the district until 1865, when Willard G. Smith was called by Pres. Brigham Young to locate in Weber Valley and preside as Bishop over the saints residing on the south side of the river. He appointed Lars P. Christensen to take charge in Milton, but in July, 1875, a regular branch organization was effected there 201-Encyc. Hist. of Church EGS with Jens Hansen as presiding Elder. When the Morgan Stake was organized July 1, 1877, Milton became a ward with Eli Whitear as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1888 by Joseph Lyman Mecham, who was succeeded in 1893 by Wm. Giles, who was succeeded in 1921 by Joseph F. Spendlove, who was succeeded in 1926 by Joseph Lyman Mecham, jun., who was succeeded later the same year by Herbert J. Whittier, who presided over the Ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 207 members, including 51 children.
