Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Missionary Home

MISSIONARY HOME (The). Practically all who are called to represent the Church as missionaries come first to Salt Lake City. Here they receive instruction, go through the temple, are set apart for their missions by members of the Council of Twelve or of the First Council of Seventy, make arrangements for their journey and leave in groups for their mission headquarters. This has been the policy of the Church for many years. Some of these missionaries, being strangers in Salt Lake City, a suitable place for them to stay while attending to these details was needed and so the establishment of this home for missionaries was suggested by Bishop David A. Smith in 1924. Under the approval of the general authorities, a residence at 31 North State St., near the Church Administration Building, was secured and furnished. On Feb. 3, 1925, the home was dedicated by Pres. Heber J. Grant and the first company of missionaries arrived to occupy the building a few days later. Classes for their benefit were commenced at once and this has now developed into a two weeks course of study of the Scriptures, supplemented by lessons on personal health and hygiene, social usages, etc., by competent teachers. The Salt Lake Transportation Company compliment the missionaries with a free sight-seeing trip around Salt Lake City and vicinity. The missionaries also visit the Bureau of Information and attend the Tabernacle Organ recitals.

A house adjoining the original premises on the north having been added, the accommodations of the home now permit the residence for two weeks without charge of about sixty Elders and twenty lady missionaries at one time. Approximately 5,500 missionaries have been entertained since its organization. Elder LeRoi C. Snow and his wife took charge of the institution at the time of its establishment. They were succeeded in 1928 by Elder John H. Taylor and his wife, who still (1930) take charge of the home.
