Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mississippi River

MISSISSIPPI RIVER became known to the Latter-day Saints in the earliest days of the Church as the missionaries extended their labors through the South. It is known as the Father of Waters, the most important river in North America, and rises at a point 1,680 feet above the level of the ocean in lat. 47 degrees north and long. 95 degrees 54 min. west. It flows through more than 18 degrees of latitude and empties into the Gulf of Mexico through several mouths. Its length is 3,160 miles. Its source is in a small lake called Itasca (the Lac la Biche of the French) in Minnesota, and its waters, until it reaches the Missouri River, are gentle and placid. It then becomes more turbulent, and on account of its volume causes frequent inundations in the country through which it passes. The river is navigable as far as St. Anthony Falls, Minneapolis, Minn. The immense fluviatile deposits at the mouth of the Mississippi, called the Delta, covers an area of not less than 14,000 square miles. In 1853 the Mississippi and its tributaries had upon its waters upwards of 15,000 steamers.

The Mississippi River was discovered in 1541 by Ferdinand de Soto, a Spanish explorer. It was afterwards explored to its mouth by La Salle, a native of Rouen in Normandy, France. The river was first entered from its mouth by D'Iberville in 1699.

In 1840 the emigration of saints from Great Britain was first landed at New Orleans instead of New York. The first ship-load was a company of Scotch saints who sailed from Liverpool Oct. 15, 1840, on the ship "Isaac Newton," and arrived at New Orleans in the evening of Dec. 2, 1840. From that date until the route of emigration from Europe was changed in 1855, about 85 ships carried emigrating saints from Europe to New Orleans; thence river steamers took the emigrants up the Mississippi River, landing them first at Nauvoo and afterwards at points along the Missouri River to the localities designated as outfitting places for the saints crossing the plains to the Rocky Mountains. Several of those companies of saints, especially those from the more northern European countries, suffered much with malarial fever in going up the rivers and many died. This was the main cause why the places of disembarkation were changed from the mouth of the Mississippi River to Atlantic ports.
