Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Missouri

MISSOURI was formed originally from the Louisiana cession. In 1805 the southeast part of the Louisiana Purchase was organized as a territory under the name of Orleans and the north part under that of Louisiana. When Louisiana was admitted into the Union as a state in 1812, the northern part was called Missouri Territory. Missouri was admitted into the Union as a state in 1821. The area of the state is 68,727 square miles. The population of Missouri was 140,455 in 1830; 383,702 in 1840; 682,044 in 1850; 1,182,012 in 1860; 1,721,295 in 1870; 2,168,380 in 1880; 2,679,185 in 1890; 3,106,665 in 1900; 3,293,335 in 1910; 3,404,055 in 1920, and 3,629,367 in 1930.

The name Missouri brings to the mind of a student of the history of the Latter-day Saints a picture of persecution and suffering almost unbelievable in view of the fact that religious freedom is one of the outstanding features of the Constitution of the United States.

The state of Missouri was visited by Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt and three other missionaries as early as 1831 on their way to the Indian tribes beyond the western boundary of that state. After arriving at Independence, two of these brethren, Peter Whitmer, jun., and Richard Ziba Petersen, remained and obtained employment as tailors, while the other three crossed the borders into Indian Territory.

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in June, 1831, at Kirtland, Ohio, Missouri was designated as the place where the saints should gather, and where the next conference of the Church should be held. At this time Jackson County, Mo., was sparsely settled and land could be purchased of the Federal Government for $1.25 per acre.

The first Latter-day Saint colony in Jackson County, Mo., was a branch of the Church emigrating from Colesville, N.Y. These saints having migrated as a body, bought land in Kaw township, about ten miles southwest of Independence, on the Big Blue, under the presidency of Newel Knight, and on Aug. 4, 1831, the first conference of the Church held in Missouri convened in this branch. This was the fifth general conference of the Church. The previous day (Aug. 3, 1831) a site (designated by the Lord) upon which a temple should be built, was dedicated by the Prophet Joseph Smith at Independence, Missouri. To this choice land, bright with promises of future greatness, the saints began to gather, eager to obtain, by purchase, their inheritance in Zion,. Edward Partridge was appointed Bishop of Zion (Jackson County, Mo.), assisted by a council of seven High Priests.

In June, 1832, a newspaper called the "Evening and Morning Star," was commenced at Independence, with William W. Phelps as editor. This was the first periodical published by the Church.

It is estimated that by June, 1833, there were about 1,200 saints, including children, in Jackson County, constituting ten branches of the Church, each of which was in charge of a presiding Elder.

The rapid increase of the saints in Jackson County caused alarm among the older residents of the county, who seemed to fear that before long the Mormons would be in the majority and hold political sway in the county. A mass meeting was held in which it was decided that the residence of Mormons was a menace to the older settlers and that the Mormons must leave. The saints, however, were not willing to be deprived of their land holdings and consequently at first refused to go. On July 20, 1833, the printing office belonging to the saints at Independence was destroyed by a mob, who also tarred and feathered Bishop Edward Partridge and a Brother Allan. In October of the same year a mob attacked a branch of the Church on the Big Blue, destroyed ten houses and severely whipped several of the brethren. Such outrages were perpetrated almost daily until Nov. 5, 1833, when Col. Thomas Pitcher, commander of the mob militia, sustained by Lieut. Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs, demanded that the saints give up their arms, which they did. After that and during the following day the mob drove the saints from their homes at the point of the bayonet, out of Jackson County. About 150 homes were later destroyed by fire. The terrified saints gathered together on the bank of the Missouri River, and, crossing over as fast as possible, were received with sympathy by the citizens of Clay County, who put every vacant house or barn at the disposal of the exiles.

In 1834 Zion's Camp, consisting of about 200 volunteers from Ohio, Michigan and other states, was organized in Ohio, and, under the leadership of the Prophet Joseph Smith, marched into Clay County, Mo., to assist the persecuted saints. They arrived at a point in Clay County June 24th, but cholera broke out among them and the camp was disbanded. (See Zion's Camp.)

On the 3rd of July, 1834, the Prophet Joseph Smith organized a stake of Zion, and a High Council to have charge of the saints in Clay County, Mo. David Whitmer was elected president of the stake, with William W. Phelps and John Whitmer as his counselors. Headquarters were established in the town of Liberty, and for a short time the saints enjoyed comparative peace. But in July, 1836, a committee of the leading citizens of Clay County waited upon the Mormon leaders, stating that the presence of the saints in Clay County was objected to by many, and demanding that they (the saints) dispose of their land holdings and vacate the county. Unwilling to encounter more mob violence, most of the saints then removed to a location selected on Shoal Creek in September, 1838, in an almost uninhabited region of country, attached to Ray County, Mo. In accordance with a request by the leading brethren, this part of the country was organized in December, 1836, as Caldwell County, Mo., with Far West, a town founded by the saints, as the county seat.

At Far West the saints enjoyed comparative peace for a couple of years, and in the summer of 1837 preparations were begun for the building of a temple in the center of the town. At this time there was a population of about 2,000 in Far West. But work was not continued as it became plainly evident that the scenes of Jackson County might be repeated in Caldwell County.

In 1838 a monthly periodical called the "Elders' Journal" was started at Far West. Also in this year a site was selected for a city in Daviess County, Mo., called Adam-ondi-Ahman, a locality said to be the place where Father Adam blessed his posterity three years before his death. A stake of Zion was organized at this place and about 200 families of saints located there, most of whom had migrated from Kirtland. (See Adam-ondi-Ahman.)

Lilburn W. Boggs, who in his capacity of Lieut. Governor of Missouri, had passively permitted the saints to be driven from Jackson County in 1833, renewed his hostilities against them in 1838, as governor of Missouri, and in October, 1838, he issued his infamous "exterminating order" in which he gave the saints the choice between banishment and death.

Encouraged by this attitude of the chief executive of their state, a mob attacked a little settlement of the saints at Hauns Mill, Caldwell County, Oct. 30, 1838, and killed or mortally wounded seventeen men and boys and severely wounded others, and on the same date the mob-militia, about 2,000 strong, surrounded Far West, and on the following day, Oct. 31, 1838, arrested the Prophet Joseph Smith and a number of the leading brethren. The next day (Nov. 1) the brethren in Far West were forced to give up their arms, after which the mob-militia pillaged the town, ravished women and did violence to a number of the brethren. Meantime the Prophet and his brethren had been imprisoned in the jail at Liberty, Clay County, and while there during a night in which, chained and helpless, they were compelled to listen to a recital of the atrocities committed by the mob upon the helpless and unarmed saints, the Prophet rose to his feet, and in a voice of thunder exclaimed, "Silence, ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant." The guards, terrified, shrank into a corner and remained quiet till a change of guards.

On Oct. 25, 1838, a skirmish between about seventy-five of the brethren and a mob encamped on Crooked River, Ray Co., Mo., resulted in the killing of Gideon Carter and mortally wounding of David W. Patten (one of the Twelve Apostles of the Church) and Elder Patterson O'Banion.

By the middle of April, 1839, nearly all the saints in Missouri, variously estimated at from twelve to fifteen thousand, had left the state, most of them fleeing to the state of Illinois, where they built up the City of Nauvoo. (See "Missouri Persecutions" by B. H. Roberts, "Historical Record," and all histories of the Church.)
