Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Moab Ward

MOAB WARD, San Juan Stake, Grand Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Grand Valley, a beautiful oasis in the desert, which is situated on the Colorado River, formerly Grand River, 35 miles south of Thompson's Springs, the nearest railroad station on the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad. Grand Valley, in which Moab is located, is one of the finest valleys in the Rocky Mountain country, surrounded by high bluffs. This valley has an elevation of 4,000 feet, being much lower than any of the surrounding country. The little valley contains some of the richest soil in the whole western country and all kinds of cereals and fine fruits are raised in abundance. Besides farming, the people of Moab are engaged in stock-raising, especially in the sheep industry.

The history of Moab commences with the establishment of the Elk Mountain Mission founded in 1855 by Latter-day Saint missionaries, who located among the Indians for the purpose of preaching the gospel and showing the natives better ways of civilization. (See Elk Mountain Mission.) But as that mission met with disaster and was broken up, the beautiful valley lay uninhabited for a number of years until ranchmen took possession of it and paid exclusive attention to the raising of cattle and sheep. In due course of time, however, Latter-day Saints again entered the valley and founded the present settlement of Moab in 1880. Among the first of these settlers were Orlando W. Warner, Thomas Pritchett and Henry Penny, who located different claims, some of them buying out the former non-Mormon ranchmen. The old Mormon ditches made by the Latter-day Saint missionaries in 1855 were cleaned out and again used for irrigation purposes.

In 1881 Bishop Randolph H. Stewart, of Huntington, Emery Co., Utah, was called by the Church authorities to locate at Moab for the purpose of taking charge of the settlement, and at a meeting held Feb. 15, 1881, attended by Pres. Christen G. Larsen of the Emery Stake and others, the saints residing in Moab or Grand Valley were organized as a ward with Randolph H. Stewart as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1893 by Mons Peterson, who in 1894 was succeeded temporarily by Orlando W. Warner, who later the same year was succeeded by Mons Peterson (serving a second term), who in 1896 was succeeded by Jeremiah Hatch (presiding Elder), who in 1897 was succeeded by David A. Johnson, who in 1903 was succeeded by John P. Larson, who in 1914 was succeeded by John Peterson, who in 1918 was succeeded by Clyde A. Hammond, who in 1921 was succeeded by Walter D. Hammond, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Moab Ward had a Church membership of 608, including 107 children. The total population of the Moab Precinct was 853 in 1930.
