Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Moapa Stake of Zion

MOAPA STAKE OF ZION, Nevada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Lincoln and Clark counties, Nevada, and in a very small part of Arizona, with headquarters at Overton in the Moapa Valley. Stake conferences and other general gatherings are held at Overton, Virgen Valley, Las Vegas and Panaca alternately. There is a stake office building at Overton containing comfortable quarters for the stake presidency, the High Council, etc. The majority of the Latter-day Saints within the limits of the stake are farmers and stock-raisers, while a few also are engaged in business in Las Vegas and other places. The stake (1930) consists of nine fully organized bishop's wards, viz.: Alamo, Bunkerville, Las Vegas, Littlefield, Logandale, Mesquite, Overton, Panaca and Saint Thomas. There are also two organized independent branches, viz.: Pioche and Caliente.

Moapa Stake is an outgrowth of the St. George Stake of Zion. Its history may be said to commence with Latter-day Saint settlements that were founded in the Muddy Valley, now Moapa Valley, in 1865, under the direction of Pres. Brigham Young. Several settlements were commenced that year and many comfortable habitations were built by the saints. In 1868 these L. D. S. settlements were organized as Rio Virgen County, Utah. But in the meantime the territory of Nevada and subsequently the state of Nevada was organized from the west part of Utah, and when a slice of Utah, in 1866, was further added to Nevada, the settlements of the saints in the Muddy Valley, which hitherto had belonged to Utah, were made a part of Nevada and became subject to such exorbitant taxation that the saints, by advice of the authorities of the Church, vacated all their settlements on the Muddy, and founded new homes in Long Valley, Utah.

Soon afterwards non-Mormon ranchmen took possession of the lands and improvements which had been made by the Latter-day Saints, but in due course of time the saints had their attention again drawn to the fertile Moapa Valley with its pleasant semitropical climate, and several of the brethren bought out some of the ranches owned by non-Mormons, and located, with their families, in the valley. As the saints increased in numbers they were organized into a branch of the Church May 6, 1883, by the authorities of the Saint George Stake of Zion. This branch was organized as the Overton Ward in 1885. Later other smaller settlements of saints came into existence, which together with the saints in Panaca, Lincoln County, Nevada, which place was not entirely vacated by the saints when the general exodus took place in 1870, made a community large enough to be organized into a stake of Zion, and so, at a conference of the St. George Stake held June 9, 1912, attended by Apostles Francis M. Lyman and George F. Richards, the saints residing in the settlements of Overton, St. Thomas, Bunkerville, Littlefield, Mesquite, Panaca and Alamo were detached from the St. George Stake and organized as the Moapa Stake of Zion.

Willard L. Jones (formerly Bishop of the Overton Ward) was chosen as president of the new stake, with John M. Bunker, formerly Bishop of Saint Thomas, as first counselor, and Samuel H. Wells as second counselor. In 1917 George L. Whitney succeeded Samuel H. Wells as second counselor. In 1929 John M. Bunker was released and George L. Whitney promoted to first counselor and Frank Edgar Mineer chosen as second counselor to Pres. Willard L. Jones, who acted as president of the Moapa Stake, Dec. 31, 1930, with Elders Whitney and Mineer as counselors. Ellis Turnbough was the first clerk of the Moapa Stake; he was succeeded later in 1912 by N. Ray Pixton, who in 1914 was succeeded by William J. Flowers, who in 1918 was succeeded by Stephen R. Whitehead, who in 1922 was succeeded by Milton S. Earl, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Moapa Stake had a Church membership of 2,752, including 696 children.
