Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Moccasin Branch

MOCCASIN BRANCH, Kanab Stake, Mohave Co., Arizona, consists of a few families of Latter-day Saints residing at Moccasin, and an Indian farm, situated three miles north of Pipe Springs in a cove in the mountains opening out to the desert on the southeast. The valley is about 2 1/2 miles wide. The Moccasin Springs (two springs close together and another spring a short distance away) are the source of a good-sized irrigation stream, in which the water is very good. A reservoir has been built to receive the water when the creek is high. Most of the land at Moccasin Springs is owned by Indians who are taken care of by the government. The Indian village contains a good school house and other buildings. The adjacent village, occupied by white people, is about 18 miles by nearest road southwest of Kanab and 35 miles by roundabout road southwest of Orderville in Long Valley. The white settlers constitute a branch of the Church.

The first title to land held by any white man to any part of the ground around Moccasin Springs was obtained from William B. Maxwell by a Brother Rhodes, who paid Maxwell 80 head of sheep for his claim. Brother Rhodes located at the springs as a ranchman as early as 1864, and he induced Randall Alexander to settle with him. The two together bought such remaining lands from the Indians as these natives still seemed to own. The ranch was vacated in 1866 because of Indian trouble. In 1871 Levi Stewart and others purchased the Alexander claim and divided the stock into eight or ten shares. A company under Louis Allen, consisting of people who had broken up their homes in the Muddy Valley (Nevada), located temporarily at Pipe Springs and Moccasin. Later the Canaan Cattle Company secured some property at Moccasin Springs, of which Lorin Pratt took charge for several years. Still later John Thomas Covington took charge. He was succeeded in 1883 by Christopher B. Heaton, who assisted the Indians in their farming, but without much success, as the Indians were not inclined to work very hard. A branch of the Church was organized as early as 1886 with Christopher B. Heaton as presiding Elder. He presided until 1890, when he moved to Mexico, where he was killed by Mexicans in 1894.

The Moccasin Branch was attached to the Orderville Ward in 1890, and Alvin Franklin Heaton appointed presiding Elder. He presided until 1894, when he sold his claims and moved away. After that only one family remained permanently at Moccasin. But as some of the Heaton boys married and young families came into existence, Jonathan Heaton commenced holding meetings at Moccasin and a Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. were organized. The saints at Moccasin Springs were organized as a regular branch of the Kanab Ward Dec. 4, 1910, with Charles C. Heaton as presiding Elder. He was succeeded Sept. 7, 1913, by Fred C. Heaton. On May 20, 1926, the Moccasin Branch, which hitherto had constituted a part of the Kanab Ward, was organized as an independent branch, with Fred C. Heaton as president. He presided Dec. 31, 1930, when the branch had a membership of 48 souls, including 13 children.
