Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Monroe

MONROE, South Sevier Stake, Sevier Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Monroe and surrounding country. Most of the people reside on the townsite, but a few scattered settlers live on their respective farms, some of them in a sort of string town on Birch Creek, south of Monroe. The farming lands are principally irrigated from the Sevier River through a canal which taps said river about four miles west of the townsite. The town of Monroe, the headquarters of the South Sevier Stake, is situated on elevated ground sloping gently northward towards the Sevier River, half a mile from the foot of the mountains on the east and about six miles from the mountains on the south. Monroe is ten miles south of Richfield, and about 180 miles by railroad southwest of Salt Lake City. Monroe comprises two fully organized bishop's wards, namely, the Monroe North and Monroe South wards. The two wards had a total Church membership of 1,228, including 288 children, Dec. 31, 1930. The total population of Monroe Precinct was 1,640 in 1930; of these 1,247 resided in the town of Monroe.

Late in the fall of 1863 George Wilson and son and two others, who intended to become settlers in that part of Sevier Valley now included in the Monroe Ward, arrived on the present site of Monroe and made a dugout near the present center of the town, which primitive dwelling they finished before Christmas, 1863. The parties named lived in that dugout all alone during the winter of 1863-64, engaged in hauling poles for fencing purposes from the mountains on the east side of the valley. David Griffith and another man arrived Feb. 20, 1864. Bro. Griffith later took the first grist of wheat ever raised in Monroe to Manti for milling. About twenty families altogether arrived in 1864 and founded the settlement of Monroe, which, however, was known from the beginning as South Bend, and afterward as Alma, thus named in honor of the Book of Mormon prophet by that name.

Wiley T. Allred presided over the settlement at the beginning. A good crop was raised in Alma in 1864. A ditch, which taps the Sevier River, about four miles west of the settlement, was made, though the townsite was watered from the Monroe Creek. In the spring of 1865 a few more settlers located at Alma, and Fred Olsen was called to succeed Wiley T. Allred as presiding Elder. Bro. Olsen proved to be an efficient leader and was very much liked by the people. In March, 1865, the Alma Precinct was created by the county court of Sevier County. In July, 1865, Indians attacked the settlement and a battle took place between the mounted militia under Warren S. Snow of Manti and the Indians. During the Indian trouble in 1865 Anthony Robinson, who was returning from Manti with a grist, was ambushed near Rocky Ford south of Salina and killed. Early in 1865 the settlers at Alma built a fort enclosing one block of the town survey. This fort was built of log houses on three sides, while a rock wall ten feet high protected the fort on the east side. This fort was built in nine days. In February, 1866, some of the families at Alma, fearing attack by Indians, moved to Richfield. Several unsuccessful attempts were made by Indians to steal the stock of the settlers. A good harvest of wheat and other cereals and vegetables was raised in Alma in 1866, but in April, 1867, the settlement was vacated, as the Indian hostilities assumed a worse feature than ever before.

A number of teams, sent out by the saints of Sanpete County, arrived in Alma in April, 1867, and assisted the people to move away. The settlers left their homes sorrowfully as many of them had become quite attached to their new location. In 1868 Fred Olsen, the former president of Alma, and others, made an attempt to resettle the place, but were attacked by Indians at North Cedar Ridge between Salina and Richfield. During the engagement that followed, Lars Alex Justeson was killed and a number of the brethren wounded. In November, 1870, Moses Gifford and others arrived on the present site of Monroe to resettle the place, the Black Hawk Indian War having practically been terminated. When these settlers arrived at Alma they found nothing hurt by Indians, but miners and prospectors who had passed through had burned many of the fences, etc., in making their camp fires. Early in the spring of 1871 a number of the brethren who were re-settling Alma brought their families out, making temporary homes in the fort. The settlers applied to the government for a post office which was granted under the name of Monroe, honoring James Monroe, fifth president of the United States. In consequence of this, the name of the settlement was also changed from that of Alma to Monroe.

Moses Gifford was the first presiding Elder at Monroe after the resettling; he was succeeded in 1874 by James Thos. Lisonbee, who presided until 1877, when the Monroe settlement was organized as a bishop's ward with Dennis L. Harris as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1885 by Thomas Cooper, who in 1891 was succeeded by Orson Magleby, who in 1901 was succeeded by Samuel W. Goold, who presided until April 24, 1904, when the Monroe Ward was divided into the Monroe North Ward and the Monroe South Ward.
