Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Monticello Ward

MONTICELLO WARD, San Juan Stake, San Juan Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Monticello, and the neighboring village of Verdure, the former situated on North Montezuma Creek, and the latter on South Montezuma Creek. The town of Monticello, the county seat of San Juan County, is beautifully situated on high ground, six miles east of the Blue Mountains, 16 miles west of the Utah-Colorado boundary line, 47 miles northeast of Bluff, 60 miles by nearest road southeast of Moab, in Grand County, Utah, and 95 miles southeast of Thompson Springs, the nearest railroad station on the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad. The altitude of Monticello is nearly 7,000 feet, and snow frequently falls in the winter to a depth of 18 inches. The place is also exposed to terrible blizzards. All kinds of cereals are raised at Monticello and also the hardier kinds of fruits, principally apples and the smaller fruits.

Monticello, or that part of San Juan County now included in the Monticello Ward, became well known to the early settlers of Bluff and those who located settlements further up on the San Juan River in New Mexico. Among the people who traveled through the country on their way to the older settlements in Utah were Apostles Erastus Snow and Brigham Young, jun., who passed through the country in 1880, and were much pleased with the facilities for a settlement on that level open stretch of country on which Monticello was subsequently built; and in 1887 the settlement of Monticello was founded by Latter-day Saints. A townsite was surveyed, canals and ditches constructed, and houses built on both North and South Montezuma creeks. Those who settled on South Montezuma Creek afterwards became members of the Verdure Branch. In the spring of 1888 other settlers cast their lot with the original settlers on the Montezuma creeks, and at a meeting held March 8, 1888, the Blue Mountain Irrigation Company was organized and the name Monticello given to the new settlement. This year also a L. D. S. meeting house was erected. Fred I. Jones took charge of the Monticello settlement at the beginning. He presided until Aug. 25, 1890, when the saints in Monticello were organized as a ward with Fred I. Jones as Bishop. He presided until 1912, when he was succeeded by Joseph Henry Wood, who in 1917 was succeeded by George J. Jarvis, who in 1920 was succeeded by Oscar W. McConkie, who in 1923 was succeeded by Charles E. Walton, who in 1928 was succeeded by Amasa J. Redd, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Monticello Ward had 384 members, including 77 children. The total population of the Monticello Precinct was 763 in 1930; of these 496 resided in Monticello.

In the early days of the Monticello Ward the pioneer settlers were very much annoyed by outlaw cowboys getting drunk and disturbing the social conditions generally, breaking up dances, etc. On one of these occasions, Sister Walton, president of the Relief Society, was killed, and one of the cowboys, a peaceable fellow, also lost his life.
