Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Moore Ward

MOORE WARD, Lost River Stake, Butte Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a somewhat scattered condition in Lost River Valley. The center of the ward is the railroad town of Moore, which is situated on the Mackay branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad, 18 miles southeast of Mckay, and 67 miles northwest of Blackfoot. Most of the saints live on their respective farms and ranches, and the ward contains some of the best farming land in Lost River Valley. That part of the valley which is irrigated obtains water from ditches which tap Lost River on both sides at different points. Lost River Valley is about five miles wide where Moore is located. The saints in the Moore Ward are, as a rule, prosperous farmers, though their land holdings are comparatively small.

For a number of years before the Lost River Stake was organized, Lost River Valley was a missionary field in the Northwestern States Mission, and constituted a part of the Idaho Conference, including the branches of Darlington, Pass Creek, Leslie and Mackay. L.D.S. Sunday schools were organized in Bartley and Chilly. The first settlers in Lost River Valley were stockmen, who located ranches in different parts of the valley. Later copper and lead ore were discovered near the place where Mackay afterwards came into existence. Among the first L. D. S. settlers in the valley were James King (later of Moore Ward) and William Darnley, who located about a mile west of the present site of Moore. L. D. S. missionaries were sent to Lost River Valley from the Bingham Stake of Zion and later from the Northwestern States Mission. On Feb. 28, 1899, William A. Ricks, a missionary, baptized James King, his wife and two daughters, who had formerly been residents of Logan, Utah. Soon afterwards a branch of the Church called the Lost River Branch was organized with James King as president. At the close of 1902 the Lost River Branch had a membership of 58. James King, who was called on a mission, was succeeded as presiding Elder by Andrew C. Jensen in 1905. In the meantime the number of people who had sometime previously been members of the Church in other places, united with the new converts in building a meeting house in the Lost River Branch, which branch for some time belonged to the Moreland Ward in the Bingham Stake.

On Sept. 16, 1906, Elias S. Kimball, president of the Blackfoot Stake, organized the Lost River Branch into a ward with Andrew C. Jensen, jun., as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1910 by William N. Patten, who in 1919 was chosen as president of the Lost River Stake and was succeeded as Bishop of the Moore Ward by Willard H. Sörensen, who in 1920 was succeeded by John E. Harris, who later in 1920 was succeeded by Vern V. Duke, who in 1923 was succeeded by J. Wesley Anderson, who in 1930 was succeeded by James Knighton, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. The Church membership on that date in the Moore Ward was 196, including 46 children. The total population of the Moore Precinct was 336 in 1930.

Until 1912, when the Arco Ward was organized, the Moore Ward included all the saints in the Big Lost River and Little Lost River valleys. A further division of the ward was made in 1916 when the north part of the ward, including the saints in Darlington, Pass Creek, Leslie, Mackay, Barton, Chilly and Dicky were transferred to the Northwestern States Mission. This reduced the membership in the Moore Ward to about 270, but in 1918, after several families of saints had made homes in the Lost River country, the membership increased to 400.
