Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Moreland Ward

MORELAND WARD, Blackfoot Stake, Bingham Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district in Snake River Valley, in and surrounding Moreland, a station on the Mackay branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad. The townsite is about four miles northwest of Snake River and six miles northwest of Blackfoot.

The first settlers in that part of Snake River Valley now included in the Moreland Ward were Charles E. Liljenquist, Josiah Draper, John England and son (Milo), George England, Joseph W. Hatch and Hans P. Christiansen, who early in 1894 started work on a canal tapping Snake River known as the "People's Canal," the project being in charge of Apostle Franklin D. Richards. In August, 1894, Apostle Heber J. Grant came to the district and chose a location for a townsite, to which the name of Moreland was given at the suggestion of John England, as most of the settlers had come to the valley on account of there being "more land" available for homesteading. For some time the settlers in Moreland belonged to the Riverside Ward, but in 1895 they erected a school house in which the people, nearly all members of the Church, held meetings occasionally. Just north of this building a substantial brick school house was erected in 1900, after which the meeting house was used exclusively for ward purposes.

On March 23, 1896, the Riverside Ward was divided and the Moreland Ward created from the north part of the same with Hans P. Christiansen as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1898 by Warren P. Lindsay, who acted as presiding Elder until September, 1899, when he was ordained a Bishop and appointed to preside over the ward. He acted until 1907, when he was succeeded by Wm. T. England, who was succeeded in 1927 by Wm. C. Cutforth, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Moreland Ward had 510 members, including 124 children. Moreland Ward belonged to the Bingham Stake until 1904, when it was transferred to the Blackfeet Stake of Zion. The total population in the Moreland Precinct was 719 in 1930.
