Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Morelos (or Colonia Morelos)

MORELOS (or COLONIA MORELOS), Juarez Stake, State of Sonora, Mexico, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in the Batetio Valley, situated west of the Sierra Madre Mountains, about 20 miles northwest of Oaxaca, Sonora; 9,000 acres of land in the state of Sonora were purchased for the Colonization Company by Pres. Anthony W. Ivins in 1899, and the first settlers located on this property known as the Batetio Ranch in January, 1900. The townsite of Morelos was located Feb. 11, 1900, and the saints there organized as a branch of the Oaxaca Ward, with Lorenzo S. Huish as presiding Elder. A number of saints from Payson, Utah, were among the first settlers of Morelos.

The early colonists of Morelos constructed a canal at a cost of about $1,200. This canal, tapping the Bavispe River, waters the gardens, orchards, ornamental trees, etc., and also supplies water for culinary purposes. After the floods of 1905 the settlement was moved north into the Batetio Valley where the colonists relied upon the Batetio Creek for their water supply.

During the existence of the colony at Morelos two roller flour mills were erected, the first of which was destroyed by fire in January, 1910, the fire being supposed to be of incendiary origin. The construction of the second mill was begun a week after the loss of the first one, which indicated the enterprise of the owner.

The year 1912 proved to be a very prosperous year in Colonia Morelos. About 300 acres planted in alfalfa produced a good crop and 50,000 bushels of grain were raised the same year. This encouraged the industrious saints of the colony very much and they looked upon it as a reward for their industry and perseverance in overcoming vast difficulties. Little did they know what was in store for them. When the revolution broke out in Mexico in 1912, the flourishing settlement of Morelos became a prey to the rebels or contending military forces, which caused the saints there, as well as all the other L. D. S. settlements in Mexico, to leave all they had and seek refuge in the United States.

Brother John J. Huber, who had acted as ward clerk at Colonia Morelos since the beginning of the settlement, gives a graphic history of the exodus of the saints from the colony, and as the experiences of the saints at Morelos are similar to those which the other L. D. S. settlements passed through, we give excerpts from the story recorded by Brother Huber under date of Oct. 7, 1912:

"In dealing with the Mexican government under Pres. Diaz the Mormons were treated fairly and every encouragement offered to have them remain in the country. Under Pres. Madero's administration the president himself and his associates accorded the saints every consideration possible under the circumstances, but the local authorities have been very oppressive and overbearing. No protection was given the colonists by the local authorities during the past two years against lawlessness.

"Among the first local outbreaks was that of November, 1911, when one Isidro Escobosa, with about 70 men, attacked the El Tigre mining camp some distance from the colonies and, being repulsed there, came to Morelos with his men, but did not remain long, retiring to and pitching his camp in a canyon about five miles northeast. They were followed immediately by 100 mounted federal cavalry, who entered Morelos and camped on the streets of the town, remaining two days, but during that time and never afterwards making any move to go out after Escobosa and his band of outlaws. While in Morelos the federal cavalry took and slaughtered cattle, ordered hay, which was furnished, giving receipts for the same, informing the Mormons that value of the things taken and received by them would be paid for at Agua Prieta when the receipts were presented. These receipts were never honored."
