Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mormon Battalion

MORMON BATTALION. While the Latter-day Saints, as exiles from Nauvoo, were wending their weary way across the prairies of Iowa in 1846, they were overtaken by Capt. James Allen, a representative of the U. S. Government, who called upon the saints to furnish a battalion to participate in the war between the United States and Mexico. The response was prompt and hence the so-called Mormon Battalion, consisting of about 500 men (besides laundresses and a few accompanying families), were organized into five companies of soldiers in July, 1846. The Battalion marched first to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, where the men received their accoutrements and general outfits for crossing the continent, and the great march westward was commenced Aug. 13, 1846, from Fort Leavenworth. In the meantime Capt. James Allen took sick and died, and the Battalion was placed in charge of Lieut. A. J. Smith, an officer of the U. S. Army. The route of travel from Fort Leavenworth was in a southwesterly direction until the Arkansas River was reached. There a small company of the soldiers and some of the families were detached from the Battalion and marched to Bent's Fort, and thence to Pueblo. The main body of the Battalion continued their journey to Santa Fe, New Mexico, where they arrived Oct. 12, 1846. Here Col. Philip St. George Cooke took charge of the Battalion, which was further divided by detaching the soldiers who were sick, or unable to march further, and the families who had accompanied the Battalion so far, in charge of Capt. James Brown, and sending them to Pueblo to winter.

The main body of the Battalion, including five of the women, then continued the journey down the Rio Grande Del Norte for about 200 miles, when a further or third division of the Battalion took place, and 50 men Were sent under Lieut. W. W. Willis on the back track to Santa Fe and thence across the country to Pueblo, where they, together with the sick detachment under James Brown, spent the winter of 1846-1847. After Lieut. Willis had left with his men, the main body of the Battalion traveled through New Mexico and what is now Arizona over deserts and mountains to California, arriving at San Diego Jan. 31, 1847, after a march of over two thousand miles, blazing the trail much of the way. History will be searched in vain for an equal march of infantry.

After serving their country as per enlistment one year, the Battalion was disbanded at Los Angeles July 16, 1847, having rendered efficient service in restoring peace and goodwill among the Mexican inhabitants of California. One company of the Battalion, however, enlisted for another six months and rendered further military service at San Diego.

The majority of the Battalion boys, after their discharge, marched northward over mountains and through the San Joaquin Valley to Sutter's Fort on the Sacramento River, and thence crossed the Sierra Nevada Mountains into what is now the Nevada deserts on their way to the Great Salt Lake Valley, where some of the men expected to meet their families. But having traveled as far as the Truckee River, the Battalion boys met James Brown of the sick detachment of the Mormon Battalion, who carried advice from the authorities of the Church with instructions to the discharged soldiers to spend the winter in California if they chose to do so, as provisions were scarce with the pioneers who were rounding Salt Lake City. Complying with this advice, about half of the Battalion boys returned to California to find employment for the winter, in which they succeeded, and in January, 1848, while some of the brethren were engaged in building a sawmill on the American River, they discovered gold at a place now known as Coloma, which caused the well known rush to the gold mines the next season. Later in 1848, most of the Battalion boys made their way to Great Salt Lake Valley and there joined the main body of the Church. Still later some of the Battalion boys with their families assisted in founding the Latter-day Saint settlement of San Bernardino, in southern California. (For further details see "Historical Record", Vol. 8, pp. 905-938. History of the Mormon Battalion by Daniel Tyler and Comprehensive History of the Church by B. H. Roberts.)
