Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mormon Ward

MORMON WARD, Bannock Stake, Bannock Co., Idaho, consisted during its existence from 1881 to 1892, of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming and ranching district situated on the west side of Bear River in Gentile Valley. The inhabitants were mostly ranchers who had located on the numerous little streams which rise in the mountains on the west side of the valley and course their way into Bear River. The principal stream in the district is Cottonwood Creek which rises in the mountains southwest and empties into Bear River near the Mormon Ward meeting house.

In 1891 Barnard White of Ogden, Utah, built a flume across Bear River to carry water from Trout Creek on the east side of the river to his ranch on the west. side. Mormon Ward extended from the junction of Cottonwood Creek and Bear River on the south and northward about 17 miles to Hendrick's Springs. The center of the ward, where the Thatcher meeting house is now (1930) located, is 15 miles southwest of Grace, 32 miles by mountain road northeast of Oxford in Cache Valley, 21 miles southwest of Soda Springs, and 30 miles northeast of Preston.

Non-Mormons, who had settled on the west side of Bear River, were strong in their determination not to sell out any of their claims to Mormons, but Solomon H. Hale, who moved into Gentile Valley with his family Dec. 18, 1874, bought out the Tunley Ranch on Burton Creek and was the first Mormon settler on the west side of Bear River in Gentile Valley. Other Mormons soon followed, though some of them were at first actually driven out of the valley at the point of the pistol, some of the non-Mormons being determined to control that side of the valley and prevent the Mormons from getting a foothold there. Associated with the gentiles in this plan were a few apostate Mormons. In due course of time, however, nearly all the gentiles sold out to Mormons, who soon became numerous enough to be organized into a branch of the Church, and on Jan. 1, 1881, the Mormon Ward (thus named in contradistinction to Gentile Valley) was organized with Solomon H. Hale as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1884 by John B. Thatcher, who in 1888 was succeeded by Ernest F. Hale, who acted until 1892, when Mormon Ward was divided and the north part of the same organized as the Thatcher Ward, and the saints in the south part were merged into the Cleveland Ward, previously organized.
