Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Moroni

MORONI, Moroni Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints and others residing in the Moroni Precinct, of which the city of Moroni, centrally located in Sanpete Valley, contains the bulk of the inhabitants. Only a few families reside on their farms immediately outside of the city limits. Water for irrigation purposes is taken out of the Sanpitch River at different points and conducted to the land in canals. Moroni is an important station on a branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, 19 miles north northeast of Manti, the county seat, 22 miles southeast of Nephi, Juab Co., and 115 miles by rail southeast of Salt Lake City. The Moroni townsite is considerably broken, consisting, as it does, of rolling hills, and the soil is highly pregnated with minerals, owing to which fruit culture has not proven very successful. Moroni contains a fine rock meeting house, or tabernacle, beautifully situated on an eminence overlooking a great part of Sanpete Valley. Moroni can boast of a fine flouring mill, several stores and many fine residences.

Moroni is one of the eight original settlements in Sanpete Valley and was founded by George W. Bradley and others in March, 1859. The first townsite was surveyed on the banks of the Sanpitch, on the lowlands, but that location proved wet and marshy. A new townsite, according to advice from Pres. Brigham Young, was surveyed on the rolling hills northward where a flourishing settlement soon sprang into existence. The place was named Moroni from the beginning, honoring a city of that name mentioned in the Book of Mormon, George W. Bradley was ordained a Bishop July 14, 1859, after having presided over the destinies of the colony from the beginning. Brother Bradley presided until 1868, when Lars Svendsen took temporary charge and presided one year, until George W. Bradley returned from a mission to the United States. He then served a second term as Bishop from 1869 to 1877, and was succeeded by John W. Irons, who in 1901 was succeeded by Orlando Bradley, who presided until 1920, when the ward was divided into the Moroni East and the Moroni West wards.

During the Black Hawk War the people of Moroni built a fort as a means of protection against the Indians, and during one season the people of Fountain Green shared this fort with the Moroni saints.

The Church membership of the two Moroni wards on Dec. 31, 1930, was 1,205, including 219 children. The total population of the Moroni Precinct was 1,385 in 1930; of these 1,218 resided in the city of Moroni.
