Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Morrisites

MORRISITES. This is the name of a sect which, under the leadership of Joseph Morris, a former member of the Church, was organized April 6, 1861, in Weber County, Utah. Kingston Fort, just below the mouth of Weber Canyon, was chosen as the gathering place for the sect, Richard Cook, Bishop of Kingston, with several members of the ward, having joined the Morrisite movement. Richard Cook and John Banks (formerly a prominent missionary in Great Britain) became counselors to Joseph Morris.

One of the tenets of the faith of the Morrisites was that the coming of the Savior was close at hand, and the members were therefore instructed to prepare only for immediate needs. And, while waiting for the coming of the Lord, they armed themselves, engaged in drills and prepared to enlist under his banner, when he should arrive.

Seceders were not allowed to leave the settlement except by permission of the leading authorities of the organization, and then they must leave all their property for the benefit of the community. In 1862 three dissatisfied members, Wm. Jones, Lars Chr. Geertsen and John Jensen, attempted to escape, taking with them a team and wagon, but were captured and imprisoned and Wm. Jones was even put in irons. Further attempt to escape was to be punished by death. Lars Chr. Geertsen, however, got away and the civil authorities in Salt Lake City were notified of the enforced captivity of the other two.

Chief Justice John F. Kinney issued a writ for Joseph Morris, Richard Cook, John Banks and Peter Klemgaard, ordering them to bring these unlawfully detained prisoners to Salt Lake City and appear themselves to show cause for their actions. The marshal, when attempting to serve this writ, was informed that the Morrisites as a community recognized no law but their own and that they would not respond to the writ.

On the return of the marshal to Salt Lake City a writ for the arrest of the Morrisite leaders for contempt of court was issued, and on account of the known fanaticism of the Morrisites, a force of militia, in charge of Col. Robert T. Burton, was called out to act in conjunction with the marshal in the enforcement of the law.

The posse arrived on a bluff near the Morrisite settlement June 13, 1862, when Major Howard Egan and an escort were sent towards the fort with a white flag, expecting to be met by a like deputation from the fort and adjust the matter quietly. No notice, however, was taken of the approach of Major Egan, who then returned to the posse.

A proclamation was then sent to the fort in the hands of a herd boy who had friends in the settlement, notifying Joseph Morris of the intentions of the posse and advising that the prisoners and the five officials named (Joseph Morris, John Banks, Richard Cook, John Parsons and Peter Klemgaard) be surrendered into the custody of the posse. If this was not done within thirty minutes, it was suggested that the women and children and all persons peaceably inclined should be permitted to leave the fort in case of attack.

Upon receipt of this message a meeting of the Morrisites was called. They assembled in the bowery while Joseph Morris retired in order to receive a revelation upon the subject. The revelation stated that this was the commencement of the troubles which had been predicted by their Prophet (Joseph Morris); the surrender of the officials was forbidden and a promise made that not a hair of the heads of the faithful should be harmed.

In the meantime, not receiving any reply to his communication, Col. Burton ordered the artillery to fire two balls from the cannon, at a point beyond the fort, hoping to frighten the insurgents into surrendering. One ball went over the fort into the bluff beyond, but the second struck the ground in front of the settlement and rebounding crashed through the brush roof of the bowery, killing two women and fearfully wounding another. The meeting dismissed in confusion and later two men, with their families, waving handkerchiefs, left the fort and sought protection from the posse. Soon afterwards, the two prisoners, having been set free, came out of the fort, waving a white flag and claimed protection. During the rest of the day a few shots were fired on both sides and Jared Smith, one of the posse, was killed.

Finding the Morrisites so determined in their fanaticism, Col. Robert T. Burton, the following day, sent a special messenger to Acting Governor Fuller asking advice. The answer stated that in view of the fact that one of the posse, an officer of the law, had been killed, the writs must be delivered and the dignity of the law of the United States be maintained.

So, on June 15th (1862), a formal attack upon the fort was made which resulted in the killing of Joseph Morris and two women, who in their fanatical frenzy clung to him, and in the death of his counselor, John Banks. During the engagement on this day, John Peter Wahlin, another member of the posse, was killed.

With the death of their leaders, further resistance from the Morrisites ceased, and a number of the leading men, being arrested, were taken to Salt Lake City for trial. Richard Cook, Peter Klemgaard and Christian Nielson were remanded to prison and the balance were released on bail, becoming sureties for each other, and were finally acquitted.

This practically ended the existence of the Morrisite faction, but some of them subsequently located near Soda Springs, Idaho, where a small town called "Morristown" was built up and existed for a number of years.
