Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Moulton Ward

MOULTON WARD. Raft River Stake, Idaho, consists of the /b Latter-day Saints residing in Junction Valley (formerly Meadow Valley) in Cassia County, Idaho, and Box Elder County, Utah. This valley has an elevation of 6,000 feet and extends from north to south about 20 miles with an average width of three miles. The south half of this valley is in Utah and the northern part in Idaho. Meetings are held in the Woodrow schoolhouse, which occupies a central position in the valley.

The first settlers in Junction Valley were John Lind and his half-brother, Alexander Anderson, with their families. These brethren arrived in the spring of 1882 and selected claims in the extreme south end of the valley, this location being in Utah. Prior to this the valley had been only occupied by stock men who objected to the coming of permanent settlers. But a few other L. D. S. families took up land in the district and a Sunday school was organized for their benefit in 1913, with John D. Baker as superintendent.

On Aug. 9, 1914, a branch of the Church was organized with James Parley Howell as presiding Elder, and meetings were commenced in the Woodrow school house. There was a school building in the north part of the valley known as the Moulton School and another in the south part of the valley known as the Junction school house, but the Woodrow School, more centrally located, is about two miles south of the Idaho-Utah boundary line, and 30 miles southwest of Malta, the headquarters of the Raft River Stake. On April 23, 1916, the Moulton Ward was organized; a post office of that name had previously been established in the district. David Saunders was chosen as Bishop of the new ward. He was succeeded in 1921 by Ernest D. Simper, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930, at which time it had a membership of 64, including 17 children. The total population of the Moulton Precinct was 42 in 1930.
