Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mound Fort Ward

MOUND FORT WARD, Weber Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in a district within the corporate limits of Ogden City, bounded on the north by the Harrisville Ward, on the east by the mountains, on the south by the Ogden River, and on the west by the Marriott Ward. Mound Fort was for many years considered a suburb of Ogden, and was a fertile farming district with Washington Avenue passing through the center of it from north to south. It is still one of the best fruit-growing districts in Weber County and contains some beautiful modern residences. All the inhabitants were Latter-day Saints with but very few exceptions.

Mound Fort as a settlement dates back to the fall of 1848, when Ezra Chase and family and others, who had arrived in the "Valley" that year, located on the north side of Ogden River on the spot where Farr's Fort afterwards was built. The first settlers turned a part of the water of Ogden River into an old channel now known as Mill Creek. Several log houses were built and with Mill Creek on the north and the Ogden River on the south the location became practically an island. Farr's Fort was built about one mile east of Washington Avenue. In 1849 and 1850 other settlers located north of Ogden River. In the spring of 1850 successful farming was commenced, and several cabins were erected. After the killing of Terrekee, an Indian chief, in 1850, the people were counseled to move together for the sake of protection. This led to the building of Farr's Fort on the bottom lands, between Mill Creek and the Ogden River.

Erastus Bingham, by appointment, took charge of meetings held in Farr's Fort. In the spring of 1851 some of the buildings which had been erected in Farr's Fort were moved out onto the farming land, later included in the Mound Fort Ward. It is estimated that about 15 families altogether located in Mound Fort that year. Erastus Bingham took charge of all the saints north of the Ogden River, and when Bingham's Fort was located in 1853, he also took charge of the saints there.

When the Indians in Weber County became hostile in 1853, it was deemed necessary for the settlers to "fort up," hence, forts were located in different parts of the county. One of these was Mound Fort (known later as the "Terrace Subdivision" of Ogden), which enclosed about 30 acres of land surveyed into small lots, and another one called Bingham's Fort was located about two miles northwest of Mound Fort, or about half a mile west of the present "Five Points." At Mound Fort meetings were held under the direction of David Moore in private houses, as no school house was built in that fort until later. The mud walls intended to enclose Mound Fort were never completed, but a bib trench was built on the top of the mound to protect the settlers against attack from the west side.

In the summer and fall of 1855 both Mound Fort and Bingham's Fort were broken up according to the advice of Pres. Brigham Young, and most of the people moved into Ogden, in order to make that town strong and safe against Indians and other enemies. In November, 1863, Amos P. Stone was appointed presiding Elder in the Mound Fort vicinity. He was succeeded in 1870 by Alfred Randall, who later the same year, was succeeded by David Moore, who presided until May, 1877, when the Mound Fort District was organized as a regular bishop's ward with David Moore as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1892 by James Taylor, who presided until the Weber Stake was divided in 1908, when the Mound Fort Ward was discontinued and the north part of the same lying east of Washington Avenue was added to the Lynne Ward and became a part of the Ogden 8th Ward. That part of the Mound Fort Ward lying west of Washington Avenue was joined to the Ogden 3rd Ward and became the Ogden 10th Ward. On the same occasion that part of Ogden lying between 11th St. and Canyon Road was added to that part of the Ogden 3rd Ward lying north of Ogden River and east of Washington Avenue and became the Ogden 7th Ward.
