Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mount Carmel Ward

MOUNT CARMEL WARD, Kanab Stake, Kane Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the lower end of Long Valley. Most of them reside in the village of Mount Carmel, which is beautifully situated on the upper Rio Virgen, 2 1/2 miles below Orderville, seven miles southwest of Glendale, and 20 miles northwest of Kanab. Since the construction of the highway from Kanab to Zion Canyon, Mount Carmel is within 20 miles of Zion Canyon and 87 miles northeast of St. George. Mount Carmel is surveyed into a regular townsite with blocks 30 rods square.

Mount Carmel as a settlement dates back to 1864 when Priddy Meeks settled in the lower end of Long Valley. He lived there several months alone, but early in 1865 other settlers arrived and considerable improvements were made, a townsite surveyed and houses built. On account of troubles with the Navajo Indians, the pioneer settlers of Winsor, later Mount Carmel, moved to Berryville, the oldest town in Long Valley, and spent the winter of 1865-1866 there, but they moved back to their own location in 1866. The place was originally called Winsor in honor of Anson P. Winsor, the Bishop of Grafton, whose jurisdiction originally extended over the saints in Long Valley, where Silas Hoyt was the first presiding Elder. He, however, was succeeded by Henry B. M. Jolley after the Winsor people moved back from Berryville. Notwithstanding the precaution and the strengthening of the settlements in Long Valley, the Indians continued hostile, and so both Winsor and Berryville were vacated in 1866. In March, 1871, a company of settlers from St. Joseph, on the Muddy, Nevada, arrived in Long Valley as an organized body, Daniel Stark being their Bishop, and he at once took charge of the settlement. In the resettling of Winsor, the town was named Mount Carmel, and in the beginning constituted a part of the Long Valley Ward. The name Mount Carmel was suggested by Joseph A. Young and adopted by the people at the time of the resettling. Daniel Stark was succeeded later by Israel Hoyt, who presided until March 5, 1877, when the Mount Carmel Branch was organized as the Mount Carmel Ward with Henry B. M. Jolley as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1892 by Haskell S. Jolley, who in 1900 was succeeded by Hans C. Sorensen, who in 1925 was succeeded by Osmer Lamb, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Mount Carmel Ward had a membership of 110, including 26 children. The total population of the Mount Carmel Precinct was 133 in 1930.
