Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mount Pisgah

MOUNT PISGAH, Iowa, was one of the temporary settlements founded by the Latter-day Saints while journeying westward from Nauvoo, Illinois, to the Missouri River in 1846. The townsite was located in Sec. 8 of the Jones Township in Union County, Iowa, six miles northeast of Afton, the county seat, and a mile and a half north of Talmadge, the nearest railway station. Mount Pisgah, which gave the name to the settlement, is a narrow ridge running from southwest to northeast between the middle fork of Grand River and Pisgah Creek. Along this ridge the Chicago, St. Paul and Kansas City Railway runs for some distance, passing within 20 rods of the Mormon cemetery where about one hundred and fifty saints are resting, and where a monument was erected to their memory in 1888.

When the saints were forced in 1846 to vacate Nauvoo, Illinois, they began their famous journey westward towards the Rocky Mountains and the advance company, after traveling 145 miles, established a temporary settlement in what is now Decatur Co., Iowa, which they called Garden Grove. Here they planted grain while others, continuing the journey westward, reached Grand River, where there was a garden spot and a grove of fine trees. Here they established another settlement which later became known as Mount Pisgah, a name given to the locality by Apostle Parley P. Pratt. Pres. Brigham Young and several of the Church leaders arrived at the location May 18, 1846, and farming was commenced, some of those who had labored at Garden Grove coming on to Mt. Pisgah to assist in the work there. In the beginning of June Pres. Brigham Young and many of the leaders left Mt. Pisgah to continue the journey westward, leaving Elder William Huntington in charge of the settlement, assisted by Ezra T. Benson and Charles C. Rich. Pres. Young advised these brethren to fence a farm of 500 to 1,000 acres, surveying the land into five, ten and twenty acre lots. On May 31st it had become necessary to locate a site for a graveyard as Elder Noah Rogers, lately returned from a mission to the South Sea Islands, died and was buried therein. (See From Kirtland to Salt Lake, by J. A. Little, page 53.)

Other migrating saints arrived in the little colony until the population numbered over 2,000 souls, but the mortality among them was quite heavy, due to exposure and hardships endured on account of leaving their homes to avoid mob violence, and the records show that about 150 persons died at Mt. Pisgah during the first six months of its settlement. Robert Campbell was appointed clerk and postmaster for the colony.

In July, 1846, the little colony was called upon to raise its quota for the Mormon Battalion, which it did, thus losing many of the able-bodied men who were needed by their families. In August, 1846, it was reported that the saints at Mt. Pisgah were "enjoying peas, cucumbers and beans, that corn had silked out and buckwheat was in flower. There was a good prospect for crops of potatoes, melons, pumpkins and squash."

On Aug. 19, 1846, Wm. Huntington died and Charles C. Rich succeeded him as presiding Elder in the settlement. He was succeeded in 1847 by Lorenzo Snow.

On account of the call of the Mormon Battalion, Pres. Young was unable to continue the journey westward further than the Missouri River in 1846 and a settlement known as Winter Quarters, Neb., was established on the west side of the river. Meantime the settlements of Garden Grove and Mt. Pisgah were constantly receiving additions of families anxious to go west in the spring.

Pottawattamie County, Iowa, having been organized in September, 1848, Mt. Pisgah became a precinct of said county and the county commissioners laid out a road from Mt. Pisgah to Council Bluffs.

In 1852 the settlement of Mt. Pisgah was broken up, the saints there being advised to unite with their co-religionists in the Rocky Mountains.

Later the Mt. Pisgah townsite, with its burying ground, became the property of a Mr. White, whose son, Alfred C. White, later owned the farm. Mr. White and his family always respected the old cemetery and in 1888 part of the land was purchased, upon which a granite shaft was raised. Upon this were engraved the names of a number of those who are known to have been inferred in the cemetery at Mount Pisgah.
