Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mount Pleasant

MOUNT PLEASANT, North Sanpete Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consists principally of the Latter-day Saints residing in the city of Mount Pleasant and constitutes two fully organized bishop's wards, viz., the Mount Pleasant North and the Mount Pleasant South wards. Both of these wards have fine and commodious meeting houses. Mount Pleasant is the largest town in Sanpete County and the headquarters of the North Sanpete Stake of Zion. It is one of the original eight Latter-day Saint settlements founded in Sanpete Valley.

In 1852 a sawmill was built on Pleasant Creek and a little settlement was commenced there by pioneers, who built a fort and made their first attempts at farming. But owing to Indian hostilities the settlement was broken up in 1853, and it was not until 1859 that the actual settlement of Mount Pleasant took place. In that year William Seely and others arrived, built houses, and made permanent improvements, since which Mount Pleasant has ever grown in wealth and population. James R. Ivie was the first presiding Elder in Mt. Pleasant, but he was succeeded July 10, 1859, when William S. Seely was chosen as Bishop of the ward called Mount Pleasant. Brother Seely acted in that position until July 4, 1877, when Mt. Pleasant was divided into two wards, viz., the Mt. Pleasant North Ward and the Mt. Pleasant South Ward. These two wards existed side by side until May 20, 1890, when they were amalgamated and all the saints in Mt. Pleasant by this change again constituted only one ward with Christian N. Lund as Bishop. He acted in that capacity until 1900, when he was chosen as president of the North Sanpete Stake of Zion, and Mt. Pleasant was then again divided into two wards, namely, the Mt. Pleasant North and the Mt. Pleasant South wards, the boundary line between the two wards being established on the street running east and west south of the meeting house block. On Dec. 31, 1930, the two Mt. Pleasant wards had a total membership of 2,057, including 271 children. The total population of the Mt. Pleasant Precinct was 2,628 in 1930; of these 2,284 resided in Mt. Pleasant city.
