Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mount Trumbull Ward

MOUNT TRUMBULL WARD, St. George Stake, Mojave Co., Arizona, consists of about 25 families of Latter-day Saints living in a mountainous country covered with cedars, about 65 miles southeast of St. George and about 15 miles from the north rim of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River. The families live very much scattered on farms made in the openings between the cedars.

Mount Trumbull, a mountain in northern Arizona, first came into prominence at the time that the St. George Temple was being erected. A sawmill was built there to furnish lumber and timber for the temple and for the building of other edifices for the saints in southern Utah. This mill was situated in the mountains about 25 miles east and 60 miles south of St. George, Utah. The brethren who were employed at the sawmill were organized into a branch of the Church called the Mount Trumbull Branch Feb. 8, 1874, with Ebenezer Bryce as presiding Elder. Warren R. Tenney was placed in charge of the sawmill at Mount Trumbull. After the completion of the St. George Temple this mill was moved from Mount Trumbull in August, 1877, to the Mogollon Mountains in Arizona, 40 miles west of the point where Captain Lot Smith and company at that time were locating settlements on the Little Colorado River. Immediately after being rebuilt, the mill commenced to saw lumber for the benefit of the Latter-day Saints in the Little Colorado Valley.

While the sawmill was located at Mount Trumbull, the brethren who worked there lived in a sort of United Order. After the completion of the temple in St. George, other sawmills were built at Mount Trumbull in order to get lumber for the settlements in southern Utah, especially St. George. Both day schools and Sunday schools, as well as meetings, were held somewhat regularly at Mount Trumbull, especially in the summer season, when quite a number of the brethren were employed around the mill, some of whom had their families with them. Besides being engaged in the lumber business, some of the brethren established ranches and a permanent branch organization existed for a number of years. This branch belonged to the St. George 1st Ward in 1892.

In 1912 a number of the L. D. S. exiles from Mexico, who were looking for new homes, settled in the timbered country of Mount Trumbull, and after a number of these had established themselves there, making improvements, they were organized into a branch of the Church Oct. 11, 1922, with Abraham Bundy as presiding Elder. This branch was organized as the Mount Trumbull Ward Nov. 11, 1928, with Roy Bundy as Bishop. He presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Mount Trumbull Ward had 123 members, including 32 children.
