Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Mountain Dell Ward, Granite Stake

MOUNTAIN DELL WARD, Granite Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in Parley's Canyon in the heart of the Wasatch Mountains and on Parley's Creek (originally called Canyon Creek) and its tributaries. Mountain Dell is 14 miles southeast of the center of Salt Lake City, and its altitude is 5,300 feet above sea level. All kinds of vegetables were raised, including potatoes, of which some samples weighed four pounds each.

In 1850 Apostle Parley P. Pratt built a toll road from the main forks of this canyon, which road was opened for traffic July 4, 1850, under the name of the Golden Gate. This road, however, was soon afterwards washed out by floods.

Among the first settlers in Mountain Dell were Ephraim K. Hanks and Augustus (Gus) P. Hardy, who in 1858 established a trading post in the canyon for the accommodation of travelers. At their "hotel" meals cost from $1.00 to $2.50 and a hundred pounds of sugar sold for $125.00.

Hanks and Hardy left the canyon, and when in 1860 Leonard G. Hardy took charge of the locality and remained there for several years, it became known as "Hardy's Place." In due course of time several saw mills were built in Parley's Canyon, and farming at the "Dell" was commenced. For the benefit of these pioneer settlers a branch of the Church was organized in March, 1867, with Josiah G. Hardy as presiding Elder. The branch was made a part of the Salt Lake City 12th Ward, of which the Hardy families were members.

In 1869 a more completely organized branch, named Mountain Dell, was established, with James Laird as presiding Elder, the branch being then under the jurisdiction of the Sugar House Ward bishopric. The saints then erected a log meeting house, which in 1894 was replaced by a substantial rock school house that served also for religious services. On Sunday, Aug. 20, 1882, the saints at Mountain Dell were organized as a ward, with William B. Hardy as Bishop; at that time the ward population, including children, was about 100.

William B. Hardy presided as Bishop at Mountain Dell from 1882 to 1895 when the ward organization was discontinued and Bines Dixon appointed presiding Elder.

The water of Parley's Creek having been purchased for the use of Salt Lake City in 1918, the natural basin, known as Mountain Dell, was converted into a reservoir. But previous to that the people had left the location.

Mountain Dell belonged to the Salt Lake Stake until January, 1900, when it became a part of the newly organized Granite Stake.
