Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Muddy Mission

MUDDY MISSION, so-called, consisted of Latter-day Saints who resided in the Muddy Valley, now Moapa Valley, from 1865 to 1871. The Moapa country was known to Latter-day Saint settlers in southern Utah as a lonely barren desert, which was made still more forbidding by being occupied by marauding Indians, who were always ready to attack weak and defenseless travelers, and neglected no opportunity to prey upon the animals of the whites. Some of the brethren who had been on Indian missions in southern Utah formed an extensive acquaintance with the Indians in Muddy Valley, and some of them, including Ira Hatch, experienced considerable hardship. In the latter part of 1864 Pres. Brigham Young called Thomas S. Smith of Farmington, Davis Co., Utah, to take the lead in establishing settlements of Latter-day Saints on the Muddy, a tributary of the Rio Virgen, which is a tributary of the Colorado River. The town of St. George and other settlements on the Rio Virgen had been established some years before, and the authorities of the Church had ascertained that there were other valleys of even lower altitude than St. George, where cotton and other semi-tropical products could be raised successfully, the climate and altitude being compared to other parts of the United States where cotton was raised. Another object which Pres. Young had in view in connection with the establishment of settlements on the Muddy was the possibility of shipping emigrants and freight from Europe and the eastern part of the United States to the settlements of the saints in Utah, by way of the Isthmus of Panama, and then ship by water course northward along the west coast of Central America and Mexico up the Gulf of California and the Colorado River as high up as navigation was possible. Thomas S. Smith and his company of pioneers arrived in the Muddy Valley early in 1865. He was followed by others until the new colony numbered nearly 50 families. These colonizing missionaries located Saint Thomas and Saint Joseph and on May 28, 1865, the saints at St. Thomas were organized as a ward with Thomas S. Smith as Bishop. On the same occasion the settlers at St. Joseph were organized as a branch of the St. Thomas. Ward with Warren Foote as president.

When Thomas S. Smith returned north in the fall of 1866, James Leithead was appointed to take charge of the settlements on the Muddy. In December, 1868, the population of St. Thomas was 216. The settlers in the Muddy Valley were organized into a county called Rio Virgen County Feb. 15, 1869, with Joseph W. Young as probate judge. In the meantime a settlement of the saints was formed at West Point, further up the valley. The saints who had settled at Overton were organized as a branch of the Church in the fall of 1869 with Helaman Pratt as presiding Elder. At the close of 1869 the Muddy Mission consisted of St. Joseph, St. Thomas, Overton, West Point and Junction City (later called Rioville). Considerable prosperity followed the activities of the saints in the Muddy Valley until the west part of Utah, including the settlements in the Muddy Valley, was transferred to Nevada, and the taxes levied by the new state of Nevada against the struggling Mormon colonies in the Muddy Valley became so oppressive that the saints left their homes in said valley in 1871 and migrated to Utah, where most of them settled in Long Valley, now in Kane County, Utah. This ended the so-called Muddy Mission, and for a number of years there were only a very few members of the Church left in Muddy Valley. In the 80's, however, several Latter-day Saint families settled on the old sites of St. Thomas, Overton and St. Joseph. (See Moapa Stake and Saint Thomas, Logandale and Overton.)
