Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Myton Ward

MYTON WARD, Roosevelt Stake, Duchesne Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing originally at Myton, a government town situated at the old crossing of the Duchesne River, about two miles below the junction of Lake Fork with that river, and 11 miles southwest of Roosevelt, the headquarters of the stake. Myton Ward extends up and down the Duchesne River about 12 miles, 2 1/2 miles above and about ten miles below. Myton is the third city in point of population in Duchesne County. The L. D. S. meeting house, formerly the Myton town hall, purchased by the ward in 1918, is a frame building, in which the main hall has a seating capacity of 200. The farming district of Hartford, located from five to eight miles northeast of Myton on the north side of the river, is also included in the Myton Ward. At Hartford a Sunday school and Primary Association are conducted under the direction of the Myton Ward bishopric.

When the Uintah Indian Reservation was thrown open for settlement by the whites in 1905, the U. S. Government located a townsite and called it Myton, in honor of a former Indian agent of that name. They also established the Indian Reclamation offices there, which gave prestige to the town. Previous to this (in 1900) Isaac W. Odekirk, formerly of Vernal, Uintah Co., kept the mail station at the Duchesne Bridge. After the country was opened for settlement, more members of the Church came into the district, and in 1909 a L. D. S. Sunday school was opened with Isaac W. Odekirk as superintendent. In 1909 a branch organization was effected with Isaac W. Odekirk as presiding Elder, as part of the Roosevelt Ward. On April 25, 1915, the Myron Ward was organized With Fred S. Musser (formerly Bishop of Midview) as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1918 by Charles J. Wahlquist, who acted until his death, April 22, 1923. He was succeeded by Joseph Harold Eldredge, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had a membership of 283, including 95 children. The total population of the Myton Precinct was 789 in 1930, of whom 395 resided in the townsite. Myton Ward belonged to the Duchesne Stake until 1920, when it became part of the Roosevelt Stake.
