Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Nauvoo

NAUVOO, Hancock Co., Ill., the headquarters of the Church from 1839 to 1846, is situated on the east bank of the Mississippi River, near the head of what were usually called the "Des Moines Rapids," 12 miles by river above Keokuk, 50 miles above Quincy, 190 miles above St. Louis and 1,200 miles above New Orleans. The name Nauvoo comes from the Hebrew and signifies "beautiful location". Only a few, if any, sites on the Mississippi River, between New Orleans and the head of navigation, can compare with it in loveliness. The Des Moines Rapids, below Nauvoo, were formerly a serious obstacle in the navigation of the Mississippi River at this point, as in the season of low water these rapids could not be passed by the steam boats plying on the river except with great difficulty. This trouble, however, was obviated when the U. S. Government, at an expense of about $4,000,000, built a dam and locks in the river between Keokuk and Nashville.

The history of Nauvoo commences with Capt. James White, a native of Ohio, who emigrated to Missouri Territory in 1818. In 1823-1824, he located as a trader with the Sac and Fox Indians, who at that time had a large village of some 400 lodges at the head of the rapids where Nauvoo afterwards was built. In 1824 a treaty was made with these Indians by the Federal Government by which they relinquished their lands on the east side of the river. Capt. White induced the Indians to vacate in his favor in consideration of 200 sacks of corn which he paid them. On the site of this vacated Indian spot Mr. White opened a farm, although the chief occupation during the remainder of his life was that of keel-boating on the Mississippi. His old residence stood on the bank of the river near the place where the Nauvoo House was subsequently partly erected near the head of the Des Moines Rapids.

A few years later a post office, the first in Hancock County, was established near the White residence and called Venus. Capt. White died in June, 1837. One of his sons, Hugh White, of whom the Church bought their first parcel of land in Hancock County in 1839, resided for many years near the old place and followed the business of steamboat piloting. In 1834 a town was laid out by Joseph B. Teas and Alex White, about a mile up the river from Venus and called Commerce. And about three years later, in 1837, Commerce city, immediately above its namesake on the river, was laid out by two speculators from Connecticut (Horace R. Hotchkiss and John Gillette).

In the fall of 1838 a Latter-day Saint Elder by the name of Israel Barlow left the state of Missouri under the exterminating order of Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs. By missing his way, or, what is more likely, directed by divine providence, he left Missouri on a different route to that followed by the great body of the exiles. Taking a northeasterly course he struck the Des Moines River a short distance above its mouth and traveled into Iowa where he was received kindly by the people, who supplied him with much needed food and raiment. To the few settlers in that region of country he told the story of the persecutions of the saints in Missouri and how his people, poor and destitute as himself, were fleeing from Missouri en masse. The sympathies of the people in Iowa being aroused, they gave Elder Barlow letters of introduction to several gentlemen among whom was Dr. Isaac Galland, a man of some influence living at Commerce, Ill. Dr. Galland owned considerable land in Commerce and vicinity which he offered for sale and which was later bought by the Church. Other purchases were subsequently made and thus most of the saints who had been expelled from Missouri settled in Commerce which, the next year (1840), was incorporated as the city of Nauvoo.

Nauvoo had a phenomenal growth from a mere insignificant village, Commerce, to a city of about 20,000 inhabitants. The city plat of Nauvoo was laid out in squares, the streets like those of Salt Lake City crossing each other at right angles, following the main points of the compass, only the lots and blocks were smaller than those in Salt Lake City. Many fine residences were erected as people flocked in from all parts of the country, and a stream of Latter-day Saint emigrants also arrived from Great Britain, generally by way of New Orleans. A university was chartered by the Illinois State Legislature, the Nauvoo Legion was organized, school houses were built and finally a beautiful temple was erected at a cost of nearly $1,000,000.

At first the saints were enabled to live at peace with their neighbors, but later a mobocratic spirit, similar to the one that had harassed the saints in Missouri, sprang up in Illinois, leading to all kinds of complications and trumped up charges and finally resulting in the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith at Carthage June 27, 1844. Persecutions against the saints continued until the whole membership of the Church in Nauvoo was obliged to go into exile in the beginning of 1846, which led to the establishment of new homes and new settlements for the gathering of the Saints in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains.

With the departure of the saints from Nauvoo in 1846 the glory of the city departed. The Nauvoo Temple was destroyed by fire by the mob, the so-called Jack Mormons who had purchased the property of the saints for a mere song, were not successful and the Icarians, who followed, met with serious disaster and disappointment in their efforts to rebuild the city of Nauvoo. Since those days Nauvoo has been nothing more than a struggling village, although an incorporated town. According to the U. S. census the population of Nauvoo was 1,130 in 1850; 1,394 in 1860; 1,578 in 1870; 1,402 in 1880; 1,249 in 1890; 1,372 in 1900; 1,068 in 1910; 990 in 1920, and 973 in 1930.

(For further details see "Historical Record," Vol. 8, pp. 743-843; Rise and Fall of Nauvoo, by B. H. Roberts; Essentials in Church History, by Joseph Fielding Smith.)
