Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Nauvoo Legion

NAUVOO LEGION was an independent body of militia, authorized by special act of the Illinois Legislature, in December, 1840. This act provided that the Nauvoo City Council might organize the inhabitants of the city subject to military duty under the laws of the state into an independent body of militia, but a subsequent amendment to the charter extended the same privilege to any citizen of Hancock County who might desire to attach himself to the Legion. The officers of the Legion were commissioned by the governor, and the members were required to perform the same amount of military duty as the regular State Militia, and were placed at the disposal of the mayor of the city and the governor of the state in executing the laws, etc. The first election of officers took place Feb. 4, 1841, and resulted in Joseph Smith being unanimously chosen Lieutenant-General. There were only six companies when first organized, but in September following, the number of members had increased to 1,490, and at the time of the Prophet's death in 1844 the Legion numbered about 5,000 men. Brigham Young succeeded Joseph Smith as Lieutenant-General, and the organization was kept up until the exodus of 1846.

After the arrival of the saints in Great Salt Lake Valley, the Indians at times being hostile, the saints found it necessary to organize a militia for self-defense. Consequently on March 27, 1852, authorized by a territorial act previously passed, a partial reorganization of the Nauvoo Legion took place in Utah and Daniel H. Wells was chosen Lieutenant-General. The territory was also duly divided into military districts and annual musters inaugurated. This military organization rendered excellent service for many years, until J. Wilson Shaffer, acting governor of Utah, in 1870, issued his notorious proclamation forbidding all musters, drills, or gatherings of the militia in Utah, except by his express orders. By an Act of Congress, the so-called Edmunds-Tucker Law, which became a law without the consent of the president March 3, 1887, the Nauvoo Legion ceased to exist.
