Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Nephi

NEPHI, Juab Co., Utah, is the seat of Juab County and the headquarters of the Juab Stake of Zion. It is a prosperous town or incorporated city situated on Salt Creek, immediately below the mouth of Salt Creek Canyon and at the west base of the Wasatch Mountains. Most of the inhabitants of Nephi are engaged in farming and stock-raising and the town can be justly proud of its fine public buildings, including houses of worship, school houses and many comfortable private residences. The Latter-day Saints of the town are organized into three bishop's wards, namely, the Nephi Center, Nephi North and Nephi South wards. The saints in the Nephi Center Ward worship in the old Nephi meeting house, or tabernacle, while the saints of the other two wards have modern, up-to-date chapels. Nephi is an important station on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad, 89 miles south of Salt Lake City. It is also the junction of the Sanpete Valley Railroad of the Denver and Rio Grande system with the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. Nephi has an attractive main street, running north and south through the center of the town, lined on both sides with well-stocked stores and business houses representing various branches of enterprise and industry.

Nephi, named after a Book of Mormon city, was founded in 1851 by Joseph L. Heywood and others, and soon became a town of importance, being surrounded by good farming land, and had Salt Creek, from which farms and gardens are irrigated, been a larger stream, Nephi would have outgrown many other towns in Utah. Joseph L. Heywood took ecclesiastical charge of the settlement from the beginning. He was succeeded in 1854 by Jacob G. Bigler, who in 1861 was succeeded by Charles H. Bryan, who presided as Bishop until 1877, when Nephi was divided into two wards, namely, the Nephi 1st Ward and the Nephi 2nd Ward. A third ward, called Nephi Center, was subsequently organized.

There was a total Church population of 2,298 in the three wards into which Nephi was divided at the close of 1930, including 306 children. The total population of the Nephi Precinct was 2,798 in 1930; of these 2,573 were residents of Nephi city.
