Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Nevada

NEVADA was formed from part of the country now included in the Mexican cession of 1848. In 1861 Nevada, which for some time previous had constituted a part of the territory of Utah, was organized as a separate territory. In 1864 and again in 1866 Utah was further reduced by the addition of strips of its territory to Nevada. Nevada was admitted into the Union as a state Oct. 31, 1864. The present area of Nevada is 109,821 square miles. The population of Nevada was 6,857 in 1860; 42,491 in 1870; 62,266 in 1880; 47,355 in 1890; 42,335 in 1900; 81,875 in 1910; 77,407 in 1920, and 91,058 in 1930.

Latter-day Saints were the first white settlers in what is now the state of Nevada. In April, 1849, a company of about eighty men left Salt Lake City as an organized company for the California mines. A Mr. De Mont was captain and Hampton Sidney Beatie, secretary. Some of the company were members of the Church and others were not. When they reached a point where the town of Genoa is now located, seven of the brethren, including H. S. Beatie, Abner Blackburn of the Mormon Battalion, and his brother, decided to remain there and start a trading post for emigrants going to California. They built a log cabin and bought goods, cattle, etc., at Placerville, California, having good success that season; the place became known as Mormon Station. They returned to Salt Lake City in the fall of the year and as the route of emigration had been changed, did not return in 1850.

While at Mormon Station, one of the Blackburns discovered gold in what was later known as Gold Canyon, but not in large quantities. Silver also being found there, miners congregated in the canyon, and in 1851 John Reese, who, with his brother Enoch, operated a store in Salt Lake City, went to Carson Valley with ten or twelve wagon loads of goods and started business at the site of Mormon Station. He remained there about nine years during which time a number of families from Utah, called by the Church to settle there under the direction of Apostle Orson Hyde, arrived. The project was known as the Carson Valley Mission, and resulted in the organization of the Carson Stake of Zion in 1856.

In 1854 the legislature of the Territory of Utah created Carson County and Apostle Orson Hyde, having been appointed Probate Judge, went to take charge of ecclesiastical as well as judicial affairs. A townsite being surveyed at Mormon Station, the name was changed to Genoa.

In 1857, on account of the approach of Johnston's Army, the saints in Carson Valley were called back to the headquarters of the Church and but few remained behind.

In 1861 the Territory of Nevada was organized from the western part of the Territory of Utah, and this included Carson Valley.

At a conference held in Great Salt Lake City in April, 1855, thirty brethren were called to take their families to Las Vegas, and make a settlement there and to carry the truths of the restored gospel to the Indians. Soon afterwards a company was formed, which reached Las Vegas June 14, 1855, in charge of William Bringhurst. The brethren immediately commenced to put in crops and build cabins and a bowery in which to hold meetings. They also erected an adobe fort as a protection against the Indians in case of need. The little settlement was frequently visited by companies of missionaries traveling to and from California and brethren from Las Vegas joined in several expeditions to the Colorado River in an effort to prove its navigability. Their missionary labors among the Lamanites resulted in the baptism of a number belonging to the Piute and Quoeech tribes.

Indication of rich mineral deposits having been discovered in the Las Vegas region, Nathaniel V. Jones from Salt Lake Valley came to prospect for these deposits, but the difficulty in obtaining fuel to feed the furnace made the work of smelting impossible and transportation of the crude ore could not be considered. In 1857, on account of the approach of the Johnston Army, the settlement of Las Vegas was broken up and the settlers returned to the more inhabited regions of Salt Lake and adjacent valleys. Later, however, a branch of the Church and still later a ward was organized at Las Vegas. (See Las Vegas.)

A company of explorers were sent out in 1855 from Salt Lake City to explore the White Mountain region, in southeastern Nevada, rumors having been received of a mysterious, shining white mountain, located near the present town of Panaca. When reached, this mountain was found to be composed of white sandstone interspersed with silica formations (bastard diamonds).

In 1858 another company, in charge of William H. Dame, made explorations in the vicinity of another so-called White Mountain, located in the southwestern part of what was later the state of Nevada, to find suitable locations for settlements in case the saints should be driven from their holdings in Salt Lake Valley. Having noted some available locations these brethren returned and on their way stopped for a time at a point where the town of Panaca is now located, where they established, for a time, their headquarters and where they made ditches, corrals and other improvements, and raised some crops.

In the beginning of 1858 there was a considerable amount of travel on the road between the settlements of southern Utah and the Pacific Coast and in January, 1858, Ira Hatch was sent to make camp on the road, about 100 miles west of Santa Clara, to assist in protecting travelers. It was a dangerous mission, although the Indians were friendly with him, as his sympathy with the travelers was liable to make enemies for him. He was later joined by Thales Haskell. Friendly relations with the Indians having been established, the settlements of St. Thomas, St. Joseph (later called Logan), Overton, West Point, and Panaca were commenced and grew steadily.

In 1864 and 1866 two strips of land were ceded from Utah to Nevada, by which acts these settlements came under the jurisdiction of the government of the state of Nevada and in 1871, on account of heavy taxation, most of the Mormon settlers moved into Utah, many of them founding new settlements in Long Valley, now in Kane County, Utah. At that time there were about 600 Latter-day Saints in the Muddy Valley, and nearly as many in Meadow Valley, Spring Valley, Eagle Valley, Dry Valley, Clover Valley, Rose Valley and other adjacent valleys; the town of Panaca was included, but that town was not vacated. Later the Muddy Valley was resettled by the saints and Bunkerville was founded in 1877 by Edward Bunker of Santa Clara and a few others who desired to live in the United Order. They raised cotton, sugar cane and vegetables with some success. Muddy Valley, in later years subjected to scientific cultivation, has become the celebrated Moapa Valley, noted for its remarkably fine vegetable productions. This name is derived from the Moapat Indians whose hunting ground it once was.

In 1897 a tract of ranch land in White Pine County, Nevada, was ceded to the Church in lieu of other property escheated to the federal government of the United States in conformity to the Edmunds Act, passed by Congress in 1882. The Church concluded to offer this land to the saints in 1897, and Bishop Thomas Judd of St. George, Utah, was appointed to take charge of the colonization. A company known as the "Nevada Land and Livestock Company" was formed and in 1898 the settlements of Lund and Preston were founded. These settlements, with others, were organized as the Nevada Stake of Zion in 1926. (See Nevada Stake.)

Ecclesiastically the settlements in the Muddy River region and White Pine County were for many years included in the St. George Stake of Zion, but on Sept. 8, 1912, the Moapa Stake of Zion was organized, which includes all settlements in the Muddy Valley, Bunkerville, Panaca, and other localities (see Moapa Stake), and in 1929 the Nevada Stake, comprising White Pine County, Nevada, was organized. These two stakes comprise the saints in White Pine and Lincoln and Clark counties, and consist of 17 wards and branches of the Church with a membership of 4,500. In addition to this many Latter-day Saints residing in other parts of Nevada belong to the California Mission. In the Nevada Conference, or District, of that mission, are the towns of Carlin and Elko (Elko Co.), Fallon (Churchill Co.), Sparks (Washoe Co.), and Winnemucca (Humboldt Co.), where the saints worship in their own chapels. Branches of the Church have also been organized in Lovelock (Pershing Co.), Reno (Washoe Co.), Tonopah (Nye Co.), and Wabuska (Lyon Co.), where meetings are held in hired halls.
