Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

New Orleans

NEW ORLEANS, the metropolis of the state of Louisiana, is an important port of entry situated on the Mississippi River, about 90 miles above its mouth; it is built upon a bend of the river from which circumstance it has been called the "Crescent City." New Orleans is 1,663 miles southwest from New York City, and 1,448 miles from Washington, D.C. The old city of New Orleans was laid out by the French in 1718. In the old French part of the city the streets are very narrow and the houses built of wood and partly of brick, stuccoed over and ornamented with cornices, balconies and balustrades, indicating the French and Spanish origin of the settlers who constructed them. In the more modern neighborhoods up-to-date buildings have been erected. Many of the dwellings are very fine and surrounded with gardens of oranges, lemons, magnolias and other beautiful and luxuriant plants and trees.

Now Orleans as a missionary field was considered by Latter-day Saint Elders soon after the Church was organized and Apostle Parley P. Pratt, in 1837, was expecting to open up a mission there, but felt impressed to go to New York instead. But as early as January, 1841, there were a few Latter-day Saints residing in New Orleans who were exceedingly anxious that a faithful Elder should come and preach to them and sent ten dollars to assist in paying the expense of his journey. Accordingly Elder Harrison Sagers was sent "to sound the gospel trumpet for the first time to the inhabitants of that city." Other Elders followed and preached in New Orleans and other towns in the state. At first they met with success but this, as usual, was followed by persecution.

In November, 1841, by instructions from the First Presidency of the Church, New Orleans was made the port of entry for saints emigrating from foreign lands, from whence they were to proceed up the Mississippi River to St. Louis, Mo., and on to Nauvoo, Ill. After the saints had been expelled from Nauvoo, New Orleans still continued to be the port of entry until 1855, when the route was changed and the saints were landed at the eastern ports of New York, Philadelphia and Boston. From 1841 to 1855, 17,463 immigrating saints arrived at the port of New Orleans in 79 companies, in charge of experienced Elders, and also a number of individuals, and small families, accompanying returning missionaries, who are not included in the above enumeration, landed at New Orleans. Several companies of missionaries going to Europe also sailed from the port of New Orleans. The first ship which arrived at New Orleans with saints from Great Britain was the "Isaac Newton", which sailed from Liverpool Oct. 14, 1840, and arrived at New Orleans Dec. 21, 1840. Following are the names of other ships carrying emigrants from Europe which made New Orleans their port entry: In 1841 the "Sheffield," one unnamed, "Echo," "Alesto," "Rochester," "Tyrean" and "Chaos;" in 1842, "Tremont," "Hope," "John Cummins," "Hanover," "Sidney," "Medford," "Henry" and "Emerald;" in 1843, "Swanton," "Yorkshire," "Claiborne," "Metoka," and "Champion;" in 1844, "Fanny," "Isaac Allerton," "Swanton, "Glasgow" and "Norfolk;" in 1845, "Palmyra," an unnamed ship, and "Oregon;" in 1846, "Liverpool;" in 1848, "Carnatic," "Sailor Prince" (lst trip), "Erin's Queen," "Sailor Prince" (2nd trip) and "Lord Sandon;" in 1849, "Zetland," "Ashland," "Henry Ware," "Buena Vista," "Hartley, "Emblem," "James Pennell," "Berlin" and "Zetland;" in 1850, "Argo," "Josiah Bradlee," "Hartley, "North Atlantic," "James Pennell" and "Joseph Badger;" in 1851, "Ellen," "George W. Bourne," "Ellen Maria," and "Olympus;" in 1852, Kennebec, "Ellen Maria," "Rockaway" and "Italy;" in 1853, "Forest Monarch," "Ellen Maria, "Golconda," "Jersey," "Elvira Owen," "International," "Falcon," "Camillus" and "Page;" in 1854, "Jesse Munn," "Benjamin Adams, "Golconda," "Windemere," "Old England, "John M. Wood," "Germanicus," "Marchfield," "Clara Wheeler" (lst trip), and "Clara Wheeler" (2nd trip), and "Liverpool," and in 1855, "Rockaway," "James Nesmith," "Neva" and "Charles Buck."

During most of this time there was a small branch of the Church at New Orleans, consisting for the most part of emigrants detained there by lack of means to continue the journey to St. Louis. When by their own labors, or by assistance from the Perpetual Emigrating Fund, they were able to go on, they did so. The special mission of the New Orleans Branch was to watch for the arrival of Latter-day Saint emigrants, take care of them during their temporary residence and also to "preach the gospel in New Orleans and adjacent country." Elder Lucius N. Scovil was superintendent of emigration at New Orleans in 1848. He was succeeded in 1849 by Thomas McKenzie, who was succeeded in 1853 by John Brown, who was succeeded in 1855 by John McGaw. After 1855, as New Orleans ceased to be the port of entry for Latter-day Saint emigrants, the branch at New Orleans soon lost its membership and ceased to exist. In recent years missionary work in New Orleans has been done by Elders laboring in the Central States and Texas missions and a small branch of the Church raised up, which on Dec. 31, 1930, had a membership of 55, including 1 Elder, 3 Priests, and 2 Deacons.
