Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"The New York Messenger"

"NEW YORK MESSENGER (The)" was a periodical published in the interest of the Church in the city of New York as a continuation of "The Prophet," and with the understanding that it was such a continuation, its first issue dated July 5, 1845, was numbered No. 53, or No. 1, Volume 2. The first numbers were edited by Parley P. and Orson Pratt, but after that Samuel Brannan became the editor. Only 20 numbers of "The New York Messenger" were published, the last issue being numbered 72, counting the 52 numbers of "The Prophet." Thus No. 20 of Vol. 2 is dated Nov. 15, 1845, and ends with page 160. As an addition to the regular number of "The Messenger," a fly leaf was printed under date of Dec. 29, 1845, giving instructions to the saints who were about to embark to California on the ship "Brooklyn." Another fly leaf was issued by Wm. L Appleby, dated Feb. 7, 1846. This was three days after the sailing of the ship "Brooklyn" from New York. "The New York Messenger" was printed with large type, each page being enclosed in a border. The printed matter on each page measured 11 by 15 1/2 inches, and the paper consisted of a four-page sheet quarto size, with four columns of printed matter on a page. "The New York Messenger," like its predecessor "The Prophet" was published at No. 7 Spruce St., New York. It had sub-offices at No. 16 Boylston Square, Boston, and on the corner of 3rd and Dock streets, Philadelphia. The subscription price for the "Messenger" was $2 per annum, but as stated, only twenty weekly numbers were issued in New York, as the press and printing material on which "The Prophet" and "The New York Messenger" had been published, were placed on board the ship "Brooklyn" and taken to California. There the same printing material was used for printing the historical newspaper the "California Star," issued by Samuel Brannan in Yerba Buena (afterwards San Francisco), California, commenced in 1846. If the subscribers who had paid in advance for a year's subscription to "The New York Messenger" were entered as subscribers to the "California Star" without further charge for a year's subscription, we imagine that there would be no complaint on their part.
