Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Newcastle Ward

NEWCASTLE WARD, Parowan Stake, Iron Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on the edge of the Escalante Desert at the mouth of Pinto Canyon, 12 miles below old Pinto, 25 miles west of Cedar City, the headquarters of the Parowan Stake, and 20 miles southeast of Modena, the nearest railroad station on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. It is a farming district in which both artificial irrigation and dry-farming is practiced side by side.

Newcastle is an outgrowth of Pinto. Some of the residents of Pinto, which is located on Pinto Creek up in the mountains southward, realizing the small amount of tillable farming land in that narrow valley, had their eyes upon the extensive flat country lying at the mouth of Pinto Canyon on the edge of the desert, and Nell D. Forsyth and others commenced a new settlement there in 1897-1898. The first cereal raised in that new settlement was rye produced by high water irrigation. Later other settlers took up land under the Desert Act, a number of houses were built, a townsite surveyed, and the actual settlement was founded in December, 1907, 10 miles below Pinto, and a little less than two miles above the present townsite of Newcastle. When the new settlement was subsequently formed on the edge of the desert, the place was named Newcastle at the suggestion of Donald Forsyth, in contradistinction from the so-called older castle known as Thornton's House or Crow Cliff Castle which was simply a summer ranch, generally vacated in the winter. The first permanent settlers at Newcastle, who were all Latter-day Saints, attended meetings at Pinto, but when a school house was built at a cost of $1,000, meetings and Sunday school sessions were held there for several years. The saints in the Newcastle settlement were organized as a bishop's ward June 15, 1913, with Jesse Turner Forsyth as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1927 by John H. Tullis, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date Newcastle Ward had a membership of 135, including 34 children. The total population of the Newcastle Precinct was 141 in 1930.
