Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Newdale Ward

NEWDALE WARD, Fremont Stake, Fremont Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing at Newdale, a station on the Orvin and St. Anthony, branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad, and vicinity. Newdale is 2 1/2 miles east of Teton and 12 miles northeast of Rexburg, the headquarters of the stake and near the boundary line between Fremont and Madison counties, Idaho. The majority of the people in the Newdale district are Latter-day Saints. Grain is raised extensively in the locality and there are four large grain elevators in Newdale.

The first settler in that district of country which later became Newdale was Edwin Moroni Stock, who erected a cabin there in 1914. He was followed by Hansine C. Hansen, a widow, formerly a resident of Teton, who brought her house with her, it being hauled from Teton by her sons and set up near that of Edwin M. Stock. As a railroad company erected an attractive depot there in the spring of 1915, other settlers soon came in, mostly members of the Church, and for their benefit a branch of the Church was organized with Lester Lavon Hansen as presiding Elder. A school house was also erected which served for all public purposes for some time. In the fall of 1915 an incorporated company, known as the Farmers' Warehouse Company, built a large warehouse at Newdale, which then became the shipping point for grain raised in the surrounding country, and it was said by railroad agents that Newdale ranked third in the United States as a grain shipping center. The branch of the Church, when first organized, was called the Bowerman Branch on account of the school house used for meeting purposes being in the Bowerman school district, but later the headquarters of the branch were changed to Newdale (the name chosen for the railroad station) and the branch was named the Newdale Branch. Newdale Ward was organized Dec. 17, 1916, with Lester L. Hansen as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1924 by John Schwendimann, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930, at which time it had a membership of 299, including 87 children. The total population of the Newdale Precinct in 1930 was 410.
