Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Newton Ward

NEWTON WARD, Benson Stake, Cache Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the Newton Precinct, including the town of Newton, which is pleasantly situated on the south slope of a hill, about three-fourths of a mile north of Bear River, about two miles by road northeast of Cache Junction, the nearest railway station on the Oregon Short Line Railroad. It is also 13 miles by nearest road southwest of Richmond (the headquarters of the stake) and 15 miles northwest of Logan. Most of the inhabitants of Newton are farmers who irrigate parts of their gardens and farms from a reservoir (fed from Clarkston Creek) about two miles north of the town. The soil around Newton is rich and productive, and owing to its location on the sunny side of the slope the place is well adapted for the raising of fruit trees. The snow generally leaves the ground in the spring much earlier than in any other part of Cache Valley. Near the settlement is found an excellent quality of building rock (sand stone) and several large buildings at Logan and other places in Cache Valley have been erected of the valuable rock quarried in the mountains west of Newton. The town had no meeting house in 1930, as it was burned to the ground Jan. 8, 1929.

Newton is an outgrowth of Clarkston and was first settled in 1869, when a townsite was surveyed, water ditches constructed and a meeting house erected. A bridge was built across Bear River in 1871, southwest of the town; a reservoir also was built the same year, and the majority of the people moved from Clarkston to the new townsite. William F. Rigby was the first Bishop of the Newton Ward (new town), organized in 1870. He was succeeded in 1884 by Hans Funk, who died in 1892 and was succeeded by William H. Griffin, sen., who in 1903 was succeeded by Martin C. Rigby, who in 1928 was succeeded by Ralph C. Jones, who acted Dec. 31, 1930.

The membership of the Newton Ward Dec. 31, 1930, was 689, including 157 children, out of a population of 696.
