Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Nibley Ward, Union Stake

NIBLEY WARD, Union Stake, Union Co., Oregon, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Nibley, which is situated 11 miles east of La Grande, the headquarters of the Union Stake, 8 1/2 miles north of Union and four miles west of the base of the mountains east of Grande Ronde Valley. The townsite of Nibley is surveyed into five-acre blocks with streets four rods wide.

David Eccles of Ogden and John Stoddard became interested in the lumber business at North Powder, Oregon, and in 1889 organized the Oregon Lumber Company with David Eccles as president. The company built saw mills at North Powder, Pleasant Valley, Hood River and Baker City, and among their employees were quite a number of Latter-day Saints. When Elders commenced to travel through the country as missionaries they searched out the brethren from Utah and endeavored to interest them in their Church duties. There were many such members of the Church in the Grande Ronde Valley, Baker City being the principal place. In the summer of 1900 Charles W. Nibley and George E. Stoddard purchased about eight thousand acres of land of A. B. Conley, with a view to making a settlement on it. Mr. Conley owned a ranch in that neighborhood with buildings upon it and sold out his entire claim to the brethren mentioned. James England, who worked for the Oregon Lumber Company, was the first man to locate on the purchase; he settled on the land in August, 1900, and made his temporary home in the company's house, the old Conley residence. Arthur M. Rawson was the first permanent settler in the district. Nine families of saints constituted the Mormon population at Nibley when a townsite was surveyed, named Nibley, in honor of Charles W. Nibley. A meeting house, a frame building, was erected in 1901, and the saints at Nibley were organized into a branch of the Church March 17, 1901, with Samuel Southwick as president. When the Union Stake of Zion was organized June 9, 1901, William J. Rawson was chosen as Bishop of the Nibley Ward, which hitherto had constituted a branch of the Northwestern States Mission. Bishop Rawson presided until April 28, 1906, when the ward organization was discontinued and Hans J. Nielson chosen as presiding Elder at Nibley; but on Dec. 29, 1906, the people voted in favor of discontinuing the Nibley Branch, the membership of which had decreased considerably on account of a number of the members having left the vicinity to seek homes elsewhere. Thus the project of founding a settlement on the so-called Nibley Purchase proved unsuccessful.
