Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Nordstjernan"

"NORDSTJERNAN" is a periodical published semi-monthly in the interest of the Church in the Swedish language, in Stockholm, Sweden. For a number of years after the founding of the Scandinavian Mission, in 1850, most Church publications in Scandinavia were published in the Danish-Norwegian language, in Copenhagan, Denmark. But, although most Swedes can read and understand Danish-Norwegian and most of the Danes can read and understand Swedish, the two languages are quite different in orthography and construction.

As the work of proselyting met with success in Sweden, it was considered necessary to have a periodical and other Church works published in the Swedish language. Hence, steps were taken toward the publication of "Nordstjernan" under the direction of the president of the Scandinavian Mission, Ola N. Liljenquist, a Swede by birth, and at that time president of the mission.

The first number of "Nordstjernan," printed on an ordinary octavo sheet of 16 pages, was dated Jan. 3, 1877, and printed in Göteborg, Sweden, with John C. Sandberg as assistant editor, Pres. Liljenquist being responsible editor. Only 17 numbers were printed in Göteborg.

Commencing with No. 18, dated Sept. 17, 1877, the editorial department of "Nordstjernan" was moved to Copenhagen, Denmark, and there printed at the printing office of F. E. Bording, who, for many years previously, had printed "Skandinaviens Stjerne" and other Church publications.

Volume I of "Nordstjernan" closed with number 24, dated Dec. 19, 1877. From the beginning of 1878 until July, 1905, "Nordstjernan" was published in Copenhagen, Denmark, under the direction of the presidents of the Scandinavian Mission, a Swedish brother being appointed as assistant editor, or translator from the English into the Swedish language.

When the Scandinavian Mission was divided in 1905 and Sweden became a separate mission, called the Swedish Mission, the office of "Nordstjernan" was moved from Copenhagen, Denmark, to Svartensgate, Stockholm, Sweden, where it is still located. With the exception of one short break "Nordstjernan" has been issued regularly since 1877 as a semi-monthly periodical, and the volume published in 1930 was the 54th volume.

"Nordstjernan," like "Skandinaviens Stjerne," has ever been a fearless advocate of the principles of the gospel among the Swedish people, mostly in Sweden, but also in America, and other parts of the world. Since 1905 the presidents of the Swedish Mission have been the responsible editors but most of the time assisted by editorial secretaries, or assistant editors.-(Deseret News, May 21, 1932. Church Section, page 8.)
