Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

North Central States Mission

NORTH CENTRAL STATES MISSION comprises the states of Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, and that part of Montana lying east of Great Falls, in the United States, and the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Ontario (as far east as Port Arthur), in Canada. The mission is divided into eight districts, or conferences, namely, North Minnesota, South Minnesota, Lake (Minnesota), North Dakota, South Dakota, Yellowstone (Montana), and Manitoba, and Saskatchewan in Canada.

The North Central States Mission was organized July 12, 1925, from parts of the Northern States, Northwestern States, Western States and Canadian missions, and included the present boundaries with the exception of that part located in Montana, which was added in 1926. John G. Allred was appointed to preside over the new mission and headquarters were established at Minneapolis, Minnesota, where a chapel had previously been erected and where a home was rented for the missionaries. The saints at Dalbo, Springvale, St. Paul and Minneapolis, in Minnesota, own their chapels, as do those at Harlem, Tyler and Wolf Point in Montana, those on the Berthold Indian Reservation in North Dakota and at Bergland and Winnepeg in Canada. Regular meetings are also held in hired halls at Belfry, Billings and Chinook, in Montana, at Duluth and Mankato in Minnesota, at Sioux Falls in South Dakota and at Regina in the province of Saskatchewan, Canada. In Grand Forks (North Dakota) meetings are held in the court house. The branches at Wolf Point (Montana) and Berthold (North Dakota) are Indian organizations presided over by well educated, full-blooded Indians.

Arthur Welling succeeded John G. Allred as president of the mission in 1929 and acted in that capacity Dec. 31, 1930.

The membership of the North Central States Mission at the close of 1930 was 2,600, including 14 High Priests, 17 Seventies, 161 Elders, 80 Priests, 48 Teachers, 130 Deacons, 1,534 lay members, and 616 children. Sixty missionaries from Zion were laboring in the mission, including 15 lady missionaries. There were also two short-term missionaries.
