Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

North Sanpete Stake of Zion

NORTH SANPETE STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the northeast part of Sanpete County, Utah, or in the north end of Sanpete Valley; it also includes Thistle Valley. North Sanpete Stake consists of six fully organized bishop's wards: viz., Fairview North, Fairview South, Milburn, Mount Pleasant North, Mount Pleasant South and Spring City. Besides these wards there is one branch named Mountainville. The headquarters of the North Sanpete Stake are at Mount Pleasant, an incorporated city in Sanpete County, and the largest city in said county.

Until 1900 all the saints in Sanpete County, Utah, belonged to the Sanpete Stake of Zion, but in December, 1900, that stake was divided into two stakes, namely, the North Sanpete Stake and the South Sanpete Stake. These two new stakes commenced to function Jan. 1, 1901 Christian N. Lund was chosen as president of the North Sanpete Stake, with Peter Mattson as his first and George Christensen as his second counselor. In 1906 Christian W. Sörensen succeeded George Christensen (who moved to Ephraim to teach in the Snow Academy) as second counselor. While First Counselor Peter Mattson filled a mission to Sweden, Peter Sundwall acted as temporary counselor to Pres. Lund. At a stake conference held Sept. 14, 1914, Christian N. Lund and his counselors (Peter Mattson and Chris. W. Sörensen) were honorably released, and Adolph Merz was chosen and sustained as president of the stake with James W. Anderson as first and Daniel Rasmussen as second counselor. On March 31, 1923, Pres. Adolph Merz and counselors (James W. Anderson and Daniel Rasmussen) were released and Sören M. Nielsen was chosen as president of the stake with Daniel Rasmussen as first and Louis A. Peterson as second counselor. In 1926 James L. Nielsen, of Fountain Green, succeeded Louis A. Peterson as second counselor. At a stake conference of the North Sanpete Stake, held at Mount Pleasant June 16, 1929, the North Sanpete Stake was divided and that part of the same containing Chester, Fountain Green, Moroni East, Moroni West and Wales wards was organized as the Moroni Stake of Zion, and James Louis Nielsen, who had acted as second counselor in the North Sanpete Stake presidency, was chosen as president of the Moroni Stake. Henry C. Jacobs, who had acted as Bishop of the Mt. Pleasant North Ward, was chosen as second counselor of the North Sanpete Stake. Søren M. Nielsen presided over the stake Dec. 31, 1930, with Daniel Rasmussen as first and Henry C. Jacobs as second counselor.

The first stake clerk of the North Sanpete Stake was Aaron Hardy, who in 1904 was succeeded by Adolph Merz, who in 1907 was succeeded by Aaron Hardy (serving a second term), who in 1911 was succeeded by Peter Mattson, who in 1918 was succeeded by John S. Blain, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the North Sanpete Stake of Zion had a membership of 4,714, including 718 children. The Patriarchs in the Stake in 1930 were Jordan Brady and Arthur O. Nielson.
