Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Oakley

OAKLEY, Cassia Co., Idaho, the headquarters of the Cassia Stake, is the terminus of the Burley and Oakley branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad. The town is located 22 miles south of Burley, the nearest point on Snake River, and 140 miles northwest of Brigham City, Utah.

Bro. Wm. E. Martindale, who had been appointed to explore Goose Creek Valley, having made a favorable report of his explorations, a number of people from Tooele County, Utah, expressed a desire to take up land in Goose Creek Valley, and Bro. Martindale was appointed to take charge of them, organize them into a branch of the Church and preside over it.

Hyrum Severe of Grantsville, Utah, was the first permanent Latter-day Saint settler at Oakley, he having bought a claim in the vicinity of an older non-Mormon rancher before Pres. Martindale and other settlers from Tooele County located there. The site of Oakley was chosen for the settlement and named Oakley, on account of a post office having been established in that part of Goose Creek Valley some time previously in honor of a Mr. Oakley, who kept a stage station at a place now called Oakley Meadow. On Sept. 24, 1882, the saints in Oakley and vicinity were organized as the Cassia Ward of the Box Elder Stake with Horton D. Haight as Bishop and Wm. C. Martindale and George C. Whittle as counselors. On Nov. 19, 1887, the saints in Oakley and vicinity were organized as the Cassia Stake with Bishop Horton D. Haight as president, and on the same occasion, the Oakley Ward was organized with John L. Smith as Bishop. He acted until May, 1900, when, being called into the stake presidency, he was succeeded by Rosel H. Hunter, who presided until May 26, 1901, when the ward was divided into three wards, namely, the Oakley 1st, the Oakley 2nd, and the Oakley 3rd. In 1906 Oakley 4th Ward was organized, and on Dec. 31, 1930, the Church population of the four Oakley wards was 1,085, including 204 children.
