Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Oaxaca Ward

OAXACA WARD, Juarez Stake, state of Sonora, Mexico, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in Colonia Oaxaca on the Bavispe River in the state of Sonora, Mexico, 20 miles north of San Miguel, the nearest settlement on the Bavispe River up stream, 25 miles north of Bavispe, the nearest Mexican town of any importance in the neighborhood, and 25 miles up the river from Batepito, a ranch situated at the junction of the Batepito and Bavispe rivers. The distance from Oaxaca to Hermosillo, the capital of Sonora, is about 300 miles, and Oaxaca is also about 100 miles southeast of Bisbee in Arizona. Oaxaca is situated in a narrow valley enclosed by high mountains on both sides. The Bavispe River, the main tributary of the Yaqui River, passes through the valley from southeast to northwest. The village of Oaxaca was situated immediately above the so-called "Pulpit Wash," which opens into the Bavispe River from the northeast. The altitude of the settlement is about 3,500 feet above sea level. The soil on the river bottom consists of a sandy loam and is very rich and productive. The river bottom is covered with mesquite, chino, cottonwood, sycamore, ash, walnut, and other trees. Grazing facilities are excellent.

In 1892 George C. Williams, one of the Latter-day Saints from Arizona, purchased a ranch from a Mexican named Cal Kosterlitzky, for the benefit of himself and family. Later, the same year, Brother Williams was joined by other L. D. S. colonists. Bro. Williams, not being able to complete the payment on the property, the real founding of the settlement was made through the L. D. S. Colonization Company. In July, 1892, there were 180 Latter-day Saints at Oaxaca, which number had increased in 1911 to 400. A townsite was surveyed Dec. 25, 1893, and named Oaxaca, at the suggestion of Pres. Porfiro Diaz, who was born in the state of Oaxaca, Mexico. A ward organization was effected March 8, 1894, by Apostles Brigham Young, John Henry Smith and George Teasdale, with Franklin Scott as Bishop. Bishop Scott was succeeded in 1899 by George C. Naegle, who in 1906 was succeeded by Franklin D. Haymore, who presided until 1911 when destructive floods, caused by the overflow of the Bavispe River, washed Oaxaca "off the map," taking the soil down into the Gulf of California. In 1911 there were only a very few inhabitants left of the once flourishing Oaxaca Ward, and those who had not left before took their departure from Oaxaca at the time of the general exodus of the saints from Mexico in 1912.

No attempt has been made since 1912 to re-settle Oaxaca, the site of which in 1930 was owned by Mexican ranchmen.
