Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Obid Ward

OBID WARD, Little Colorado Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, consisted of a settlement of Latter-day Saints founded on the south side, or right bank, of the Little Colorado River, about 24 miles southeast of the present town of Winslow and 12 miles northwest of Holbrook, Navajo Co., Arizona.

The settlement of Obid was founded by missionaries called from Utah by the Church authorities to settle in Arizona. These settlers on their arrival on the Little Colorado River in 1876 made a general rendezvous or encampment on the Little Colorado River near the place where Joseph City now stands. The country was explored and townsites selected. William C. Allen and company located on the right bank or north side of the Little Colorado River, about 25 miles southeast of Sunset Crossing, and called their place Allen. George Lake and company located on the opposite side of the river, about four miles southwest of Allen, and called their camp Obid. Lot Smith and his company retraced a part of their travel, going down the river, and settled about five miles below or northwest of Sunset Crossing and called their location Sunset. Jesse O. Ballenger and company located about three miles southwest of Sunset on the west side of the river and called their place Ballenger's Camp. The people of Obid worked together with those of Allen's camp on the other side of the river in the construction of dams and the Obid people moved their location May 27, 1876, to the springs, near which they put in their vegetables and also planted about 30 acres of corn.

Pres. Daniel H. Wells and Apostles Erastus Snow and Brigham Young, jun., visited the camps of the saints on the Little Colorado River in June, 1876. They held a meeting with the saints at Obid June 5, 1876, and endorsed George Lake as president of the camp. The brethren at Obid built a fort, one and a half mile from the river or four miles west of St. Joseph, or Allen's Camp. The Obid Fort walls enclosed a parcel of land about twelve rods square. The walls were 3 1/2 feet thick at the bottom, tapering off to 18 inches thick at the top. The north, east and west sides were ultimately finished with walls about ten feet high, while the south side was only finished 5 feet high. Nearly all the houses, which were built inside of the fort, were constructed of logs; five, however, were built of rocks; traces of the latter could be found many years afterwards. Bastions with port holes were built at the northeast and southwest corners of the fort. Rock for building purposes was obtained from a ledge about two miles northeast of the fort. These rocks were flat and laying in their natural state had the appearance of piled up lumber. They were slate rock averaging two inches in thickness. Work was commenced on the fort walls July 3, 1876, and three days later (July 6th) the first meeting was held in the camp which, at that time, contained 122 souls. Farming land was taken up north and northeast of the fort between that and the river. The land west of the fort was full of springs and consequently swampy in places. These swamps made the locality unhealthy and malaria soon asserted itself. In July, 1876, the brethren at Obid built a saw pit and commenced to saw lumber of cottonwood logs for the construction of the fort walls, and also for door frames. The lower part of the wall was built of large rocks. On July 19th the dam washed away, and as nothing was done to repair it that year the crops were a failure. The washing away of the dam and other troubles caused some of the settlers to become discouraged and on Aug. 7, 1876, eleven men and four women started back for Utah. In January, 1877, a school house was built at Obid and on Jan. 22, 1877, the first Latter-day Saint school ever taught in Arizona was commenced in that building with Phebe A. McNiel as teacher. The settlers were all living in the United Order, working together with one common interest and with energy and good will. In 1877 the Obid people built a new dam from which they conveyed water for irrigation onto their land. It was a brush and log dam which raised the water in the river about four feet, and a fair crop was raised that year. In the fall of 1877 the people were attacked with malaria and the sickness spread so rapidly and appeared so universal that at last only one healthy man could be found in camp. Chills and fever attacked adults and children alike, all owing to the swampy location. Hence, most of the people deserted the Obid location and moved across the river to Allen's Camp. In 1878 the Obid Camp was entirely abandoned, but the Allen colonists kept a dairy on the site of Obid for two summers afterwards.
