Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Old Folks' Excursions

OLD FOLKS' EXCURSIONS. The late Charles R. Savage of Salt Lake City was a philanthropist and, realizing that old folks had but few amusements, conceived the idea that on one day annually they should be treated as special guests of honor and an outing arranged for their enjoyment. Early in 1875 he communicated his views to Edward Hunter, Presiding Bishop of the Church, who became interested and called upon his chief clerk, George Goddard, to assist Elder Savage in arranging for an Old Folks' Excursion at as early a date as possible. John W. Young, manager of the newly built Utah-Western Railroad, gladly consented to give the honored guests a free ride to and from Lake Point, a popular bathing resort on the shore of the Great Salt Lake, and other citizens contributed to the event in various ways.

So, on Friday, May 14, 1875, the first of these annual Old Folks' Excursions was successfully carried out under the direction of the committee named, assisted by a number of aides. The train left the depot at Salt Lake City at 8 a.m., carrying about 240 aged guests, accompanied by a brass band and a choir. After the company had spent a pleasant day and partaken of a sumptuous lunch provided by the committee, the return journey was commenced at 5 p.m. and all arrived home without accident.

Similar excursions have been arranged annually in Salt Lake City without intermission, except in 1877 (on account of the demise of Pres. Brigham Young) and in 1918 (on account of the war). In these excursions color or religious affiliations are not considered-all residents of the district 70 years of age and over are welcome guests. A red ribbon badge is worn by all from 70 to 80 years of age, a blue one by those 80 to 90, and a white one by those 90 years and over; it has even been found necessary to provide a special badge for those one hundred years old and over.

At various times, citizens of American Fork, Brigham City, Lehi, Ogden, Payson, Pleasant Grove, Provo, Spanish Fork, Springville, and Tooele, Utah, have graciously acted as hosts to the old folks of Salt Lake City and excursions have also been taken to Garfield, Black Rock and Saltair on the shores of the Great Salt Lake, the Lagoon in Davis County, and Wandamere Park in Salt Lake City. Of late years, however, Liberty Park in Salt Lake City has been the place of gathering. To facilitate transportation of the aged guests the street car company has given free transportation to all wearing the official badges, and other citizens have sent automobiles for the use of the committee in various ways.

These old folks excursions have been duplicated in the various stakes and branches of the Church in different parts of the United States and Canada and are held annually. In several of the missions in foreign lands similar excursions have been arranged, and the idea has also been taken up with enthusiasm by other religious and civic organizations at home and abroad.

The Presiding Bishops of the Church have always acted as chairmen of the Old Folks Central Committee. Andrew Jenson, a member of the committee since 1883, is vice chairman. A monument in honor of Charles R. Savage and the old folks is being constructed and will be placed in Salt Lake City. Following is a list of those who have been active as members of the Old Folks General Committee from the beginning till the end of 1930: Edward Hunter, George Goddard, Charles R. Savage, William Eddington, William Naylor, John Kirkman, William L. Binder, Andrew Jenson, William B. Preston, Nelson A. Empey, Brigham S. Young, Heber S. Goddard, Hyrum S. Groesbeck, George B. Margetts, William B. Barton, Brigham F. Grant, Charles W. Nibley, Heber C. Iverson George T. Bourne, Joshua B. Bean, George L. Savage, Oscar F. Hunter, George E. Burbidge, Joseph J. Daynes, Nephi L. Morris, Kasper J. Fetzer. John T. Williams, Richard P. Morris, Rodney Hillam, jun., Sylvester Q. Cannon, Stanley F. Taylor, William W. Armstrong, Herbert S. Auerbach, Willard C. Burton, Harry L. Finch, and George W. Middleton.
