Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Ontario Branch

ONTARIO BRANCH, Boise Stake, Malheur Co., Oregon, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Ontario and surrounding country. Ontario is situated on the west side, or left bank, of Snake River, on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, 19 miles southwest of Weiser, in Idaho, 74 miles by highway northwest of Boise, Idaho, and 35 miles southeast of Huntington, Oregon. The saints belonging to the Ontario Branch reside partly on the townsite of Ontario and partly on the farms in the surrounding country district. Ontario is about a mile west of the Idaho-Oregon boundary line, the Snake River at this point forming the boundary between the two states. Some of the members of the Church belonging to the Ontario Branch live in Payette, Fruitland and New Plymouth, in Idaho, and a few also in Vail and Harper, Oregon. In fact the saints in the Ontario Branch are scattered to such an extent that the extreme distance between members is 50 miles east and west and about the same distance north and south. As the saints of the Ontario Branch do not have a meeting house of their own they hold their religious services in the Knights of Pythias Hall in the town of Ontario.

The first Latter-day Saints who made a home in what is now the Ontario Branch were Leonard Christiansen and family, who located in the town of Ontario, where he opened a barber shop in 1911. His was the only Latter-day Saint family in the neighborhood for several years; they belonged to the Weiser Ward in Idaho. In due course of time other Latter-day Saint families made homes in Ontario, and on June 13, 1926, these saints were organized into a branch of the Church with Ernest L. Allen as presiding Elder. The branch commenced its existence with 139 members of the Church (including children) who had formerly belonged to the Weiser Ward. President Allen was succeeded in 1928 by Leonard Christiansen, who presided over the branch Dec. 31, 1930. The membership of the branch on that date was 340, including 95 children. The total population of the Ontario Precinct was 1,941 in 1930.
