Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Orangeville Ward

ORANGEVILLE WARD, Emery Stake, Emery Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Orangeville and surrounding country district. The town is pleasantly situated on Cottonwood Creek, about eight miles below the mouth of Cottonwood Canyon, 2 1/2 miles west of Castle Dale, the headquarters of the stake, 33 miles southwest of Price, the nearest railroad station, and 160 miles southeast of Salt Lake City. The town has a number of fine residences, several small stores, a substantial meeting house and a recently erected modern school house. Within the limits of the ward is a flouring mill situated on Cottonwood Creek, about two miles west of the town.

Orangeville is one of the original towns founded by Latter-day Saints in Castle Valley in 1877. Among the first settlers who came over the mountains from Sanpete Valley to settle in Castle Valley was Erastus Curtis. Others followed, and the first settlers consisted principally of young married people who hailed from Fountain Green and Manti in Sanpete Valley. Most of these were called by the ecclesiastical authorities of the Sanpete Stake of Zion and went over the mountains to Castle Valley in obedience to that call. Some of them became owners of good and productive farms in their new location. A townsite was surveyed in Orangeville in 1888 and named Castle Dale, which name had previously been given to the post office established the year before. A primitive meeting house, a log building, 18 by 24 feet, was erected in 1880. When more settlers came over the mountains in 1881, the locality began to show signs of prosperity, and on Aug. 13, 1882, the original Castle Dale Ward was divided into two bishop's wards, the upper part of the same being organized into a new ward called Orangeville, in honor of Orange Seeley, who had figured prominently in the founding of settlements in Castle Valley. Jasper Robertson was chosen as Bishop of the Orangeville Ward. He presided from 1882 to 1906, when he was succeeded by Henry M. Reid, who in 1921 was succeeded by John H. Taylor, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Church membership of Orangeville Ward was 582, including 115 children. The total population of the Orangeville Precinct was 644 in 1930, of which 532 resided in the town of Orangeville.
