Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Orderville Ward

ORDERVILLE WARD, Kanab Stake, Kane Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Orderville, the largest settlement in Long Valley, situated on the Rio Virgen, four miles southwest of Glendale, two miles northeast of Mt. Carmel and 22 miles northwest of Kanab, the stake headquarters. It is also 90 miles by road via Zion Park, east of St. George, and 105 miles south of Marysvale, the terminus of the Marysvale branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad. Orderville is surrounded by good and fertile lands, very limited, however, but all kinds of cereals and fruits are raised.

Early in 1874 Pres. Brigham Young introduced the subject of the United Order in St. George and sent John R. Young and others to Long Valley to organize branches of the same there. At a meeting held at Mount Carmel, nearly all the saints there joined said order. In the spring of 1875 a division took place among those of the brethren at Mt. Carmel who had joined the United Order, and those who had withdrawn from it, and those who were in favor of continuing the order, in charge of Bishop Howard O. Spencer, located a new town in Long Valley, about two and a half miles above Mt. Carmel. Small lumber houses and a large dining hall were erected, and the people in the new settlement started out full-heartedly for the purpose of making the United Order a success. They succeeded, and Orderville has the reputation of continuing working faithfully in that order longer and more successfully than any other settlement of the saints in the Rocky Mountains. The experience of these faithful, devoted people is a lesson to others. Under the laws and agreements entered into by all concerned, this branch of the United Order continued for 12 years, or until 1886, when Pres. John Taylor advised them to separate and live as other people. Hence the affairs of the order were settled seemingly to the satisfaction of all concerned.

The saints at Orderville were organized as a bishop's ward Aug. 7, 1877, with Thomas Chamberlain as Bishop. Previous to that the saints at Orderville had constituted a part of the Mount Carmel Ward. Bishop Chamberlain was succeeded in 1884 by Henry W. Esplin, who in 1911 was succeeded by Henry Chamberlain, who in 1921 was succeeded by Edward Carroll, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. At that time the Orderville Ward had a membership of 437, including 114 children.

The total population of the Orderville Precinct was 439 in 1930.
