Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Overland Telegraph

OVERLAND TELEGRAPH (The), uniting the Eastern States with the Pacific Coast, and passing through Salt Lake City and other towns in Utah, was constructed in 1860-1861. As early as Feb. 14, 1852, the legislative assembly of Utah Territory memorialized the U. S. Congress for the construction of a great national central railroad from the Missouri River to the Pacific Coast, and also for the establishment of a telegraph line across the continent, both to pass through Salt Lake City. But it was not until the year 1861 that telegraph connection was thus established and the transcontinental railroad was not built until nearly eight years later.

In the construction of the trans-continental telegraph line Salt Lake City was made an important connecting point, the eastern division being built westward from the Missouri River and the western division eastward from San Francisco to Salt Lake City. Messrs. Little and Decker of Salt Lake City took a contract to furnish poles from Salt Lake City to Ruby Valley, Nevada, a difficult assignment, owing to the scarcity of suitable trees except in almost inaccessible parts of the mountain slopes.

Communication between the Eastern States and Salt Lake City was established Oct. 18, 1861, when by courtesy of Mr. Creighton, general agent for the Eastern Division, Pres. Brigham Young was invited to send the first message over the line. This was a congratulatory communication to Mr. J. H. Wade, president of the Pacific Telegraph Company at Cleveland, Ohio. Communication between San Francisco and Salt Lake City was established six days later (Oct. 24th), and Pres. Brigham Young was again invited to send the first message over the line, on this occasion by courtesy of Mr. James Street, supervising agent of the Western Division, Pres. Young sent a congratulatory message to Mr. H. W. Carpenter, president of the Overland Telegraph line at San Francisco. Thus, on Oct. 24, 1861, complete telegraphic communication from the Atlantic to the Pacific coasts was established. Immediately afterwards Pres. Young put into operation plans for the establishment of branch lines throughout the territory. (See Deseret Telegraph.)
