Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

P

Pacheco (Colonia Pacheco)

PACHECO (COLONIA PACHECO), Juarez Stake, state of Chihuahua, Mexico, is situated in the Corrales Basin in the heart of the Sierra Madre Mountains on the headwaters of the Rio Piedras Verdes, 35 miles southwest of Colonia Juarez, the headquarters of the Juarez Stake of Zion. The colonists of Pacheco raise corn, potatoes, alfalfa, fruits, cattle and hogs, and also manufacture a very fine grade of cheese. All three of the L. D. S. mountain settlements raise a very fine quality of vegetables. The lands surrounding Pacheco are, as a rule, fertile and productive, although in places quite rocky. The altitude of the settlement is about 7,000 feet above sea level and only a small part of the land lying adjacent to the river is irrigated from that stream, while other lands are irrigated from small streams situated adjacent to the townsite. Dry farming is carried on successfully in the valley both above and below the settlement.

Pacheco was first settled by L. D. S. colonists in the spring of 1887, the first settlers being George C. Williams and Peter A. Dillman, who were soon joined by other L. D. S. home-seekers. The mountain slopes are covered with pine, oak, juniper, maple and other trees. A townsite was surveyed in 1889 and a branch organization effected with Merit Staley as presiding Elder. The Pacheco Ward was organized Feb. 12, 1890, with Jesse N. Smith, jun., as Bishop, the settlement being named in honor of General Carlos Pacheco, who had used his influence in the interest of the saints and received Apostle Brigham Young and other representatives of the Church with cordiality in the early days of Latter-day Saint colonization in Mexico.

Bishop Jesse N. Smith, jun., was succeeded in 1895 by George W. Hardy, who in 1903 was succeeded by John E. Steiner, who presided until the exodus in 1912. When Pacheco was resettled by the saints in 1920, Clarence L. Lunt was chosen as presiding Elder of the colony, and when the branch was organized as a ward in 1921, Bro. Lunt was chosen as Bishop. He acted until March 2, 1930, when he was succeeded by Marion L. Wilson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had a membership of 94, including 34 children.
