Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Palestine Mission

PALESTINE MISSION (The) comprises the so-called "Holy Land," or the region of country bordering on the Mediterranean Sea, lying southwest of Syria, or west of the Jordan Valley extending to the Mediterranean Sea. This section of country, for many years dominated by Turkey, was turned over to Great Britain in 1917, under mandate by the League of Nations, with the object of establishing therein a national home for the Jews. The area of Palestine, under the terms of the mandate, is about 9,000 square miles. The population was 816,060 in 1930, of which about 80 per cent were Moslems. The Jewish settlements are grouped in four districts, Judea, Samaria, Lower Galilee and Upper Galilee. The British High Commissioner assisted by an executive council is responsible for the execution of the laws. The Zionist Organization is represented by a National Committee. Wheat, barley, lentils, olives and citrus fruits are produced extensively, and olive oil, soap and wine are the chief exports. Sheep, goats, and camels are also raised.

Palestine was never an organized mission of the Church, but has been termed a mission since Apostle Orson Hyde visited the country in 1841. Otherwise it has been a part of the Turkish Mission and is now (1930) associated with the Armenian Mission. There is a small branch of the Church at Haifa and a few scattered German and Armenian saints at Jaffa and other parts of Palestine.

The Latter-day Saints believe in the literal gathering of Israel and that the Jews, in due time of the Lord, will again possess the coveted land of Palestine. With this in view Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page, two of the Apostles of the Church, were called at a general conference held in Nauvoo, Ill., April 6, 1840, to fill a mission to Palestine. John E. Page did not respond to the call and so Elder Hyde went alone. After spending some time in England, Holland, Austria and Turkey, he reached Palestine in October, 1841. On the 24th of that month he ascended the Mount of Olives (near Jerusalem) and dedicated the land by prayer for the gathering of the remnant of the Jews. He returned to Nauvoo in 1842.

In February and March, 1873, Palestine was visited by Pres. George A. Smith and party from Utah. The company consisted of Pres. George A. Smith, Apostle Lorenzo Snow, Elders Paul A. Schettler, Feramorz Little, George Dunford, Sister Eliza R. Snow and Clara S. Little. Most of the party left Salt Lake City Dec. 17, 1872, and after visiting in England, France, Italy and other countries, arrived in Jerusalem Feb. 25, 1873. After making a trip to the Dead Sea, the River Jordan, etc., this Palestine party held solemn worship on the Mount of Olives, and then visited other places of interest in Palestine. Leaving Jerusalem March 5, 1873, they visited the ancient site of Shechem (now Nablons), Samaria, Nazareth, Cana, Tiberius, the Sea of Galilee, Bethsaida, Capernaum, Dan and Caesarea Phillipi, and arrived at Damascus, Syria, March 15, 1873. From that City the journey was continued over the mountains of Lebanon to Beyrout, Syria, whence they sailed on a steamer for Constantinople, where they arrived April 1st. After visiting several other countries, the party returned to America, Pres. George A. Smith arriving in Salt Lake City June 18, 1873, and the other members of the party shortly before or soon afterwards.

The Turkish Mission was opened in Constantinople in December, 1884, by Elder Jacob Spori, and as missionary labors extended into Syria, the Elders invariably journeyed southward into Palestine to visit places of interest connected with the life and labors of the Savior. At Haifa, Palestine, a little seaport on the Mediterranean coast, Elders Spori and Joseph M. Tanner found a small colony of Germans who listened to their testimony, and on Aug. 29, 1886, George Grau, one of their number, was baptized by Elder Spori. This was the first baptism by divine authority in this dispensation in Palestine. Work was continued, principally among the German colonists, and two Elders from Zion died in Haifa while filling missions, namely, Adolph Hang in 1892 and John A. Clark in 1895. Their graves are suitably marked and have been frequently visited by missionaries and other saints. President Booth and wife labored in Palestine previous to the demise of Pres. Booth in Aleppo, Syria, in 1928. In 1929 no L. D. S. missionaries from Zion labored in Palestine.

Many prominent members of the Church have visited Palestine as missionaries and tourists, and their prayers and faith have always been that Palestine might speedily become one of the most flourishing mission fields of the Church. Besides those already named, we may mention the following Elders who as missionaries have visited Palestine: Janne M. Sjodahl, who organized a small branch of the Church at Jaffa in 1890; Dr Frederick Stauffer (1890, 1924, 1928), Andrew Jenson (1896), Anthon H. Lund and Ferdinand F. Hintze (1897), Thomas P. Page (1899-1901), Francis M. Lyman and Sylvester Q. Cannon (1902) and David O. McKay and Hugh J. Cannon (1921).
