Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Palmyra (Old Palmyra)

PALMYRA (Old Palmyra), a town founded on the Spanish Fork River in Utah County, Utah, in 1852, was situated about 1 1/2 miles west northwest of the present Spanish Fork center. It contained a fort enclosing about 40 acres of land. The houses in that fort were built mostly of adobes and logs, which primitive dwellings formed the outside of the fort. Apostle George A. Smith, writing of Palmyra under date of Dec. 26, 1852, says:

"I have sought out the location of the city of Palmyra on the Spanish Fork River, Utah County, and secured the survey of 360 lots containing 100 rods of ground each, a temple square of 13 acres and four school squares of 2 1/2 acres; streets six rods wide. The public square commands a view of all the settlements in Utah Valley except Mountainville (Alpine) and is one of the most delightful spots in the mountains. It is 60 miles from Great Salt Lake City and now contains sixty families. Stephen Markham presides. This plot was surveyed in July (1852) and the first house built on it in August. A good adobe school house, 22x35 feet inside, has been erected." (Mill. Star 15: 286.)

Only a few buildings and dugouts were erected on the Palmyra city plat. During the short time the people remained there they lived in cabins erected in the fort. Some of the families moved into the fort in 1852, but the majority did not move until the Walker War broke out in 1853, when the people of the Upper Settlement (about a dozen families) moved into Palmyra for safety. Those who originally located in Palmyra had arrived in the valley with the emigration of 1852. Early in 1853 a post office was established in Palmyra with Charles H. Davis as postmaster. At a meeting of the saints of the Spanish Fork Ward held in the evening of March 22, 1853, and attended by Apostle George A. Smith, Stephen Markham was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Palmyra Ward. According to the. official report of October, 1853, Palmyra then contained 412 souls. The people of the Upper Settlement, who moved to Palmyra, spent the winter of 1853-1854 there. The brethren who owned farms up the river attended to these during the summer until the crops were secured. Some of the settlers, instead of moving to the Palmyra Fort, left for other parts of the country. In the latter part of 1853 the brethren of Palmyra were busily engaged in building their fort in the center of their contemplated city of Palmyra. In the spring of 1854 a number of saints, who had spent the winter in Palmyra Fort, moved up to the mouth of Spanish Fork Canyon, where they afterwards built a fort. (See Fort St. Luke.)

Early in 1856, by advice of Pres. Brigham Young, Palmyra was broken up on account of its low and swampy location, where alkali rose to the surface through irrigation and destroyed the crops. Following this advice the settlers located farther up the river, where the site of the present Spanish Fork had been chosen and a survey of a city already made. (See Spanish Fork.)
