Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Panguitch

PANGUITCH, Panguitch Stake, Garfield Co., Utah, is the county seat of Garfield County and the headquarters of the Panguitch Stake. It is pleasantly located near the hills in the south end of Panguitch Valley, and 15 miles northeast of Panguitch Lake. The town of Panguitch is 55 miles South of Marysvale, the nearest railroad station, 40 miles east of Parowan, and 60 miles northwest of Kanab.

Panguitch Valley became known to the early pioneers of Utah and Parley P. Pratt's exploring company passed through it in the latter part of 1849. But the valley, being considered rather cold for farming purposes, was not settled until the spring of 1864. In that year about fifty families from Parowan, Iron Co., and vicinity came to the valley, including Jens Nielsen of Cedar City, who had been appointed to preside over them. During the year these pioneers cleared and fenced a considerable amount of land, made ditches, built several log houses, raised a fair crop of wheat and a number of fat cattle. The next year a school house was built in which meetings were also held. In 1866 Indians began to show hostility and the settlement was temporarily vacated in 1867, the people moving to Parowan, Cedar City and Beaver. In 1871 Panguitch was re-settled and George W. Sevey was appointed to take charge of the settlement as Bishop. The next year a townsite was surveyed, which (in 1930) includes the southeast part of the town, considerable extensions having been made on the north and west and some on the south of the original survey.

Panguitch Lake, which abounds in fish, soon became such a favorite resort that even in the early 80's James H. Imlay conducted meetings there during the summer months. When in 1877 the Panguitch Stake of Zion was organized Bishop George W. Sevey was called to act as a counselor in the stake presidency but continued to preside as Bishop in Panguitch until 1879, when the town was divided into two wards, namely, the Panguitch 1st and the Panguitch 2nd. This division, however, only continued until 1887, when the two wards were consolidated and Allan Miller was sustained as Bishop of the amalgamated Panguitch Ward. He was succeeded in 1900 by James Bell Heywood, who presided until 1916, when the Panguitch Ward was again divided into two wards, namely, the Panguitch North Ward and the Panguitch South Ward. On Dec. 31, 1930, the two wards in Panguitch had a total membership of 1,429, including 264 children. The total population in the Panguitch Precinct in 1930 was 1,661, of whom 1,541 resided on the townsite.
