Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Paris

PARIS, Bear Lake Stake, Bear Lake Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in Paris and vicinity. It is the headquarters of the Bear Lake Stake of Zion and the seat of Bear Lake County, Idaho. It comprises two organized bishop's wards, viz., the Paris 1st and the Paris 2nd wards. In both wards there are fine L. D. S. chapels, besides the stake tabernacle, which is one of the finest houses of worship in southern Idaho. Besides these public buildings there are a fine school house, a number of substantial business blocks, and numerous private residences, mostly brick and frame buildings. The gardens and farming lands belonging to Paris are irrigated from Paris Creek, which rises in the Wasatch Mountains west of the settlement and separates Bear Lake Valley from Cache Valley.

Paris, the oldest settlement in Bear Lake Valley, was settled by a colony of Latter-day Saints under the direction of the late Apostle Charles C. Rich in 1863, and was from the beginning the most important settlement in the valley. Like the adjoining settlements, the saints in Paris were first organized into a branch of the Church, and remained thus until 1870, when the branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward, with Henry D. Horne as Bishop. He presided until 1877, when Paris was divided into two wards, viz., the Paris 1st and the Paris 2nd. Paris, which has a long interesting history, had a total membership of 982, including 156 children, Dec. 31, 1930, as against a total population of 1,009 in the Paris Precinct.

One of the important features in the history of Paris was the erection of the Fielding Academy, established by the Church about 1900. It was one of the finest institutions of learning in southern Idaho, and thousands of young Latter-day Saints and others received a splendid education in that institution. The Academy building occupied an elevated position immediately west of Paris, but was destroyed by fire Sept. 8, 1928, at a loss of $50,000. Since that time the Church has sustained a L. D. S. seminary in Paris, which is still in good running order. It is housed in a fine modern building on the public square, immediately northeast of the tabernacle.
