Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Parley's Park Ward

PARLEY'S PARK WARD, Summit Stake, Summit Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in Parley's Park Precinct, including the village of Snyderville, Kimball's Ranch and all the scattered settlers living along the headwaters of Silver Creek and East Canyon Creek with their numerous small tributaries. Stock raising occupied most of the time of the inhabitants. There are a number of stone quarries at the foot of the mountains northwest and southeast of Snyderville from which some of the finest red sandstone found in the country is extracted.

The beautiful little valley called Parley's Park was known to the early pioneers of Utah in 1847, and in 1850 Apostle Parley P. Pratt made a road through the lower part of Parley's Canyon and became so pleased with the little valley that he laid claim to it and named it Parley's Park. He employed a man to put up a cabin on the bank of Spring Creek, on the present site of Snyderville. Later Samuel Snyder built a saw mill in the district. The next permanent settler was. Wm. H. Kimball, a son of Pres. Heber C. Kimball, who built a trading station known as Kimball's Hotel, a well known place for many years to travelers on the old overland mail route. After a while other settlers came and meetings were held in Parley's Park under the direction of Jesse W. Johnson. In June, 1866, Ephraim S. Snyder was called by Wm. W. Cluff, presiding Bishop in Summit County, to preside over the saints in Parley's Park. When the Summit Stake was organized July 9, 1877, the saints in Parley's Park, including those at Snyderville, were organized as the Parley's Park Ward with Joseph H. Black as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1878 by Alexander H. Stanley, who was succeeded in 1881 by George M. Pace, who presided until his death, March 6, 1897, and was succeeded by Hans O. Young, who was succeeded in 1901 by Angus J. Cannon, who was succeeded in 1916 by Milton O. Bitner, who moved away in March, 1924, after which his counselor, Wilford W. Snyder, presided until August, 1924, when the ward was disorganized and the former members became a part of the Park City Ward. The Parley's Park Precinct in 1930 had a total population of 125.
