Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

People's Party

PEOPLE'S PARTY (The) was a political organization founded in Salt Lake City, Utah, in 1870. In the beginning of that year, a plan was devised by Wm. S. Godbe and some others to unite a number of disaffected members of the Church with the Gentile (non-Mormon) element in Salt Lake City to form a separate political party. A caucus of the leading men concerned was called and a municipal ticket, called the "Independent" and later the "Liberal" ticket, was adopted. To ratify this action a mass meeting was called to be held Feb. 10, 1870, in the old Walker store, at which the "people" of Salt Lake City, one and all, were invited to be present. So generous was the response to this invitation and the "people," mostly Mormons, being so largely in the majority, they took the matter into their own hands and, electing a chairman, nominated a "People's Ticket" in opposition to the "Independent" or "Liberal" ticket. (History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, p. 428.)

After this, for about 20 years, two municipal tickets were in the field, sponsored by the "People's Party" and the "Liberal Party." As time progressed, the "Liberal Party" gained some power and in 1885, having extended its scope all over the Territory of Utah, it received a majority vote in Summit County and still later a majority vote was claimed by the party in Tooele County, Utah. In 1880, George Q. Cannon, "People's Party" candidate for delegate to Congress, received 18,668 votes, while Allen G. Campbell, Liberal candidate, only received 1,857 votes. In 1883, John T. Caine, the People's candidate, received 23,039 votes, while Philip T. Van Zile, the Liberal candidate, had 4,884 votes. In 1890, during the anti-polygamy prosecutions, the municipal government of Salt Lake City passed into the hands of the "Liberal Party," but after the proclamation, later in 1890, of the "Manifesto," by Pres. Wilford Woodruff, prohibiting the solemnization of marriages forbidden by the laws of the land, the great plank in the opposition party being removed, the "People's Party" and the "Liberal Party" were dissolved, the voters affiliating themselves with the two great national parties, Democrat and Republican.
