Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company

PERPETUAL EMIGRATING FUND COMPANY. The establishment of the headquarters of the Church in Great Salt Lake Valley automatically made the "Great Basin," as Utah and adjacent territory were then called, the gathering place for the Latter-day Saints. But the securing of means to transport so many members of the Church, drawn mostly from the poorer classes, and scattered over the United States and in foreign lands, was a question of grave importance. So in September, 1849, the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company was organized. Donations of money, oxen, wagons, bread stuffs, etc., were solicited from the saints already located in the Valley and of those in the United States and elsewhere, to constitute a fund whereby the poor might be gathered to "Zion." The means advanced for transportation was considered as a loan, to be repaid as soon as possible after the arrival of the immigrants at their destination and it is fair to state that, in many cases, this obligation was honorably discharged.

The Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company was legally incorporated by the Provisional Government of the State of Deseret Oct. 4, 1851, and at all times during its existence functioned under strict supervision. It continued to operate as an emigration agency, collecting and disbursing funds, chartering ships, establishing purchasing agencies and arranging for transportation of emigrants across the plains and mountains in properly organized companies, at first in ox or mule trains and later by rail, until the company was dissolved by action of the Edmunds-Tucker Law in 1887. It is estimated that during its existence about 50,000 persons were assisted, and that at least one-half of these were brought from foreign lands. Thus it will be seen that the Perpetual Emigrating Fund served a noble purpose, and that through its agency thousands of families from crowded cities were brought to the broad open spaces of western America, where they might enjoy health, happiness and the inestimable blessings bestowed upon those who are faithful to the gospel of Christ.
