Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Petersboro Ward

PETERSBORO WARD, Cache Stake, Cache Co., Utah, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district situated between Mendon and Cache Junction. The ward and precinct extended north to Bear River. The center of the ward was the Petersboro school house, which was situated in the southeast quarter of Sec. 19, Township 12 N., Range 1 W., Salt Lake Meridian, six miles southeast of Cache Junction, four miles north of Mendon and six miles by nearest road northwest of Logan.

Sylvanus Collett was the first settler in that district of country later included in the Petersboro Ward. He located about 1867 at a spring near Bear River, about six miles northwest of the present school house. Charles W. Maughan was the first settler in what later became the south end of Petersboro Ward, locating with his family in 1871 at what is locally known as the "Four Mile Spring." Other settlers moved in gradually after that, and on Aug. 13, 1876, Wm. L. Williamson was appointed teacher in what was known as District No. 6 of the Mendon Ward. Later, Elias Davis acted as presiding Elder and meetings were commenced in the district school house. Bro. Davis presided until he was succeeded in 1884 by John Simpson, who later was succeeded by Morgan Phelps, who presided until July 17, 1887, when the branch was reorganized as the Petersboro Ward with Wm. D. Cranney as Bishop. In 1895 the ward had a membership of 139, including 53 children. Soon after that the ward ceased to exist and the saints still residing in the district were attached partly to the Mendon Ward on the south and partly to the Benson Ward on the east. In 1930 there were still a number of Latter-day Saints in the Petersboro district, which consisted of two precincts, with 95 souls in Precinct No. 1 and 138 in Precinct No. 2, some of these being Latter-day Saints. Bishop Wm. D. Cranney was the only Bishop who presided over the ward.
