Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pine Valley Ward

PINE VALLEY WARD, St. George Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Pine Valley proper and in Grass Valley. It also includes some ranches on the Santa Clara Creek below Pine Valley, extending about 12 1/4 miles in a southwesterly direction. One of the principal ranches is the so-called Foster's Ranch, where Henry Chadburn once acted as presiding Elder. The town or village of Pine Valley is situated in the romantic Pine Valley Basin, near the top of the Pine Valley Mountains. The Basin is about five miles long from east to west and about two miles wide. The mountains are quite lofty immediately south of the valley. The Santa Clara River heads in the mountains south and east of Pine Valley in what is known as the Pine Valley crest. The Pine Valley settlement is 13 1/2 miles south of Pinto, 34 1/2 miles northeast of St. George, and 35 miles southeast of Modena, the nearest railroad station on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. The limited area of land in Pine Valley is generally rich and productive, but the altitude is too high for fruit.

Robert Richey, Lorenzo W. Roundy and Jehu Blackburn erected a saw mill in Pine Valley in 1855-1856, but this mill was not in running order until 1857, when the sawyers commenced to turn out lumber in large quantities, supplying the surrounding settlements of Washington, Santa Clara, Harmony Pinto, and other places, with lumber and shingles. The first settlers and those who afterwards located around the mill were organized as a branch of the Church in 1859, with John Hawley as presiding Elder. He presided until July 6, 1867, when the Pine Valley Branch was organized as the Pine Valley Ward with William Snow as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1879 by Fred W. Jones, who in 1888 was succeeded by William Gardner, who in 1893 was succeeded by Jeter Snow, who presided until 1929, when he was succeeded by Erastus S. Gardner, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Pine Valley Ward had 66 members, including 12 children. The Pine Valley district had a total population of 49 in 1930.
