Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pinedale Ward

PINEDALE WARD, Snowflake Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a forest country on the north slope of the Mogollon Mountains, about 18 miles southwest of Snowflake, the stake headquarters. Most of the families reside in the village of Pinedale and the sawmill camp of Standard, and some on adjacent farms. Most of the people in the vicinity are members of the Church.

As early as the fall of 1878 the pioneer settlers of Snowflake came to the vicinity of Pinedale to get logs, poles, etc., for building purposes; thus the place became known as the Snowflake Camp. The following year (1879) Niels Mortensen and his sons, James and Willard, took up land claims in the vicinity which was called Mortensen, but is now known as East Pinedale, and in the winter of 1879-1880 Thos. Jessup and Thos. Willis erected a saw mill about 1 1/2 miles south of the Mortensen location. This was the first saw mill built in that part of the country. This mill was later moved to the present site of Pinedale. In 1881 the place was deserted on account of Indian troubles, but later some of the families returned, being joined by others. Some difficulty was also experienced with cowboys who threatened to run all the Mormons out of the country. But this rough element fought against themselves and caused so much disturbance that the law intervened and eliminated this undesirable element. During the time that this reign of terror existed, a band of horses belonging to Bro. Niels Peterson was driven off, but with the assistance of Wm. J. Flake and other brethren was recovered. In revenge some of the cowboys caught Bro. Peterson and whipped him very severely. The man who was the leader in this outrage was killed soon afterwards in a fight with one of his comrades.

On Dec. 18, 1887, at a quarterly conference of the Snowflake Stake, the saints "in the mountains" were organized as the Pinedale Ward with Niels Peterson as Bishop. Bishop Peterson died July 7, 1902, and for a time his counselors (Joseph Lorenzo Brewer and Silas Ardine Owen) took charge of the ward. In 1903 Elijah M. Thomas was set apart as Bishop of Pinedale Ward; he was succeeded in 1914 by Joseph Lorenzo Peterson, who was succeeded in 1916 by Albert J. Brewer, who was succeeded in 1921 by Elijah Thomas, jun., who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On this date the Pinedale Ward had 142 members, including 29 children.
