Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pinto Ward

PINTO WARD, Parowan Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Pinto and the smaller village of Hamblin in the Mountain Meadows. The village of Pluto is situated in a narrow valley on Pinto Creek extending from southeast to northwest and is about 1 1/2 miles wide. Pinto is six miles west of Hamblin, 13 1/2 miles northeast of Pine Valley, 15 miles west of Harmony, 42 miles northeast of St. George by nearest road, 28 miles southwest of Cedar City, and 302 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. Pinto Creek rises in the Pine Valley Mountains about six miles southwest of the Rim of the Basin.

In the fall of 1856 six or eight Indian missionaries camped on Pinto Creek by a haystack owned by Brother Gould, who, however, was not a permanent settler on the creek, but had come out from Parowan to cut hay. The missionaries (in charge of Rufus C. Allen) were on their way from Harmony to Santa Clara. Attention was afterwards drawn to this locality and the place settled by Rufus C. Allen and others in the fall of 1856. Rufus C. Allen presided over the Pinto settlement during the first six months of its existence; he was succeeded as president of the Indian Mission in the spring of 1857 by Jacob Hamblin, who appointed Richard S. Robinson to preside at Pinto. New arrivals increased the number of settlers and on July 17, 1859, Pinto was more fully organized as a branch of the Church, with Richard S. Robinson as presiding Elder. He acted in that capacity until July 11, 1867, when the Pinto Branch was organized as a bishop's ward with Richard S. Robinson as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1876 by Robert Knell, who in 1897 was succeeded by Robert C. Knell, who in 1903 was succeeded by Heber E. Harrison, who presided until 1916, when the Pinto Ward organization was discontinued, most of the settlers having removed from Pinto to the new location now known as Newcastle on the edge of the Escalante desert, about 12 miles north of Pinto. In 1930 only two families of saints occupied the old townsite of Pinto, one belonging to the Newcastle Ward and the other to Cedar 1st Ward.
