Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pipe Springs Branch

PIPE SPRINGS BRANCH, Kanab Stake, Mohave Co., Arizona, consisted of a few families of saints residing at Pipe Springs, eight miles south of the boundary line between Utah and Arizona, 21 miles southwest of Kanab and 60 miles southeast of St. George. It is situated on the edge of the desert on a projecting point. The two-story building at the spring is sometimes called Winsor Castle. The place was secure against ordinary attacks of savages and others, the walls surrounding the building, or rather walls which form a part of the building, were supplied with port holes. Two gates, ten feet wide, lead into the enclosure. Moccasin Springs is three miles north of Pipe Springs.

In 1863 James M. Whitmore had a survey made of 140 acres of land, including the Pipe Springs. He built a small rock camp house, established a sheep ranch and owned the place when he was killed by Indians in 1866. McIntyre, his herder, was also killed by the Indians. Later Pres. Young purchased the Whitmore claim for $1,000 cash from Elizabeth Whitmore, widow of James M. Whitmore, and Anson P. Winsor took charge of the herd at Pipe Springs, according to the appointment of Pres. Young. Brother Winsor's compensation was afterwards adjusted at $1,200 a year, and he took charge of the property until Jan. 1, 1873. While the Church herd was kept at the Pipe Springs Ranch and prior to the Winsor Stockgrowing Company, the Church built a fort at the springs, which became known as Winsor Castle; a one-third interest in Moccasin Springs was purchased at the suggestion of Pres. Young and was later paid for by the company named. The Winsor Castle and Stockgrowing Company was organized in St. George in 1873, with a capital stock of $500,000. This company continued operations until 1879, when it was dissolved and the property distributed among the stockholders. The Pipe Springs fort houses during the anti-polygamy prosecution were occupied as a refuge for plural wives who were sought after as witnesses in those days. There were as many as nine plural wives there at one time, eight of whom had children born there. As early as 1892 the Pipe Springs Ranch and all property connected with it was managed for the Church by Edwin D. Woolley, president of the Kanab Stake. In 1890, when the government confiscated Church property, there were about 1,400 head of cattle on the Pipe Springs Ranch belonging to the Church, in care of Pres. Edwin D. Woolley. When Marshall Dyer came down to look after the stock a disagreement arose in regard to the prices. The stock was sold to John W. Young and taken east to House Rock Valley, east of the Buckskin Mountains, and the Winsor Castle improvements were sold to Benjamin F. Saunders, who disposed of the property to Bullock and Jones of Cedar City, who in turn sold to Alexander F. Findlay of Kanab, who still later sold it to Jonathan Heaton and sons. About 1920 the Pipe Springs property with all the improvements on it was sold to the U. S. Government, which has since restored it to its former condition, and it is now (1930) maintained as a national monument at government expense, it being a part of the 12x18 miles reservation known as the Kaibab Indian Reservation. Leonard Heaton, who resides there with his family, maintains a service station and a small store in the interest of travelers.
