Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pleasant Green Ward

PLEASANT GREEN WARD, Oquirrh Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in Pleasant Green and surroundings. Pleasant Green is a station on the Garfield branch of the Salt Lake and Utah Railroad, being the center of a farming and milling district, including a number of employees at the copper mills. The farming community resides principally in the east part of the district. Pleasant Green is about 15 miles west southwest of the Temple Block in Salt Lake City; it is closely joined on the west by Magna.

William G. Young, a son of Lorenzo D. Young, was the first man who took up a farm in the district or country now known as Pleasant Green. He located there soon after the pioneers entered Salt Lake Valley in 1847, and lived in a cave about a mile west of Mill Stone Point (so called because the mill stones for the first mill erected in Salt Lake Valley were taken from there). Later Lorenzo D. Young settled at Mill Stone Point and farmed some land. In 1853 Abraham Coon and sons and Lehi Nephi Hardman located a stock range at the mouth of what was later known as Coon's Canyon. At the time of the Walker Indian War, in 1853, Wm. G. Young, Morgan Hinman and John Y. Greene erected a fort, built with adobe walls, close to Wm. G. Young's cave dwelling, as a protection for the settlers against Indians. In 1856 Joseph Toronto herded cattle belonging to Pres. Brigham Young at a point later known as Toronto's Point.

In 1867 the saints at Pleasant Green became part of the newly organized Brighton Ward of the Salt Lake Stake. In 1872 John Hirst located in the settlement and asked permission of Bishop Alonzo H. Raleigh of the 19th Ward, Salt Lake City (who also had jurisdiction in Brighton), to hold meetings with the saints at Pleasant Green as they were so far distant from any of the wards. After being appointed presiding Elder in the district, meetings were held monthly in private houses and later in a small log house erected by Josiah Lees about a quarter of a mile east of the present meeting house. In 1877 a branch organization was effected with John Hirst as presiding Elder and the same year an adobe meeting house was built which served the branch, and later the ward, until 1897, when it was replaced by a substantial brick chapel. Elder Hirst died Sept. 7, 1878, and was succeeded as presiding Elder by Lehi Nephi Hardman. On Oct. 1, 1882, Pleasant Green Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward with Lehi Nephi Hardman as Bishop. He was succeeded in that position in 1892 by Hiram T. Spencer, who acted as bishop until Feb. 27, 1916, when the ward was divided and the western part of the same organized as Magna Ward, and on the same occasion George A. Little was appointed Bishop of Pleasant Green Ward. He was succeeded in 1919 by Isaac W. Coon, who was succeeded in 1923 by Omer E. Hall, who was succeeded in 1928 by Harry Edward Sutton. In 1929 Bishop Sutton was appointed to preside over the Oquirrh Stake and was succeeded as Bishop of Pleasant Green Ward by Leonard C. Healy, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 1,308 members, including 482 children.

Pleasant Green Ward belonged to Salt Lake Stake until 1904, when it became a part of the Pioneer Stake of Zion. In 1923, when the Oquirrh Stake was organized, the ward was transferred to that stake.
