Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pleasant Valley Ward

PLEASANT VALLEY WARD, Carbon Stake, Carbon Co., Utah, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in Pleasant Valley, which in 1930 was a defunct coal-mining camp. The center of the Pleasant Valley Ward was about 16 miles south of Colton on the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, with which Pleasant Valley was connected by a branch railroad. Pleasant Valley is 22 miles by rail, or 20 miles by nearest mountain road northwest of Price. The coal mines which supported the Pleasant Valley settlement were located in the adjacent mountains.

At an early day Pleasant Valley was used as a herd ground in the summer season, principally by the people of Utah and Salt Lake valleys, and at a later date a few ranches were established at different points in the valley where the herdsmen were in the habit of staying with their stock in the summer, but almost invariably left for a warmer climate to spend the winter. The floor of Pleasant Valley is about 8,000 feet above sea level. As early as 1878 John E. Ingles and Stewart Eccles of Ogden Valley came into Pleasant Valley with a shingle mill, which they put up on Mud Creek, six miles above or south of the present Scofield. This, however, was not the first sawmill built in the valley. Other sawmills were established and large quantities of lumber shipped to Ogden and other distant places. Prior to 1875 coal was discovered at the place now known as Winter Quarters, and among the first miners employed at the mines there when they were opened were Latter-day Saints. These miners, together with some of the ranchmen in Pleasant Valley, were organized on Dec. 22, 1881, into a branch of the Church called the Pleasant Valley Branch, with David Williams as president. This branch originally belonged to the Sanpete Stake of Zion, but was transferred to the Utah Stake in 1882, in which year a Latter-day Saint meeting house was erected at Winter Quarters. In 1883 the Pleasant Valley Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward with David Williams as Bishop. A terrible snowslide, which came down upon the town of Winter Quarters Feb. 19, 1884, swept away the meeting house, but after meetings and Sunday schools had been held for a short time in the boarding house, a new meeting house was erected in T shape in 1885. In 1886 Bishop Williams was succeeded by John T. Ballantyne, who in 1888 was succeeded by Thomas J. Parmley. In 1888 (June 17) the Pleasant Valley Branch or Ward was divided and organized into two wards, named respectively Pleasant Valley and Scofield. Thomas J. Parmley was chosen as Bishop of the Pleasant Valley Ward, and John T. Ballantyne as Bishop of the Scofield Ward. Pleasant Valley and Scofield existed as separate ward organizations only about two years (1888-1890). In 1890 the Scofield Ward was discontinued and became a part of the Pleasant Valley Ward. Thomas J. Parmley presided as Bishop until 1920, when he was succeeded by John L. Parry, who in 1927 was succeeded by Alfred Newren as presiding Elder over the saints who still remained in the Pleasant Valley district. This change was caused by the closing down of the coal mines, which resulted in most of the people moving away. After the disorganization of the ward, only Sacrament meetings and Sunday school sessions were maintained a short time, and when the mines closed down altogether all activities ceased in 1928, and at the close of 1930 there was scarcely a vestige left of the once flourishing Pleasant Valley Ward. Yet, the old ward meeting house was still standing with boarded up doors and windows.
