Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Bikuben"

"BIKUBEN" is a weekly newspaper published in Salt Lake City, Utah, in the interests of the Church in the Danish-Norwegian language. The first number was issued August 1, 1876, by Anders W. Winberg, as a small folio sheet containing four pages, each page containing five columns of reading matter. In his introductory, Elder Winberg explains that "Bikuben" came into the world as a result of considerable consultation concerning the necessity of a Scandinavian organ of the Church, which would speak the truth and advocate the interests of the Latter-day Saints. Prior to this an apostate periodical entitled "Utah Skandinav" had been published, and "Bikuben" was commenced partly for the purpose of counteracting the misrepresentations circulated through the medium of said anti-Mormon periodical.

For a short time in 1878 Andrew Jenson and Johan A. Bruun were associated with Anders W. Winberg in the affairs of "Bikuben".

In 1891 Elder Winberg closed his fifteen years' activity as publisher, having sold "Bikuben" with all its belongings to Peter O. Thomassen, who now became its owner and publisher. P.O. Thomassen's first move was to increase the size of the paper, and also to improve its mechanical appearance. So, instead of continuing as a four-page (28 column) paper, "Bikuben" appeared as an eight-page newspaper, seven columns on a page. But, unfortunately, Bro. Thomassen's connection with the paper was cut short when he died very suddenly in Salt Lake City, Oct. 28, 1891. On Nov. 17, 1891, Apostle Anthon H. Lund called a meeting of leading Scandinavians in Salt Lake City, which led to the organization of the Bikuben Publishing Company, which purchased the paper and all its belongings from the heirs of Peter O. Thomassen. The new company continued the publication of "Bikuben" for two years.

With the beginning of 1893 the "Deseret News" took over "Bikuben", with all its belongings, and the office was moved from Main Street to the old adobe house (the old mint location) situated east of the corner of Main and South Temple streets near the ground now occupied by the Hotel Utah.

In 1895 Oluf J. Anderson, who had edited the paper since 1892, retired from the editorial chair, and it fell to the lot of Elder J. M. Sjödahl to edit "Bikuben". He did his work in an able and satisfactory manner until the beginning of 1898 when he went to Palestine on a mission, and Elder Andrew Jenson was called by the First Presidency to take charge of "Bikuben" in behalf of the Church. The "Bikuben" printing office and everything belonging to it became Church property.

With Bro. Jenson's appointment as manager, changes were made in the personnel of the paper. Bro. Oluf J. Anderson was appointed editor and Carl V. Anderson, foreman of the printing office. For about ten years, following this change, "Bikuben" was conducted on a self-sustaining basis, with this exception that the Church furnished office room.

With the beginning of Vol. 25, Andrew Jenson commenced his career as editor of "Bikuben", with Carl V. Anderson as assistant. While Elder Jenson (in 1902-1903) filled a mission to Europe, most of the editorial work was done by Elder Anderson, and while Elder Jenson filled another mission to Europe (1904-1905), Elder C. C. A. Christensen conducted the editorial department as assistant editor. In 1905 Carl V. Anderson's connection with the paper ceased, owing to other engagements, and Hans J. Christiansen was chosen as an assistant.

With the beginning of 1907, Hans J. Christiansen succeeded Parley P. Jenson as business manager.

In August, 1907, "Bikuben's" office was moved from No. 22 North Main Street (the old Tithing Office building) to No. 147 West North Temple Street, into a Church building which on the same occasion became the home of "Utah Posten" and the German paper "The Beobachter". About that time a new linotype machine, one of the very best of its kind in the state, was installed for the use of both "Bikuben" and "Utah Posten". In the fall of 1907 Morten A. C. Nicolaysen, who, previous to his arrival in Utah, had acted as editorial secretary at the office of "Skandinaviens Stjerne" in Copenhagen, Denmark, became assistant editor of "Bikuben".

Andrew Jenson was called on a mission to Scandinavia early in 1909 and was succeeded, as editor of "Bikuben" by Hans J. Christiansen, who acted until 1914, when he was called on a mission to Scandinavia. Andrew Jenson then took temporary charge of the paper until April, 1915, when he was succeeded by John S. Hansen as editor and Peter S. Christiansen as business manager. In June, 1923, an editorial committee consisting of Rulon S. Wells, Janne M. Sjödahl, Andrew Jenson and Wm. J. DeBry was appointed by the Church authorities to edit the four foreign newspapers, namely, "Bikuben", "Utah Posten", "Beobachter" and "Utah-Nederlander", with J. M. Sjödahl as chief editor, and Adam L. Petersen as general manager. When this editorial committee ceased to function in 1924, John S. Hansen became associate editor of "Bikuben", and since the death of Adam L. Petersen, in 1930, Elder Hansen has also acted as general manager of the four papers, published in the interest of the Church in Salt Lake City in foreign languages, grouped as the "Associated Newspapers". Peter S. Christiansen acted as associate editor of "Bikuben" until April, 1927, when he was called on a mission to Scandinavia. He was succeeded by John S. Hansen, who still acted as associate editor of "Bikuben" Dec. 31, 1930.
