Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pleasant View Ward, Ogden Stake

PLEASANT VIEW WARD, Ogden Stake, Weber Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a beautiful tract of country lying immediately west of North Ogden, in which the agricultural lands slope gradually from the mountains on the north to the floor of the main valley on the south. Much of the land within the limits of the ward is utilized for orchards, the land with its southern slope being especially adapted for fruit culture. The ward extends to the mountains on the north, to North Ogden on the east, Harrisville on the south, and Farr West on the west. The upper part of the ward commands a most excellent view of the valley looking southward and the islands of the Great Salt Lake. This feature of that part of the country suggested the name Pleasant View. The main highway leading from Ogden to Brigham City, as well as the Oregon Short Line and the Utah-Idaho Central railroads, pass through the ward from southeast to northwest. Some of the finest residences are built along the highway. Near the center of the ward, where the meeting house stands, are also a modern school house and several stores. Some of the farmers in Pleasant View irrigate their land from Ogden River through a canal which taps that river near the mouth of Ogden Canyon. Some of them also irrigate their land from springs of which there are quite a number gushing out of the hills at the base of the majestic mountain called Ben Lomond. The center of Pleasant View Ward is about 7 1/2 miles northwest of Ogden, two miles northwest of North Ogden and 1 1/2 miles southeast of the Hot Springs.

Pleasant View Ward is an outgrowth of North Ogden and was organized as a ward July 9, 1882, with Edward W Wade as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1900 by Charles A. Hickenlooper, who in 1913 was succeeded by Reuben T. Rhees, who in 1924 was succeeded by Henry L. Jensen, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 310 members, including 54 children. The total population of the Pleasant View Precinct was 430 in 1930.
