Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Plymouth Ward

PLYMOUTH WARD, Bear River Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, formerly Known as "Square Town," "Pierson," and "North Plymouth," consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in or near the village of Plymouth, which is situated near the east bank of the Malad River, 31 miles northwest of Brigham City, Utah, and 25 miles south of Malad City in Idaho. The original village of Plymouth consisted of a rock school house, some stores and a few private dwellings, but the majority of the people lived in a scattered condition on their respective farms, some of them high up on the mountains northeast of the village. Plymouth commands a fine view of the north end of Bear River Flat and might be said to be situated in the extreme north end of Bear River Valley and the south end of Malad Valley. Northward the ward extends to the Portage and Washakie wards, in the Malad Stake; eastward and westward to the mountains on either side of the valley, and south to the Fielding Ward.

Plymouth was first settled in 1869 by Harmon Dudley Pierson, Isaac Zundell and others. A townsite was surveyed in the spring of 1870, when others moved in. The place was first known as "the settlement over the ridge." Afterwards it was named Square Town, owing to the fact that the four families (Isaac Zundell, Thomas Taylor and Joseph and Wm. Morrell), who were the first settlers, had located on the four corners of a surveyed block. When a post office was subsequently established the place was called Plymouth. For a number of years the people belonged to the Portage Ward, and Isaac Zundell was the first presiding Elder, or presiding Teacher, laboring under the direction of the bishopric of the Portage Ward. The infant settlement was founded on a small stream of water, just sufficient to irrigate a few lots, and no attempt was made to farm on an extensive scale for many years afterwards. In 1877 John W. Hess of Farmington and others commenced farming outside of Square Town and in the same year Parley L. Pierson succeeded Bro. Zundel as presiding Elder. He acted in that capacity until about 1880 when Harmon I. Pierson succeeded him. He presided until the Plymouth Ward was organized Jan. 27, 1884, with Myron J. Richards as Bishop. In 1885 the post office of Square Town which, since the flat south of that original village had been settled, was generally known as North Plymouth, was discontinued. When the Malad Stake was organized Feb. 12, 1888, Plymouth, which had formerly belong to the Box Elder Stake, became a part of the Malad Stake. The Plymouth Ward was divided into 2 wards June 15, 1891, the northern part, including the original Square Town, called Pierson Ward, thus named in honor of Harmon Dudley Pierson, one of the original founders of the place. Thomas H. Archibald was chosen as Bishop of the Pierson Ward which, however, changed its name to North Plymouth early in 1898. The south part of the old ward retained the name of Plymouth which, however, in 1903 changed its name to Fielding.

When the south part of the Plymouth Ward was named. the Fielding Ward the original name for North Plymouth was restored to the old town called Square Town, but later changed to Plymouth, by which name it is still known.

Bishop Thomas H. Archibald was succeeded as Bishop of the Plymouth Ward in 1913 by Leon A. Rose, who in 1922 was succeeded by Mahonri A. Josephson, who in 1923 was succeeded by Robert T. Nish, who acted as Bishop of the Plymouth Ward Dec. 31, 1930.

On that date the Plymouth Ward had 358 members, including 95 children.
