Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Pocatello

POCATELLO is the principal city in Bannock County, Idaho, situated on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, 170 miles northwest of Salt Lake City, Utah. It is the commercial center of an extensive upland. The Latter-day Saints in Pocatello are organized into six bishop's wards, which together had a total membership of 4,519, including 1,057 children, Dec. 31, 1930. The elevation of Pocatello is 4,466 feet above sea level. Besides the Oregon Short Line Railroad shops and other buildings, the town contains fine Latter-day Saint Church buildings, a number of modern school houses, business blocks, and many beautiful residences. The great majority of the inhabitants are non-Mormons, but so far peace and good will has, as a rule, prevailed among the Mormon and non-Mormon inhabitants. Pocatello is the end of a division and also a junction town on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, containing a round house and many shop buildings. The total population of Pocatello city was 16,471 in 1930.

Pocatello had no existence prior to the building of the Utah and Northern Railway (afterwards changed to the Oregon Short Line), but as soon as the railroad was built it became a town of considerable importance, and among the men who found employment in the railway shops, or in other business associated with the railroad town, were a number of Latter-day Saints, who were organized into a branch of the Church belonging to the Bannock Stake May 6, 1888, with William Willison as president. At that time the saints in Pocatello numbered 178. For some time after the organization of the branch, meetings were held in the cottages of the saints, and sometimes out of doors, but a house of worship, a frame structure, was soon afterwards erected. After being annexed to Oneida Stake in 1888, the branch organization continued until July 13, 1890, when the Pocatello Branch was organized as a ward with Carl J. Cannon as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1901 by Hyrum Smith Woolley, who in 1903 was succeeded by Milo O. Hendricks, who presided until Dec. 13, 1908, when the Pocatello Ward was divided into two wards, namely, the Pocatello 1st and Pocatello 2nd wards.
