Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Portneuf Stake of Zion

PORTNEUF STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Marsh Valley and immediate neighborhood in Bannock County, Idaho, with headquarters at Downey. The stake, which includes farming districts, extends north to Pocatello Stake, east to the Bannock Stake, south to the Oneida and Malad stakes, and west to the mountains, which divide Marsh Valley from Malad and Bannock valleys. The Portneuf Stake, in 1930, contained the following wards: Arimo, Cambridge, Downey, Garden Creek, Grant, Lava, Lava Hot Springs, Marsh Center, McCammon, Merrill, Swan Lake, Topaz, Virginia and Woodland.

The first L. D. S. settlers in Marsh Valley belonged to the Malad Stake, later to the Cache Stake, and still later to the Oneida Stake, and when the Pocatello Stake was organized in 1898 the settlements in Marsh Valley became a part of that stake, where they remained until Aug. 15, 1915. On that date a conference of the Pocatello Stake was held, attended by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, on which occasion the south part of the Pocatello Stake was organized into a new stake named the Portneuf Stake of Zion, containing all the settlements in Marsh Valley and adjacent districts, which had formerly belonged to the Pocatello Stake, also a small part of the Oneida Stake. The dividing line between the Pocatello and Portneuf stakes was established at a point between Inkom and McCammon wards, that line forming the north boundary of the new Portneuf Stake, while Swan Lake was made the south boundary of the stake. George T. Hyde, who had served as a counselor in the Pocatello Stake presidency, was chosen as president of the Portneuf Stake, with William W. Henderson as his first and Swen F. Johnson as his second counselor. When the stake was first organized it consisted of the following wards, which formerly had constituted an important part of the Pocatello Stake: Cambridge, Garden Creek, Grant, Marsh Center and McCammon.

In 1917 First Counselor Henderson was released and Swen F. Johnson promoted to first counselor and Alonzo Harmon Price chosen as second counselor to Pres. George T. Hyde. Second Counselor Alonzo H. Price died Oct. 8, 1917, and on Feb. 24, 1918, Myron J. Richards was set apart as second counselor in his stead. In 1922 Henry W. Henderson succeeded Myron J. Richards as second counselor, and in 1923 Royal T. Hale succeeded Henry W. Henderson in the same position. First Counselor Swen F. Johnson was released in 1927, and Royal T. Hale was promoted from second to first counselor and Orville E. Hendricks was chosen as second counselor. George T. Hyde still presided over the stake Dec. 31, 1930, with Royal T. Hale and Orville E. Hendricks as counselors. Henry J. Johnson was the first clerk of the Portneuf Stake; he was succeeded in 1915 by Edward Cox, who in 1920 was succeeded by G. Osmond Hyde, who in 1921 was succeeded by Jacob L. Hartvigsen, who still acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Portneuf Stake had 3,158 members, including 631 children.
