Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Bingham Ward

BINGHAM WARD, West Jordan Stake, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the mining town of Bingham, which is situated in Bingham Canyon of the Oquirrh Mountains, about 25 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. The Latter-day Saint brethren in Bingham are mostly employed in and about the mines as miners, teamsters and laborers. Others are engaged in business enterprises. The meeting house, a good-sized frame building, is centrally located on Main Street. It has an auditorium seating 300 people and contains four class rooms.

In August, 1849, Sanford and Thomas Bingham took a herd of horses and cattle belonging to the Binghams, Pres. Brigham Young and others up to the high land near the mouth of the main canyon opening into Salt Lake Valley from the west. They built a cabin about 1 1/2 miles below the mouth of the canyon on the north side of the creek, in which they lived while herding the stock during the winter of 1848-49, and also during the spring and summer of 1849, and perhaps during the winter of 1849-50. The locality was named Bingham honoring the Bingham families, after they had made their temporary home at the mouth of the canyon. Some prospecting for precious metal was done by the Bingham boys and several good prospects were discovered but not developed. When the people from the east side of the valley who had commenced a settlement between the two Cottonwood creeks entered Bingham Canyon on the west side of the valley to obtain poles and other fencing material, they found the two Binghams encamped in their little cabin. After the founding of Herriman in 1851 the early settlers of that little village used the region of country, both mountain and valley, near Bingham Canyon, as a herd ground. In 1863, precious metal was discovered in Bingham Canyon and mining commenced in September of that year. This was the commencement of the flourishing mining town of Bingham which at the present time has a population of 10,000, of whom about twelve hundred are Latter-day Saints. The Bingham Copper Mine, the largest copper mine in the world, is the principal industry at Bingham and gives employment to most of the inhabitants. The Bingham Canyon Railroad was built as a branch of the Utah Central Railroad to Bingham in 1873.

Among the first men employed in the mines at Bingham were some Latter-day Saints who commenced to hold meetings for which purpose they secured a school house. The first L. D. S. organization at Bingham was a Sunday school, organized in 1896. Bro. William Thomson, 2nd counselor in the bishopric of Butlerville, was called to locate at Bingham to take charge of the meetings which had been commenced by missionaries. He took charge of the saints June 6, 1897, and a branch was organized April 3, 1898, with William Thomson as presiding Elder. This branch was organized as a ward Oct. 8, 1899, with William Thomson as Bishop. Bro. Thomson was succeeded in 1901 by William B. Waters, who in 1913 was succeeded by James A. Wright, who in 1924 was succeeded by David C. Lyon, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 1,257 members, including 353 children.
