Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Preston Ward

PRESTON WARD, Nevada Stake, White Pine Co., Nevada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Preston and vicinity. Preston is about six miles northwest of Lund and 35 miles south of Ely, the headquarters of the Nevada Stake. Farming and stock-raising are the principal industries of the inhabitants.

Preston is one of the three settlements founded by the Latter-day Saints in White Pine County, Nevada, in 1898, on ranch land ceded to the Church in 1897 in lieu of other property escheated to the Federal Government of the United States. Preston was named in honor of Wm. B. Preston, presiding Bishop of the Church.

The first settlers on the location, which was later named Preston, were John Sörensen, Zephaniah and Wm. C. Bradley, James H. Jensen, Albert W. Gee and Daniel P. Nichols, who arrived in the locality in June, 1898. Others followed and a Sunday school was organized July 11th of the same year with Samuel Carter, who had just arrived in the settlement, as superintendent. Bishop Thomas P. Judd of St. George, who had been authorized to form settlements in White Pine County, Nevada, and to preside over them, effected a local branch organization on April 30, 1899, with Zephaniah R. Bradley as president. A Relief Society was organized in the settlement Dec. 4, 1900, with Mrs. Martha J. Bradley as president. On the same occasion, also, a Y. M. M. I. A. was organized with Sören C. Christensen as president, a Y. L. M. I. A. with Mrs. Anne Arnoldsen as president, and a Primary Association with Mrs. Ida Jensen as president. At this time Preston formed a part of the White Pine Ward, which contained all the saints in White Pine County, Nevada, but on Oct. 13, 1901, Preston was organized as a separate ward with Hyrum S. Arnoldsen as Bishop. Preston then belonged to the St. George Stake, but in 1910 it was transferred to the North Weber Stake as communications with Ogden, the headquarters of North Weber Stake, was easier than with St. George. Later in 1926, when the Nevada Stake was organized, Preston became a part of that stake.

On the arrival of the first settlers in Preston, meetings were held in an old ranch house previously erected in the vicinity, but in 1903 a log meeting house was built, which was later enlarged and is still used as an amusement hall. In 1912 a concrete chapel, with an auditorium capable of seating 200 persons, was erected largely through the efforts of the Relief Society sisters, and this building is still used as a meeting house by the ward.

Bishop Arnoldsen was succeeded in 1912 by Christian Hermanson, jun., who in 1918 was succeeded by Niels P. Jensen, who in 1926 was succeeded by Pharo Arnoldsen, who in 1928 was succeeded by Andrew L. Petersen, who presided as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 158 members, including 33 children. The total population of the Preston Precinct was 180 in 1930.
