Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Price Ward, St. George Stake

PRICE WARD, St. George Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in the two small villages of Price and Bloomington, situated on the Rio Virgen. The village of Price was situated on the right bank of the Rio Virgen, the river bed being at that point about 200 yards wide. Opposite Price, on the north side of the river, was the village of Bloomington, 5 1/2 miles southwest of St. George. The farming land on the southeast side of the river extends up and down that stream for a distance of about three miles with an average width of half a mile. The small farms were irrigated from the Rio Virgen which was tapped about three miles above Price, just below the junction of the Santa Clara with the Rio Virgen. The boundary line between Utah and Arizona is only about two miles south of Price.

That part of southern Utah, later included in the Price Ward, was first settled by Latter-day Saints in 1858. In order to satisfactorily and more fully test the practicability of producing cotton in southern Utah, Pres. Brigham Young and counselors and a few others fitted out a small party in January, 1858, and sent it in charge of Joseph Home to establish a cotton farm on the Rio Virgen. They arrived at the junction of the Rio Virgen and Santa Clara Feb. 10, 1858, and located the site for a dam which they finished March 19, 1858, and commenced planting May 6, 1858. Their location was called Heberville, honoring Pres. Heber C. Kimball. In November, 1858, Supt. Joseph Horne started for Salt Lake City with 575 pounds of ginned cotton and 160 gallons of molasses, which he delivered at the general tithing office in Salt Lake City.

In the spring of 1859 a post office was established at Heberville with George Pectol as postmaster. In the spring of 1859 Joseph Horne and other brethren returned to Heberville and resumed their labors, and during that season considerable cotton was raised. Cotton at that time was worth $1.90 per pound. When St. George was first settled in 1861, some of the brethren going down to the lower valley, where Price was subsequently built, found some unpicked cotton and a log house standing about one and a half mile above the later site of Price. This was the old Horne location. The field in which the Joseph Home company had raised cotton was in that part of the valley, or near where this log house stood. Later that year the floods washed away nearly all the land which had been cultivated by the Home Company, and the rest of that land has since nearly all gone down the river, including the site on which the old log house mentioned once stood. In 1862, soon after the settling of St. George, Ellis M. Sanders of St. George and others commenced to farm on the same side of the Rio Virgen as the Horne farm, but the Heberville bottom, containing some five hundred acres, which a year before had been submerged, leaving a deposit of from two to six feet of sand, was reoccupied. Some twenty men farmed there that year. In 1870 William H. Carpenter, David H. Cannon and others cultivated a small piece of land on the north side of the Rio Virgen, opposite what was then the town of Heberville. On Feb. 17, 1874, some of the farmers of St. George and Santa Clara were organized by Pres. Brigham Young to carry on their business as farmers at what had been called Heberville, but that name was dropped and Price substituted instead. A company was organized for the purpose of extending the old ditch and building up the place. In December, 1877, the so-called St. James Company was reorganized with Lars James Larsen as president. Farming at Price was carried on according to United Order principles, and in 1877 Milo Andrus was called to Price to take charge of the settlement.

On Jan. 18, 1879, the saints at Price were organized as a ward with Robert Gardner as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1881 by Nephi R. Fawcett, who presided until April 25, 1904, when the Price Ward was disorganized and the remaining members transferred to the St. George West Ward. After the Price Ward was disorganized in 1904, the settlement of Price was deserted as a location and most of the inhabitants moved to Bloomington, where they were continued as a branch organization, constituting a part of the St. George West Ward, with Alfred A. Carpenter as presiding Elder. In 1930 the old site of Price was entirely uninhabited, but about four families who belonged to the St. George South Ward still resided at Bloomington, where Alfred Carpenter functioned as presiding Elder as late as 1920.
