Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Primary Associations

PRIMARY ASSOCIATIONS. The L. D. S. Primary Association functions for children from four to twelve years of age, when they usually graduate into the Mutual Improvement Associations.

In 1878 Mrs. Aurelia Spencer Rogers tion was organized, there were no Kindergartens, and although there were good Sunday schools in operation, opportunities to teach children, in connection with the principles of the gospel, activities for the cultivation of moral, physical, social and industrial development were lacking.

In 1878 Mrs. Aurelia Spencer Rogers of Farmington conceived the idea of the Primary Association, and unfolded her plan to Sister Eliza R. Snow, who practically presided over all the women's activities in the Church. Sister Snow, being deeply impressed, laid the matter before the presiding authorities of the Church, who appointed her to direct the organization of the movement and, with her assistance, Mrs. Rogers at once commenced the first Primary Association, in Farmington, Davis County, Utah. Shortly afterwards, another Primary Association was started in the Eleventh Ward, Salt Lake City, and Primary Associations soon became part of the auxiliary work throughout the church.

Meetings are usually held once a week and, not only theology, but good manners, the value of punctuality, the need for obedience, the joy of loving service, kindness to each other and to dumb animals are featured. The children are taught, and become quite proficient in various hand crafts, and are taught to lead in prayer, in singing and in the various games and, if any talent is perceived, it is carefully fostered for the benefit of other members.

Being taught to be grateful for good health, the children are sympathetic to others who are sick and crippled and not able to play as they do. So, a project was commenced whereby the children, by practicing a little self-denial, were able to create a fund by which some sick child was given medical treatment and hospital care. By degrees, this project found such favor that the First Presidency of the Church erected a spacious Convelescent Home for children in Salt Lake City, which was opened in 1922. Once a year, the children, and adults who desire to contribute, are asked to donate one cent for every year of their age to the hospital fund.

The "Children's Friend", the organ of the Primary Association, was first issued Jan. 19, 1902, with Miss May Anderson as editor, a position she still occupied Dec. 31, 1930.

Two Primary song books have been issued by the Primary Association, containing songs, marches, etc. suitable for the organization.

The General Superintendency of the Primary Association, Dec. 31, 1930, was Miss May Anderson, Mrs. Isabelle S. Ross and Mrs. Edna Harker Thomas, with Miss Mary R. Jack as general secretary and treasurer. At that time there were 1,252 Primary Associations in the Church, with a membership of 104,899.
