Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"The Prophet"

"PROPHET, THE", was a periodical published in the interest of the Church in New York City in 1844 and 1845. The prospectus announcing the intended publication, dated New York, May 7, 1844, said:

"The Board of Control of the Society for the Diffusion of Truth of the City of New York, being desirous of promulgating the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in its fulness and ameliorating the condition of fallen men, have thought it wisdom to establish a paper in this city as an advocacy and herald of the faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a portion of which at times will be devoted to agriculture, commerce and manufactures, as well as to the foreign and domestic news of the day. It will likewise be the faithful advocate and defender of the Constitution of the United States, whose glory and effulgence is known in every clime, which was battled for and won by our illustrious and patriotic ancestors. The arts and sciences shall not be neglected. Sketches, narratives, biographies, moral essays and poems will also find a place in the columns of "The Prophet", whilst its conductors will endeavor to impart variety and life to its columns.

"Terms: 'The Prophet' will be issued Saturday morning, the 18th inst., on an imperial sheet, at No. 7 Spruce St., New York, and will appear regularly thereafter on that day of the week at $1 per annum, invariably in advance."

The subscription price was afterwards raised from $1 per annum, or 3 cents per copy, to $2 per annum, or 6 cents per copy.

"The Prophet" was a four-page newspaper containing 20 columns of reading matter, 5 columns to the page. It was published at No. 68 Commercial St., New York. Parley P. Pratt's name appears in the first numbers as editor, but in the fall of 1844 Samuel Brannan & Co. appear as publishers and Wm. Smith as editor. In December, 1844, Samuel Brannan's name is given both as publisher and editor. In May, 1845, Parley P. Pratt was again mentioned as editor. Altogether 52 numbers of "The Prophet" were published, the first being dated May 18, 1844, and the last number May 24, 1845. "The Prophet" was succeeded by the "New York Messenger." (Which see.)
