Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Quincy Branch

QUINCY BRANCH, Tooele Stake, Tooele Co., Utah, consisted of a few families of Latter-day Saints residing in Skull Valley, including the Quincy Ranch. Skull Valley was used as a herd ground for cattle as early as 1857, when a man named Box located there and built a herd-house. Two years later Chauncey Webb also settled in what was then known locally as "The Dell." About the same time William H. Hooper located a ranch at some springs where Quincy Ranch and later the Hawaiian colony, Iosepa, were afterwards located. In 1869 William Lee, who had for some time acted as Indian Agent in Tooele County, was sent by Pres. Brigham Young to locate an Indian farm in Skull Valley about seven miles south of Iosepa, at a place called Sells, where an Indian school was established. Colonel F. H. Head, superintendent of Indian affairs in Utah, was much interested in the movement and furnished machinery, wagons, oxen and farming implements for the Indians.

On Aug. 7, 1870, a branch of the Church was organized in Skull Valley consisting of the ranch hands and a few other settlers, with Willard B. Richards as president. This branch was known as the Quincy Branch named in honor of John Quincy Knowlton. The branch was also known as the Knowlton Branch. In August, 1873, William Lee was appointed by Pres. Young as a missionary to the Indians in Tooele County. Benjamin Franklin Knowlton succeeded Willard B. Richards as president of the branch about 1879. Later John Quincy Knowlton was sustained as president of the Quincy or Knowlton Branch. On Aug. 15, 1889, the Church purchased the Knowlton Ranch in Skull Valley for the benefit of the Hawaiian saints who had emigrated to Utah, and the settlement known as the Iosepa Colony was commenced Aug. 28, 1889, when a company of Hawaiian saints arrived at the Quincy Ranch, in charge of Harvey H. Cluff. (See Iosepa.) At a quarterly conference of the Tooele Stake held at Grantsville Jan. 25, 1891, Benjamin F. Knowlton of the Quincy Branch reported that owing to the establishment of the Hawaiian Colony in Skull Valley, the white L. D. S. families formerly residing in Skull Valley had all moved away except himself, and so Brother Knowlton was released as president of the Quincy Branch.
