Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Randolph Ward

RANDOLPH WARD, Woodruff Stake, Rich Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Randolph and vicinity. Randolph is a prosperous settlement situated on Bear River, 32 miles northwest of Evanston, Wyoming; it is the headquarters of the Woodruff Stake of Zion, and the seat of Rich County. Stock raising and farming are the principal industries of the inhabitants of Randolph, and the town, which is situated nearly in the Center of Rich County, has considerable land under cultivation and possesses excellent grazing facilities. The townsite is surveyed into ten-acre blocks, eight lots in a block, with streets eight rods wide. The altitude of Randolph is about 6,300 feet above sea level. Water for irrigation purposes is obtained principally from Little Creek, which rises in the mountains about seven miles west of Randolph. Bear River Valley, where Randolph is situated, is about 3 1/2 miles wide, and presents an open flat country sloping gently towards Bear River. The valley proper extends from Cokeville on the north in a southerly direction about 55 miles, varying in width from a mere canyon to five miles. Good crops are raised usually, notwithstanding the high altitude.

Randolph H. Stewart, together with others, was called from Bear Lake County, Idaho, by the Church authorities, to commence a settlement, which later was named in his honor. These first settlers arrived on the present site of Randolph March 14, 1870. Improvements, including house building and ditching, were commenced at once and Randolph H. Stewart built the first house in the new settlement; a few other houses were built during the year, mostly on the townsite, which was surveyed in the summer of 1870. The Randolph Precinct was created Sept. 5, 1870. Randolph H. Stewart was the first presiding Elder of Randolph; he presided until 1877 when he was made Bishop of the Randolph Ward and acted until 1880, when he was succeeded by Archibald McKinnon, who in 1901 was succeeded by John C. Grey, who in 1918 was succeeded by George A. Peart, jun., who in 1922 was succeeded by Oluf Larson, who in 1929 was succeeded by Lawrence B. Johnson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Randolph Ward had 688 members, including 152 children. The total population of Randolph Precinct (exclusive of Sage Creek Precinct) was 594 in 1930; of these 447 resided in the town of Randolph.

The first meeting house in Randolph was a small log building which was used for school purposes as well as meetings. Later a larger building (an adobe house) was erected and used similarly. This served until the present meeting house, a fine brick building, was erected.
