Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Redcliff Ward

REDCLIFF WARD, Duchesne Stake, Duchesne Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a fine little valley lying along the Duchesne River, about three miles long from northwest to southeast. The red sand cliffs in the south end of the valley suggested the name of the settlement, though the post office name is Hanna, thus named after William P. Hanna, one of the first non-Mormon settlers in that part of the country. The Redcliff Ward meeting house is nine miles by nearest road northwest of Tabiona, 38 miles northwest of Duchesne, and 35 miles southeast of Kamas (across the mountains) in Summit County, Utah. Redcliff embraces some fine farming lands, and all kinds of grains are raised, although the place is 7,000 feet above sea level. Timber for sawing and fuel is plentiful in the vicinity.

When the Uintah Reservation was thrown open to white settlers in 1905, the government established a townsite called Stockmore, about 1 1/2 miles north of the present Redcliff meeting house. A number of lots were sold to settlers, and an attempt made to build a town, but the undertaking was not successful. The first L. D. S. settlers who located in that part of the country now included in the Redcliff Ward were Thomas Rhoades and family, and others, who arrived in the spring of 1906, built cabins and commenced making improvements. The first crop was raised in 1907 and a school house built in 1911. The first settlers belonged to the Tabiona Branch, but later a local branch organization was effected, with Thomas Rhoades as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1917 by Heber Moon, who presided until June 30, 1918, when the Stockmore Branch was organized as the Redcliff Ward, with Heber Moon as Bishop. He was succeeded by William G. Michie, who acted Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Church membership of the Redcliff Ward was 130, including 33 children. The total population of the Redcliff (Hanna) Precinct was 190 in 1930.
