Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Redmesa Ward

REDMESA WARD, Young Stake, La Plata Co., Colo., consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on the Fort Lewis Mesa, which consists of an open country extending to the La Plata Mountains on the north and to the La Plata River on the west. This river rises in the La Plata Mountains and empties into the San Juan River. The center of the Redmesa Ward, or the place where the L. D. S. meeting house stands, is seven miles north of the boundary line between Colorado and New Mexico, seven miles southwest of the center of Kline Ward, 19 miles southwest of Hesperus, the nearest railroad station, 25 miles southwest of Durango, 25 miles southeast of Mancos and 33 miles northeast of Burnham (Fruitland), New Mexico. Nearly all the inhabitants of the Redmesa Ward live scattered on their respective farms and nearly all of them are Latter-day Saints. Water for irrigation purposes is obtained from the La Plata River in three ditches which tap said river at different points.

Redmesa Ward was organized in 1908 with Hiram M. Taylor as Bishop. The Redmesa Reservoir on the La Plata River was washed away by floods in 1910 and 12 years later the inhabitants of the Redmesa Ward, assisted by the Church, undertook to rebuild the same. Redmesa Ward is an outgrowth of the Kline Ward, of which it originally formed a part. The first settlers in that part of the country now included in the Redmesa Ward were Hiram M. Taylor, James M. Slade, and Joseph H. Dean from Mancos, with their respective families. The brethren named had in March, 1905, filed on government lands which had just come into the market by the opening of the Fort Lewis Indian Reservation. These first settlers built lumber shanties on their land holdings. Later the same year other L. D. S. settlers arrived and about half a dozen families of saints spent the winter of 1906-1907 on the Redmesa bench. These saints generally attended meetings at Kline, but a Sunday school was organized in that part of the Kline Ward which subsequently became Redmesa. On May 27, 1908, the saints on the Redmesa bench, or the south part of the Kline Ward, were organized as a regular bishop's ward with Hiram M. Taylor as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1912 by Leo S. Taylor, who in 1923 was succeeded by Charles E. Dean, who presided Dec, 31, 1930. On that date the Redmesa Ward had 263 members, including 76 children. The total population of the Redmesa Precinct was 719 in 1930.
