Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Redmond Ward

REDMOND WARD, North Sevier Stake, Sevier Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the Redmond Precinct. The village of Redmond, located half a mile west of the Sevier River, is three miles north of Salina and 22 miles northeast of Richfield, the seat of Sevier County. A range of mounds consisting of red sandstone suggested the name of the precinct and ward. In the vicinity of the village there are found white marble and rock salt, in paying quantities. Farming and sheep-raising are the principal industries of the place. Nearly all the people in the district are Latter-day Saints. Redmond has one of the finest meeting houses in the North Sevier Stake. It is a modern brick building with cement basement, having an auditorium capable of seating 450 people. The old rock meeting house, a two story building, is now used as the town hall.

In the spring of 1875 John Johnson of Salina and Christian Jensen and his son, James S. Jensen, of Ephraim, Sanpete Co., located near the so-called Red Mounds. Others joined them, and a section of land known as the North Field was surveyed and lots sold. The settlers, uniting with the people of Aurora and Salina, commenced work on the Red Butte Springs Canal, to bring water to the location. Much trouble was caused by rabbits which, however, in 1876 were attacked with a strange disease that killed nearly all of them, and thus saved the crops of the settlers.

On Feb. 25, 1877, the Redmond Ward was organized with John Johnson as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1887 by Hans Rasmussen, who was succeeded in 1902 by Martin Jensen, who was succeeded in 1912 by James Arthur Christensen, who, being called into the presidency of the North Sevier Stake, was succeeded in 1921 by James Ernest Frandsen, who was succeeded in 1924 by Delbert Hansen, who was succeeded in 1928 by Orrin Franklin Petersen, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had a membership of 634, including 141 children. Redmond Ward belonged to the Sevier Stake of Zion until 1921, when it became part of the North Sevier Stake.

The first L. D. S. meeting house in Redmond was a small log house, used also for all public gatherings; later a small adobe building (still standing) was erected for the same purpose, and still later a two-story rock building (now used as the City Hall) served as a place of worship. About 1907 a two-story brick building was purchased and remodeled for an all-purpose ward house. This was used until about 1915, when the present new modern chapel was erected at a cost of $15,000, since which the older brick meeting house has been used as an amusement hall belonging to the ward.
