Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Relief Society

RELIEF SOCIETY. The first L. D. S. Relief Society, composed of women members of the Church, was organized on the 17th of March, 1842, at Nauvoo, Illinois, by the Prophet Joseph Smith, as a benevolent society having as its object "the care of the poor, looking after the needy, assisting to correct morals and strengthen the virtues of the community."

By request of the women present, Mrs. Emma Smith, wife of the Prophet, was appointed president, and she chose Mrs. Sarah M. Cleveland and Mrs. Elizabeth Ann Whitney as her counselors. Miss Eliza R. Snow was elected secretary with Miss Phebe M. Wheeler as her assistant, and Miss Elvira A. Cowles was appointed treasurer. The name of the organization was the "Female Relief Society of Nauvoo." Donations were made as the nucleus of a fund with which to prosecute the aims of the association. At this time the society was composed of 18 members but during the first two years 1,275 names were enrolled and the recorded receipts were $415.24.

Early in the settlement of the saints in the Rocky Mountains local relief societies were formed as a natural outgrowth of the parent society in Nauvoo. Eliza R. Snow was the first general president of the organization. After her demise, Dec. 5, 1887, Zina D. H. Young became president; she was succeeded in 1901 by Bathsheba W. Smith, who was succeeded in 1910 by Emmeline B. Wells, who was succeeded in 1921 by Clarissa S. Williams, who was succeeded in 1928 by Louise Y. Robison, who acted as president Dec. 31, 1930.

Every family enrolled in the ward or branch record is visited every month be the Relief Society sisters, traveling in pairs. At this time donations are received for the benefit of the society, but if families are found to be in need, the matter is reported and prompt assistance rendered. At times of sickness or death, the Relief Society sisters are veritable angels of mercy.

The Relief Societies meet in the various wards and branches once a week for business and for the study of theology, literature, social service (including health, psychology, first aid in case of sickness, good house-keeping, care of children, etc.) as outlined by the General Board, and a large amount of sewing is done by the members for the benefit of the needy.

The "Woman's Exponent," a magazine for women, was first issued in 1872, with Miss Louisa Lula Greene, of Salt Lake City, as editor. This periodical was recognized as the organ of the Relief Society. In 1877 Mrs. Emmeline B. Wells became editor and continued the publication until 1914, after which, during one year, the "Relief Society Bulletin" was published under the direction of the Relief Society Board. The name of this periodical was changed in 1915 to "Relief Society Magazine," under which title it has had a continued existence. At the close of 1930 it had a circulation of 25,000.

Mrs. Louise Y. Robison presided over the organization Dec. 31, 1930, with Amy Brown Lyman and Julia Alleman Child as her counselors. Julia. A. F. Lund was secretary and treasurer. At that time there were 1,568 ward and branch organizations, 104 stake boards and branch societies in 26 missions. The total membership (officers and members) was 64,225.
