Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Richfield

RICHFIELD, Sevier Stake, is the seat of Sevier County, Utah, and the headquarters of the Sevier Stake. It is the commercial center of most of the Sevier Valley, and a station on the Marysvale branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad Richfield has three banks, several stores, many shops and business houses, and a large number of comfortable and fine residences. The gardens and farms of Richfield are principally irrigated from a canal which taps the Sevier River about 10 miles southwest of the settlement. Some irrigation water is also obtained from the Richfield Creek which rises in springs, somewhat warm, situated at the foot of the mountains west of town. Richfield consists of four organized bishop's wards, viz., the Richfield 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th wards. These four wards had a total membership Dec. 31, 1930, of 2,273, including 458 children. The total population of Richfield Precinct was 3,174 in 1930, of which 3,067 resided in Richfield.

For many years after settlements of saints had been founded in Sanpete Valley on the north and in Pauvant Valley on the west, the Sevier Valley was left in possession of the Indians, who roamed at pleasure and pitched their wickiups on the Sevier River whenever they did not choose the mountains for their abode. Yet a number of white men had for several years kept their eyes on the beautiful valley with its apparent rich soil as a suitable place for locating settlements. But it was not until the fall of 1863 that Albert Lewis of Manti, together with seven other men, ventured out for the purpose of making a settlement in that part of the Sevier Valley where the progressive town of Richfield now stands. These first settlers, unlike those who followed the next year, were not called by Church authorities to locate in the Sevier Valley, but came voluntarily and spent the winter of 1863-1864 in a "hole in the ground," which they had carefully covered up with brush and other materials and they also piled up some rocks which they called a chimney, built in such a shape that it resembled very much an Indian wickiup. This shanty was erected about two blocks south of the present Richfield public square. These eight men, who had chosen Albert Lewis as their leader, had no families with them.

What is actually called the founding of Richfield took place in the spring of 1864, when about 20 families located on the present site of Richfield, among whom were Joseph S. Doxford and Harrison P. Fugatt, who arrived March 13, 1864. On the following day Niels Mortensen (Petersen) arrived with his family. These first three families were followed by others soon afterwards, and when Apostle Orson Hyde visited the place in May, 1864, he appointed Nelson Higgins, a former resident of Moroni, presiding Elder of the infant colony. A townsite was surveyed in 1864 for which the name of Richfield was selected. Originally the place was known as "Big Springs." It was also called Omni by some. A bowery was built in 1864; water ditches commenced, houses built, and much labor done. In 1865 the first school house was built, and later the same year the so-called Black Hawk War broke out, during which the inhabitants were in constant danger of losing their lives. Many depredations were committed by the Indians in the immediate vicinity of the town, several people being killed. Finally the settlement was vacated in 1867, when most of the people moved to Sanpete County for safety. (See Sevier Stake.)

Richfield was resettled in 1870 by William Morrison and others. They found the place the same as when it was vacated three years before, the only damage done to property was the burning of some corrals and fences by miners in quest of firewood. The new settlers occupied the buildings erected and vacated by the first settlers, and William Morrison was appointed the first presiding Elder of the settlement. He acted in that capacity until March 5, 1871, when Nelson Higgins was reinstated as Bishop of Richfield. He was succeeded in 1873 by William H. Seegmiller, who presided until July 15, 1877, when the Sevier Stake of Zion was reorganized and Richfield divided into two wards, namely, the Richfield 1st Ward with Paul Poulson as Bishop, and Richfield 2nd Ward with Tarlton Lewis as Bishop. These two wards had a separate existence until May 20, 1894, when they were amalgamated and organized into the Richfield Ward with Theodore Brandley as Bishop. He presided over the Richfield Ward until Jan. 17, 1904, when Richfield was divided into three wards, namely, the Richfield 1st, 2nd and 3rd wards, and on June 15, 1930, the Richfield 4th Ward was organized from parts taken from the other three Richfield wards.
