Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Richfield Ward

RICHFIELD WARD, San Luis Stake, Conejos Co., Colorado, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Richfield and vicinity, which is situated in a beautiful level plain about a mile east of La Jara, a station on the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad.

Richfield is an outgrowth of Manassa Ward, some of the former settlers there having in 1880 located on land a short distance northward. They dug a ditch through which water was brought, contrary to the expectations of their Mexican neighbors, on account of the level condition of the country. Artesian wells had previously supplied all the water used in the district. A small townsite was surveyed in the summer of 1882 and a crop of wheat raised, although some residents of the locality had said they would not give five cents for all the wheat the Mormons could raise there. The location of the townsite was changed in 1882 to the present site, on which a log meeting house was soon afterwards erected. Thor N. Peterson was acknowledged at the beginning as presiding Elder of the settlement, and on Feb. 18, 1883, a branch organization was effected with Thor N. Peterson as presiding Elder. Four months later (June 9, 1883) the branch was organized as a ward with Thor N. Peterson as Bishop. When the town of Sanford was Surveyed in 1886 by advice of Pres. Erastus Snow, most of the people at Richfield moved to Sanford, including the Bishop, after which the counselors took charge at Richfield until the ward ceased to exist in 1888, and a branch organization was effected with Ephraim Coombs as presiding Elder. He presided in that capacity until Aug. 13, 1891, when the ward was reorganized with Ephraim Coombs as Bishop. Bishop Coombs was succeeded in 1905 by John William Shawcroft, who was succeeded in 1908 by Henry W. Valentine, who was succeeded in 1912 by David E. Shawcroft, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time the ward had a membership of 388, including 87 children.
