Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Richmond (Cache County, Utah)

RICHMOND is one of the principal cities of Cache County, Utah, and the headquarters of the Benson Stake of Zion. It is the northernmost of all the cities of Utah, located only four miles south of the boundary line between Utah and Idaho. It is six miles north of Smithfield, 13 miles north of Logan (the seat of Cache County) and about 108 miles by rail northeast of Salt Lake City. The town of Richmond is located in the center of a rich agricultural and stock raising district which greatly adds to its wealth and importance. Nearly all the inhabitants are Latter-day Saints engaged in farming, gardening, stock raising and dairying. All kinds of cereals and the hardier kinds of fruit are raised here in abundance. The town can boast of a fine house of worship or tabernacle, standing on rising ground in the /b center of the town, the North Cache High School, a district school house, a L. D. S. seminary, a stake office, a library, and the Sego Milk Products Company's plant, as well as a number of well stocked stores and business houses. Richmond, thus named on account of the richness of its soil, also contains numerous fine residences. It is an incorporated city.

Richmond was first settled in 1859, the first settlers being Agrippa Cooper and family. Other families joined them the same year, and on Nov. 15, 1859, a branch of the Church was organized at Richmond with Thomas Tidwell as presiding Elder. A fort was built as a means of protection against the Indians, and the first meeting house was erected in 1860. The place was organized as a regular bishop's ward in 1861 with Marriner W. Merrill (afterwards one of the Twelve Apostles) as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1879 by William L. Skidmore, who was succeeded in 1900 by Thomas H. Merrill, who presided until Jan. 22, 1917, when Richmond was divided into two wards, namely, the Richmond North and the Richmond South wards.

The Church membership of the two Richmond wards Dec. 31, 1930, was 1,241, including 202 children, out of a total population of 1,310.
