Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Richville Ward

RICHVILLE WARD, Morgan Stake, Morgan Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a string-town, located on the west side of East Canyon Creek, at the base of the hills about three miles southwest of Morgan. Nearly all the inhabitants are Latter-day Saints, and the ward has all of the usual auxiliary organizations in good running order. The L. D. S. meeting house, a brick structure, situated at the mouth of Taggart's Hollow, has a seating capacity of 250.

David Henderson and Jonathan Hemingway were the first settlers in the district on the south side of Weber Valley, later known as Richville Ward. They located there in 1860 and were joined in 1861 by John H. and Thomas Rich, Gillespie W. Waldron, John Wood, Solomon Conley and others. A townsite was selected near East Canyon Creek, but the settlers were advised to locate on the higher lands near the foot hills, which they did, and settled at the mouth of Taggart's Hollow; about half a dozen log houses were built there in 1861. A ditch, tapping East Canyon Creek, was also constructed and good crops of wheat, oats and vegetables were raised in 1861. The following year the ditch was extended and other settlers arrived, among whom was Albert Douglas Dickson, who for many years presided as Bishop of the ward. In 1862, a grist mill, the first, it is claimed, in Morgan County, was constructed by Geo. W. Taggart and Morgan L. and Henry L. Hinman. This mill was still used in 1900.

Thomas Rich was the first presiding Elder at Richville; he acted under the direction of Thomas Jefferson Thurston, who had charge of all the settlements south of the Weber River. Bro. Rich was succeeded in 1871 by Jonathan Hemingway, who, having moved away, was succeeded by John Seaman, who was succeeded by Gillespie W. Waldron, who presided until 1877, when, at the organization of the Morgan Stake, Richville was organized as a regular bishop's ward, with Albert Douglas Dickson as Bishop. Bishop Dickson acted in that capacity for 37 years and then, being honorably released, was succeeded in 1914 by John Henry Rose, who was succeeded in 1928 by Wm. R. Rich, who acted as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 131 members, including 20 children.

A log school house was erected in Richville in 1863, which served for meeting and school purposes until 1872, when a more commodious and substantial building was erected, which served until 1914, when the present new brick chapel was erected.
