Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Rigby Stake of Zion

RIGBY STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Jefferson County, and the north part of Bonneville County, Idaho. The stake headquarters are in the town of Rigby, 14 miles northeast of Idaho Falls. The stake in 1930 consisted of 15 bishop's wards, viz., Annis, Bybee, Clark, Garfield, Grant, LaBelle, Lewisville, Lorenzo, Menan, Perry, Rigby 1st, Rigby 2nd, Rifle and Roberts; and the Palisade Branch. Nearly all the inhabitants within the limits of the stake are farmers. There is a fine stake tabernacle in Rigby, which has a seating capacity of 1,600.

The first Latter-day Saint settlers in the great Snake River Valley affiliated with the Cache Stake of Zion, and when the Bannock Stake was organized in 1884, they became members of that stake. When the Bannock Stake was divided in 1895 and the south part of the same was organized as the Bingham Stake, Rigby and adjoining settlements became an important part of that stake, and remained thus until Feb. 3, 1908, when the Bingham Stake was divided and the north part of the same was organized into a new stake of Zion called the Rigby Stake, thus named in honor of William F. Rigby, who had acted as a counselor in the presidency of the Fremont Stake. Don Carlos Walker, who had acted as a counselor in the Bingham Stake presidency, was chosen as president of the new Rigby Stake, with Josiah Call as his first and William W. Selck, jun., as his second counselor. At the time of the organization the Rigby Stake embraced the following wards, which had all belonged to the Bingham Stake: Annis, Grant, LaBelle, Lewisville, Lorenzo, Menan, Rigby and Rudy. The Palisade Branch was added afterwards. In 1911 a stake office, a rock building, was erected at Rigby, at a cost of about $6,000. It affords rooms for the stake presidency, the High Council, and it also contains a bishop's office, a vault for the safe-keeping of records, a prayer room, etc. On March 10, 1912, Pres. Don C. Walker was released, together with his counselors, and John W. Hart was sustained as president of the Rigby Stake, with Josiah Call as first and William W. Selck, jun., as second counselor. This presidency stood intact Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Rigby Stake had a total membership of 5,473, including 1,220 children. Among the stake officers was Patriarch John Webster.

William W. Selck, sen., was the first clerk of the Rigby Stake; he was succeeded in 1921 by Orson A. Snow, who acted Dec. 31, 1930.
