Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Black Rock

BLACK ROCK is an isolated rock about ninety feet long and forty feet wide, standing about forty feet above the water near the shore of the Great Salt Lake, about 21 miles west of Salt Lake City. It was for a time a favorite resort for pleasure seekers and was reached by the Utah and Nevada Railroad from Salt Lake City.

On July 27, 1847, three days after the arrival of Pres. Brigham Young in Great Salt Lake Valley, he with some of the Apostles and Sam Brannan and others traveled westward, to the lake. The cavalcade consisted of one carriage, several horses and mules and carried some provisions and blankets. The company enjoyed a bath in the lake and continued the journey as far as Tooele Valley, passing Black Rock en route.

In 1849 three or four herders camped in the vicinity of Black Rock with government stock belonging to Captain Howard Stansbury who was making a survey of the Great Salt Lake and vicinity. In 1851 Indians drove off a considerable amount of stock owned by a Mr. Charles White who located in the district after the Stansbury party had vacated it.

The first recorded celebration of Independence day by the Utah pioneers was on July 4, 1851, when a procession of 150 carriages left Salt Lake City at 8 a. m. and arrived at Black Rock four hours later. The company included the First Presidency and other Church officials, prominent citizens and friends led by the Nauvoo Legion and a brass band. A new flag, made for the occasion, had been raised on the flag pole at Black Rock and a program of bathing, dancing, speeches, singing, etc., was enjoyed, picnic partaken of and a night encampment made, the return journey not being made until the following morning. Many more excursions of ward and other organizations are mentioned as having been made to Black Rock.

About 1860, Heber P. Kimball built a house near Black Rock, known as the Rock House, which was used as a ranch house, in which visitors to the lake were often entertained.

In the spring of 1880 Alonzo Hyde and David John Taylor secured a lease on the property in the vicinity of Black Rock with a view of converting it into a fashionable bathing resort. About one hundred bath houses were erected, a roofed bowery for picknickers built, board walks to the water's edge constructed and swings and other amusements provided and the old ranch house converted into a hotel. The following year William G. Davis is mentioned as joint proprietor with Alonzo Hyde, and he, being a ship builder by trade, constructed some steam boats which were an added attraction to the resort. But the erection of the splendid Saltair Pavilion in 1893 caused the smaller resorts at Black Rock, Garfield and Lake Point to close.
