Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Riverton

RIVERTON is a town in Salt Lake Valley bounded on the north by South Jordan Ward, on the east by the Jordan River (which separates it from the Draper Ward), on the south by the Bluffdale Ward, and on the west by the Herriman Ward. It is pleasantly situated on the west side of the so-called Redwood Road, about 19 miles south southwest of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City.

Riverton Ward was an outgrowth of South Jordan Ward. Samuel Green and others were among the first settlers in the Jordan River bottoms in that part of Salt Lake County now included in the Riverton settlement. Lars Jensen was the first settler on the bench west of the river bottom, where he built the first house in 1870. In 1871 work was commenced on the South Jordan Canal, which had been surveyed the year previously. After three years (during which John Hanson took a very prominent part) Salt Lake City came to the assistance of the settlers and finished the canal, which taps the Jordan River near the "Point of the Mountain," about one mile north of the Utah County line and is about twenty miles long. Water was first turned into this canal about the year 1876, and from that time the bench country west of the Jordan River began to fill up with settlers, who irrigated their farms with the canal water. A few years later, when the Utah and Salt Lake Canal was completed, more land was brought under cultivation. Hence the gradual increase of population west of the Jordan River.

At an early day, a branch organization was effected, with Nicholas T. Silcock as president, and the little settlement was named Gardnersville, in honor of Bishop Archibald Gardner, who owned most of the land in the neighborhood at that time. Bro. Silcock presided until the South Jordan Ward was organized June 17, 1877, of which Gardnersville became a part. In 1879, when a judicial precinct was established, the name of the settlement was changed to Riverton. Another branch organization was effected in 1881 under the direction of the South Jordan Ward bishopric, with Lars Jensen as presiding Elder. He presided until his death, April 23, 1883. Some time afterwards Orrin P. Miller was placed in charge of the branch, which was organized as a ward Aug. 8, 1886, with Orrin P. Miller as Bishop. Bishop Miller was succeeded in 1900 by Gordon S. Bills, who was succeeded in 1921 by David Bills, who presided until the ward was divided in 1927.
