Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Rockport Ward

ROCKPORT WARD, Summit Stake, Summit Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Rockport and its immediate vicinity. Rockport is located on the west bank of the Weber River at the mouth of Three Mile Canyon, about 12 miles south of Coalville, the headquarters of the stake. Nearly all the people in the locality are members of the Church. Rockport was settled in 1860 by Edmund Hortin and his large family who had come west as part of an independent company of emigrating saints in charge of Capt. Franklin Brown. Being pleased with the location, they concluded to remain, while the rest of the company, among whom was Charles R. Savage (who acted as chaplain), went on to Salt Lake City, where they arrived Sept. 4, 1860. When the emigrants reached the present site of Rockport, they found there a Bro. Henry Reynolds who had come with another company of emigrants earlier the same year, and when other settlers located in the district this man, Henry Reynolds, became the first presiding Elder at Rockport. It is related that at Christmas, 1860, the Hortin family and Bro. Reynolds were anxious to celebrate, but, having no money, they bargained for some beef, to pay for which they mortgaged a part of their next season's crop! It is understood that this cooperative Christmas dinner was enjoyed. During the Black Hawk Indian War in 1865 a fort built of rocks was erected at Rockport as a protection, but it was never occupied.

For a time the settlers at Rockport were a part of the Peoa Ward. Edward Bryant succeeded Henry Reynolds as presiding Elder in 1862 and acted in that position until 1877, when the Rockport Ward was organized with John M. Malin as Bishop. He acted until his death Sept. 2 1896, after which he was succeeded by Henry Seamons, who was succeeded in 1901 by James Vernon, who was succeeded in 1914 by Ralph W. Maxwell (presiding Elder), who was succeeded in 1915 by Joseph E. Horton (Bishop), who was succeeded in 1917 by Robert Siddoway, who died July 25, 1921, and was succeeded by William O. Gibbons, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 82 members, including 18 children. The Rockport Precinct in 1930 had a total population of 109.
