Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Rockville Ward

ROCKVILLE WARD, Zion Park Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the little town of Rockville, and also in the village of Shonesburg. Rockville is situated in the narrow Rio Virgen Valley on the north banks of said stream. The farming land belonging to the settlement consists of narrow strips on both sides of the river, where the valley is scarcely a mile wide. The gardens and farms of Rockville are irrigated from the Rio Virgen and its north fork. Rockville is 10 miles up the Rio Virgen from Virgin City, 20 miles southeast of Toquerville, 15 miles east of Hurricane, the stake headquarters, and 43 miles northeast of St. George. The people of Rockville have always had great trouble in controlling the waters of the Rio Virgen, in which they have built dams every year, which have been washed away just as regularly as they have been built, sometimes several dams in one season. Nevertheless Rockville can boast of the finest location for a town on that river. There are many comfortable private residences in Rockville, consisting of adobe, rock and lumber houses. Rockville is on the main highway leading to Zion Park.

Rockville as a settlement dates back to 1861, when it was founded under the direction of the late Apostle Orson Pratt and John C. Hall. The first location made by the settlers was at a place named Adventure, but the present Rockville townsite was selected and surveyed in 1862, and about a dozen L. D. S. families spent the winter of 1862-1863 at Rockville. The original settlement of Adventure was abandoned and the people who had located there became identified with Rockville. A cotton gin mill, which had been built at Rockville, was destroyed by fire in 1864, and the raising of cotton never was much of a success in the settlement, though the gin mill was re-built.

Ezra Strong was the first presiding Elder at Rockville. He was succeeded in 1864 by Zemira Draper, who presided until 1866, when the people vacated the surrounding smaller settlements because of Indian troubles and moved into Rockville for protection. In that year Rockville became an organized ward with Anson P. Winsor as Bishop. He presided until 1867, when he was succeeded by Charles N. Smith, who in 1891 was succeeded by Gottlieb Hirschi, who in 1900 was succeeded by John F. Langston, who in 1906 was succeeded by David Hirschi, who in 1921 was succeeded by Philetus Jones, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Rockville Ward had 361 members, including 96 children. The total population of the Rockville Precinct was 251 in 1930, and 23 people in Grafton Precinct also belonged to the Rockville Ward.
