Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Rotterdam Conference

ROTTERDAM CONFERENCE, or District, of the Netherlands Mission, includes the southwest part of Holland (or the provinces of South-Holland, Zeeland and Noord-Brabant), with headquarters in Rotterdam, where the headquarters of the Netherlands Mission were also located. From May, 1901, to January, 1907, the province of Utrecht also formed part of the Rotterdam Conference.

The conference was organized Nov. 1, 1897, with Elder William J. DeBry, a missionary, as president. Up to February 16, 1902, the headquarters of the mission, located at 120, Izaak Huberstraat, were also used as headquarters of the Rotterdam Conference, but after that date the "Excelsior" building, containing a spacious hall and several rooms, was used as conference headquarters as well as for regular branch and conference meetings.

In February, 1903, the conference was reported with five branches, namely, Rotterdam 1st Branch, Rotterdam 2nd Branch, Dordrecht, The Hague and Utrecht. In December of that year the Rotterdam 2nd Branch was added to Rotterdam 1st Branch, but in later years another Rotterdam 2nd Branch was created, called the Overmaas Branch.

In 1905 missionary labor was begun at Leiden. The hall "Excelsior" at Rotterdam was dedicated in 1908, a new hall was opened at Schiedam, and that same year the first L. D. S. meeting was held at Gouda.

In January, 1913, when the Antwerp Conference was organized, part of the Rotterdam Conference territory (mainly the cities of Middelburg and Breda) was included in the new division, but in May, 1914, that part was returned to the Rotterdam Conference.

From Oct. 15, 1927, to Oct. 15, 1928, the province of Zeeland (theretofore part of the Rotterdam Conference) was known as the Zeeland District. And when the Zeeland District ceased to exist, its territory (mainly the cities of Vlissingen, Middelburg and Goes) was added to the Rotterdam District again.

In 1930 the Rotterdam District comprised the following branches: Rotterdam, Overmaas, Dordrecht, Schiedam, Gouda, Delft, The Hague and Leiden. The total membership of the Church in the district in that year was 1,307, including 159 children.
