Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Saint David Branch

SAINT DAVID BRANCH, St. Joseph Stake, Cochise Co., Arizona, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing on the San Pedro River, including the settlement of St. David and the locality known as the Macdonald Settlement, and vicinity. The St. David townsite is nine miles southeast of Benson, the nearest point on the Southern Pacific Railroad, but only one mile east of Canestio on the railroad leading to Guymas in Sonora, Mexico. St. David is also 15 miles northwest of Tombstone, the seat of Cochise County, and 100 miles by nearest wagon road southwest of Thatcher, the headquarters of St. Joseph Stake. San Pedro Valley measures about 50 miles from the boundary line between Mexico and the United States on the south to where the San Pedro River enters a box canyon on the north. The valley is about 18 miles wide where St. David is located. It is not known when the first Mexicans located in the San Pedro Valley, but it is well known that the Mormon Battalion, in its famous march from Fort Leavenworth to California, passed through the valley in the latter part of 1846. It was on the San Pedro River, about 30 miles south of the present settlement of St. David, that the Mormon Battalion boys had their great encounter with the wild bulls.

The valley was first settled by a company of Latter-day Saints in January, 1877, consisting of Philemon C. Merrill (of Mormon Battalion fame) and others, who founded the town of St. David on the San Pedro River, naming their settlement St. David in honor of David Patten Kimball. Philemon C. Merrill presided over the settlement at the beginning, and in the fall of 1878 he was blessed and set apart by Apostle Erastus Snow to preside over the saints in the southern country. Early in 1879 the colonists on the San Pedro River commenced making a canal on the east side of the river and got water for irrigation purposes on to their land. In May, 1880, the townsite of St. David was surveyed and some of the settlers built houses on it. An adobe school house was erected in 1881. Philemon C. Merrill was succeeded as presiding Elder in 1881 by David P. Kimball, who presided in that capacity until Sept. 30, 1882, when St. David was organized as a ward with David P. Kimball as Bishop. Bishop Kimball was chosen as counselor in the St. Joseph Stake presidency when the St. Joseph Stake was organized Feb. 25, 1882, and Henry J. Home was chosen as Bishop of the St. David Ward. Later that year he was succeeded by Wm. D. Johnson, who in 1885 was succeeded by Morgan H. Merrill, who in 1888 was succeeded by Peter A. Lofgren, who in 1901 was succeeded by John S. Merrill, who in 1907 was succeeded by John Crozier Kimball, who acted until 1910, when the ward was discontinued and a branch organization effected instead. When the St. Joseph Stake was first organized in 1882, St, David was made the headquarters of the stake and thus it remained until 1892, when the stake headquarters were permanently located at Thatcher, Graham Co., Arizona.

In 1930 the saints in St. David and vicinity constituted a part of the California Mission.
