Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Saint George

SAINT GEORGE, St. George Stake, the seat of Washington County, Utah, and the headquarters of the St. George Stake of Zion, is the principal town on the main highway between Cedar City, Utah, and Las Vegas, Nevada. It is located near the junction of the Rio Virgen and the Santa Clara Creek, about seven miles north of the boundary line between Utah and Arizona. St. George is noted for its fine gardens and fruits, although in many instances the earth on which the planting took place had to be hauled long distances in order to make gardens on the alkaline sand. The principal occupations of the citizens are farming and gardening. Grapes are cultivated quite extensively. St. George is one of Utah's healthiest cities. The beautiful temple, built on the edge of the desert, immediately south of the city, is the principal object of interest in southern Utah. (See St. George Temple.) The St. George tabernacle is a most beautiful structure, built of native sandstone taken from a quarry in the vicinity, the rocks being cut and dressed into uniform sizes. A fine clock in the center of the tower tells the time of day to the public. St. George enjoyed for years the reputation of being the most enterprising town in southern Utah. Too much praise cannot be given the people who built up that beautiful city in the midst of a barren desert. Like other smaller towns in Washington County, St. George is a beautiful flower garden in the spring, its flowers and vegetation being in striking contrast to the surrounding country, where, north of the Rim of the Basin, winter reigns supreme until much later in the season. The elevation of St. George being only about 2,700 feet above sea level, the climate is almost semitropical. St. George is 56 miles southwest of Cedar City, and 50 miles by air line south of Modena, the nearest railroad station on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. St. George is also 310 miles by rail and wagon road southwest of Salt Lake City.

St. George was founded in 1861 by missionaries who were called at the general conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City in October of that year with their families to locate in southern Utah. After the locality adjacent to the Rio Virgen was examined, the present site of St. George was chosen as the place to build the main settlement in the so-called Utah's Dixie and from the very beginning the location was named St. George in honor of Apostle George A. Smith. The first important arrival of the missionaries mentioned took place Dec. 1, 1861, and a camp was immediately formed half a mile northeast of where the St. George Temple now stands. Several committees were appointed and improvements commenced at once. Many other settlers arrived early in 1862, and in September of that year Pres. Brigham Young, accompanied by others, visited St. George the first time. In 1864 a tunnel, 900 feet long, belonging to the St. George and Rio Virgen Canal Company, which had commenced operations in 1862, was finished. This tunnel penetrates the Black Ridge southeast of St. George as a part of the canal system, the length of the canal being about six miles with an average depth of three feet and six feet in width. This ditch was sufficient to carry water from the Rio Virgen to the land irrigated at St. George, but as the dams built in the river were frequently washed away it entailed heavy losses on the settlers, and later a canal, 11 miles long, was built, taking out water on both sides of the river.

When St. George was first located in 1861, Robert Gardner was chosen as Bishop, but in 1862 the town was divided into four wards, namely, the St. George 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th wards. These four wards existed side by side until 1895, when they were amalgamated into one ward, the St. George Ward, with James Andrus as Bishop. He presided until 1902, when St. George was divided into two wards, namely, the St. George East Ward and the St. George West Ward, and in 1925 parts of these two wards were detached and organized as the St. George South Ward. The three St. George wards, namely, the St. George East, South and West had a total membership Dec. 31, 1930, of 2,251, including 475 children. The total population of St. George Precinct was 2,499 in 1930, of which 2,434 resided in the city of St. George.
