Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Saint George Stake of Zion

SAINT GEORGE STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing principally in Washington County, Utah. The stake extends north to the Parowan Stake, east to the Zion Park Stake, south to the boundary line between Utah and Arizona, and including one ward, Mt. Trumbull, in Arizona, and west to the boundary line between Utah and Nevada. The headquarters of the stake are in the, city of St. George, where there is a fine stake tabernacle, buildings belonging to the Dixie College, a number of L. D. S. meeting houses, modern school houses, and the beautiful St. George Temple, the first temple completed by the Latter-day Saints in the Rocky Mountains. Nearly the entire population within the limits of the stake are farmers and stockraisers, mostly on a small scale, while a number are engaged in business enterprises. The St. George Stake (in 1930) consisted of 12 organized bishop's wards, viz., Central, Enterprise, Gunlock, Leeds, Mount Trumbull, Pine Valley, Santa Clara, Saint George East, Saint George South, Saint George West, Veyo, and Washington. Besides these 12 wards there is the Ivins Branch.

Soon after Salt Lake City had been founded by the Latter-day Saints in 1847, the country as far south as the Colorado River, as far west as the Sierra Nevada Mountains, and as far north as the Oregon line was explored with a view of locating settlements wherever there were facilities for doing so. Parley P. Pratt's exploring company, which left Salt Lake City in the latter part of 1849 and returned early in 1850, explored southern Utah as far as the present location of St. George, which led to the establishment of the settlement of the town of Washington, in 1857, and the establishment of an Indian Mission at Santa Clara in 1854. Toquerville was founded in 1858, Grafton in 1860, and Rockville in 1863, and so on. These settlements were grouped ecclesiastically under the head of Southern Utah Mission, and continued thus until 1877, when a general reorganization of the settlements of the Saints in the Rocky Mountains took place, and the whole territory of Utah, as also the adjoining territories of Idaho on the north, and Arizona on the south, were organized into stakes of Zion. Thus at the general conference of the Church held in St. George April 7, 1877, the saints in Washington County, Utah, were organized as the St. George Stake of Zion with John D. T. McAllister as president, Thomas J. Jones as first and Henry Eyring as second counselor. In 1881 Henry Eyring succeeded Thomas J. Jones as first counselor, and Daniel D. McArthur was chosen as second counselor to Pres. McAllister. In 1887 Daniel D. McArthur was succeeded by David H. Cannon as second counselor. In 1888 Pres. John D. T. McAllister was released, together with his counselors (Henry Eyring and David H. Cannon), and Daniel D. McArthur was chosen as president of the St. George Stake, with Anthony W. Ivins as first and Erastus B. Snow as second counselor. First Counselor Anthony W. Ivins was called to preside over the Juarez Stake in Mexico, in 1895, and David H. Cannon was chosen as first counselor in his stead. Second Counselor Erastus B. Snow died Sept. 22, 1900. On June 15, 1901, Pres. Daniel D. McArthur was released, together with his counselor (David H. Cannon), and Edward H. Snow was chosen as president of the St. George Stake, with Thomas P. Cottam as first counselor. George F. Whitehead was chosen as second counselor Sept. 13, 1901. Pres. Edward H. Snow moved to Salt Lake City to fill a state office, and on June 15, 1925, he was released, together with his counselors (Thomas P. Cottam and George F. Whitehead). Joseph K. Nicholes was chosen as president of the St. George Stake, with William O. Bentley as first and Walter Cannon as second counselor. At a stake conference held Sept. 21, 1930, Pres. Joseph K. Nicholes was released on account of failing health, together with his counselors (William O. Bentley and Walter Cannon), and William O. Bentley was chosen as president of the St. George Stake with Wilford W. McArthur as first and Orval Hafen as second counselor. This presidency acted Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the St. George Stake had a total membership of 4,283, including 932 children. Among the Priesthood were three Patriarchs, viz., William Gardner, George W. Worthen and Albert L. Bryner. James G. Bleak was the first clerk of the St. George Stake; he was succeeded in 1901 by Melvin M. Harmon, who in 1903 was succeeded by David R. Forsha, who in 1904 was succeeded by Arthur F. Miles, who in 1906 was succeeded by David R. Forsha (serving a second term), who in 1916 was succeeded by George E. Miles, who acted Dec. 31, 1930.
