Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Saint John Ward, Tooele Stake

SAINT JOHN WARD, Tooele Stake, Tooele Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of St. John, which is one of the three principal Mormon settlements in Rush Valley. It is situated on rising ground in the midst of an immense stock-range, 1 1/2 mile northeast of Clover Creek, from which stream the settlers get their water for irrigation purposes through a canal about two miles long. The village of St. John is 16 miles southwest of Tooele, the county seat and the headquarters of the Tooele Stake, 18 1/2 miles by nearest road south of Grantsville, and 51 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. Nearly all the inhabitants are Latter-day Saints engaged in farming and stock raising. The ward owns a fine rock meeting house, well finished and furnished. Good well water is obtained at a depth of from 35 to 60 feet.

In 1867 the Johnson Settlement on Clover Creek was visited by Apostle George A. Smith, who recommended that the people who had settled on Clover Creek should change their location by moving about two miles further down the creek. The majority of the people carried out the suggestion under the direction of Bishop John Rowberry by moving to the present site of St. John in the autumn of 1867. A new townsite was surveyed and James Staples and David Henry Leonard built the first houses (log cabins) on it. The place was named St. John, in honor of Bishop John Rowberry. Some of the settlers in the Johnson Settlement (or Shambip), however, refused to move to the new town and remained on the creek above named, occupying the original site of Johnson's Settlement (now Clover Creek). But the majority of the original settlers became residents of St. John and from 1867 to 1882 the settlers further up the creek (Johnson's Settlement) constituted a part of the St. John Ward. Enos Stookey presided. He, however, was one of those who opposed moving the settlement to the present site of St. John, and was released from presiding, and George W. Burridge was chosen to succeed him. At a special conference held at Tooele, June 24, 1877, the saints of St. John were organized into a regular bishop's ward, with George W. Burridge as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1888 by David H. Caldwell, who in 1898 was succeeded by John G. Ahlström, who in 1905 was succeeded by John T. Russell, who in 1915 was succeeded by Linius C. Petersen, who in 1918 was succeeded by Willard Shields Sagers, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the St. John Ward had 118 members, including 21 children. The total population of the St. John Precinct was 135 in 1930.
