Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Saint Johns Ward

SAINT JOHNS WARD, St. Johns Stake, Apache Co., Arizona, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of St. Johns, the seat of Apache county, located on the west, or left bank of the Little Colorado River, in a valley about four miles long and about two miles wide. St. Johns is 50 miles south of Navajo Springs, 45 miles east of Snowflake (the headquarters of the Snowflake Stake), 15 miles west of the boundary line between New Mexico and Arizona, and 80 miles northeast of Fort Apache. The saints worship in the old Church Academy Building.

Solomon and Morris Barth (Jews) and some Mexicans, in 1873, commenced a settlement, which later became St. Johns. In November, 1879, Elder Ammon M. Tenney, a prominent missionary to the Indians, following instructions from Apostle Wilford Woodruff, purchased squatters rights to a large tract of land in St. Johns and vicinity of the Barth brothers, upon which to locate a settlement for the missionaries. The price was 770 head of average Americans cows from 3 to 7 years old. Bro. Wm. J. Flake of Snowflake loaned 100 head of stock to assist the project and the Church supplied the balance of the amount necessary. Bro. Flake was later paid in full, and the Church in part by the settlers. Joseph Hyrum Watkins and Wm. F. James of Ogden were the first missionaries who, with their families, located on the purchase in 1879; they were followed by others, and Ammon M. Tenney was appointed to preside over the settlement. A townsite was selected about a mile north of the Mexican town, but, this not being a good location, another townsite was located nearer the Mexican town. On Oct. 9, 1880, a public square on the new townsite was located by Pres. Jesse N. Smith, who organized the St. Johns Ward with David K. Udall as Bishop. Bro. Udall had been called by the First Presidency to fill this position and had been ordained a Bishop by Apostle Erastus Snow June 5, 1880, at Glendale, Kane Co., Utah. In 1880, also, a cooperative store was established at St. Johns by John W. Young, Ammon M. Tenney and Peter J. Christoffersen. On June 24, 1882, a tragedy occured at St. Johns when some members of the Greer family, who were peacefully watching the celebration of a Catholic festival, were asked by the police to deliver up their arms. This they refused to do and took refuge in the cooperative store. Later, they sought shelter in an unfinished adobe building, when the Mexicans commenced firing upon them. Old Father Tenney (Nathan C. Tenney, father of Ammon M. Tenney) offered to go into the house and get the boys to deliver up their arms under police protection if the Mexicans would cease firing. This they did for a time, while Father Tenney went to get the sheriff, to whom the Greer boys had promised to deliver up their guns; but while the sheriff was in the act of taking possession of the fire arms, a stray shot from one of the Mexicans killed Father Tenney. Another man, James Vaughn, was also killed. There had been trouble between the Greer boys and some of the Mexicans some time previously.

The St. Johns Printing and Publishing Company was organized in January, 1883, with Bishop David K. Udall as president. This company purchased the "Arizona Pioneer" from Chas. A. Franklin, a non-Mormon, who had edited the same since the previous July. This was the first newspaper published in Apache County, Arizona. The company changed the name of the paper to "Orion Era," of which Bro. Miles P. Romney was made editor. A flouring mill was erected at St. Johns in 1884 and put into operation in 1886. This later became the Excelsior Roller Mill. For some time the saints at St. Johns had to struggle with many difficulties, not the least being the opposition shown by a certain "ring" among the officials of Arizona Territory, who opposed the saints when they demanded justice against Mexicans and others who "jumped" their land claims and water rights and in other ways molested them. But the prayers of the saints prevailed and in due time justice was meted out to them. One of the members of the "ring," a powerful opponent of the saints, was sentenced to ten years imprisonment in the Yuma penitentiary for forgery and raising county warrants; another died, and others fled the country to avoid merited punishment for their crimes. From this time the settlement at St. Johns prospered, and when the St. Johns Stake of Zion was organized in 1887, St. Johns became the headquarters of the same. Following is a list of the Bishops who have presided over St. Johns Ward: David K. Udall, 1880-1887; Willard Farr, 1887-1894; Charles P. Anderson, 1894-1905; Ove Ephraim Oveson, 1905-1910; LeRoy Gibbons, 1910-1915; William D. Rencher, 1915-1922; Edwin I. Whiting, 1922-1928, and Albert Franklin Anderson, 1928-1930. On Dec. 31, 1930 St. Johns Ward had 866 members, including 207 children. The total population of the St. Johns Precinct in 1930 was 1,386.
