Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Saint Louis Branch

SAINT LOUIS BRANCH, Mo., Central States Mission, consisted in 1930 of the Latter-day Saints residing in the city of St. Louis and vicinity, representing a total membership of 402, including 70 children.

St. Louis, Mo., became known to the Latter-day Saints in the latter part of 1830 when Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt and three other missionary companions passed through St. Louis on their way to Independence, Jackson Co., Mo., and since that time St. Louis has been prominently connected with the history of the Latter-day Saints. Thousands of L. D. S. emigrants from Great Britain and continental Europe, who landed on the American shore at New Orleans, located temporarily in St. Louis, where they found employment and earned means to take them to the Valley later.

When the saints were expelled from their homes in Illinois in 1846, hundreds, perhaps thousands of them, found temporary shelter and employment in St. Louis. In 1855 the saints in St. Louis, which at that time numbered about 3,000, were organized into a stake of Zion, which, however, existed only for a short time. Thousands of missionaries bound for the Eastern States and Europe made their way through St. Louis, where the good saints in an early day rendered financial aid to the missionaries who were going abroad. Altogether the Latter-day Saints remember St. Louis with gratitude, and at the time that the saints were expelled from Missouri the St. Louis people did not seem to share or sympathize at all with the cruel treatment which was meted out to the saints at that time in upper Missouri, as a number of the leading newspapers in St. Louis championed the cause of the saints and condemned the actions of Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs and the officials of Missouri generally. Ever since 1831 there have been Latter-day Saints in the city of St. Louis, which in 1840 had 16,469 inhabitants according to the U. S. census. The population was 575,238 in 1900, and 821,960 in 1930.
