Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Saint Thomas Ward

SAINT THOMAS WARD, Moapa Stake, Clark Co., Nevada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the lower end of the Moapa Valley, near the junction of the Muddy with the Rio Virgen. The Muddy Valley at the place where Saint Thomas stands is about 1 1/2 miles wide. St. Thomas is the terminus of a branch of the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad, extending from Moapa to St. Thomas. St. Thomas is seven miles southeast of Overton, the headquarters of the Moapa Stake of Zion, and 25 miles by nearest road southwest of Bunkerville. Meetings and Sunday school sessions are held by the St. Thomas saints in the district school house.

St. Thomas was founded in 1865 by the missionaries who were called by the authorities of the Church that year to locate new settlements in southern Utah. Improvements were at once inaugurated and a townsite surveyed in 1866. Like the other settlements on the Muddy, the settlers at St. Thomas left their homes in 1871 on account of the exorbitant taxation imposed upon them by the state of Nevada. For a number of years the Moapa Valley, including St. Thomas, was occupied by non-Mormon ranchmen, but, as conditions changed, some of the saints re-settled St. Thomas, and were organized into a branch of the Church with Moses W. Gibson as presiding Elder. When John M. Bunker, who resided in Overton, was chosen as Bishop of the Overton Ward in 1901, the office of presiding Elder was discontinued as the saints of St. Thomas became an integral part of the Overton Ward. This condition continued until 1908, during which time the membership of St. Thomas had increased considerably, and at a meeting held Sept. 18, 1908, the saints at St. Thomas were separated from those at Overton and organized into a separate ward with John M. Bunker as Bishop. When the Moapa Stake was organized June 9, 1912, John M. Bunker was chosen as first counselor in the new stake presidency, and was consequently released as Bishop of St. Thomas, and Robert O. Gibson chosen as his successor. Brother Gibson presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the St. Thomas Ward had a membership of 160, including 44 children. The total population of the St. Thomas Precinct was 274 in 1930.
