Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Salmon River Mission

SALMON RIVER MISSION. Pres. Brigham Young, after locating the headquarters of the Church in Great Salt Lake City, Utah, began to plan for outposts for the intended settlements of the saints. Thus Parowan was founded in the south, a settlement in Carson Valley in the west, Fort Supply in the east, and Fort Limhi in the north. At the annual conference of the Church held in Great Salt Lake City April 7, 1855, a number of brethren were called to locate a settlement among the Bannock and Shoshone Indians in the far off north, in what was then Oregon Territory (now Idaho), and Elder Thomas S. Smith of Farmington, Davis Co., Utah, a man of considerable experience, was appointed to take charge of the colony, and on May 15, 1855, he, together with other brethren, left their homes in Farmington and other places, and on the 19th arrived on Bear River north of Brigham City. The next day (May 20) the company was organized with Thomas S. Smith as president, Francillo Durfee as captain, William Burgess, jun., lieutenant, B. F. Cummings, sergeant, David Moore, historian, and 21 other brethren. From the encampment on Bear River the expedition continued the journey through Malad Valley, over the Malad Divide and down Bannock Creek to Portneuf River, which stream they crossed on a bridge. On the 29th they arrived at the ferry on Snake River, immediately below where the Blackfoot River empties into the Snake. It took them three days to cross the river with their wagons and stock. On June 2nd the journey was resumed in a northeasterly direction over an almost trackless waste of a barren sagebrush plain, and along the right bank of Snake River, until Market Lake was reached; there the camp turned to the left and traveled in a northwesterly direction over rocks, sagebrush and sand, by way of Mud Lake and up Spring Creek (now Birch Creek) until they reached the Salmon River Pass. Through this part of the country they made an entire new road, not having as much as an Indian trail to guide them. Continuing through the pass over the divide to an upper valley of the Salmon River Basin, the headwaters of the east branch of the river, now known as Lemhi River, were soon reached, and here Pres. Smith called a halt. Selecting five brethren of the camp, he proceeded on the 14th of June, 1855, about 30 miles further down the stream and on the 15th he selected a site for a fort and a tract of farming land, to which the main camp moved on the 18th.

With that energy and determination characteristic of Mormon Pioneers, the brethren immediately commenced to make improvements, and they soon had a blacksmith shop in working order, burned coal and built a corral for the stock. By Aug. 12th they had erected a fort wall with gates, built seven houses and a blacksmith shop, besides breaking and planting several acres of land, and doing considerable fencing. They called their location Fort Limhi, in honor of Limhi, a Nephite king mentioned in the Book of Mormon. Fort Limhi (now spelled Lemhi) consisted of a neat fort enclosing a space of 16 rods square, located on the bench land, a short distance from the fight bank of the east branch of Salmon River, now called Lemhi River, in what is now Township 19 North, Range 24 East, Boise Meridian. It is about 20 miles above the point where that stream unites with the main Salmon River, at Salmon City, 125 miles northwest of Market Lake on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, or 379 miles the way the expedition traveled north northeast of Salt Lake City, Utah. The valley in which Fort Limhi was located is small, but the soil on the river is rich, and the table land afforded, at that time, good pasturage for stock. Timber was also abundant on the river and on the adjacent mountains.

The settlement of Fort Limhi proved a success; the Indians, who were anxious to learn the white man's ways of agriculture, were assisted by the brethren. Other settlers from Utah arrived and Pres. Brigham Young, with a strong escort, visited the settlement in 1857. A second fort was built that year, north of the original fort, and considerable grain and vegetables were raised. On the 25th of February, 1858, while several of the brethren were busily engaged in mowing hay, hauling timber, etc., a large party of Bannock and Shoshone Indians, many of whom lived around the fort, and had previously been very friendly, made a sudden break upon the herd of the settlers, drove off most of the stock belonging to the fort, killed George McBride and James Miller, and wounded Pres. Thomas S. Smith and other brethren. This uprising of the Indians led to the abandonment of Fort Limhi by the Latter-day Saints late in 1858. In two companies the settlers returned to Utah, and on the journey Bailey Lake, one of the party, was killed by Indians on Bannock Creek.

Thus ended the famous Salmon River Mission, which proved to be one of the most dangerous missions ever performed among the Indians in the north, and no attempt has since been made to establish any settlement of the saints on Salmon River or its tributaries. Most of the lands cultivated by the missionaries are now included in the Lemhi Indian Reservation. Different theories have been advanced as to the cause of this sudden Indian outbreak, but the most correct one is perhaps based on the fact that the U. S. soldiers, under Gen. Albert S. Johnston, who were encamped near Fort Bridger in the winter of 1857-1858, were influencing the Indians at that time to commit all manner of depredations upon the Mormons. It was even asserted by parties who ought to know that the officers of the army were offering the Indians a certain amount for every Mormon scalp they could secure. The whole Salmon River region remained in undisturbed possession of the Indians until 1866, when mining discoveries opened up the country and Salmon City was founded in the spring of 1867, at a point where. Lemhi River empties into the Salmon River, about 20 miles northwest of where Fort Limhi stood. A county called Lemhi, which in 1930 had a population of 4,643 was created by the Idaho Legislature Jan. 9, 1869. The ruins of old Fort Limhi are still in existence and in a good state of preservation. Fort Limhi was the first Anglo-Saxon settlement founded in what is now the state of Idaho.
