Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Salt Lake City 18th Ward

SALT LAKE CITY 18TH WARD, Ensign Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, one of the original nineteen wards into which Salt Lake City was divided in February, 1849, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Salt Lake City which is bounded on the north by 7th Ave. (or Ensign Ward), east by C St. (or the 20th Ward), south by South Temple St. (or the 12th-13th Ward), and west by Main St. (or the 17th Ward). At the time of its organization the ward extended northward and eastward to the mountains.

The first permanent settlers in the 18th Ward were Pres. Brigham Young and Elders Heber C. Kimball and Newel K. Whitney who, with their families, were the only residents of the ward for several years. The first large adobe house erected in Salt Lake Valley, known as the White House, was built for Pres. Young on South Temple St. on the site now occupied by the Elks' Club house. At an early date Pres. Young also erected a school house on the southwest corner of the same lot, near the Eagle Gate. In this old school house many of the later leaders of the Church and of the state of Utah received much of their education. This building was also used as a meeting house for the ward and for council meetings of the Church leaders until a more up-to-date building was erected. Many other buildings of historic interest were located in the 18th Ward. Thus the first mill (a chopper, known as Crismon's Mill), located on City Creek, was built near the junction of 3rd Ave. and Canyon Road; also the "Mint", which stood immediately east of where the Hotel Utah now stands on East South Temple St., the "Deseret News" plant and the Tithing Office; also the Eagle Gate.

In 1856 all that part of the 18th Ward lying east of Walnut St. (later A St.) was organized as the 20th Ward, thus greatly reducing the size of the parent ward. In 1877 this boundary line was changed to Pine St. (C St.), its present boundary. The organization of Ensign Ward in 1913 diminished its northern boundary to 7th Ave.

In 1883 a fine brick chapel, erected by the saints of the ward on A St., between 2nd and 3rd avenues, was dedicated. This edifice, with costly additions and improvements, is still in use. In 1884 a school house, for the benefit of Latter-day Saint children, was erected just south of the ward chapel. This building was later torn down, and in 1907 a fine amusement hall, known as Whitney Hall, was erected upon its site, at a cost of $35,000, as an addition to the 18th Ward chapel.

Newel K. Whitney, presiding Bishop of the Church, was the first Bishop of the ward; he was succeeded in 1851 by Lorenzo D. Young, who in 1878 was succeeded by Orson. F. Whitney (at that time only 23 years of age, the youngest Bishop in the Church), who, being called to be one of the Twelve Apostles, was succeeded in 1906 by Thomas Alfred Clawson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 1,837 members, including 152 children. For many years the 18th Ward belonged to Salt Lake Stake, but when Salt Lake City was divided into four stakes in 1904, the ward became a part of Ensign Stake.
