Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Salt Lake Temple

SALT LAKE TEMPLE (The), in Salt Lake City, Utah, is the fourth temple erected in Utah. It is spoken of as the "Great Temple" on account of it being the largest and most expensive temple yet built by the Latter-day Saints. Its erection occupied a period of forty years, owing to its massive construction and also due to the fact that in this period the Latter-day Saints, in spite of their poverty, built three other temples in Utah, namely, the St. George, Logan and Manti temples. From 1855 to 1889 a smaller building, known as the "Endowment House," in Salt Lake City, served some of the purposes of a temple.

On July 28, 1847, or four days after the arrival of Pres. Brigham Young in Great Salt Lake Valley, he designated the site where a temple should be built and on a motion of Apostle Orson Pratt, expressing approval of the location, was carried unanimously. Shortly afterwards the Temple Block, a square of ten acres, was surveyed and the ground dedicated Feb. 14, 1853. The corner stone of the temple was laid by Pres. Brigham Young on April 6, 1853. It was decided in 1852 to surround the entire Temple Block with a wall 15 feet high, which was subsequently built and still stands.

Granite obtained from Little Cottonwood Canyon, 20 miles distant, was used in the construction of this magnificent temple. In the early days huge blocks of granite were brought from the canyon by ox teams, four or five days being required to transport each block. The architectural plan was presented by Pres. Young and the structural plans worked out under his direction by Truman O. Angell, the Church architect. It is an oblong structure, extending east and west. The dimensions are 186x99 feet. The main walls are 107 feet in height and vary in thickness from 8 feet at the base to 6 feet higher up. At the east end of the building are three pinnacled towers, the height of the center one being 210 feet. There are three similar pinnacled towers on the west end, the height of the center one being 204 feet. Each of these six pinnacles has four stages, the lower three in each being ornamented with four smaller pinnacles. Standing on the capstone of the center tower on the east is a hammered copper statue representing the Angel Moroni, with a trumpet, proclaiming the restoration of the gospel. This colossal figure is 12 feet in height and is heavily gilded with pure gold leaf, making an imposing appearance. The temple consists of four floors of lofty, elegantly finished and beautifully furnished rooms. In the basement floor is a magnificent baptismal font which rests upon the backs of twelve life-sized bronze oxen.

The capstone of the temple was laid April 6, 1892, after which work was continued with vigor so that the "Great Temple" was dedicated on April 6, 1893, by Pres. Wilford Woodruff. The dedicatory services were repeated until April 18th, and again on April 23rd and 24th. The approximate cost of the erection and furnishing of this magnificent edifice is estimated at $4,000,000, a large part of which was subscribed by voluntary donations of means and labor by the Latter-day Saints. (For further details see The House of the Lord, by James E. Talmage and The Great Temple, by D. M. McAllister.)
