Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Salt Lake Theatre

SALT LAKE THEATRE, the erection of which was a stupendous undertaking at the time, was built in 18611862, on the northwest corner of the intersection of State and First South streets, Salt Lake City, in conformity with the policy of President Brigham Young that "the people must have amusement as well as religion." William H. Folson was the architect who drew the plans and superintended the work, while Hiram B. Clawson was Pres. Young's manager in its construction. Architect Folsom received considerable assistance from Elias L. T. Harrison, an architect from London, a newly arrived convert, who, being a great admirer of the Drury Lane Theatre in London, assisted in the architectural design of the interior of the building. Another useful man arrived in Utah just when needed. This was George M. Ottinger, the gifted artist, who was at once set to work painting the scenery and he made the first scenery used in the theatre.

The size of the edifice on the ground floor was 80x144 feet, and 40 feet high from the water table to the square. The front was decorated with two Grecian Doric columns. The auditorium had a parquet, dress circle, and three balconies. No theatre of its size and up-to-date construction was to be found in the West for many years afterwards.

It must be remembered that the erection of this building was eight years before the advent of the Union Pacific Railroad. There being no gasoline engines or electricity, a water-wheel was constructed in a branch of City Creek adjacent to the building, and this wheel, connected with a shaft and gearing, hoisted up all the massive timbers used in the erection of the house. Most of the nails used were hand-made, and wooden pins and rawhide thongs played an important part in the construction. The theatre was built as a community enterprise, and the laborers cheerfully accepted as payment for their services tithing office orders for food or merchandise, or written promises of future theatre tickets.

The theatre was formally opened on March 6, 1862, President Daniel H. Wells offering the dedicatory prayer. The capacity of the auditorium was 1,500 people and it was crowded from pit to ceiling.

For a time the Deseret Dramatic Association, an amateur affiliation, gave performances twice a week, after which Thomas A. Lyne, a veteran actor from Nauvoo, Illinois, organized a stock company and Hiram B. Clawson, the manager of the theatre, occasionally imported stars, the first being Mr. and Mrs. Selden Irwin, who had been playing in Denver, and who spent the winter of 1863-1864 in Salt Lake City. The Irwins were followed by George Pauncefort, and later by the much beloved Julia Dean Hayne, etc. Among those who played with the early day actors in the Salt Lake Theatre was Mrs. Asenath Adams, mother of Maude Adams, and the great actress herself made her debut on the boards of this theatre as a babe in arms. After the completion of the Transcontinental Railroad through Utah in 1869, many great artists, anxious to play in the famous Salt Lake Theatre, performed here and later Salt Lake City became one of the histrionic centers of Western America.

The first director of the theatre orchestra, composed of twenty members of the best musical talent in the territory, was Professor Charles J. Thomas, a recent arrival from England. Two years later he was succeeded by George Careless, another talented musician and composer.

In the early days, produce was accepted in payment of tickets, grain, chickens, and other merchandise being delivered at the nearby tithing office and receipt for value in theatre tickets given in exchange.

After sixty-six years of service, the Salt Lake Theatre was torn down in 1928, the site having been sold to the Mountain States Telephone Company, which contemplated the erection of a modern office building there.
