Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Samaria Ward

SAMARIA WARD, Malad Stake, Oneida Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Samaria and immediate vicinity. This town is pleasantly situated on a level tract of country extending from the Malad River on the east to the mountains on the west. The townsite, which is surveyed into regular ten-acre blocks with streets six rods wide, is nine miles by the nearest traveled road southwest of Malad, the stake headquarters. Nearly all the inhabitants of Samaria are Latter-day Saints, and the only public buildings in the town are a meeting house, built in 1891, and a brick school house.

The first settlers of Samaria were John Evan Price and his son Daniel E. Price, who arrived on the present site of Samaria Feb. 10, 1868. Other settlers arrived about the same time. The first habitation on the present site of Samaria was a dug-out built April 16, 1868, on the bank of Samaria Creek, about 1 1/2 blocks east of where the Samaria Co-op Store now stands. Brother Price, in speaking about these earlier days, said that his was the only white family there, all the neighbors being Indians. Thomas S. Thomas took charge of the settlement at the beginning, and when the saints were organized into a regular branch of the Church as a part of the Malad Ward Nov. 18, 1868, he was duly appointed presiding Elder of the branch. The first water for irrigation purposes was obtained by the people of Samaria from the Warm Springs, originally known as John Thorpe's Spring, three miles north of the present townsite. Later irrigation water was obtained from the head of Little or West Malad River. A school district was organized in Samaria in 1869, and a school house built the same year. In that year, also, Thomas S. Thomas, who resigned as president, was succeeded by Samuel D. Williams as president of the branch. When the Malad Stake of Zion was organized in 1888, Samaria, together with the other settlements in Malad Valley, were detached from the Oneida Stake to become a part of the new Malad Stake.

The saints of Samaria Branch were organized as a bishop's ward Oct. 31, 1880, with Jonah Evans as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1897 by Daniel E. Price, who in 1912 was succeeded by William W. Williams, who in 1913 was succeeded by Hyrum Peterson, who in 1914 was succeeded by David Hughes, who in 1927 was succeeded by John P. Roderick, who in 1930 was succeeded by James H. Williams, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Samaria Ward had a membership of 369, including 77 children.
