Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

San Bernardino, California

SAN BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA. A number of brethren who had served in the Mormon Battalion, and some who had visited southern California on other occasions, being very favorably impressed with the country, expressed their desire to establish settlements of saints there. Although the policy of Pres. Brigham Young was to strengthen the settlements already functioning in the Great Basin rather than go further afield, as usual, he gave the wishes of these brethren careful consideration, and at a meeting held in the President's Office in Salt Lake City Feb. 23, 1851, Apostles Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich were set apart to take a company of prospective settlers to southern California, preside over the affairs of the Church in that state and establish a stronghold for the gathering of the saints in California.

Rendezvous was made at Peteetneet (Payson, Utah Co., Utah), where on March 22nd the company was organized. It consisted of about 500 saints with 150 wagons and was divided into companies of tens, fifties and one hundred-fifty wagons, journeying together.

At Peteetneet, Apostle Parley P. Pratt, with a party of seven missionaries (some accompanied by their wives) en route to the Pacific Coast, joined the caravan which left Payson, March 24th. It is to his observations, published in the "Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt", that we are indebted for many details of that memorable journey, during which much suffering was endured from thirst while crossing the desert. Of these trials the local histories of San Bernardino, California, often make mention. The company, however, arrived safely, without mishap, on the banks of the Mohave River and encamped at the mouth of the Cajon Pass on May 28th. Here Elder Parley P. Pratt and his company left the caravan and proceeded onward to the Pacific Coast to embark for South America and the Pacific Islands.

The saints encamped at the mouth of the Cajon Pass were obliged to wait there until a location could be secured upon which they might settle. On July 5th and 6th, 1851, a conference was held in the camp, at which Elders Lyman and Rich were sustained as the presiding authorities of the Church in California. A branch (or stake) was organized, called the California Branch, with David Seeley as president, and Samuel Wolfe and Simeon Andrews as counselors. A high council was also chosen. William Crosby was set apart as Bishop of the new branch with Robert M. Smith and Albert W. Collins as his counselors.

On Sept. 22nd Elders Lyman and Rich concluded arrangements for the purchase of a tract of land containing from 80,000 to 100,000 acres, which was known locally as the San Bernardino Ranch. The price was $77,000 on time payments. The first payment being made, the saints moved to their new home, which was 12 miles below their previous camping place.

With the energy and perseverance characteristic of L. D. S. empire builders, they at once selected a townsite which was surveyed and, although the city was not legally incorporated until 1854, permission was obtained from the state officials to hold an election at which two justices of the peace and two constables were chosen. This precaution was necessary as the Indians in the district, assisted by a few renegade whites, were somewhat troublesome, and had to be kept in subjection. A military organization of more than 150 able-bodied men was effected with Jefferson Hunt of the Mormon Battalion as captain. More ammunition was secured from the Pueblo do los Angeles, fifty miles distant, and a fort erected covering about eight acres of land. By the end of the year 1851 one hundred dwellings had been built inside the fort in which, at least, that number of families were housed. A ditch also had been dug, bringing water from nearby creeks, and a canvas pavilion had been constructed which was used as a school during the week, in which about 125 pupils received instruction from Bro. Wm. Stout. Sacrament meetings and other Church assemblies were also held in this pavilion. Within the enclosure a flowing well had been driven in case the water supply from the creeks should be cut off by the Indians.

San Bernardino County was organized in 1853, Elders David Seeley, Henry G. Sherwood and John Brown being chosen commissioners. The Century Annals of San Bernardino County give the names of heads of families at San Bernardino at that time and the local reports state that the Mormons were ideal colonists.

After the organization of the county more colonists from Utah came to the settlement and also a number of non-Mormons, including some Jews, so that it was necessary to secure more land and part of the Chino (or Williams) Ranch was purchased by the settlers. As payments on the land became due the people united in their efforts to meet the deficiency by selling some of their cattle, produce and other things and by making a strenuous effort to pay for their own holdings that the means might be used by their leaders. Some of the brethren were appointed to go to the gold mines in an effort to raise funds, but did not meet with much success as they found the miners discouraged and in an almost starving condition. However, in due time the indebtedness was duly wiped out.

On July 4, 1856, about 2,000 members of the branch sat down to a feast at San Bernardino, at which joy and happiness prevailed except that a few apostate Mormons, and Spaniards strove to make a disturbance. Shortly afterwards a general reformation took place, most of the saints at San Bernardino being rebaptized, as many as one hundred in a day being recorded. Following is a list of stock, etc., owned by the saints at this time: American cows, 12,516; California steers, 618; American oxen, 230; horses, 1,383; mules, 229; sheep, 3,917; goats, 505, and hogs, 537. Seven saw mills, two shingle mills and three grist mills were in operation.

San Bernardino was the rendezvous for many missionaries sailing for foreign lands from the Pacific ports, and many returning missionaries, with their small companies of migrating saints, spent some time in the settlement before proceeding to Salt Lake Valley.

As is always the case when the success of Mormon colonists attracts a number of adventurers and land sharks, the political situation in San Bernardino became tense and election days a time of tumult, and many of the saints remembered with yearning in their hearts the peaceful vales of Utah. Hence most of the settlers rendered willing obedience to the instructions of Pres. Brigham Young in 1857 to the effect that the San Bernardino colonists should return to the "Valleys of the Mountains" to defend their mountain homes from invasion by Johnston's Army which, on account of misrepresentation by enemies of the saints, was approaching the borders of Utah. At the close of 1858 only a few of the faithful saints were left in San Bernardino.

During their six years sojourn in San Bernardino, however, these Mormon colonists made an enviable record and a name that is referred to in history in terms of commendation and respect.
