Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sandy

SANDY, East Jordan Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, is a town and business center on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad, about 12 miles south of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City. The origin of the name is uncertain, some claiming that it was given because of the sandy nature of the soil in this region of country, and others that it was named in honor of Alexander Kinghorn, commonly known as "Sandy", the engineer who ran the first locomotive into the station.

The site of Sandy, on account of its altitude, was chosen in 1871 by the location of a station from which a branch line could be built to the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canyon, mining operations in that canyon at the time being quite active, and for several years Sandy was the shipping point also for the mines at Bingham and Tintic in Utah, and Pioche in Nevada. After the advent of the railroad in 1871, several smelters were located in the vicinity of Sandy, among which may be mentioned the "Saturn", the "Flagstaff" and the "Mountain Chief" (also called Mingo). These mining operations drew into the district a somewhat rough element and several shooting frays are noted in the early history of Sandy. Smelting is still continued in the district.

Meetings were held in a rented hall in Sandy for the Latter-day Saints residing there and in the vicinity as early as 1873, with Isaac Harrison as presiding Elder. He acted under the direction of the bishopric of South Cottonwood Ward. Later meetings were held in a room of the Utah Southern Railroad until Bro. Andrew O. Gaelte opened his private residence to the saints free of charge. In 1874 a lumber building was purchased to serve as a chapel and moved to a location near the place where the Sandy 1st Ward meeting house now stands. Elder Isaac Harrison was succeeded in the presidency of the branch by William Newell, who in turn was succeeded by Elder Isaac Harrison, serving a second term. In 1877, when the Union Ward was organized, the saints at Sandy were organized as a branch of that ward with John W. Sharp as presiding Elder. He presided until Sept. 3, 1882, when the Sandy Branch was organized as a ward with Ezekiel Holman as Bishop. Soon after the organization of the ward a frame meeting house was erected, the former building being too small to accommodate the members of the ward. This meeting house served until 1900 when a fine chapel, built of pressed brick, was erected in Sandy.

A large number of converts from Scandinavia, especally from Sweden, settled in Sandy, locating on farms and took an active part in the activities of the ward.

Bishop Holman presided until 1892, when, on account of impaired vision, he was honorably released and was succeeded by James Jensen, who presided until the organization of Jordan Stake in 1900, when he was called to act as a counselor in the stake presidency, and was succeeded as Bishop of Sandy Ward by William D. Kuhre, who acted until 1914, when he was called to preside over the Jordan Stake, and was succeeded as Bishop of Sandy Ward by Alva J. Butler, who acted until Sandy Ward was divided into three wards in 1920. Sandy Ward belonged to the Salt Lake Stake of Zion until 1900, when it became a part of the Jordan Stake.
