Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

San Francisco Stake of Zion

SAN FRANCISCO STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the cities of San Francisco, Oakland, Berkeley, and other cities and towns in the surrounding country in California. The headquarters of the stake are in the city of Oakland, across the bay from San Francisco. The stake consists of the following organized bishop's wards: Balboa, Berkeley, Dimond, Elmhurst, Martinez, Mission, Oakland, Richmond, San Francisco and Sunset.

As the Latter-day Saint population increased in California, and there were a number of branches in the California Mission which had grown into permanent organizations, with an ever-increasing membership, it was decided to organize some of these largest and more permanent branches into a stake of Zion, which was accordingly done at a special meeting held July 10, 1927, attended by Apostles Rudger Clawson and George Albert Smith. On that occasion the following branches, which hitherto had belonged to the San Francisco Conference, or District of the California Mission, were organized into the San Francisco Stake of Zion, to-wit: Berkeley, Daly City, Dimond, Elmhurst, Martinez, Mission, Oakland, Richmond, San Francisco, and Sunset. Oakland was chosen as the headquarters of the new stake. None of the branches in the other districts of northern California were taken into the stake. Wallace Aird Macdonald, jun., formerly president of the Oakland Branch, was chosen as president of the new stake. John Edward Johnson, former president of the Berkeley Branch, was chosen as first counselor, and Clyde Walter Lindsay, formerly president of the Mission Branch, was chosen as second counselor. Reed S. Gardner, formerly secretary of the California Mission, was chosen as stake clerk. The only change in this stake presidency that took place prior to the close of 1930 was the release of second counselor Clyde W. Lindsay Nov. 16, 1930, and the appointment of Eugene Hilton as his successor. On Dec. 31, 1930, the total membership of the San Francisco Stake was 3,534, including 734 children. Among the brethren of the Priesthood were three Patriarchs, namely, Wm. E. Potts, Gaston L. Braley and Norman B. Phillips.
