Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

San Francisco Ward

SAN FRANCISCO WARD, San Francisco Stake, San Francisco Co., California, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of San Francisco lying north of Market and Oak streets and the Golden Gate Park. The city of San Francisco had a population of 634,394 in 1930.

When the San Francisco Stake of Zion was organized July 10, 1927, the San Francisco Branch, which hitherto had formed a part of the California Mission, was organized into a bishop's ward, with Jay C. Newman as Bishop. He was succeeded Oct 30, 1927, by Claude W. Nalder, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the San Francisco Ward had a membership of 412 souls, including 50 children.

San Francisco has been connected with the history of the Latter-day Saints almost from the very beginning.

A company of saints which sailed from New York, by way of Cape Horn, arrived in the Bay of San Francisco July 31, 1846, and soon afterwards turned the California or Spanish town Yerba Buena into the Anglo-Saxon town of San Francisco. These saints, who made the voyage in the ship "Brooklyn," under the direction of Samuel Brannan, constituted the first branch of Latter-day Saints in California. Samuel Brannan took charge of the branch until 1847, when he was succeeded by Addison Pratt, who had returned to America from his mission to the Society Islands. A branch organization was kept up in San Francisco until 1858, when, on account of the Johnston Army troubles, all the Latter-day Saint organizations in California were temporarily discontinued, the saints removing to Utah. While there were a few scattered saints in California continuously from 1858 to 1894, there was no permanent Church organization there. After opening the California Mission anew in 1893, the saints in San Francisco and Oakland were organized as a branch of the Church, and on March 28, 1894, the name of the Oakland Branch was changed to San Francisco Branch with a presiding Elder; it has had a continued existence ever since.
