Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

San Juan Stake of Zion

SAN JUAN STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in San Juan and Grand counties, Utah, with headquarters at Blanding. The stake, in 1930, consisted of only three organized bishop's wards, namely, Blanding, Monticello and Moab. The great majority of the inhabitants within the limits of the San Juan Stake are Latter-day Saint farmers and stock-raisers. All the settlements are surrounded by extensive deserts, and two of them (Blanding and Monticello) are far removed from any railroad communication.

The first attempt made by Latter-day Saints to colonize in that part of Utah now included in the San Juan Stake of Zion took place in 1855, when the authorities of the Church called a number of missionaries, mostly from Manti, Sanpete Co., to locate a settlement among the Indians in the beautiful little valley in which Moab is now situated. This mission, known in the history of the Church as the Elk Mountain Mission, left Manti May 21, 1855, and arrived on the present site of Moab June 12, 1855. The missionaries immediately went to work building a fort, planting crops and assisting the Indians in every way possible. All went well until Sept. 23, 1855, when the Indians went on the war-path, attacked the settlement, killed James W. Hunt, Ed. Edwards and Wm. Behunin, and compelled the settlers to vacate, which they did Sept. 25, 1855. From that time until 1879 no attempt was made to plant colonies in the southeast part of Utah, but in the latter part of 1879 a number of families were called from Parowan and Cedar City to locate a settlement on the San Juan River. In obedience to that call, a company of settlers, under the direction of Silas S. Smith, started from the Iron County settlements and without much difficulty crossed the mountains into Potatoe Valley, where Escalante is now situated, but from there on, in making a road through the desert to the Colorado River, and especially in crossing the Colorado River and then on the east side, making new roads through a badly broken up country, these pioneer settlers experienced more hardships than any other colony known in the history of the Church who have founded settlements in the Rocky Mountains. However, after extreme suffering and hardships, these sturdy pioneers succeeded in reaching a point on the San Juan River, where they located a colony known as Bluff City. In due course of time Monticello and Moab, in Utah, Fruitland, in New Mexico, and Mancos, in Colorado, were settled by Latter-day Saints, and these were organized into the San Juan Stake of Zion Sept. 23, 1883, with Platte D. Lyman as president. He was succeeded, temporarily, in 1884 by Jens Nielsen as presiding Bishop, but in 1885 Francis A. Hammond was called from Huntsville, Weber Co., Utah, to preside over the San Juan Stake, with William Halls as first and William Adams as second counselor. In 1897 Platte D. Lyman succeeded William Adams as second counselor. In 1898 Platte D. Lyman was succeeded by Wayne H. Redd as second counselor. Pres. Francis A. Hammond was accidentally killed Nov. 27, 1900, and at a meeting held in June, 1901, Platte D. Lyman was chosen as president of the San Juan Stake, with William Halls as first and Wayne H. Redd as second counselor. Platte D. Lyman, who died Nov. 13, 1901, was succeeded in the presidency of the San Juan Stake by Walter C. Lyman, who chose William Halls and Wayne H. Redd as his counselors. This presidency stood intact until Nov. 13, 1910, when Lemuel H. Redd, jun., was chosen as president of the stake, with David Hails as first and Albert R. Lyman as second counselor.

On May 21, 1912, the San Juan Stake was divided, and the settlements of the saints in New Mexico and Colorado were organized as the Young Stake, on which occasion David Halls, who had acted as first counselor in the San Juan Stake, became a member of the presidency in the new stake, and Albert R. Lyman was promoted from second to first counselor and George Adams chosen as second counselor in the San Juan Stake. Pres. Lemuel H. Redd, jun., died June 1, 1923, and the counselors took charge until Nov. 25, 1923, when Wayne H. Redd was chosen as president of the stake, with Albert R. Lyman as first and Oscar W. McConkie as second counselor. Joseph B. Harris succeeded Oscar W. McConkie as second counselor Dec. 6, 1925. In December, 1928, Albert R. Lyman was released and Joseph B. Harris was promoted to first counselor and Leonard K. Jones chosen as second counselor to Pres. Redd. Wayne H. Redd presided over the San Juan Stake Dec. 31, 1930, with Joseph B. Harris as first and Leonard K. Jones as second counselor. The first stake clerk of the San Juan Stake was Charles E. Walton, who in 1897 was succeeded by Lemuel H. Redd, jun., who in 1901 was succeeded by William Halls, who in 1904 was succeeded by Lemuel H. Redd, jun. (serving a second term), who in 1905 was succeeded by Peter H. Allen, who in 1923 was succeeded by B. Frank Redd, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On this date the San Juan Stake had a total membership of 1,925, including 348 children. Among the Priesthood there were four Patriarchs, namely, Kumen Jones, Wayne H. Redd, Alexander Jameson and Benjamin D. Black.
