Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Santa Clara Ward

SANTA CLARA WARD, St. George Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Santa Clara, which is situated on the left bank or the east side of the Santa Clara Creek, about five miles northwest of St. George, in a narrow valley, which at the place where the village is situated is only three-quarters of a mile wide. The farming lands lie both below and above the settlement, in which there is only one principal street, running east and west. The farms at Santa Clara are necessarily small, as the farming land is very limited indeed, but the small area of land is cultivated carefully by the settlers. Santa Clara, a veritable oasis in the desert, is noted for its fine quality of fruit. Grapes and almonds abound, besides apples, peaches, plums, cherries, pears, etc. As a rule four crops of lucern are raised every season. All the inhabitants of Santa Clara are members of the Church and most of them are Swiss or descendants of Swiss saints. Most of the houses in the settlement are built of adobes, but there are also some rock and frame buildings. Plaster of paris and isinglass are found in the mountains west of the settlement. The farms and gardens of Santa Clara are irrigated from the waters of Santa Clara Creek.

Apostle Parley P. Pratt's exploring company, in their travels through southern Utah, went as far south in January, 1850, as the mouth of the Santa Clara Creek, and since that time the Santa Clara Valley and its vicinity has been well known to the Mormon population of Utah. It was a favorite rendezvous of the Indians before the arrival of the whites. After the founding of Harmony in 1852, an exploring company was sent down to the Santa Clara and other parts of the country along the Rio Virgen, and some of the brethren called on missions to southern Utah in October, 1853, arrived on the Santa Clara stream in the fall of that year. Other missionaries, under Elder Rufus C. Allen, arrived in the spring of 1854. These missionaries had been organized in Salt Lake City under the direction of Apostles Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt, and sent out under the presidency of Rufus C. Allen. The other missionaries in the company were David Lewis, Samuel F. Atwood, Jacob Hamblin, Samuel Knight, Lorenzo W. Roundy, Thales H. Haskell, Richard S. Robinson, Ira Hatch, Amos G. Thornton, Prime T. Coleman, David W. Tullis, Benjamin Knell, Augustus P. Hardy, Clark Ames, Hyrum Burgess, Thomas D. Brown, Robert Ritchey, John R. Murdock, John Lott, Elnathan Eldredge, Isaac Riddle and William Henefer. These first missionaries, called to labor among the Indians, spent some time at Harmony, where they helped to build a fort, but in June, 1854, they arrived on the Santa Clara Creek, where they found a camp of Indians numbering nearly 200 souls. These Indians were very friendly and the missionaries at once commenced assisting the Indians in sowing and planting and otherwise instructing them in civilized ways. Santa Clara continued principally as an Indian missionary station. Jacob Hamblin succeeded Rufus C. Allen as president of the mission. In 1856 the site for a fort was selected half a mile above the present Santa Clara village, or about a quarter of a mile above the log cabin formerly built by the missionaries. This fort, as well as the pioneers can remember, enclosed an area of 100 feet square. The hammer-faced rock walls were two feet thick, and twelve feet high. The fort was built in three weeks, and was afterwards declared by Pres. Brigham Young to be the best built fort in Utah.

The influence of the missionaries kept increasing for good and the Indians, realizing their own low estate, improved their mode of life. Jacob Hamblin was appointed president of the Indian Mission in 1857 and Zadok Judd was appointed Bishop of the temporal affairs of the place. Assisted by the missionaries, the Indians usually raised good crops. In 1858 some of the saints who had vacated San Bernardino, Calif., settled at Santa Clara, strengthening the town, and assisted to build a school house outside of the fort. From Santa Clara Jacob Hamblin was sent on a mission to the Moquis Indians in 1858. A post office was established in Santa Clara in 1859, in which year also Pres. Brigham Young visited the settlement. At the general conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City in October, 1861, a large number of families were called from the northern settlements to locate in southern Utah. Among them was the so-called Swiss Company, which arrived at Santa Clara Nov. 28, 1861. These saints were placed in charge of Daniel Bonelli, one of the missionaries called to settle in southern Utah. The arrival of the Swiss Company gave a fresh impetus to the settlement.

Santa Clara was partly destroyed by floods in January, 1862. Rufus C. Allen, the first president of the Santa Clara Indian Mission, was succeeded by Jacob Hamblin, who presided until 1862, when Edward Bunker was called by the Church authorities to Santa Clara to preside as Bishop. Under his administration many improvements were made, water ditches extended, and a new town plot surveyed on the present site of Santa Clara. Bro. Bunker presided until 1877, when he left Santa Clara to locate the settlement of Bunkerville. He was succeeded as Bishop of Santa Clara by Marius Ensign, who in 1884 was succeeded by John G. Hafen, who in 1912 was succeeded by Edward R. Frei, who in 1927 was succeeded by Vivian J. Frei, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had a membership of 313, including 63 children. The total population of Santa Clara Precinct in 1930 was 378, of which 249 resided in the Santa Clara village.
