Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Scipio Ward

SCIPIO WARD, Millard Stake, Millard Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Scipio, in Round Valley, in the extreme east central part of Millard County. The center of the ward is 14 miles northeast of Holden, 25 miles northeast of Fillmore, the headquarters of the stake, and 130 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. Scipio is the coldest settled place in Millard County, in consequence of which fruits, grown extensively in other parts of the county, will not grow there, but good grain is produced. Nearly all the inhabitants are members of the Church.

Pres. Brigham Young and party often passed through Round Valley on their travels to and from the settlements in southern Utah, and even then the locality was considered as a desirable location for a settlement. Yet actual settlement did not commence until 1860, when water for irrigation purposes was secured by the construction of a dam at the lower end of the valley. In 1861 Apostle George A. Smith visited Round Valley and organized the settlers there as a branch of the Church, with Benjamin H. Johnson as presiding teacher pro tem. Later the same year Elias F. Pearson was appointed president of the branch. In 1862 a school house was built, which was also used as a meeting house.

In 1863 Pres. Young again passed through the valley and located a townsite, to which he gave the name of Scipio, after Scipio Africanus, the great Roman general. When Scipio was first settled a lake in the lower part of the valley, about two miles long, supplied water for the settlement, but later as the supply was taken care of some distance above, this lake dried up. As the lake bottom was found to consist of valuable and productive farming land, it was surveyed into regular farming lots, which subsequently yielded grain and cereals in great abundance. Jesse B. Martin succeeded Elias F. Pearson as presiding Elder in 1863. He was succeeded in 1867 by Daniel Thompson, who acted until 1877, when the Scipio Ward was organized with Daniel Thompson as Bishop. In 1882 Bishop Thompson was called into the stake presidency and was succeeded as Bishop of Scipio by Thomas Yates, who was succeeded in 1902 by Orvil L. Thompson, who, being called into the presidency of the stake, was succeeded in 1907 by William R. Thompson, who was succeeded in 1918 by William Ira Hatch, who died Jan. 21, 1919, and was succeeded by Bert L. Robins, who was succeeded in 1925 by Arthur Charles Brown, who was succeeded in 1928 by Lars Jensen, who was succeeded by James Wells Robins, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had a membership of 552, including 125 children. The Scipio Precinct had a total population of 565 in 1930.
