Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Bluff Ward

BLUFF WARD, San Juan Stake, San Juan Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in the once prosperous little town of Bluff (sometimes called Bluff City) situated on the San Juan River, the first seat of San Juan County, 47 miles southwest of Monticello, 110 miles by nearest road south of Moab, Grand Co., Utah, 150 miles by nearest road southwest of Thompson Springs, the nearest railroad station on the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, and 350 miles by railroad and nearest road southeast of Salt Lake City. Nearly all the inhabitants of the Bluff Ward were Latter-day Saints engaged mostly in farming, stock-raising and horticulture. The sheep industry, especially, proved a profitable business to many of the inhabitants. A co-operative store, which supplied the inhabitants in that region of country and which also dealt extensively in stock and sheep, paid an annual dividend of 40 per cent. Considerable alfalfa was raised and splendid fruit, all of which found a ready market at Durango, Colo.

The town of Bluff was strung out below the high bluffs skirting the San Juan River; the cottonwood trees growing in great quantities along the banks of the river served as fuel. The cliffs surrounding the bluffs are 300 feet high. About four miles from the town there is an ancient Indian cave-dwelling, containing 18 or 20 rooms. Some trouble was experienced with the Navajo and Ute Indians in the early days.

Bluff City was founded by the pioneers of San Juan County in 1880 and Jens Nielson acted as Bishop of the settlement from the beginning. (See history of San Juan Stake). The pioneers of Bluff were very enterprising and frugal and built up a beautiful town containing many fine residences and showing prosperity on every hand. But from the beginning the pioneers of Bluff experienced hardships and losses through the overflow of the San Juan River which frequently destroyed the dams erected by the people and washed away much of their valuable land. Hence, attention was drawn to the highlands lying northward toward the Blue Mountains, where a new settlement was founded called Grayson (afterwards named Blanding) where a prosperous settlement has since been built. Most of the inhabitants of Bluff moved to the new location (see Blanding). Bishop Jens Nielson was succeeded in 1906 by Lemuel H. Redd, jun., who in 1910 was succeeded by Kumen Jones, who in 1921 was succeeded by John L. Hunt (presiding Elder), who in 1923 was succeeded by Daniel Perkins (Bishop), who presided until June 17, 1928, when the few remaining saints in Bluff were organized as a dependent branch of the Blanding Ward, with Uriah A. Nielson as presiding Elder. In 1930 he took charge of the few families who still remained in the old town of Bluff. In that year there were only 70 people left on the old Bluff townsite, but many of the fine substantial brick houses, which had been erected by the early settlers, still stood there in mute testimony of a town which had seen better days.
