Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Seminaries

SEMINARIES (Latter-day Saint). For many years after the arrival of the pioneers in Utah in 1847, the Church was responsible for the secular education of the young people and established grade schools, high schools and universities. But later when the territorial and, of more recent years, the state boards of education established institutions of learning, a duplication of secular studies at the expense of the Church was avoided. But as religious education is not emphasized in state schools, the necessity of supplying, especially to the youth in the adolescent age, this most important branch of education, L. D. S. seminaries were commenced in 1921 in buildings secured or erected in close proximity to the various high schools. Here, under efficient teachers, courses of study in Old Testament history, New Testament history and Church history and doctrine were offered and members of the Church were urged to advise their sons and daughters to take advantage of the opportunity offered without charge and for their benefit, and also given freely to non-members of the Church. The aims of these institutions are to promote a knowledge of the Bible and other standard Church works, to establish attitudes that will lead to reverence for God, respect for authority and promote good citizenship. The students are also trained in leadership, especially in regard to officiating in the ordinances of the gospel and acting as executives in all worthy enterprises. Realizing the advantage of such instruction, the cooperation of the state institutions has been secured and credit towards graduation is allowed by most of the state schools to seminary students taking Bible classes.

At the close of 1930 there were seminaries in American Fork, Beaver, Bicknell, Blanding, Brigham City, Castle Dale, Cedar City, Coalville, Circleville, Delta, Ephraim, Escalante, Ferron, Fillmore, Grantsville, Garland, Gunnison, Heber, Hyrum, Hinckley, Huntington, Hurricane, Kanab, Kamas, Kaysville, Lehi, Logan, Magna, Manti, Monroe, Morgan, Moroni, Mount Pleasant, Murray, Nephi, Ogden, Panguitch, Payson, Pleasant Grove, Provo, Richmond, Richfield, Roosevelt, Salt Lake City, Salina, Sandy, Spanish Fork, Springville, Tooele and Vernal in Utah; in Ammon, Blackfoot, Burley, Driggs, Grace, Heyburn, Malad, Menan, Montpelier, Oakley, Paris, Pocatello, Preston, Rexburg, Rigby, Rupert, Shelley and Sugar City in Idaho; at Lovell, Cowley, and Lyman in Wyoming; at Mesa, Phoenix, Snowflake and St. Johns in Arizona, and at Manassa and Sanford in Colorado.

Institutes, giving the same courses of instruction in an advanced form to college students, have been established in Logan, near the Utah Agricultural College; at Moscow, near the University of Idaho, and at Pocatello, near the southern branch of the University of Idaho.
