Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sevier Stake of Zion

SEVIER STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the west-central part, and also southeast part of Sevier County, and a small part of Piute County, Utah, with headquarters at Richfield, where there is a fine stake tabernacle and stake office building with accommodations for the stake presidency and the High Council of the stake, and where most of the stake conferences and other general gatherings convene. Nearly all the inhabitants of the Sevier country are farmers and stockraisers, and water for irrigation purposes is obtained, mainly, from the Sevier River and from smaller streams, which enter into the Sevier Valley, both from the east and the west, and from the Otter Creek Reservoir in Piute County, which was built by counsel of the Church authorities in 1907-1921, and was one of the first reservoirs built for irrigation purposes in the United States. The Sevier Valley has an excellent climate; the winters are mild, as a rule, and the summers not very hot. The surrounding hills and mountains afford good grazing for stock. The Sevier Stake consists of eight bishop's wards, viz.: Glenwood, Koosharem, Richfield 1st, Richfield 2nd, Richfield 3rd, Richfield 4th, Venice and Sigurd.

In the summer of 1863 Apostle George A. Smith, then living in Provo, Utah, sent George W. Bean and other brethren to explore the valley of the Sevier in south-central Utah. These explorers, in traveling southward, reached Gunnison, where they found Barney or Elijah Ward, an old mountaineer who had lived in the country a long time and had raised a family of children by a Shoshone (Indian) wife. Barney spoke of the Sevier Valley as the finest country in Utah for wintering stock. Thus encouraged, the party went on, explored almost every nook and corner in the valley and reported in favor of making settlements of the saints in that part of Utah. As Elder Orson Hyde, at that time, presided over all the settlements in Sanpete Valley, the actual settlement of the Sevier Valley was assigned to him by the Church authorities at Salt Lake City. And so a number of families were called from Sanpete Valley and elsewhere for that purpose. Among them was Robert Wilson Glenn, who, in 1864, located on the east side of the Sevier River, in what was called Glenn's Cove, afterwards known as Glencoe, and still later Glenwood. Richfield was settled by Albert Lewis in January, 1864, and Alma (Monroe) by Moses Gifford and others about the same time. A month later Salina was settled by Peter Rasmussen and others. During the year 1864 other settlements were formed in the upper valleys on the Sevier, such as Marysvale, Circleville and Panguitch. By united efforts and determination by these pioneers, the settlements made a good start, and in January, 1865, the Utah Legislature organized Sevier County, locating the county seat at Richfield. The so-called Black Hawk War broke out in April, 1865; it commenced in Sanpete County, where hostile Indians killed Peter Ludvigsen, a young man, near Twelve Mile Creek. The Indians then headed for Salina Canyon, Where they came upon Barney Ward, the old mountaineer, and James Anderson, whom they killed April 10, 1865, and drove stock owned by these men to the stronghold of the Indians, by way of Salina Pass. The people of Sanpete, being aroused, organized a party of militia, which under the leadership of Col. Reddick W. Allred started in pursuit. They followed the Indians up Salina Canyon, and at a point near the Alum Beds, about 12 miles up the canyon from the present Salina, the Indians attacked the brethren and from ambush killed William Kearns of Gunnison and Jens Sørensen of Ephraim, and wounded others. On July 14, 1865, Robert Gillespie was murdered at Gravelly Ford, eight miles south of Salina. The next day Anthony Robinson of Alma (Monroe) was found in his wagon, murdered by the Indians. The news of these tragedies seemed to raise the martial spirit in Sanpete, and General Warren S. Snow with about a hundred men marched towards Fish Lake, and near the head of Grass Valley they had a fight with the Indians, a number of whom were killed, and one of the whites severely wounded. On July 26, 1865, a hostile raid was made by Indians on the Glenwood settlement, and one of the brethren was badly wounded. About this time General Snow, with 103 men, went up the Sevier River as far as Circleville, then up East Fork of the Sevier, where he got on the trail of the Indians, which he followed across the mountains into the lower end of Rabbit Valley, where they had a skirmish with the Indians during which some of the brethren were wounded.

While the year 1866 opened peacefully for the people of Sevier, the Indians renewed their hostilities in April, and swept the range near Salina of all the cattle and horses. As the prospect of a continuous Indian war faced the settlers, troops were ordered from other parts of Utah to protect the people in the southern settlements, the Church furnishing forage and food supplies as far as possible. The people of Glenwood, living so near the mountains on the east, being exposed to Indian raids, moved their women and children to Richfield April 20, 1866. On the morning of April 24, 1866, before daylight, the Indians made a raid on Alma (now Monroe), shot down cattle, hogs and sheep in the town and then moved southward to Marysvale, where they killed Albert Lewis, April 22, 1866, and wounded other brethren. In the meantime the Indians continued very active and carried on their depredations in Sanpete and Utah counties, as well as keeping Sevier County in constant agitation. In June, 1866, the Indians raided Round Valley, in Millard County, killing James R. Ivie and driving off four or five hundred head of cattle and horses. Gen. Pace, being near Gunnison, made an unsuccessful attempt to head off the raiders at Gravelly Ford. About this time Gen. Daniel H. Wells, who had made a tour of the country, planned an expedition to Fish Lake, which, however, brought no result. On June 23, 1866, Gen. Wells, who had also visited Circleville, met with the saints of Richfield, and advised the people to abandon that outpost and all other exposed localities and concentrate at the stronger places. At Glenwood he laid out a fort for the convenience of the settlers, and left a company of militia stationed there to protect the citizens while they built a fort wall. Gen. Wells also advised the people of Alma (Monroe) to remove their women and children to Richfield and assist in building a rock wall there enclosing the public square. Military operations were carried on by Gen. Pace and details of troops from the northern counties until cold weather caused the Indians to retire for the season. Thus matters stood at the close of 1866 in the Sevier country. On the morning of March 21, 1867, just at daybreak, three persons were killed while on their way from Richfield to Glenwood, namely, Jens P. Petersen and wife, and a young lady named Mary Smith. According to counsel from Church and military authorities, all the settlements on the Sevier River except Gunnison were vacated. About 200 teams were sent from Sanpete to remove the people from Richfield, Alma (Monroe) and Glenwood, and by April 25, 1867, all were removed to places of safety. On April 29, 1867, General Warren B. Pace with his militia established headquarters on a small hill immediately east of the fort built at Gunnison. They erected a stone fort.

In May a party of the former settlers of Richfield and vicinity, accompanied by an escort of militia, made a trip to the vacated settlements on the Sevier, returning with a quantity of grain and some of their property. No hostile Indians were seen by the members of this expedition, but a number of chickens, pigs, and cats were found in the deserted town. Silence reigned throughout the abandoned settlements, causing a peculiar, solemn, awe-inspiring feeling to come upon the visitors. A similar expedition was made later. In 1868 an attempt was made to resettle the Sevier country by a party from Sanpete County, in charge of Frederick Olson of Springtown, who had acted as presiding Elder at Alma (Monroe) before that settlement was broken up by the Indians. But this party, on reaching Cedar Ridge, about eight miles north of Richfield, were suddenly attacked by Indians who emerged from cedars above the road. A battle ensued, during which Lars Alexander Justeson was killed outright and others of the party were wounded. There were no women or children in the company and the 25 men constituting the party, mostly from Gunnison, Fountain Green and Springtown, were glad to escape with their lives and return to their homes in Sanpete Valley. A company of men visited Richfield in August, 1870, and spent a week there engaged in putting up hay. On Nov. 5, 1870, a few families arrived at Richfield to re-settle the place. These families were consequently the first to make Richfield a permanent settlement. At a meeting held Dec. 18, 1870, William Morrison was sustained as president of the settlement, with Niels Mortensen (Petersen) and Stephen M. Farnsworth as counselors. Nelson Higgins was chosen as Bishop. Eight families spent the winter of 1870-1871 in Richfield. Early in 1871 Glenwood, Alma (Monroe) and Salina were also re-settled.

In July, 1872, Richfield had 150 families, Monroe 80 families, Glenwood 75 families, Salina 33 families, Annabella Springs 14 heads of families, and Clear Creek nine heads of families. These settlements have had a continued existence ever since. On May 18, 1872, Joseph A. Young, a son of Pres. Brigham Young, was appointed to preside over the settlements in the Sevier Valley, and on Sunday, May 24, 1874, an important meeting was held at Richfield, attended by Apostles Orson Pratt and John Taylor, on which occasion the Sevier settlements were organized as the Sevier Stake of Zion with Joseph A. Young as president and Albert K. Thurber as his counselor. In 1874 the United Order was universally introduced among the saints in the Sevier Valley, and considerable work was done under that organization in the different settlements, but without permanent success. Pres. Joseph A. Young died suddenly in Manti Aug. 5, 1875; he was succeeded by Albert K. Thurber as president of the stake. On July 15, 1877, a more complete organization of the Sevier Stake took place when Franklin Spencer was chosen as president of the stake with Albert K. Thurber as first and William H. Seegmiller as second counselor. A High Council and many other stake officers were chosen. Pres. Spencer was succeeded in 1884 by Albert K. Thurber (serving a second term), who in 1888 was succeeded by William H. Seegmiller, who in 1910 was succeeded by Robert D. Young, who still presided Dec. 31, 1930.

Following is a list of other presiding stake officers of the Sevier Stake: First counselors: Albert K. Thurber, 1874-1875; 1877-1887; William H. Seegmiller, 1887-1888; George W. Bean, 1888-1894; William H. Clark, 1894-1902; Joseph S. Horne, 1902-1910, and James M. Peterson, 1910-1930. Second counselors: William H. Seegmiller, 1877-1887; William Henry Clark, 1887-1894; Joseph Smith Horne, 1894-1902; James Christiansen, 1902-1904; Robert D. Young, 1904-1910; John Christiansen, 1910-1930, and Fred Horace Gunn, 1930. Stake clerks: William G. Baker, 1874-1877; William Morrison, 1877-1887; Theodore Brandley, 1887-1892; Samuel D. Clark, 1892-1893; George W. Bean, 1893-1895; Simon Christensen, 1895-1902; George M. Jones, 1906-1922; Willard H. Robinson, 1922-1929, and William A. Seegmiller, 1929-1930. On Dec. 31, 1930, the Sevier Stake had 3,641 members, including 741 children. Among the Priesthood were four Patriarchs, viz.: Joseph Smith Horne, Herbert H. Bell, John Dastrup and Hans J. Hansen.

At a stake conference of the Sevier Stake held Jan. 30, 1921, the Sevier Stake of Zion was divided into three stakes, the south part of the same being organized as the South Sevier Stake, and the north part as the North Sevier Stake, while the central part was continued with the old name. After this separation the Sevier Stake consisted of the following wards, to-wit: Richfield 1st, Richfield 2nd, Richfield 3rd, Glenwood, Venice, and Koosharem; also the Burrville Branch. These wards had a total Church population of 3,641. In the organization of the South Sevier Stake on the same date the following wards were taken from the Sevier Stake: Annabella, Elsinore, Inverury, Joseph, Marysvale, Monroe North, Monroe South, and Sevier. The North Sevier Stake was organized with the following wards, which formerly belonged to the Sevier Stake: Aurora, Redmond, Salina 1st, Salina 2nd, Sigurd and Vermillion.
