Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sharon

SHARON, Windsor Co., Vermont, the birthplace of Joseph Smith the Prophet, is a farming district in a mountainous country, with a small village called Sharon and scattered settlers. The village is situated on White River and is a station on the White River Railroad, about ten miles northwest of the White River Junction on the Boston and Maine Railroad, and six miles southeast of South Royalton. The place where the Prophet Joseph Smith was born Dec. 23, 1805, is about three miles northwest of the village of Sharon. In 1905 the Church bought the old Mack Farm, containing about 200 acres of land, on which to erect a monument in memory of the Prophet. This monument stands approximately upon the spot on which the Prophet Joseph Smith first saw the light of day in mortality, and a memorial cottage was erected on the site of the home in which he was born. Both the monument and cottage were dedicated with simple but appropriate ceremonies Dec. 23, 1905, that date being the 100th anniversary of the Prophet's birth. The shaft is 38 1/2 feet high, each foot representing a year of the Prophet's life.

The memorial farm contains about 250 acres of land consisting of farming land, meadows, pastures and woodland. The memorial cottage stands on high ground on the boundary line between Sharon and South Royalton, but the exact spot upon which the Prophet was born is in Sharon. Hence, it is historically correct to say that the Prophet Joseph Smith was born in Sharon. The monument, which is said to be the largest polished marble shaft in the world, stands immediately northeast of the cottage.

After the dedication of the monument in 1905, Elder Junius F. Wells, under whose supervision the monument and cottage were built, took charge of the premises until 1911, when Franklin Brown of Salt Lake City was placed in charge of the farm for the Church. Bro. Brown died Jan. 1, 1919, and Elder Heber Chase Smith was then called to superintend and take care of both the cottage and farm, which had been enlarged by new purchases. He was succeeded May 19, 1924, by Angus J. Cannon, who had charge in 1930. The main products of the farm are hay, corn and vegetables, and the farm in 1928 was stocked with Jersey cattle.

Thousands of people visit the place annually, both Mormons and non-Mormons, and, as a rule, even non-Mormon visitors listen attentively to the information given them by those in charge, who represent the Church, and good impressions are made and the visitors leave with the understanding that Mormonism is a matter of greater moment than they had previously imagined.
