Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sharon Stake of Zion

SHARON STAKE OF ZION embraces the Latter-day Saints residing on both sides of the Provo River and on the so-called Provo Bench, in Utah County, Utah. North it extends to the Timpanogos Stake, east to the Wasatch Mountains or the Utah-Wasatch County line; south to the Utah Stake or the north boundary of Provo City, and west to the Utah Lake. It embraces the following organized wards: Edgemont, Grand View, Lake View, Pleasant View, Sharon, Timpanogos and Vineyard. The headquarters of the stake are in the Timpanogos Ward, the center of which is five miles northwest of Provo and 42 miles southeast of Salt Lake City. At Timpanogos there is a Church building used conjointly as a seminary and for accommodation of the stake presidency and High Council.

At a quarterly conference of the Utah Stake held at Provo Sept. 15, 1929, attended by Apostle Stephen L Richards and the Utah Stake presidency, the Utah Stake of Zion was divided and a new stake, embracing the north part of the Utah Stake, was organized into a new stake of Zion named Sharon, to include the following wards which had formerly belonged to the Utah Stake: Edgemont, Grand View, Lake View, Pleasant View, Sharon, Timpanogos and Vineyard, with a total Church membership (including children) of 3,022. This left in the former Utah Stake the following wards: Provo 1st, Provo 2nd, Provo 3rd, Provo 4th, Provo 5th, Provo 6th, Manavu, Pioneer and Bonneville. The division of the Utah Stake was deemed consistent with the policy of the Church in favor of smaller units, as the Utah Stake, before this division, was one of the largest in the entire Church, having a membership of 12,276. Arthur Vivian Watkins of the Sharon Ward was sustained as president of the new stake; Samuel H. Blake, Bishop of the Vineyard Ward, was chosen as first counselor, and Adelbert Bigler, second counselor in the Edgemont Ward, as second counselor. Alex Ferdinand Andreasen was chosen as stake clerk. On Dec. 31, 1930, the stake had a membership of 3,087, including 702 children.
