Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Shelley Stake of Zion

SHELLEY STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the north central part of Bingham County, and a small part of Bonneville County, Idaho, with headquarters at Shelley, where there is a fine modern tabernacle and a stake office affording accommodations for the stake presidency and High Council. With the exception of business men located mostly in the town of Shelley, nearly the entire population within the limits of the Shelley Stake are Latter-day Saint farmers and stock-raisers. The stake extends northward to the Idaho Falls Stake, east to the mountains, south to the Blackfoot Stake, and west to the desert. The stake consists of nine wards, namely, Basalt, Firth, Goshen, Jameston, Kimball, Shelley 1st, Shelley 2nd, Taylor and Woodville.

At a stake conference of the Blackfoot Stake held Aug. 16, 1914, attended by Apostles Francis M. Lyman and George F. Richards, the Blackfoot Stake was divided and the north part of the same organized into a new stake called the Shelley Stake, with Joseph H. Dye as president, Warren James Mallory 1st and Wilford M. Christensen 2nd counselor, and Frederick Christian Mickelsen, stake clerk. The following wards which had belonged to the Blackfoot Stake were taken from said stake and organized into the Shelley Stake: Basalt, Goshen, Jameston, Kimball, Shelley 1st, Shelley 2nd, Taylor and Woodville. The stake secured the so-called creamery property for a site on which to build a stake tabernacle Jan. 14, 1920. Work of construction was commenced June 29, 1927, and pushed forward with vigor and determination. The building, which is 56 by 99 feet, was nearly finished in 1930. The walls rise 32 feet from the foundation to the square. The main auditorium can seat 1,200 people, with provisions for a gallery, when needed. The social hall measures 54 by 90 feet, with a very fine maple floor. In the center between the auditorium and the social hall there is a proscenium arch facing the hall, making the entire social hall a stage, if needed, with dressing rooms. In the basement there are 17 large class rooms besides the president's office, stake clerk's office, vault for records, a banquet hall, a spacious kitchen, a baptismal font, a large seminary class room, dressing rooms, and rest rooms. The building is heated with the latest and most improved steam-heating plant.

On Feb. 17, 1924, Pres. Joseph H. Dye was released, together with his counselors (Warren J. Mallory and Wilford M. Christensen), and James Berkeley Larsen was sustained as president of the Shelley Stake, with Wilford M. Christensen as first and E. Milton Christensen as second counselor. Francis M. Davis succeeded E. Milton Christensen as second counselor Nov. 3, 1929. Fred C. Mickelsen, the first clerk of the Shelley Stake, died Aug. 20, 1928, and was succeeded by Louis Ivan Jensen, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. James Berkeley Larsen presided Dec. 31, 1930, with Wilford M. Christensen as first and Francis Marion Davis as second, counselor. On that date the Shelley Stake had a total membership of 3,397, including 733 children. Among the Priesthood were three Patriarchs, namely, Adolph M. Nielson, Hans O. Weeding and Joseph H. Dean.
