Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Showlow Ward

SHOWLOW WARD, Snowflake Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a large area of country extending north and south along Showlow Creek and its branches, near the top of the Mogollon Mountains, about 22 miles south of Snowflake, the stake headquarters, and has several dependent branches, among which are Ellsworth, Woodland and Pinetop.

In 1876 Alfred Cluff and David E. Adams, members of Allen's Camp on the Little Colorado, having become dissatisfied with their location on the river, went up to the present site of Showlow to work for a Mr. Chas. E. Cooley, who owned the property as part of his ranch. Here they were joined by Brother George Buckler, who also worked for Mr. Cooley. Some time later, these brethren rented the ranch of Mr. Cooley. In 1878 Merrit Staley, Joseph H. Frisby and Moses Cluff arrived at Showlow. Brother Cluff located 1 1/2 miles above the Cooley ranch and commenced to hold meetings with the few saints in the district, he having been appointed to preside over them. In 1880 Edson Whipple, one of the original pioneers of Utah, located with his family two miles below Cooley's ranch. There he was joined by three of his sons (Albert, Edson, jun., and Willard). They built a large block house with port holes as a protection against Indians and renegade whites, who infested the locality.

On May 13, 1884, at a meeting held at "Edson Whipple's Fort," attended by Jesse N. Smith, president of the Eastern Arizona Stake, a ward was organized called Forest Dale with Hans Hansen as Bishop. The name was, however, soon afterward changed to Showlow. Brother Hansen acted as Bishop of the Showlow Ward until his death, which occurred about 1901, after which the ward organization was discontinued. Later more land was purchased in the vicinity by Latter-day Saints and Showlow Ward was organized in 1903 with James C. Owens as Bishop. In 1915 the saints erected a substantial meeting house, built of cement blocks. This edifice has an auditorium seating 500 people and contains many modern conveniences, including a stage. Bishop Owens was succeeded in 1919 by John Lorenzo Willis, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Showlow Ward had 298 members, including 82 children.
