Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Siam Mission

SIAM MISSION (The). Siam is an Asiatic kingdom, situated north of the Gulf of Siam, which separates the Malay from the Indo-Chinese Peninsula. Its area is about 195,000 square miles. The population is about 10,000, 000, over two thirds of whom are Siamese. The religion of the country is Buddhism. The capital or chief port is Bangkok; the most important exports are rice and teak lumber. The King of Siam is assisted by a cabinet made up of various heads of departments. There is also a legislative council of about forty ministers.

At a special two days conference commenced in Great Salt Lake City Aug. 28, 1852, 106 Elders were called to go on foreign missions, among whom Chauncey W. West, Elam Luddington, Benjamin F. Dewey and Levi Savage were called to Siam. In company with other missionaries these four Elders traveled with teams to San Bernardino, Calif., where they arrived Dec. 3, 1852. In California they were aided financially by the saints and friends, especially by John M. Homer. Nine of the missionaries bound for India and the four for Siam secured passage on the ship "Monsoon," which arrived at Calcutta, India, April 26, 1853. On their arrival in Calcutta, it was discovered that transportation to Siam was impossible on account of strained relations between the Burmese government and the East Indian Company, and so, in council with Nathaniel V. Jones, president of the Hindostan Mission, Elders Luddington, Savage, West and Dewey decided to remain for a time in India, Elders Luddington and Savage being assigned to labor in Burma, and Elders West and Dewey on the island of Ceylon. In spite of a most earnest desire on the part of the missionaries to faithfully perform the mission assigned to them, Elder Luddington only succeeded in entering the kingdom of Siam. He commenced his missionary labors in Bangkok, spending four months in that city and vicinity. He finally left the country and Siam never again became a missionary field for L. D. S. Elders.
