Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Silk Culture in Utah

SILK CULTURE IN UTAH. In 1868 Octave Ursenbach, a native of Geneva, Switzerland, having imported some silkworm eggs from France, established a small cocoonery in the 16th Ward, Salt Lake City. Pres. Brigham Young, becoming deeply interested in the project, soon afterwards called upon the saints to raise mulberry trees, and he established a large cocoonery at his farm, known as Forest Farm (now Forest Dale), south of Salt Lake City. Twenty or thirty acres of mulberry trees were planted around the house, and Mrs. Zina D. Young was given charge of the cocoonery. The following year a Frenchman named Louis Bertrand, who had a knowledge of the silk industry, took charge of the project and was succeeded a year or so later by Robert Wimmer. The project, however, was not successful, and in order to more closely observe the enterprise, Pres. Brigham Young erected a small brick building in the rear of the Beehive House, for experimental purposes, under the supervision of Alexander Pyper.

In 1875 the cocoonery at the Forest Farm was placed in charge of Dr. John L. Dunyon and his wife and achieved unlooked-for success. It is said that at one time they had on hand 750 pounds of cocoons and several ounces of eggs.

A temporary organization of persons interested in sericulture existed in the 70's, but in January, 1880, the Utah Silk Association was organized; fostered by Pres. John Taylor, with Wm. Jennings as president, Eliza R. Snow as vice-president, A. Milton Musser as secretary and Paul A. Schettler as treasurer. This company erected a brick building at the mouth of City Creek Canyon, Salt Lake City, and purchased machinery for winding, doubling, dyeing and skeining silk. Cocoons were sent in from all parts of the territory. Cocoons sent by Z. C. M. I. to the Nonotuck Silk Co., of Florence, Mass., were reported by them to be the "best samples of American silk cocoons ever tested." In Provo, Utah, also home grown silk was manufactured and sold in dress lengths.

Silk exhibits of home manufacture formed an important part of every territorial and state fair for a number of years, and silk articles from Utah formed a part of Utah's exhibit at the World's Fair in Chicago in 1893. Still, sericulture in Utah can never be said to have passed the experimental stage.
