Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Skandinaviens Stjerne"

"SKANDINAVIENS STJERNE" (Star of Scandinavia), a periodical published in the Danish-Norwegian language, in Copenhagen, Denmark, was the organ of the Church in the three Scandinavian countries from 1851 to 1905. Since 1905 it has been the official organ of the Church in Denmark and Norway, with scattered subscribers in many different parts of the world. This paper was commenced by Apostle Erastus Snow, and the first number was dated October, 1851. The first volume was published as a monthly magazine and covered the period from October, 1851, to October, 1852. With the commencement of volume 2, the periodical was, changed from a monthly to a semi-monthly publication, and as such it has been continued ever since, each volume containing 24 numbers of 16 pages each with the exception of volume 46 (1897), which consisted of 30 numbers, in order to conform more strictly to the duration of the calendar year, commencing with 1898. "Skandinaviens Stjerne" is the oldest publication of the Church in a foreign language, being commenced only a year later than "The Deseret News." Erastus Snow published the first few numbers and after him the periodical has been edited and published by the presidents of the Scandinavian Mission, later by the presidents of the Danish-Norwegian Mission, and still later by the presidents of the Danish Mission, with the main circulation in Denmark and Norway.

The late F. E. Bording, a printer of Copenhagen, printed the first issue of "Skandinaviens Stjerne," and continued to print the publication as long as he lived. After his death, which occurred July 3, 1884, his son-in-law, Valdemar Petersen, printed the periodical for the Church, together with other Church publications, the same as Mr. Bording.

"Skandinaviens Stjerne" has been a staunch and able defender of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It has advocated the restored gospel to more people than any other periodical published by the Church in a foreign language. Its contents have consisted, to a great extent, of translations from English Church works and periodicals, namely, from the "Deseret News," the "Millennial Star," "Journal of Discourses," conference pamphlets, etc. It has also been an accurate recorder of historical events and the Church historians rely to a great extent upon the data it contains, as relating to the progress of the work of the Lord in the three Scandinavian countries. It also kept a record of the many companies of saints who emigrated from Denmark, Sweden and Norway to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, until recent years. Some of the best and most able Church members of Scandinavian origin have contributed towards making the periodical a true expounder of its motto, "Sandbed, Kundskab, Dyd og Tro forenet." (Truth, knowledge, virtue and faith united.)

Altogether 79 volumes of "Skandinaviens Stjerne" have been published since 1851, the present or current number covering 1930 being the 79th.
