Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Snowflake Stake of Zion

SNOWFLAKE STAKE OF ZION consists of Latter-day Saints residing in Navajo County, Arizona, with headquarters at Snowflake, a town situated about 28 miles south of Holbrook, the nearest railway station on the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad. The stake consists of eleven wards, namely, Clay Springs, Holbrook, Joseph City, Lakeside, Pinedale, Showlow, Shumway, Snowflake, Taylor, Winslow and Woodruff.

The first Latter-day Saint settlements in Arizona were founded on the Little Colorado River in 1876, mostly by people who had been called by the authorities of the Church for that purpose. Four towns were founded on the Little Colorado River, namely, Brigham City, Sunset, St. Joseph and Obed, which were organized into the Little Colorado Stake Of Zion Jan. 27, 1878, with Lot Smith as president. The Little Colorado River proving treacherous and unreliable for irrigation purposes, some of the settlers left their first location on said river and traveled up stream eastward, where they located Woodruff, St. Johns and other settlements, and in 1879 the Little Colorado Stake was divided and the eastern part of the same organized as the Eastern Arizona Stake. The two stakes (Little Colorado and Eastern Arizona) existed side by side until 1887, when the Eastern Arizona Stake was divided into two stakes, named respectively the St. Johns Stake and the Snowflake Stake, the Snowflake Stake absorbing remnants of the original Little Colorado Stake. The Snowflake Stake was organized Dec. 18, 1887, with Jesse N. Smith as president, Lorenzo H. Hatch as first and Joseph H. Richards as secound counselor. A High Council, Priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations were organized at the same time. Pres. Jesse N. Smith died June 5, 1906, after rendering very efficient service in the capacity of president. After his death his counselors took temporary charge of the stake until Feb. 11, 1907, when Samuel F. Smith (son of the late Jesse N. Smith) was chosen as president of the Snowflake Stake, with James M. Flake as first and Alof Larson as second counselor. In 1923 Joseph Peterson succeeded James M. Flake as first counselor in the stake presidency. Samuel F. Smith presided over the Snowflake Stake Dec. 31, 1930, with Joseph Peterson as first and Alof Larson as second counselor. J. Lester Shumway was the stake clerk.

Joseph Fish was the first clerk of the Snowflake Stake; he was succeeded in 1894 by Levi M. Savage, who in 1904 was succeeded by Samuel F. Smith, who in 1907 was succeeded by Martin R. Tanner, who in 1918 was succeeded by James B. Pace, who in 1923 was succeeded by J. Lester Shumway.

On Dec. 31, 1930, the Snowflake Stake had 3,140 members, including 805 children.
