Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Social Hall

SOCIAL HALL, in Salt Lake City, Utah, was the first playhouse west of the Missouri River. It was an adobe structure, built in 1852 on the east side of State St. between South Temple arid First South streets. The auditorium was only 40 x 60 feet, with a seating capacity of about 300 persons. On the east end was a stage and here a new and distinctive dramatic era in Salt Lake City began. The building was dedicated January 1, 1853, and on January 17th the play "Don Caesar de Bazan" and a farce entitled "The Irish Lion" were performed.

But dancing was the principal feature of the public gatherings in the Social Hall in the early days, the cotillion, minuet and other square dances being favored, as Pres. Brigham Young opposed the waltz and round dances generally.

In 1853 the Deseret Dramatic Association was organized and continued to function as late as 1865, giving performances in the Salt Lake Theatre occasionally when it was opened in 1862. These early actors received no salary, being repaid for their services only by the applause they received, and an occasional benefit performance. Ballo's orchestra and brass band gave many of the musical settings.

The Social Hall continued to be used for public gatherings for more than half a century, after which the building was used as a Mutual Improvement Association library and gymnasium, as a training school by the University of Utah and by Miss Maud May Babcock and her "Varsity Players" sponsored by the University of Utah. Many notable plays were staged there by Miss Babcock between 1918 and 1921.

But as the immediate surroundings of the Social Hall had become a thriving business section and as the Social Hall had been condemned as unsafe, it was torn down in 1922. A little grass plot, sacred to the memory of the Social Hall, has been laid out on the site that it occupied and a granite marker with a brass plaque erected thereon, bearing an engraving of the building and an appropriate inscription.
