Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Soda Springs Ward

SODA SPRINGS WARD, Idaho Stake, Caribou Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Soda Springs and a few ranches lying adjacent. The boundaries of the ward are co-extensive with the precinct, in which the majority of the inhabitants are non-Mormons. Most of the saints in the ward are engaged in ranching and a few in farming. Soda Springs, which is an important station on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, is a popular health resort, and in summer the hotels are usually crowded with invalids and others, who locate there to drink the renowned mineral water, and to enjoy the pure air of the mountains. About 1 1/2 miles southwest of the town lies Morristown, which was founded in 1863 by the so-called Morrisites, who were moved away from their location on the Weber River, Utah, the year before. Soda Springs is 30 miles northwest of Montpelier, in Bear Lake County, Idaho, 45 miles east of McCammon, Idaho, and 238 miles by rail northeast of Salt Lake City, Utah.

Soda Springs, originally called Beer Springs, was well known by the early trappers and explorers. In the fall of 1863 a company of U. S. soldiers located a temporary fort on the bank of Bear River, immediately below the present town of Soda Springs. This fort, which was occupied by about one-hundred soldiers, was built as a protection against Indians. About forty families of Morrisites arrived in the locality in May, 1863. (See article on Morristown.) In June, 1870, Pres. Brigham Young and other leaders of the Church visited that part of the country, which led to the survey of a townsite at Soda Springs, consisting of 56 ten-acre blocks, with streets 8 rods wide. The actual settlement of Soda Springs took place in May, 1871, when a number of the brethren who had been called by the Church authorities to locate at Soda Springs arrived from Utah. An organized company of saints, including William H. Hooper, Brigham Young, Horace S. Eldredge and others, secured several thousand acres of land in and around Soda Springs and started a L. D. S. colony. In 1872 a branch store of the Z. C. M. I. was opened at Soda Springs. Philemon C. Merrill was the first presiding Elder at Soda Springs. He was succeeded July 16, 1873, by Jeppe G. Folkman, who was succeeded in 1876 by Daniel F. Lau, who acted as presiding Elder until August, 1877, when the Soda Springs Branch was organized into a regular bishop's ward with Daniel F. Lau as Bishop. He presided in that capacity until 1901, when he was succeeded by Thomas H. Horsley, who in 1917 was succeeded by David K. McLean, who in 1926 was succeeded by Hyrum M. Lau, who died Nov. 4, 1927, and was succeeded by Everett L. Horsley, who in 1929 was succeeded by Kenneth G. Balls, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Church membership of the Soda Springs Ward was 475, including 81 children. The total population of the Soda Springs Precinct in 1930 was 1,106, of which 831 resided in the Soda Springs village.
