Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South American Mission

SOUTH AMERICAN MISSION (The) includes the two great republics of Argentina and Brazil, but extension into other parts of South America will only be a matter of time. There are branches of the Church in Buenos Aires (Argentina) and Rio de Janeiro (Brazil).

The first L. D. S. missionaries called to South America were Apostle Parley P. Pratt, accompanied by his wife (Phebe Soper), and Elder Rufus C. Allen. They left San Francisco, Calif., on the bark "Henry Kelsey" Sept. 3, 1851, and arrived at Valparaiso, Chile, Nov. 8, 1851. Here they rented a house and commenced to study the Spanish language. Chile was at that time in the throes of a revolution, and but little missionary work had been accomplished by these Elders when they left Valparaiso March 2, 1852, arriving in San Francisco again May 21, 1852. However, the fact of an Apostle of the Church having been sent to open the door for the preaching of the restored gospel in South America so early in the history of the Church is interesting and significant.

In 1923 Andrew Jenson, assistant Church Historian, visited South America in the interest of Church history, traveling in Peru, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil. He became deeply impressed that South America was a field ready for the harvest, and so reported upon his return home to the Church authorities.

In 1924 Wilhelm Friedrichs and Emil Hoppe, converts from Germany, residing in Buenos Aires, Argentina, wrote to the authorities of the Church, urging that missionaries be sent to that city and stating that some Germans residing there were awaiting baptism.

In September, 1925, Apostle Melvin J. Ballard was appointed to open up a mission in South America; Elders Rulon S. Wells (who spoke German) and Rey L. Pratt (who spoke Spanish), both members of the First Council of Seventy, were appointed to assist Elder Ballard. These three Elders arrived in Buenos Aires Dec. 6, 1925, and were met at the dock by Brothers Friedrichs and Hoppe, and a cottage meeting was held at the home of Bro. Friedrichs in the evening. A week later (Dec. 13th) six persons were baptized by Elder Ballard in the Rio de la Plata, namely, Mr. and Mrs. Kulick and their daughter, and Mr. and Mrs. Biebersdort and their daughter. Later the same day a sacrament meeting was held, at which the newly baptized converts were confirmed and Bros. Friedrichs and Hoppe were ordained Priests. Some little children were also blessed. On Christmas Day (Dec. 25, 1925) a meeting was held near the bank of the river, at which Elder Ballard dedicated the lands of South America to the preaching of the gospel; it was a solemn occasion. Other Elders were called into the field, among whom was K. B. Reinhold Stoof, who for several years had been editor of the "Beobachter," a Church publication in the German language printed in Salt Lake City. Elder Stoof succeeded Apostle Melvin J. Ballard in the presidency of the South American Mission when he and his companions left Buenos Aires in July, 1926. On Dec. 31, 1930, Elder Stoof still presided over the mission. According to the official report of Dec. 31, 1930, the South American Mission had a total membership of 135, including 27 children. Fourteen Elders from Zion were laboring in the mission, the membership of which consisted principally of German converts; missionary work, however, was being commenced among the Indians. The headquarters of the mission were at Buenos Aires.
