Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South Cottonwood Ward

SOUTH COTTONWOOD WARD consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a central part of Salt Lake County, bounded on the north by Mill Creek Ward, on the east by Cottonwood Ward, on the south by Union Ward, and on the west by Murray East Ward. The South Cottonwood Ward meeting house, which was built in 1869, is situated a mile east of State St., on rising ground north of South Cottonwood Creek and a mile east of the State Road, about ten miles southeast of the Temple Block in Salt Lake City. Nearly all the inhabitants are Latter-day Saints, who live in a scattered condition on their respective farms, which are irrigated from Big and Little Cottonwood creeks, and the East Jordan Canal.

When Apostle Amasa M. Lyman arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley with his company of saints in October, 1848, he located part of them (mainly a number of families from the state of Mississippi) at a point between the two Cottonwood creeks, about ten miles southeast from the Great Salt Lake City fort. A tract of country consisting of about one mile square was surveyed and divided into ten-acre lots for the convenience of the settlers, among whom were Amasa M. Lyman, William Crosby, Daniel Clark, James M. Flake, John Tanner and sons (Sidney and Nathan), Daniel M. Thomas, John Brown, and others. The place of their location was known as the "Amasa Survey." During the fall and winter of 1848 a few houses were built of logs, which the brethren hauled from near the mouth of Big Cottonwood and Mill Creek canyons, but most of the people lived in their tents and wagons until the spring of 1849 when a number of other houses were built. The first adobe house was erected in the settlement by John Brown in the summer of 1849. In the meantime water was taken out of the two Cottonwood creeks and other improvements made. The number of settlers was also increased by several families located at various points along the creeks, and a ward organization, known originally as the Cottonwood Ward (afterwards changing its name to South Cottonwood), was effected in 1849 with William Crosby as Bishop. During the year 1849 a small crop of wheat was raised, but it grew so scattered and short that when harvest came most of it had to be pulled by hand. The little colony, however, was very industrious; the crickets were fought vigorously, and immense numbers of them killed, but notwithstanding this the crops no doubt would all have been destroyed had not the gulls put in their appearance. In 18481850 the little colony grew steadily. The first meeting house built in the ward was a small adobe building known as Jonathan C. Wright's school house, erected in 1851. Previous to this all meetings had been held in private houses. As the settlers increased in numbers other school houses were built and the ward meeting house was erected in 1856. It was a substantial adobe building, and was, at the time of its completion, the finest meeting house outside of Salt Lake City. The present commodious ward house, also an adobe building, 40 by 60 feet, was erected in 1869.

In the fall of 1851 the majority of the people accompanied Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich to southern California, where they founded San Bernardino, after which the "Amasa Survey" was transferred to the Church. Bishop Crosby being among those who went to California, Jonathan C. Wright was appointed Bishop in his stead. He was succeeded in 1852 by Abraham O. Smoot, who in 1854 was succeeded by Andrew Caboon, who in 1872 was succeeded by Joseph S. Rawlins, who in 1900 was succeeded by Orson Sanders, who in 1904 was succeeded by William B. Erekson, who in 1914 was succeeded by Jesse H. Wheeler, who in 1927 was succeeded by Amos H. Turner, who in 1929 was succeeded by James E. Erekson, jun., who acted as Bishop of the South Cottonwood Ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the South Cottonwood Ward had 674 members, including 99 children.

South Cottonwood Ward originally covered an extensive area of Salt Lake Valley, but as the population in the south end of said valley increased, the ward was divided, and among the wards which are outgrowths of the South Cottonwood Ward we may mention Murray 1st and 2nd wards, Grant Ward, Union Ward, and in fact all the wards lying southward to the mountains which separate Salt Lake Valley from Utah Valley.
