Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South Dakota

SOUTH DAKOTA. That part of the United States now constituting North and South Dakota was a part of the original Louisiana Purchase. For some time it constituted a part of Nebraska, and was organized as a territory in 1861, and on Nov. 2, 1889, the two Dakotas were admitted into the Union as states, named respectively North and South Dakota. The manufacture of intoxicating liquors in South Dakota was prohibited by legislative enactment in 1890. The area of the state is 76,868 square miles. The population of South Dakota was 348,600 in 1890; 401,570 in 1900; 583,888 in 1910; 636,547 in 1920, and 692,849 in 1930.

After the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum in Carthage, Ill., June 27, 1844, a number of schisms arose in the Church as men, ambitious for power and positions, led some of the saints away into different parts of the country. James Emmett was one of these and prevailed upon a few misguided people to bring their families and settle on the Vermillion River, a tributary of the Missouri River, in what is now Clay County, South Dakota. On the journey, finding the older women of the company a hindrance to progress, he ordered them to return to their former homes on Bear Creek, Hancock Co., Ill. In vain they pleaded to remain with their children; they were sent back in charge of three men, but with such a scanty supply of food that they could not subsist until the end of their journey unaided. This, and other acts of tyranny, caused dissension in the Emmett Camp, and hearing of this, in February, 1845, Pres. Brigham Young sent Apostle Amasa M. Lyman and Elder Daniel Spencer to visit the colony. They found much disunion among the people, and Emmett had implanted in their minds so many false impressions that they were not willing to return to Nauvoo. Shortly afterwards, however, Emmett came to Nauvoo, and, confessing his faults, became reconciled with the leaders of the Church. After that better conditions prevailed among the members of the camp on the Vermillion River, about one hundred in number, for a time. When in 1846, the saints had vacated Nauvoo and settled temporarily at Winter Quarters on the west bank of the Missouri River, Pres. Brigham Young sent two of the brethren to notify the saints in Emmett's Camp of the intended migration westward. They found that Emmett had deserted his post, and, with a young squaw, had left the company. The remaining saints were invited to join the emigration westward, which some of them did, and the camp was broken up.

While missionaries laboring in the Northern States doubtless preached in that part of the United States now comprising South Dakota, no organized missionary work is recorded as being done there until 1898, when Elders Brigham F. Duffin and Leonidas S. Mecham, laboring in the Northern States Mission, were called by Pres. Louis A. Kelsch to open up a missionary field in South Dakota. They arrived at Watertown, Codington Co., July 27th. of that year, and at once commenced to hold open air meetings. Soon afterwards a conference, called the South Dakota Conference, was organized with Brigham F. Duffin as president, and other Elders were sent to labor in the state.

In 1900 North and South Dakota were transferred from the Northern States Mission to the Colorado Mission (now Western States Mission). At that time the headquarters of the South Dakota Conference were at Sioux Falls. In 1925 the east part of South Dakota was annexed to the South Central States Mission and so remained Dec. 31, 1930.
