Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South Hawaii Conference

SOUTH HAWAII CONFERENCE, or District, Hawaiian Mission, consists of the southwest part of the island of Hawaii, the largest island of the Hawaiian archipelago. The island of Hawaii contains 4,915 square miles, or twice the area of all the other islands combined. It is characterized by two central mountain peaks, Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa. The active volcano, Kilauea, is situated 4,000 feet above sea level on the slopes of Mauna Loa. Nearly eight miles in circumference and 600 feet deep, the crater encloses an area of 2,650 acres of solid lava formation. The center of the crater is occupied by a vast pit known as the "House of Everlasting Fire," which measures two miles in circumference. The pit is the center of all activity in the volcano.

The first L. D. S. Elders who labored as missionaries on Hawaii were James Hawkins and Hiram H. Blackwell. They sailed from Honolulu Dec. 21, 1850, and arrived at Hilo on Hawaii a few days later. Elder Blackwell soon afterwards left his post, but Elder Hawkins, writing under date of March 11, 1851, said that he had baptized 14 of the natives. He was later joined by Elder John S. Woodbury and his wife. Soon afterwards Elder Hawkins went to one of the other islands to labor and, in order to assist her husband, Sister Woodbury opened a school at Kaukau to teach English and also did sewing for the native women. Elder Woodbury baptized two of the students of his wife's school, after which Elder Woodbury and wife went to labor on one of the other islands. But the seed sown by these humble missionaries was to bear rich fruits later.

In April, 1853, a Brother Rice, a white convert, was called to work as a missionary among the natives on the island of Hawaii. On June 1, 1853, Elders Thomas Karren, Nathan Tanner and a native Elder (John W. Kawaihae) went to labor on Hawaii. They desired to land at Hilo, but contrary winds took them to Kohala, where they found some natives waiting and praying for the Elders to come. Although the missionaries were worn out with traveling, the natives insisted on hearing them preach and 25 were baptized before breakfast the following morning. On June 15th two branches of the Church were organized, one with 15 and the other with 34 members. These were the first branches of the Church organized on the island of Hawaii. On July 27, 1853, the native Elder (John W. Kawaihae) died of chills and fever, due to over exertion in his missionary labors. The local missionary (Bro. Rice) joined the American Elders, and by the end of August the membership of the Church on the island of Hawaii numbered over 1,000. In 1855 Hawaii contained two conferences, namely, Hilo and Kohala, but, in late years, as the work spread over the island, it was divided more broadly into the North Hawaii and the South Hawaii conferences. In October, 1886, the South Hawaii Conference contained nine branches with a membership of 281. The South Hawaii Conference, or District, at present (1930) embraces all of the island of Hawaii, not included in the Hilo and Hamakua conferences. There are several good meeting houses in the district, those at Waiohinu and Kau having been recently erected. In most of the branches L. D. S. Church auxiliary organizations are functioning successfully.
