Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South Jordan Ward

SOUTH JORDAN WARD, West Jordan Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Salt Lake County, Utah, which is bounded on the north by the West Jordan Ward (separated from the Sandy 8rd and Crescent wards), on the east by the Jordan River, bounded on the south by the Riverton 2nd Ward, and west by Herriman. It contains 14 square miles of farming country. Farming and sheep raising are the principal industries of the people, and water for irrigation purposes is obtained from the Beckstead Ditch (made in 1859) and from the South Jordan Canal, the Utah and Salt Lake Canal, Provo Reservoir, and Utah Lake Distributing Canal. The L. D. S. ward house, situated on 16th West St., is 16 miles south of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City, and four miles south, west of Sandy.

That part of Salt Lake County which is now included in the South Jordan Ward was first settled by Isaac J. Wardle and Samuel Alexander Beckstead, who, on March 1, 1859, located on the west side of the Jordan River, at a point nearly a mile south of the present South Jordan Ward House. Other settlers located at various bends of the river later the same year. About the year 1876, when the South Jordan Canal was finished, the population commenced to increase rapidly, and new farms were commenced on the bench. Later, when the Utah and Salt Lake Canal and other canals were completed, a still greater increase of population and prosperity was experienced, and up to the present time all kinds of grain, hay, and vegetables are raised with great success.

In 1863 the South Jordan saints were organized as a branch of the West Jordan Ward with James Woods as president. He was succeeded in 1867 by William A. Bills, who presided in that capacity for ten years, or until June 17, 1877, when the branch was organized as the South Jordan Ward with William A. Bills as Bishop. Bro. Bills was succeeded in 1900 by Thomas Blake, who in 1911 was succeeded by Samuel E. Holt, who in 1924 was succeeded by Hyrum Stocking, who presided until May 11, 1930, when he was succeeded by Byram Henry Beckstead, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 722 members, including 160 children.
