Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South Sanpete Stake of Zion

SOUTH SANPETE STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the central part of Sanpete County, Utah, with headquarters in Manti, where there is a stake house, with accommodations for the stake presidency and the High Council. The South Sanpete Stake consists of seven organized bishop's wards, viz., Ephraim North, Ephraim South, Ephraim West, Manti Center, Manti North, Manti South and Sterling. Nearly the entire population living within the boundaries of the South Sanpete Stake are L. D. S. farmers and stock raisers and business men. All the wards have substantial chapels, some of them modern, in which to hold religious services, including Sunday school sessions.

At the beginning the Sanpete Stake of Zion contained all the Latter-day Saints in Sanpete County, but at a meeting held Dec. 9, 1900, the Sanpete Stake was divided and two new stakes organized in its stead, viz., the South Sanpete Stake with the following settlements, or wards, which had previously belonged to the Sanpete Stake: Axtell, Centerfield, Ephraim North, Ephraim South, Fayette, Gunnison, Manti North, Manti South, Mayfield and Sterling, and the North Sanpete Stake with the following wards, which likewise had constituted a part of the Sanpete Stake: Chester, Fairview, Fountain Green, Freedom, Indianola, Milburn, Moroni, Mt. Pleasant North, Mt. Pleasant South, Spring City, and Wales. These two new stakes commenced to function Jan. 1, 1901. Canute Peterson, who had presided over the Sanpete Stake, was chosen as president of the South Sanpete Stake, with Henry Beal as his first and John B. Maiben as his second counselor. Pres. Canute Peterson died Oct. 14, 1902, at Ephraim, after which his counselors (Henry Beal and John B. Maiben) took temporary charge of the stake until Nov. 16, 1902, when Lewis Anderson was chosen as president of the South Sanpete Stake, with Joseph Y. Jensen as first and Gustave A. Iverson as second counselor. Second Counselor Gustave A. Iverson went to Michigan for educational purposes and on Aug 5, 1905, Ezra Shomaker was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Anderson. This presidency stood intact until Feb. 5, 1922, when they were all released, and Lewis R. Anderson, a son of the former president, was chosen as president of the stake, with Jacob B. Jacobson as first and John N. Dorius as second counselor. In 1924 Newton E. Noyes succeeded John N. Dorius as second counselor. Lewis R. Anderson acted as president Dec. 31, 1930, with Jacob B. Jacobson as first and Newton E. Noyes as second counselor. Lewis Anderson was the first stake clerk of the South Sanpete Stake. He was succeeded in 1903 by Peter A. Poulson, who acted Dec. 31, 1930.

At a stake conference held May 6, 1923, the south part of the South Sanpete Stake was organized as the Gunnison Stake with the following wards, which hitherto had belonged to the South Sanpete Stake: Axtell, Centerfield, Fayette, Gunnison and Mayfield and Clarion Branch. On Dec. 31, 1930, the South Sanpete Stake had a total membership of 4,315, including 802 children.
