Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South Sevier Stake of Zion

SOUTH SEVIER STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the south part of Sevier County, and a small part of Pluto County, Utah, with headquarters in Monroe, Sevier Co., where there is a good-sized modern stake tabernacle, combined with the Monroe South Ward, and also accommodations for the stake presidency and High Council, in the Monroe North Ward chapel. The South Sevier Stake consists of eight fully organized bishop's wards, viz., Annabella, Elsinore, Inverury, Joseph, Marysvale, Monroe North, Monroe South and Sevier. Nearly all the members of the Church belonging to the South Sevier Stake of Zion are farmers and stock-raisers. The farmers rely mainly upon the Sevier River for water for irrigation purposes and upon a number of streams issuing forth from the mountains on either side of the Sevier Valley.

Until 1921 all the Saints in Sevier County belonged to the Sevier Stake of Zion, but as the Church population in the county increased in number, it was considered wise by the Church authorities to divide the Sevier Stake. This was done at a stake conference held at Richfield Jan. 30, 1921, attended by Apostles George F. Richards and Richard R. Lyman, on which occasion the Sevier Stake was divided into three stakes, namely, the South Sevier Stake and North Sevier Stake (organized as new stakes) and the old Sevier Stake, which was continued under the old name, containing the more central part of the Sevier Valley and also the extreme southeast part of Sevier County, including Grass Valley. The South Sevier Stake was to comprise the following wards, which had hitherto constituted a part of the Sevier Stake, viz., Annabells, Elsinore, Joseph, Inverury, Monroe North, Monroe South, Sevier and Marysvale. These wards had a total membership of 2,819, including children, at the organization of the stake. John E. Magleby, of Monroe, was chosen as president of the South Sevier Stake, with Bishop Joseph Levi Staples of Elsinore as first and Bishop Joseph William Parker of Joseph as second counselor. On Feb. 18, 1923, James R. Ware succeeded Joseph W. Parker as second counselor in the stake presidency. First Counselor Joseph L. Staples was released Nov. 8, 1925, and James R. Ware was promoted to first counselor, and James Brown, formerly stake clerk, chosen as second counselor to Pres. Magleby.

Pres. John E. Magleby was called to preside over the New Zealand Mission, and at a stake conference held May 13, 1928, he was released as president of the South Sevier Stake, and James Russell Ware, who had acted as first counselor to Pres. Magleby, was chosen as president of the South Sevier Stake, with James Brown as his first and Wilford Hansen as his second counselor. These brethren held the positions named Dec. 31, 1930. James Brown was the first clerk of the South Sevier Stake; he was succeeded in 1925 by Walter Oscar Lundgren, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the South Sevier Stake had a total membership of 3,197, including 706 children. Among the Priesthood was Patriarch Jens Iver Jensen.
