Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

South Weber Ward

SOUTH WEBER WARD, Mount Ogden Stake, Davis Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on the south side of Weber River. The ward extends north to the Weber County Line and to Weber River, east to the Uintah Ward, south to the East Layton Ward, and west to the Sunset Ward-both in the North Davis Stake of Zion. The meeting house, a brick building erected in 1884, stands on the main highway leading from Riverdale to Weber Canyon and is about nine miles south of Ogden.

In November, 1851, Byrum and John Bybee settled in the vicinity of the present South Weber Ward meeting house. Other settlers followed and erected cabins in fort style, the location being known as Kingston's Fort. Thomas Kingston, one of the first settlers and active in the development of the place, was the first Bishop of the ward, being chosen to that position Nov. 11, 1853. A log school house was erected in 1854, Cyrus Canfield being the first teacher. Sister Sarah Woodruff, wife of Apostle Wilford Woodruff, was the second teacher who taught in that primitive school house. Bishop Kingston was succeeded in 1857 by Richard Cook, who, with fifteen other members of the ward, was excommunicated from the Church in 1861 for following Joseph Morris, and was succeeded by Philo Allen as presiding Elder pro tem. South Weber became the stronghold of the Morrisite faction, and the old Kingston Fort in 1862 became the scene of its final extinction. Joseph Morris calling himself a prophet, had drawn away from the Church a number of adherents, among whom was John Banks, formerly a prominent missionary in Great Britain, and Richard Cook, Bishop of the South Weber Ward. Aided by Richard Cook, they had taken possession of the old fort, where they defied law and order, and on this account a posse was sent out from Salt Lake City on June 12, 1862, to arrest the leaders of the faction. After two days of siege, an engagement took place in which Joseph Morris, John Banks and some others, including two members of Col. Burton's posse, lost their lives. After the death of Morris, his adherents scattered to different parts of the country.

In 1865 presiding Elder Philo Allen of South Weber resigned his position and was succeeded by William Firth, who was succeeded in 1877 by David S. Cook as Bishop of the ward. He acted in that position until his death May 5, 1890, and was succeeded by George W. Kendall, who was succeeded in 1909 by Adolph G. Fernelius, who was succeeded in 1910 by George W. Kendall (serving a second term), who was succeeded in 1914 by Joseph A. Fife (presiding Elder), who was succeeded in 1915 by Clarence Charles Earl, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had a membership of 161, including 34 children. The South Weber Precinct had a total population of 279 in 1930. South Weber Ward belonged to the Davis Stake until 1904 when, as the residents of the ward did most of their business in Ogden, it was transferred to the Weber Stake and continued thus until 1922, when it became a part of the Mount Ogden Stake.
