Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Spring City Ward

SPRING CITY WARD, North Sanpete Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Sanpete Valley which lies between Mount Pleasant and Ephraim. Nearly all the inhabitants reside in Spring City proper, and only a few live on their respective farms in the neighborhood. Spring City is pleasantly situated on Canal Creek, near the foot of the Wasatch Mountains, on the east side of Sanpete Valley and on the Marysvale branch of the Rio Grande Western Railway, ten miles northeast of Ephraim, eight miles southeast of Moroni, six miles southwest of Mt. Pleasant, and 109 miles by railroad from Salt Lake City. The upper part of Spring City is built on rocky and gravelly land, well adapted for the Culture of fruit trees, while the soil in the lower part of the townsite is a heavy clay. The farming land, which is watered from Canal Creek, Oak Creek and half of Cedar Creek, lies mostly west and northwest of the town, and is generally rich and very productive. All kinds of small grain and hardy vegetables are raised in abundance. The town has as good water for culinary purposes as any place in Sanpete Valley.

Spring City as a settlement dates back to 1852, when Pres. Brigham Young advised Father James Allred to select a place for a settlement where he could locate with his numerous posterity and kindred and preside over them. Complying with this advice, Father Allred, early in the spring of 1852, examined the tract of country lying along Canal Creek and finally decided on the present site of Spring City for a settlement March 22, 1852. Four days later the Allreds commenced making improvements. James T. S. Allred hauled a small log house with him from Manti with an ox team. The settlers re-erected this dwelling on the present site of Spring City in one day; it was a sawed log building about 16 feet square. During the summer of 1852 other houses were built, and a townsite surveyed. The little colony became known from the beginning as the Allred Settlement with Father James Allred as the patriarchal head of the family. Meetings were held principally in his own log cabin, and about a dozen families spent the winter of 18521853 in the little settlement. In the spring of 1853 farming operations were resumed successfully, and the colony was duly organized as a bishop's ward in April, 1853, with Reuben W. Allred as Bishop. When the Walker Indian War broke out in July, 1853, the settlements in Sanpete Valley were exposed to great danger, and after the raid on the Mt. Pleasant Settlement July 19, 1853, about a dozen families from that place moved into the Allred Settlement, where all hands hastily built a fort by moving their log houses together. This fort was completed July 28, 1853. Notwithstanding the precaution of building a fort, the Indians, under Walker, made a raid on the Allred Settlement and drove off 200 head of horned stock and 30 head of horses, which was nearly all the stock belonging to the colony. In the face of these Indian troubles the Allred Settlement was vacated July 31, 1853, the people moving to Manti. While the families from the Allred Settlement were safely housed in Manti, the brethren returned to the vacated settlement on Canal Creek in companies to water and harvest their grain. In October, 1853, while James Allred and others were attending conference in Salt Lake City, they learned of the arrival of the first large company of Scandinavian emigrants, who had reached Salt Lake City Sept. 31, 1853. An influence was brought to bear upon them to settle in Sanpete Valley, and a large number of them responded, and accompanied James Allred to the location on Canal Creek, which was re-settled and called "Little Denmark." The Scandinavian saints lived in a kind of United Order, dividing their provisions and labor, some working on their houses while others stood guard. In the meantime the Indians continued to be hostile, and so the settlement on Canal Creek was vacated a second time, Dec. 19, 1853, the people moving to Manti. On Jan. 6, 1854, the Indians burned the fort and everything which had been left by the settlers on Canal Creek. For nearly six years after that no new attempt was made to settle on Canal Creek, but in the summer of 1859 the permanent settlement of Spring City (originally called Springtown) was made by a little company of settlers who arrived on Canal Creek June 28, 1859; it included William Black, George Black, Joseph S. Black, and others with their families. These settlers immediately had a townsite containing 640 acres surveyed, and the surrounding farming lands were surveyed into 10 and 5 acre lots, which were distributed among the brethren. About a dozen families spent the winter of 18591860 in that new settlement, which since that time has enjoyed a gradual growth and continued prosperity.

The new settlement was organized as a bishop's ward in January, 1860, with Christen G. Larsen as Bishop. During the Black Hawk Indian War, James Meeks and Andrew Johnson were killed by Indians near Spring City, April 13, 1867. Bishop Larsen was succeeded in 1868 by Fred Olsen, who in 1882 was succeeded by James A. Allred, who died April 3, 1904, and was succeeded by Lauritz Orson Larsen, who died Sept. 28, 1913, and was succeeded by Samuel Allred, who in 1928 was succeeded by James F. Ellis, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Spring City Ward had a Church membership of 1,021, including 166 children. The total population of the Spring City Precinct was 1,050 in 1930, of which 992 resided in Spring City.
