Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Spring Lake Ward

SPRING LAKE WARD, Nebo Stake, Utah Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Spring Lake, which is situated about half way between Payson on the northeast and Santaquin on the southwest, about three miles from either place. It is a small farming settlement which has a substantial meeting house and a school house.

The beautiful little pond or lake, which makes Spring Lake Villa so picturesque, is an artificial sheet of water originally made in 1856 by the people of Payson, who built a dam there, raising the water several feet for irrigation purposes. There were no settlers in the place until the fall of 1859, when James Pace and James Butler settled on the slope immediately south of the pond. Other settlers followed, and the place became known for its splendid orchards. Among the early settlers of Spring Lake was Joseph E. Johnson, a Church veteran and a gardener by vocation, who published a small paper entitled the "Utah Pomologist," and later "The Farmers' Oracle," printed on a press which he had brought with him from Nebraska, after having published the "Omaha Arrow" at Omaha (the first newspaper ever published in that place), and later had set up his press on Wood River, about 250 miles west of the Missouri River, where he published a small newspaper entitled "The Woodman's Echo," in the interest of travelers, there being no real settlers within hundreds of miles of his printing office.

Benjamin F. Johnson, who had charge of the settlement from the beginning, was the first Bishop of Spring Lake, which was organized as a ward Aug. 12, 1877; he was succeeded as presiding Elder in 1882 by Samuel Openshaw, who in 1883 was succeeded by John H. Moore, jun., who in 1889 was succeeded by German Ellsworth, who in 1892 was succeeded by William J. Taylor, who presided until 1901, when the branch was again organized as a ward with William J. Taylor as Bishop; he was succeeded in 1921 by Herman Twede, who acted as Bishop of Spring Lake Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward membership was 241, including 57 children. The total population of the Spring Lake Precinct was 300 in 1930.
