Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Book of Mormon

BOOK OF MORMON. The Latter-day Saints accept the Book of Mormon as a divine record and as a companion volume to the Bible. The idea entertained by many that the Book of Mormon is the acknowledged Bible of the Latter-day Saints is absolutely erroneous. None of the established Christian sects of today are stronger adherents to the doctrines of the old Jewish record, including both the Old and New Testaments, than are the Latter-day Saints (or Mormons). But while the Bible gives an account of the dealings of the Lord with the ancient inhabitants on the Eastern hemisphere, the Book of Mormon contains a similar account of what took place during many centuries on the American continent, and its pages, like those of the Bible, are replete with doctrinal and prophetic sayings of the most choice and sacred order. It is also in perfect accord with modern science and the discoveries of American antiquities, and none of the numerous attempts made by its opponents to disprove its divinity has been successful.

The sacred volume was originally engraved on plates of gold, principally by Mormon, a Nephite Prophet, who lived about 400 years after the birth of the Savior. After finishing the work of his father, Moroni, the son of Mormon, hid the plates in a hill situated in that part of the country now embraced in the western part of the state of New York, near the present town of Palmyra, where the young prophet, Joseph Smith, about 1,400 years later, found them, as directed by the same Moroni (now a resurrected being and an angel of the Lord), who deposited them. Joseph Smith translated the records by the gift and power of God through the Urim and Thummim found with the plates, and the result was the Book of Mormon, of which the first edition was published in Palmyra, N. Y., early in 1830. The edition consisted of 5,000 copies. Three special witnesses, namely, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, were permitted to see the plates as shown them by an angel, and hearing the voice of God declaring that the translation was correct. Eight other witnesses were shown the plates by Joseph Smith. Many other editions of the Book of Mormon have since been published in the English language, both in America and Great Britain. It has also been translated from the English into the Danish, Welsh, French, German, Italian, Hawaiian, Swedish, Turkish, Spanish, Maori, Netherlands, Japanese, Hindostanee, modern Jewish and Greek languages. The Danish translation was published in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1851; the Welsh in Merthyr Tydvil, Wales, the French in Paris, France, the German at Hamburg, Germany, and the Italian at London, England, in 1852; the Hawaiian in San Francisco, California, in 1855; the Swedish in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1878; the Spanish in Salt Lake City, Utah, 1886; the Maori at Auckland, New Zealand, in 1889; the Dutch, or Netherlands, in Amsterdam, Holland, in 1890; the Samoan in Salt Lake City, Utah, in 1903; the Tahitian in Papeete, Tahiti, in 1904; the Turkish in Boston, Mass., in 1906, and the Japanese in Tokio, Japan, in 1909. The Hindostanee, modern Jewish and Greek translations have not yet been printed.
