Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Star Valley Stake of Zion

STAR VALLEY STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Star Valley, Lincoln County (formerly Uinta County), Wyoming, with headquarters at Afton. The stake consists of eleven organized bishop's wards, namely, Afton North, Afton South, Auburn, Bedford, Etna, Fairview, Freedom, Grover, Osmond, Smoot and Thayne. Also one independent branch named Turnerville.

Star Valley, or Upper Salt River Valley, was known to overland travelers who passed through it on what was called Lander's Cutoff, which entered the valley from the south through Lander's Canyon and left it, going up Stump Creek, thus crossing the valley from a southeasterly to a northwesterly direction. Lander's Cut-off dates back to 1863.

Elder Moses Thatcher and Bishop William B. Preston visited the Upper Salt River Valley in the fall of 1877 and were highly pleased with its appearance. They came in from Bear Lake Valley and found neither trappers nor settlers in the valley, but a large number of Shoshone Indian wickiups, built of willows. No Indians, however, were in sight.

In August, 1878, Apostles Brigham Young, jun., and Moses Thatcher and William B. Preston, of the Cache Valley Stake presidency, visited Upper Salt River Valley. They stopped their teams on the west bank of Salt River at a point about five miles northwest of Afton. A meeting was held here and Brigham Young, jun., dedicated the valley by prayer as a gathering place for the saints. The company had arrived in the valley in the morning of the day on which they held their dedicatory services, which was Aug. 29, 1878.

At a meeting of the Twelve held in Salt Lake City, Utah, May 7, 1879, Apostles Charles C. Rich and Moses Thatcher were appointed to supervise the rounding of settlements of saints in Star Valley. The first attempt at settling said valley took place in the summer of 1879, when David Robinson, August Lehmberg, and one or two others came over the mountains from Bear Lake Valley and located at a point near the present site of Auburn. These families, who all settled together, spent the winter of 1879-1880 in three small cabins built in the fall of 1879.

In 1880 a few other families came into the valley, among whom were Charles D. Cazier, who commenced to build a house where Grover now stands, but he soon moved across the river and located near the present site of Auburn. In the fall of the same year (1880) Apostles Charles C. Rich and Moses Thatcher, accompanied by others, visited the valley and held a meeting with the saints there Sept. 3, 1880, on which occasion Charles Drake Cazier was chosen to preside over the branch of the Church then organized. The Apostles advised the settlers to locate on Swift Creek, the present site of Afton, and directed Brother Cazier to have a townsite surveyed there to contain 30 blocks of ten acres each. On the same occasion, Elder Thatcher remarked that the elevated bench at the mouth of Swift Creek Canyon would be a beautiful location for a temple. It was, also, on that occasion that Brother Thatcher named the valley Star Valley, as he called it a star among valleys; hitherto it had been known as Upper Salt River Valley.

Soon after Brother Cazier's appointment to preside, meetings were commenced in private houses and continued during the winter of 1880-1881. Some of the saints who lived at a distance made their way to the house of worship on snowshoes. About nine families spent the winter of 1880-1881 in that part of the valley which is now included in the Auburn Ward, west of Salt River.

In the spring of 1881 a post office called Charleston was opened in Star Valley with Charles D. Cazier as postmaster and Thos. F. Burton as assistant. Cazier's commission was dated May 31, 1881, but though he was furnished with a mailsack and a key, no regular mail was either sent out or received at that time. The first mail service in the valley was not commenced until 1888, when the Afton post office was opened and a regular mail route was established between Montpelier, Idaho, and Afton, Wyoming.

It appears that the saints in Star Valley were a little slow in moving to the east side of the valley, as they had been counseled to do. Hence, Afton was not permanently settled until 1885. In the meantime other settlements were founded, viz., Fairview, Freedom, Glencoe (now Thayne), Cottonwood (now Smoot), and Grover.

As the number of saints increased in the valley, it was decided to separate the settlements in Star Valley from those in Bear Lake Valley and organize a new stake, which was done Aug. 13, 1892, on the occasion of a visit into the valley by Pres. Joseph F. Smith, Apostle Francis M. Lyman, Pres. William Budge and counselor George Osmond, and several other brethren from the Bear Lake Stake. George Osmond, who had acted as second counselor to Pres. William Budge of the Bear Lake Stake, was chosen as president of the new stake, called the Star Valley Stake, with William W. Burton as his first and Anson V. Call as his second counselor. A High Council and other stake officers were also chosen on the same occasion. When first organized the Star Valley Stake consisted of seven wards, viz., Afton, Auburn, Fairview, Freedom, Glencoe (now Thayne), Cottonwood (now Smoot), and Grover. Later Afton was divided into the Afton North Ward and Afton South Ward. New settlements called Bedford, Etna and Osmond were subsequently organized.

Pres. Osmond died March 25, 1913. He was succeeded by Clarence Gardner, who in 1930 acted as president with Arthur F. Burton as first and Albert A. Barrus as second counselor; David Bennion was the stake clerk. Besides those already named, Wilford A. Hyde acted as second counselor in the stake presidency 1905-1912, and Clarence Gardner in 1912-1913. Following are the names of the stake clerks: William H. Kennington, 1892-1913; Joseph H. Rackstraw, 1913-1917; Adelbert E. Wilde, 1917-1918; Carl Cook, 1918-1926, and David Bennion, 1926-1930.

The saints in Star Valley have faced many difficulties in coping with the elements and a rigid climate, the altitude of Star Valley being about 6,000 feet above sea level. But while the crops have sometimes failed through being frost-bitten, the climate has changed materially for the better, and the people generally are prosperous, healthy and strong, and most of them faithful Latter-day Saints. The membership of Star Valley Stake Dec. 31, 1930, was 3,826, including 917 children.
