Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sterling Ward, South Sanpete Stake

STERLING WARD, South Sanpete Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the immediate neighborhood of Six Mile Creek and Nine Mile Creek, between Manti and Mayfield, being co-extensive with the Sterling Precinct, which consists of a farming and stock raising district. The lands and gardens are irrigated from the two creeks mentioned, and at the head of Nine Mile Creek Sterling draws its supply of culinary water through the winter. The village of Sterling, which is situated on the left bank of Six Mile Creek, occupies a central position of the ward. In the mountains about two miles northeast of the village of Sterling is the well-known Funk's Lake, a favorite resort for the people of Sanpete County. On June 22, 1878, a party of 11 persons were accidentally drowned in Funk's Lake, while boat-riding.

That part of Sanpete Valley which is now included in the Sterling Ward was in early pioneer days used as a herd ground by the people of Manti. William D. Funk and Daniel B. Funk of Manti were the first white men who located land claims on Six Mile Creek. They took up some land on the north side of said creek in 1872, made a ditch the same year, which conveyed the waters of the creek onto their lands. Other settlers arrived the same year, and still others the following years. In February, 1873, the brethren who had commenced to make improvements on Six Mile Creek moved their families out from Manti, which year, consequently, marks the beginning of the settlement. In 1874 the saints who had settled on Six Mile Creek were organized as a branch of the Church, or a part of the Manti Ward, with William G. Petty as president. He presided until 1877, when the branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward with William G. Petty as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1884 by John L. Peacock, who in 1891 was succeeded by Niels C. Christensen, who in 1910 was succeeded by Lewis C. Olsen, who in 1920 was succeeded by Erick Ludvigson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Sterling Ward had 302 members, including 67 children. The total population of the Sterling Precinct was 311 in 1930.
