Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Stirling Ward

STIRLING WARD, Taylor Stake, Alberta, Canada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Stirling and surroundings. The town is built on a rolling prairie country, nine miles by road or seven miles by railroad northeast of Raymond, 20 miles southeast of Lethbridge, and 50 miles by rail northeast of Cardston. It is also 33 miles due north of the boundary line between the United States and Canada. The railway station of Stirling is 1 1/4 miles north of the center of the town.

Stirling as a L. D. S. settlement dates back to 1898, when the First Presidency of the Church entered into an agreement with the Alberta Irrigation Company (of which the Canadian Northwest Irrigation Company was the successor) to construct a canal extending from the St. Mary's River to Stirling. The canal was built and the townsite surveyed. On May 4, 1899, Elder Theodore Brandley and 29 companions stepped off the narrow gauge railroad at the Great Falls and Canadian Railway station, then the only building in sight on the prairie. A feeling of dismay over the outlook was felt by some of these pioneers, who had left orchards, gardens, trees, beautiful homes and many of life's enjoyments in Utah. But Pres. Chas. O. Card, who met the company, turned toward the spot selected for a townsite, and, addressing the newcomers said: "There on that hill you may select your city lot and begin to build your future home." The little band of saints, filled with courage and hope, pitched their tents on the plains of Alberta with one aim in life: to do the will of their Heavenly Father. On Saturday, June 17, 1899, it began to rain. The men had all gone out to work on the canal, leaving Elder Brandley to care for the women and children who remained in town. Steadily the downpour continued, and, according to the government rain gauge, six inches of rain fell in the space of 14 hours. For two weeks this storm raged without ceasing. Tents would no longer give shelter from the rain and the people had to hold umbrellas over their heads while they ate their scanty meals, prepared under these circumstances. They were also compelled to sleep in wet bedding, and, as a last resource, cover their beds with dish pans to catch the water as it poured through the sodden canvas. But these sturdy settlers of Stirling stuck to their task and the outcome is a beautiful growing town on the prairie where the good saints of the ward have erected one of the finest L. D. S. chapels in Canada at a cost of not much less than $40,000. The Stirling Ward was organized June 25, 1899, with Theodore Brandley as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1902 by Franklin D. Grant, who in 1904 was succeeded by Arthur E. Fawns, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930, on which date it had a membership of 637, including 145 children.
