Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Stone Ward

STONE WARD, Curlew Stake, Oneida Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district in Curlew Valley. The ward extends from north to south about five miles, the south end being the boundary line between Utah and Idaho. Most of the settlers are farmers, who live with their families in a scattered condition on their respective farms. There is no village center, except the so-called "Church House," one store and a post office, standing on the banks of Deep Creek, also called Curlew Creek, about three miles northeast of Snowville in Utah, and seven miles south of Holbrook, the headquarters of the Curlew Stake. The gardens and farming lands of Stone are irrigated from a canal which taps Deep Creek about nine miles north of the ward center, heading in the so-called Deep Creek Springs, which issue from the hills about 150 yards above the head of the canal. Some of the farms are situated on the east side of Deep Creek and form a part of the so-called Curlew Project, which depends mainly upon a reservoir for irrigation water.

Stone Ward is an outgrowth of Snowville, Box Elder Co., Utah. The original name of what is now Stone Ward was St. Thomas, named in honor of the first settlers. On Aug. 10, 1902, the saints of Stone were organized as a regular bishop's ward, with Thomas W. Rowe as Bishop. For some time prior to that these saints had constituted a branch of the Snowville Ward. The new ward was named Stone, in honor of an old settler by that name who was among the first white men to make a home in Curlew Valley. When the Curlew Stake was organized May 17, 1915, Bishop Thos. W. Rowe was chosen as second counselor in the new stake presidency. He was succeeded as Bishop of the Stone Ward by Hulbert B. Robbins, who in 1917 was succeeded by Andrew P. Peterson, who in 1922 was succeeded by James W. Palmer, who in 1929 was succeeded by Thomas Leland Cottle, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the membership of the Stone Ward was 170, including 60 children. Stone Ward, which originally belonged to Box Elder Stake, was transferred to Malad Stake in 1908 and became a part of the Curlew Stake in 1915.
