Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Strangites

STRANGITES, a name given to the followers of James Jesse Strang who, previous to the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, June 27, 1844, had been ordained an Elder in the Church, but who refused to acknowledge Brigham Young as president after the martyrdom. Strang claimed to have received a letter from the Prophet, written in Carthage Jail the day previous to the martyrdom, appointing him to preside over the Church in case of the Prophet's demise. The Council of Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young at their head, denounced Strang as an imposter and the letter a forgery. He, however, being a lawyer by profession and having considerable oratorical ability, gained a following and went to the banks of White River, near Burlington, Wisconsin, where he began to build a city, which he called Voree, or the "Garden of Peace". He established a printing office and published a weekly paper, called the "Voree Herald". The location of Voree not proving satisfactory, James J. Strang selected a new gathering place for his sect on Beaver Island, in the north end of Lake Michigan in 1850. Here he established a colony which he called St. James in honor of himself, and there he ruled as a potentate. Mr. Strang also published a book entitled the "Book of the Law of the Lord," containing revelations which he claimed to have obtained from the Lord. The newspaper was continued under the name of "The Gospel Herald."

But as a leader, James J. Strang was too arbitrary and ambitious, and on one occasion he caused one of his adherents to be publicly flogged. This man and others, who considered themselves abused, vowed to be revenged and on July 9, 1856, Mr. Strang was shot by a Mr. Wentworth, a member of the colony. The injured man was removed to Voree, accompanied by his family, and died there a week later. After this, the members of the sect scattered, but in 1922 there were remaining a few members, among whom was one 90 years of age, a former official of the organization, residing near Burlington, Wisconsin. Some journeyed westward and united with the body of the Church in Utah.
