Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sugar House Ward

SUGAR HOUSE WARD consists (1930) of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Salt Lake City, Utah, lying within the following boundaries: Commencing at the intersection of 17th South and 10th East streets, running thence south to Hollywood Avenue, thence east to 11th East St., thence south to the Park City branch of the D. & R. G. Railroad track, thence east to 17th East St., thence north to Westminster Avenue, thence west to 13th East St., thence north to 17th South St., then west to 10th East St., or the place of beginning. The new, modern ward meeting house is situated on the west side of 12th East Street, facing east, between Ramona Ave. and 21st South St.

Sugar House Ward dates back to 1848, the year after the Pioneers arrived in the valley. Ira Eldredge was the first farmer on Canyon Creek (Parley's Creek) within the present limits of the Sugar House Ward. In the spring of 1848 he conducted water from the creek on a piece of land about half a mile southeast of the present site of the State Prison, and raised a crop of wheat, Indian corn and potatoes that season. In the fall of 1848 Charles Crismon built the first house on the creek, near the spot where the residence of the late Ira Eldredge stood. Among others of the first settlers on Canyon Creek were Charles Kennedy, Joseph Fisher, Lorenzo D. Young, John Eldredge, Norman Bliss and Albert Griffin, who located at various places on the creek in 1849 and 1850. Pres. Brigham Young built a flouring mill on the creek at an early day.

In 1852 the population on Canyon Creek was considerably increased by the arrival of immigrants from the East, and in 1853 the settlers on Canyon Creek assisted the Mill Creek saints in building a small fort on Mill Creek, about two miles south of Canyon Creek. The first school house on Canyon Creek, a small log building, was erected in 1852, on the north side of the creek, a few rods below where the old paper mill stood. For several years schools were taught and meetings held in that building. A school district was organized June 8, 1852; by the county court.

The necessary machinery for a sugar factory was brought by Philip De La Mare from England for the Deseret Manufacturing Company in 1852, and in the fall of that year an unsuccessful attempt was made to manufacture sugar in Provo, Utah, the imported machinery being put up for that purpose in a factory building there. In the spring of 1853 it was removed to the Temple Block in Salt Lake City, where another fruitless attempt was made to manufacture sugar from beets. Early in 1854 the machinery was taken to a sugar factory built on Canyon Creek, where the building, later known as the old Sugar House or Paper Mill, was erected by the Church in 1854-1855, under the direction of Abraham O. Smoot. In the latter part of 1855 the machinery was put in running order in the new building, and a quantity of good molasses made from beets, the sugar business still proving a failure. About 300 acres of land were planted with beets in 1855. It is estimated that the Church lost about $100,000 by these experiments. The machinery imported for the purpose of making sugar was later scattered throughout the country; the greater part of it, however, was stored for years under sheds in the Tithing Yard in Salt Lake City.

The log school house built on Canyon Creek in 1852 served for meetings and school purposes until 1855, when an adobe school house was built on a hill across the street north of the building known as the Sugar House. This school house was torn down in 1887 and a two-story brick building erected to which an addition was later made to form a T shaped structure. In 1927 one of the finest chapels in Salt Lake County, with an amusement hall attached, was erected by the saints of Sugar House Ward on 12th East St. between Ramona and 21st South streets, at a cost of $89,000.

In 1860 the building known as the Sugar House was remodeled and a paper factory established within its walls in which paper, used for the publication of the "Deseret News", etc., was manufactured. Although the industry of making paper proved more profitable than the manufacture of sugar, it was nevertheless abandoned for the lack of sufficient water to run the heavy machinery, Canyon Creek proving inadequate for both irrigation and mill purposes. Later, nails were manufactured in the old sugar factory and still later it became a bucket factory. For several years, also, the building housed machine shops for the Utah Central Railway (now the Park City branch of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad).

In 1867 an organization was formed in the Sugar House Ward for mutual improvement. This organization may consistently be termed the first of its kind in the territory of Utah.

At a council of the presiding officers of the Church held in Great Salt Lake City Feb. 16, 1849, it was decided to organize all that part of Great Salt Lake Valley embraced in the original Five-Acre Survey into a ward to be known as the Canyon Creek Ward. It appears, however, that no such ward was ever organized. The few saints on Canyon Creek attended meetings in Salt Lake City for a number of years, and Bishop Reuben Miller of Mill Creek and Peter McCue of the 1st Ward, Salt Lake City, held jurisdiction alternately, until it was decided that Bishop Miller should have exclusive jurisdiction. A presiding Elder, who acted under the direction of Bishop Miller, took charge of the meetings and local affairs generally on Canyon Creek.

At an important meeting held April 23, 1854, the saints on Canyon Creek were organized as a ward called the Sugar House Ward, after the Sugar House, which was then in course of erection. Abraham O. Smoot, who had been called away from Cottonwood by Pres. Brigham Young to superintend the erection of the building mentioned and to take charge of the adjacent Forest Farm, was appointed Bishop of the new ward. Bishop Smoot, who had been elected mayor of Great Salt Lake City in 1857 to fill the unexpired term of the late Jedediah M. Grant, removed to the city and Ira Eldredge succeeded him as Bishop of the Sugar House Ward. Bishop Eldredge died Feb. 6, 1866, after which William C. A. Smoot was chosen as acting Bishop. He acted in that capacity until July 23, 1877, when he was succeeded by Apollos G. Driggs, who in 1900 was succeeded by Millen M. Atwood, who in 1905 was succeeded by John M. Whitaker, who in 1914 was succeeded by William L. Hansen, who in 1919 was succeeded by LeGrand Richards, who in 1925 was succeeded by Thomas M. Wheeler, who acted as Bishop of the ward Dec. 31, 1930.

The Sugar House Ward originally embraced the so-called Five-Acre Survey and all the country lying east of it to the foot of the mountains; westward it extended to the Jordan River. Subsequently the southern boundary line was moved about one mile south. At a meeting held Jan. 3, 1883, it was decided that all that part of the Sugar House Ward lying north of Roper St. (or 13th South St.) should belong to Salt Lake City wards. This change transferred a good number of families from the Sugar House Ward to the 1st Ward, Salt Lake City, and also some families to the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th wards.

Of all the original wards organized in Salt Lake Valley, or in fact throughout the Church, no single ward has had so many divisions and subdivisions as the Sugar House Ward. It is practically the parent ward to all of the following wards in Salt Lake Valley: Belvedere, Burton, Central Park, Emerson, Forest Dale, Hawthorne, Highland Park, Jefferson, LeGrand, Liberty, Lincoln, McKinley, Nibley Park, Parley's, Richards, Salt Lake City 30th, Salt Lake City 31st, Southgate, Wasatch, Waterloo, Wells, Whittier and Yale-23 wards altogether.

In 1873 a post office was established at Sugar House, called the Paper Mill Station. In 1887 the western boundary of the ward was placed at 5th East St., or what was then known as the Farmers Precinct, but the ward at that time still contained twenty-two square miles of country lying east and southeast of Salt Lake City boundaries. Little by little, as the population of the city increased, parts of Sugar House Ward were detached from the parent ward and organized as separate wards until its boundaries became as at present constituted, all within the city limits. On Dec. 31, 1930, the Sugar House Ward had 1,365 members, including 291 children.

Sugar House Ward belonged to Salt Lake Stake for many years, but in January, 1900, when Granite Stake was organized, it became part of that stake. The ward contains a large number of stores, business offices, etc., and is the commercial center of the southeast section of Salt Lake City.
