Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sugarville Ward

SUGARVILLE WARD, Deseret Stake, Millard Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district in the lower Sevier Valley (a part of the great Pauvant Valley) about 12 miles northwest of Delta. A small village forming the center of the Sugarville Ward is located on a spur of the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. North the Sugarville Ward extends indefinitely into the desert, east to Delta, south to the Sevier River, and west to the Hinckley Ward. Most of the inhabitants are Latter-day Saints. Sugar beets and alfalfa were the main products raised until the sugar factory ceased its operations.

Sugarville Ward, formerly called Alfalfa and Omaha, is an outgrowth of the Sutherland Ward, although some of the early settlers belonged to Abraham Ward. As that part of the country now included in the Sugarville Ward was settled by Latter-day Saints, and some of the farmers within the district lived long distances from the Abraham and Sutherland Ward centers, a Sunday school for the accommodation of the children in the locality was organized in 1913 and the neighborhood called Alfalfa, a townsite within the limits of the Abraham Ward. The saints at Alfalfa were organized into a branch of the Abraham Ward July 12, 1914, with Jesse Sill as presiding Elder. That year the Alfalfa Branch, which in the meantime had been named the Omaha Branch, was transferred from the Abraham Ward to the Sutherland Ward. In 1915 a spur of the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad was built from Delta to Omaha, a distance of 13 miles. On Jan. 1, 1918, the Sugarville Branch of the Sutherland Ward was made an independent branch, with Jesse Sill as presiding Elder. He presided until June 29, 1919, when the Sugarville Branch was organized as a ward with Norman S. Anderson as Bishop. Bro. Anderson was succeeded in 1920 by John W. Miller, who in 1926 was succeeded by Wells J. Robertson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Church membership of the Sugarville Ward was 133, including 33 children.
