Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Boulder Branch

BOULDER BRANCH, of Garfield Stake, Garfield Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a beautiful fertile valley, twelve miles northeast of Escalante in Garfield County, Utah. This valley is by no means easy of access, for in order to reach it, the traveler has to make his way over almost impassable mountain roads and dugways, almost perpendicular rocky heights and bad river crossings, but after once reaching the valley a miniature paradise opens to view. The farming lands in Boulder Valley are rich and productive. The valley is on the Green River slope at a lower altitude than some of the other settlements in the Garfield Stake. All kinds of fruit are raised as well as the ordinary cereals and vegetables. That part of the country now included in the Boulder Branch was first settled by Amasa M. Lyman, jun., and family in 1889, but prior to that the country around the Boulder Mountains had been utilized by ranchmen for herding sheep and cattle, grass and water being plentiful. In due course of time attention was drawn to the Boulder country as a good place for making a settlement, though far remote from any other settlements of the saints. A number of men (all Latter-day Saints) commenced to make roads from Fremont Valley over the mountains with a view of making homes on Boulder and Deer creeks. A log school house was erected and meetings and Sunday school sessions commenced. On Aug. 16, 1903, the saints in the Boulder country were organized as a regular branch of the Church with James C. Peterson (formerly of Richfield, Utah) as presiding Elder. This branch organization was made a part of the Thurber Ward of the Wayne Stake. In 1908 James C. Peterson was succeeded as presiding Elder of the branch by Christian Andreas Hansen, who died Sept. 19, 1914, and was succeeded by James C. Peterson, who, having returned from a mission to Scandinavia, was again appointed president of the branch. Pres. Peterson died July 5, 1917, and was succeeded as presiding Elder by Claude V. Baker, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the membership of the Boulder Branch was 169 souls, including 44 children. The total population of the Boulder Precinct in 1930 was 192.
