Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sunday Schools

SUNDAY SCHOOLS. The first L. D. S. Sunday school in Great Salt Lake Valley was organized on Sunday Dec. 9, 1849, in the 14th Ward, Great Salt Lake City, with Richard Ballantyne as superintendent. Sessions were commenced with a few children in the little Ballantyne home, located on the corner of 1st West and 3rd South streets, Great Salt Lake City, but when, later, the first 14th Ward meeting house was completed, Sunday school sessions were held there. From this small beginning the L. D. S. Sunday school movement increased until it was found necessary to organize a supervising body. Consequently on Nov. 4, 1867, under the direction of Pres. Brigham Young, the Sunday School Union Board was organized with George Q. Cannon as president. The name was later changed to the Deseret Sunday School Union. For many years George Goddard was first assistant to General Superintendent George Q. Cannon. The name of George Goddard became known from child to sage in connection with Sunday school work in the Church.

On Jan, 1, 1866, the "Juvenile Instructor," the organ of the L. D. S. Sunday schools, was commenced. This magazine has had a continued existence ever since, except that in 1930 the name of the publication was changed to "The Instructor."

Lesson outlines, in pamphlet or leaflet form, are published for use in the senior divisions of the schools and for the junior class lessons are outlined in "The Instructor."

Four hymn books have been published by the Deseret Sunday School Union for the benefit of the Sunday school, namely, the "S. S. Union Music Book" in 1884; the "Sunday School Hymn Book" in 1888; "The Deseret Sunday School Song Book" in 1892, and "Deseret Songs," containing 300 selections, in 1909.

Sunday Schools are held in every ward and branch in the stakes and in most of the branches in the missions.

On Dec. 31, 1930, David O. McKay was the General Superintendent of the L, D. S. Sunday School Union with Stephen L. Richards as 1st assistant and George D. Pyper as 2nd assistant superintendent. A. Hamer Reiser was secretary and John F. Bennett treasurer. At that time 1,877 schools were functioning regularly with an enrollment of 26,822 officers and 259,388 pupils.
