Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Sunset

SUNSET, Little Colorado Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, was a temporary settlement of Latter-day Saints situated on the sandy flats of the Little Colorado River, about 1 1/2 miles east of said river and about four miles northeast of the present town of Winslow on the Atchinson, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad. The Sunset settlement consisted of a fort stockade, about 12 rods square, the rock houses being built so as to form the walls of the square. There were entrances to the fort through the walls on the north and south sides. A dining hall was erected in the center of the fort, near which there was a well. Farming lands were surveyed all around the fort. Water for irrigation purposes was obtained from the river through ditches, the first of which was made when the settlement was founded. The head of the ditch was two and a half miles east of the settlement. Later, when a mill was built, the water was raised eight feet, being forced out onto the level on both sides of the river by levees built across the low lands. In this manner water for irrigation purposes was obtained for both Sunset and Brigham City. The old Sunset Crossing, which suggested the name of the settlement, was immediately below the present bridge on the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad. It was, according to the statement of the pioneers, thus named by a party of travelers who crossed the Little Colorado River at that point just at sunset.

Sunset was one of the original settlements founded by the colonizing L. D. S. missionaries called from Utah to settle in Arizona in the beginning of 1876. These missionaries traveled in four companies, presided over respectively by Lot Smith, George Lake, Wm. C. Allen and Jesse O. Ballenger. After encountering a number of vicissitudes incidental to traveling through a desolate country without a made road, the company arrived at the Sunset Crossing on the Little Colorado River March 23, 1876. The next day the company traveled 25 miles to a point about three miles west of the present site of St. Joseph. There a counsel was held and plans laid for future movements.

Wm. C. Allen and company located about 25 miles southeast of Sunset Crossing and called their place Allen. George Lake and company located on the opposite side of the river about three miles southwest of Allen and called their camp Obed. Lot Smith and company retraced part of their journey, going down the river, and settled about three miles below and northwest of the Sunset Crossing and called their location Sunset. Jesse O. Ballenger and company located about four miles northwest of Sunset Crossing on the east side of the river and called their place Ballenger's Camp, afterwards changed to Brigham City.

The Sunset settlement was commenced by building a fort stockade, with rock houses built all around inside of the stockade posts, which consisted of round cottonwood logs, mostly driftwood picked up on the river flats. A dining hall was erected near the center of the fort, where a well was also dug. Apostle Erastus Snow visited Sunset Sept. 23, 1878, on which occasion Levi M. Savage was chosen as Bishop of the Sunset Ward. At that time there were 31 dwellings, 14x16 feet, one dining hall, 15x55 feet, one school room, 14x33 feet, one kitchen, 15x25 feet, with good lumber roofs, and two store rooms, 14x20 and 10x12 feet respectively. There was also a granary with some 400 bushels and a corn crib, 10x32 feet, with 75 bushels of corn in it. Stock yards and corrals enclosed three acres of ground. The colony consisted of 102 souls, namely, 19 men, 18 women, 43 boys and 22 girls, all living in the United Order. Good crops were raised in 1878, but a flood occurred which raised the water so high that the settlers up the river had to cross the bottom lands in a boat to attend the conference at Brigham City.

The people of Sunset lived together, at Brigham City, using a common kitchen, bakery and dining hall. There was one commissary or superintendent with two sisters as cooks, who served 3 1/2 days at a time, assisted by two boy waiters. There was a well in the fort 36 feet deep. Two men were engaged as carpenters, eight on the farm, two herded stock, one worked in the garden, three at the dairy, and one as a shoemaker. In 1879 good crops were raised in Sunset as well as in the other settlements on the Little Colorado River, although the people sustained great losses in the washing away of their dams. In 1880 the crops were almost a total failure in the valley of the Little Colorado River, and Sunset, like Brigham City, suffered from the breaking up of the dams and the consequent burning up of their crops. In 1882 many of the people of Sunset became discouraged and moved away. Others left the settlement in 1883, and in 1884 the remaining settlers at Sunset left for other parts of the country. In 1885 Lot Smith's family were the only ones left of the once flourishing little settlement of Sunset. The people moved away gradually, a few at a time, and the last families moved away in 1888, soon after the disorganization of the Little Colorado Stake.
