Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Bountiful

BOUNTIFUL, a town in the South Davis Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the southeastern part of Davis County, Utah. The center of the ward (or the Bountiful Tabernacle) is located about ten miles north of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City.

Bountiful has the distinction of being the second oldest Mormon settlement in Utah. It is the immediate outgrowth of the immigration which followed the original pioneers under Pres. Brigham Young in July, 1847. Perregrine Sessions, captain of the 1st fifty of Capt. Daniel Spencer's hundred, arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley Sept. 26, 1847, and three days later (Sept. 29th) he encamped on a spot of ground later embraced in the town of Bountiful, where he made his permanent home. He was accompanied by Samuel Brown and these two men built a shanty and herded about 300 head of cattle on the range. In the spring of 1848, Perregrine Sessions built a better cabin for his family and more settlers came to join him, among whom were Aaron B. Cherry, Jezreel Shomaker, Orville S. Cox, John Perry and William Duell. Later the same year Anson Call, Eric G. M. Hogan, Albert Connelly, Ezra Clark, James Stevenson, Robinson C. Merkley, Titus Billings, Wm. Empey, Charles Chapman and others also came to the Sessions Settlement, as it was called. About 25 families spent the winter of 1848-49 near the mouth of North Canyon, where the pioneers had located. In 1849 more families arrived and Apostle Lorenzo Snow built a house and brought part of his family to the location.

Orville S. Cox took the lead of religious affairs in the new settlement at the beginning and early in 1849 he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the North Mill Canyon Ward, as it was called. The next year Bishop Cox was called to help settle Sanpete Valley and Anson Call was appointed his successor. This year nearly all the grain and vegetables planted by these pioneer settlers were destroyed by crickets. When despair filled their hearts, the sea gulls from the Great Salt Lake providentially came to the rescue and enough of their crops were saved to preserve the people from actual starvation.

In October, 1853, North Canyon Ward had a membership of 574 souls. On Feb. 27, 1855, the occasion of a visit by Apostles George A. Smith and Ezra T. Benson, the name of North Canyon Ward was changed to Bountiful, the fertility of the soil in the district suggesting its comparison with the "Land Bountiful" mentioned in the Book of Mormon.

The natural fertility of the soil of the district was at times counter-balanced by scourges of crickets and grasshoppers. Bishop Anson Call related that one afternoon in the summer of 1855 over a wide area the sky was dark with grasshoppers. These pests settled as a. solid mass on buildings, gardens and fields. As they came from the east and lighted on the wheat, it was bent over to the west. The next morning these destroyers arose in clouds and continued their flight westward over the Great Salt Lake. This was their destruction, for they were precipitated into the briny waters and perished. Later they were washed ashore in a winnow, varying from two to six feet wide and from one to three feet in thickness. This winnow extended along the shore of the lake for a distance of fifty miles.

In 1855 a Lyceum Association was organized at Bountiful for mutual improvement, and Apostle George A. Smith, visiting the society the same year, suggested that the members should try to establish a library in connection with it, which they did. As early as 1853 a Sunday school was held in the home of Jeremiah Willie in the Sessions Settlement but after the "move" in 1858, on account of the approach of Johnston's Army, no record of Sunday schools in Bountiful for several years has been found, but at the close of 1868 there were six day schools and three Sunday schools in active operation in Bountiful. In 1868, also, a permanent Relief Society was organized at Bountiful with Mrs. Elizabeth Barlow as president. A Relief Society had previously been organized in 1853, but ceased to operate after the "move" in 1858. In 1870 the Young Ladies Cooperative Retrenchment Association (later a Y. L. M. I. A.) was organized and in 1874 the Bountiful Young Men's Association (later a Y. M. M. I. A.) was organized. In 1874 also a branch of the United Order was established in Bountiful with Anson Call as president.

In 1849 a log school house was built in the North Canyon Ward, which in 1852 was replaced by an adobe building. This, in connection with another similar school house erected in the upper part of the ward, served for school and meeting purposes until the Bountiful Tabernacle was completed in 1862. In 1877 the Bountiful Ward was divided into three wards, namely, East Bountiful, West Bountiful and South Bountiful. In 1909 the East Bountiful Ward was divided into the Bountiful 1st and 2nd wards.

Bishop John Stoker presided over the Bountiful Ward 24 years, or until 1874, when he was succeeded by Anson Call (serving a second term), who acted as Bishop until the ward was divided in 1877.
