Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Swan Lake Ward

SWAN LAKE WARD, Portneuf Stake, Bannock Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the extreme north end of Cache Valley, on the Rim of the Basin, so-called. It comprises considerable valley and mountain country and both irrigated and dry farming is carried on successfully by the agriculturists, which constitute the inhabitants of the ward. It is a scattered settlement extending north to the Grant Ward, and south to the Oxford Ward, in the Oneida Stake. East and west it extends to the mountains. The ward covers a part of the Rim of the Great Interior Basin at a place where there is no "rim" at all, but nevertheless a watershed dividing the headwaters of a tributary of Bear River on the south from Marsh Creek, a tributary of Portneuf River, on the north. The center of the ward is the village of Swan Lake, which is 4 1/2 miles northeast of Oxford, 12 miles southeast of Downey, the stake headquarters, and 22 miles northwest of Preston, in Oneida Stake. The inhabitants are nearly all farmers and Latter-day Saints. The ward extends north to Red Rock, the point where the water can run north into Marsh Creek, and south into Bear River.

Swan Lake Ward is an outgrowth of Oxford in Cache Valley, but at a meeting held May 29, 1911, the saints residing in the extreme north end of Cache Valley, near the historic Swan Lake, were organized into a bishop's ward, with James J. Petty, jun., as Bishop. Prior to the organization of the ward the saints in the Swan Lake District constituted a part of the Oxford Ward, and in 1884 became a part of the Oneida Stake, where it remained until Aug. 15, 1915, when the Swan Lake Ward was transferred from the Oneida to the new Portneuf Stake. Joseph W. Kay acted as presiding Elder at Swan Lake from 1900 to 1911. He was succeeded by Lewis J. Petty as Bishop, who still presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 240 members, including 46 children. The total population of the Swan Lake Precinct was 256 in 1930.
