Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Swiss Mission

SWISS MISSION (The) consisted of the little republic of Switzerland. Switzerland, also known as Helvetia, is located in Europe between Germany, France and Italy; it has an area of 15,940 square miles and is the most elevated country in Europe. It extends only 250 miles from east to west and 150 miles from north to south. The population of Switzerland at the close of 1930 was 3,067,305. German is the prevailing language, although French and Italian are spoken in certain parts which border on France and Italy.

Switzerland became a missionary field of the Church in 1850, when Apostle Lorenzo Snow, who had commenced to open up a mission in Italy, sent Thomas B. H. Stenhouse into Switzerland to open up a mission there. Elder Stenhouse took with him some pamphlets in the French language, published by Elder Snow in Piedmont, Italy. In April, 1851, the "Millennial Star" announced that Elder Stenhouse had made some converts and administered the ordinance of baptism. His labors were principally confined to Geneva and Lausanne and in 1852, when Pres. Lorenzo Snow visited Elder Stenhouse, he found about 20 faithful members of the Church in these districts. The Book of Mormon in the German and also in the French language was being used, as well as the magazine "L'Etoile du Deseret," a periodical, the publication of which was commenced by Apostle John Taylor, president of the French Mission, in Paris in 1851. In 1853 Elder Stenhouse at Lausanne commenced the publication of "Le Reflecteur," another monthly periodical in the interest of the mission.

Other missionaries came into the field, but many of them endured persecution and were frequently banished by the civil authorities from the districts in which they were laboring. Among the early converts was Serge Ballif of Lausanne, who gave up a good position and a comfortable home in order to devote himself to missionary work.

On Dec. 25, 1853, the first conference of the Church in Switzerland was held in Geneva, at which 110 members of the Church were represented in Switzerland. At this conference Chas. R. Savage acted as secretary. Five districts were represented, namely, Geneva, Vaud, Neuchatel, Basel and Zurich.

In 1854 the Swiss Mission and the Italian Mission were amalgamated under the name of the Swiss and Italian Mission and the publication of "Le Reflecteur" was discontinued. (See Swiss and Italian Mission.)

In the beginning of 1898 Switzerland was again organized as a separate mission with Henry E. Bowman as president. Headquarters for the Swiss Mission were retained at the old mission house at Bern, formerly used as the headquarters of the Swiss and German Mission. Renewed efforts to spread the gospel were made, and a male quartet, composed of missionaries from Zion, rendered excellent service at public meetings held in hired halls in the different towns and cities. At the close of the year 1898 the Swiss Mission had 14 organized branches and a total membership of 1,000. Twenty-seven Elders from Zion were laboring in Switzerland at that time.

In November, 1899, a volume of L. D. S. hymns in French, mostly translated from the English by Elder Daniel B. Richards and Sister Matilda Cecelia Giauque, was published in Neuchatel.

In January, 1900, Lewis S. Cardon succeeded Henry E. Bowman as president of the Swiss Mission, which, at the close of the year 1900, had 15 organized branches, namely, Bern, Basel, Biel, Biberist-Solothurn, Graubunden, Lausanne, Geneve, Langnau, Luzern, Neuchatel, Piedmont, Saint Gallen, Sirnach, Thun, Winterthur-Schaffhausen, and Zurich. Thirty-eight Elders were laboring in the mission. David L. McDonald succeeded Lewis S. Cardon in the presidency of the mission in 1901. He was succeeded in 1902 by Levi Edgar Young, who presided until May 22, 1904, when the Swiss Mission and the German Mission were again amalgamated under the name of the Swiss and German Mission (which see).
