Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Syracuse Ward

SYRACUSE WARD, North Davis Stake, Davis Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing at Syracuse, a scattered settlement in the center of which is a fruit cannery, located at the end of a spur of the Oregon Short Line Railroad. The village of Syracuse is located on the east shore, of the Great Salt Lake, about 28 miles northwest of Salt Lake City and 12 miles southwest of Ogden, Utah.

Syracuse Ward was organized Dec. 1, 1895, from parts of the South Hooper and Kaysville wards, with David Cook, sen., as Bishop. The first settlers in that part of Davis County were Joseph Bodily, David A. Kerr and Wm. S. Cook. Joseph Bodily arrived in 1877, built a house and moved his family into it. A year later David A. Kerr from South Weber arrived and also built a house, and these two, associated with Wm. S. Cook, who bought an 80-acre claim in the vicinity, made a three-mile long ditch to bring water onto their land. Other settlers followed, some of whom, according to their location, belonged to South Hooper Ward and some to South Weber Ward. In 1887 a bathing resort was established at Syracuse which, before the erection of the Saltair Pavilion, was well patronized.

It was found that the sandy loam soil in Syracuse and vicinity was suitable for orchards, and strawberries, cherries, peaches, pears, plums and other small fruits are raised very successfully.

As early as 1885 a frame meeting house, also used as a school house, was built at Syracuse, where a Sunday school was commenced the same year with Wm. H. Beazer as superintendent. About the same time David A. Kerr was appointed to act as Teacher in that part of the district included in the South Hooper Ward, and Wm. H. Beazer and Joseph Bodily as Teachers in that part included in the Kaysville Ward. Meetings had previously been held in private houses. At the time of the organization of the ward in 1895 it contained 27 families, or 237 souls. In 1913 a substantial brick chapel was erected at Syracuse at a cost of about $12,000. At the time of its organization the ward belonged to Davis Stake, but when that stake was divided in 1915 it became part of the North Davis Stake.

Bishop David Cook was succeeded in 1909 by Francis H. Nalder, who, being called as a counselor in the North Davis Stake presidency, was succeeded in 1915 by Arnold D. Miller, who also being called to act in the stake presidency, was succeeded in 1927 by Alma O. Stoker, who presided as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 706 members, including 179 children. The total population of the Syracuse Precinct was 890 in 1930.
