Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Tabernacles

TABERNACLES. The Tabernacle erected in the wilderness by the Israelites, by command of Jehovah, was, to some extent, a model of the temple to be erected later by them in the promised land. This tabernacle was the place where Jehovah might manifest himself to his Priesthood and give instructions to Moses, the lawgiver. The building was capable of being moved and reconstructed and the Ark of the Covenant, which it contained, was so sacred that only the Levites, the priestly tribe, were permitted to touch it. And thus the Israelites in their wanderings were trained in the knowledge of God and of his laws.

But the tabernacles of the Latter-day Saints are not models of their temples but are merely large assembly rooms or halls, where the saints, who have smaller meeting houses for their branch or ward meetings, might gather together in conference, or to receive general instructions.

The first tabernacle mentioned in the history of the Latter-day Saints was in Pottawattamie County, Iowa, while the exiles from Nauvoo were awaiting an opportunity to journey westward to the Rocky Mountains. Being constructed of logs, it became known as the "Log Tabernacle." This structure was built at the mouth of Miller's Hollow, or Kanesville (now Council Bluffs). It was 40 x 60 feet and capable of seating about a thousand people. Here, on Dec. 27, 1847, the First Presidency of the Church was reorganized with Brigham Young as president and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as counselors. Another log tabernacle was erected in the Big Pigeon settlement on Pigeon Creek, Pottawattamie County, Iowa, in the spring of 1849. This temporary building, 53 x 32 feet in size, was constructed of oak logs hewn on the inside, with a puncheon floor and a roof of oak lap shingles. In the center of the building on each side was an extension of about 16 x 14 feet, the ground plan thus taking the form of a Greek cross. The Big Pigeon settlement was broken up in 1852, when most of the saints in Pottawattamie County went west to the Rocky Mountains.

After the sick detachment of the Mormon Battalion had entered Salt Lake Valley July 29, 1847, these soldiers erected a bowery on the Temple Block. Later the same year another bowery was erected in the Old Fort, and in 1849 a more substantial bowery was constructed on the Temple Block, which was utilized until the Tabernacle was finished in 1852. This building, known as the "Old Tabernacle," was constructed of adobes on a rock foundation and stood on the southwest corner of the Temple Block. It measured 126 feet in length and 64 feet in width and had a sloping roof covered with wood shingles. It was capable of seating about 2,500 persons. There, the famous Tabernacle Choir was organized and functioned, and meetings were held regularly on Sundays. This tabernacle was torn down in 1877, when the erection of the Assembly Hall was commenced on the site.

For the famous Salt Lake Tabernacle, see separate article under the caption "Tabernacle (The)".

Many of the stakes of Zion have erected tabernacles with spacious halls and often with rooms attached for offices of the stake presidency and for meetings of stake quorums. Among these may be mentioned the tabernacles at Beaver, Bountiful, Brigham City, Granite Stake (Salt Lake City), Kaysville, Lehi, Ogden, Paris, Parowan, St. George and Springville, Utah.
