Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Taylorsville Ward, Cottonwood Stake

TAYLORSVILLE WARD, Cottonwood Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, (formerly North Jordan) consists of a farming district lying west of Jordan River somewhat centrally in Salt Lake County, bounded on the north by the Pleasant Green, Hunter and Granger wards, on the east by the Jordan River, on the south by West Jordan Ward, and west by the Oquirrh Range of Mountains. The ward meeting house is beautifully located near the center of the ward on the south side of one of the main roads running east and west across Salt Lake Valley, about half way between Jordan River on the east and the Redwood Road on the west. It is 10 1/2 miles southwest of Salt Lake City, or about two miles west of Midvale. The ward contains some of the best farms in Salt Lake Valley and many fine residences. Farming and sheep-raising are the principal industries of its inhabitants.

The early history of the North Jordan or Taylorsville Ward is interwoven with that of West Jordan, it being the headquarters of the latter ward until the spring of 1859, when Bishop Archibald Gardner became Bishop. At that time the West Jordan Ward included all that part of Salt Lake County lying west of the Jordan River, besides a small tract of country on the east side. A branch organization was effected at North Jordan with John Bennion as presiding Elder; he acted under the direction of Bishop Gardner. Elder John Bennion resigned his position and Samuel Bennion succeeded him as presiding Elder Sept. 27, 1863. The latter acted in that capacity until June 17, 1877, when the North Jordan Branch was organized into a ward called the North Jordan Ward, with Samuel Bennion as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1889 by Heber Bennion, who in in 1907 was succeeded by Joseph Lindsay, jun., who in 1913 was succeeded by Hyrum Bennion, jun., who in 1921 was succeeded by Samuel J. Lindsay, who acted as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Taylorsville Ward had 627 members, including 134 children.

In February, 1884, part of the North Jordan Ward was separated from the parent ward and organized into a new ward called the Granger Ward. Later the name of the ward was changed from North Jordan to that of Taylorsville, the latter name having previously been given to the precinct. Taylorsville or North Jordan Ward belonged to the Salt Lake Stake of Zion from its beginning until 1900, when it became a part of the Granite Stake, to which it belonged until 1914, when it was transferred to the Cottonwood Stake.
