Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Teasdale Ward

TEASDAL.E WARD, Wayne Stake, Wayne Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Teasdale, about ten miles southeast of Thurber.

The members of the Grover Branch of saints residing on Carcass Creek belong to this ward. Two families residing on Fish Creek 4 1/2 miles southeast, and several other families living at different points along the Fremont River, also belong to Teasdale Ward. The village of Teasdale is located on Teasdale Creek (formerly Bullberry Creek), in a little circular valley bordered on the south by lofty mountains. The townsite is very rocky and a rocky ridge extends through the center of the townsite from northwest to southeast. The village is five miles southeast of Thurber and 15 miles southeast of Loa, the headquarters of the Wayne Stake. Nearly all the residents are L. D. S. farmers and stockraisers. Not counting the families in the Grover Branch, there are 48 families of saints in Teasdale proper. The meeting house at Teasdale is a rock building erected in 1910. There is also an amusement hall (a rock building) and a Relief Society hall (a log building).

Jeremiah Stringam and George and Willard Brinkerhoff, who were settling at Thurber, made the first attempt at farming near the place where Teasdale now stands, in 1879. In 1880 water from Bullberry Creek was taken out on the south side to irrigate lands. The first houses, however, were built on the present site of Teasdale in 1882, when a townsite was also surveyed. When the Thurber Ward was organized in June, 1882, the saints on Bullberry Creek were included as a dependent branch in said ward, with Robert Nelson Adams as branch president. The settlement was named Teasdale in honor of Apostle George Teasdale. Later (in 1882) George Coleman succeeded Brother Adams as president of the branch. Teasdale was organized as a regular bishop's ward Feb. 2, 1886, with George Coleman as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1900 by George S. Coleman, who in 1903 was succeeded by Heber James Wilson, who in 1907 was succeeded by William Henry Heaps, who in 1926 was succeeded by Jus Williams, who on Jan. 12, 1930, was succeeded by Neil Forsythia, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Teasdale Ward had 342 members, including 93 children.
