Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Tempe Ward

TEMPE WARD, Maricopa Stake, Maricopa Co., Arizona, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Tempe, which is a station on the Southern Pacific Railroad, about eight miles west of Mesa, the stake headquarters, and nine miles southeast of Phoenix, the capital of Arizona. Tempe Ward can boast of a fine modern meeting house, erected like other buildings of the same kind in Arizona in the so-called Spanish Mission style, at a cost of $20,000. It has an auditorium capable of seating 300 people.

Joseph Ezekiel Johnson with his family and other relatives arrived at Mesa, Arizona, July 22, 1882, with an outfit consisting of about ten wagons. Bro. Johnson purchased 80 acres of land of Judge Chas. T. Hayden for $2,000, including a tract of land on which the present town of Tempe is built. On this purchase Bro. Johnson built up a town, near a small village occupied by Mexicans and Judge Hayden. Other L. D. S. families located at Tempe later, and when the Maricopa Stake of Zion was organized Dec. 10, 1882, David T. LeBaron was set apart as presiding Elder at Tempe. The Tempe Branch was organized as a ward June 15, 1884, with Samuel Openshaw as Bishop. Bishop Openshaw, being forced into exile on account of anti-polygamy prosecutions, was succeeded as Bishop in 1885 by James Francis Johnson. In 1887 a railroad was built from Maricopa to Phoenix by a syndicate from California, which planned to locate a railroad town where the Johnsons and other L. D. S. families had located. This syndicate bought out the Johnsons, which caused the ward to be discontinued Sept. 1, 1887, as most of the saints, who had constituted the membership of the same, left Tempe and located in other Mormon settlements in Salt River Valley. The few saints who remained at Tempe became attached to the Alma Branch; but as the town of Tempe grew and became a place of importance, and a number of Latter-day Saint families had gone into business there and otherwise became a part of the population, a branch of the Church was organized in Tempe Dec. 5, 1927, with Marion W. Turley as presiding Elder. On Feb. 1.9, 1928, this branch was organized as a ward with Marion W. Turley as Bishop; he acted in that capacity Dec. 31, 1930. Soon after the organization of the ward, steps were taken to erect a meeting house, one wing of which, called a recreation hall, was completed so that the first meetings could be held in it Nov. 19, 1929. Tempe, which may be termed a suburb of the growing city of Phoenix, seems to have a promising future. On Dec. 31, 1930, the Tempe Ward had 200 members, including 34 children. The total population of the Tempe town was 2,495 in 1930.
