Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Temple Block

TEMPLE BLOCK, situated in the heart of Salt Lake City, Utah, is a ten-acre square surrounded by a stone and adobe wall, 15 feet high and three feet thick. It forms the center of Salt Lake City, the street running north of it being North Temple St., the street east, East Temple St. (or Main St.), the street south, South Temple St., and the street west, West Temple St. The southeast corner of the Temple Block is the base line for meridian and latitude measurements and is the starting point for nearly all the surveys in Utah into townships and sections, the exception being a special base meridian established in Uintah County, Utah. Through large gates on each of the four sides of the Temple Block people pass in and out, the south gate being the one most frequently used. Immediately inside the south gate is an attractive building of artistic architectual design with the words Bureau of Information inscribed over the door. The attractions on the Temple Block are: 1, the Temple, 2, the Tabernacle, 3, the Assembly Hall, 4, the Bureau of Information with Museum, 5, Seagull Monument, 6, the Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith monuments, 7, the Monuments to the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, and 8, one of the first houses built in Utah.

The Temple Block is beautifully decorated with trees, shrubs, flowers and lawns, artistically laid out and improved in a most attractive style. The Temple Block was selected by Pres. Brigham Young and the first Utah pioneers in July, 1847, as the place on which to erect a temple. The present walls were built around the block in 1852-1856. (For further particulars see articles on Salt Lake Temple, Tabernacle, Assembly Hall, Seagull Monument, Bureau of Information, Bowery, Old Tabernacle, and Endowment House.) The southeast corner of the Temple Block is 4,250 feet above the level of the sea, or 50 feet above the medium level of the Great Salt Lake.
