Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Teton Stake of Zion

TETON STAKE OF ZION consists of Latter-day Saints residing in Teton County, Idaho, and Teton County, Wyoming, with headquarters at Driggs, Idaho. It consists of 11 organized wards, all in Teton County, Idaho, viz., Bates, Cache, Sedron, Chapin, Clawson, Darby, Driggs, Palisade, Pratt, Tetonia, and Victor. Also the Richvale Branch, and the following branches in Teton County, Wyoming: Grovont, Jackson, South Park and Wilson. The Teton Stake has a tabernacle, a stake and ward house combined. It is an attractive white painted frame building, with an auditorium, including a gallery, seating 700 people. Immediately west of the tabernacle is a stake office building, with commodious rooms for the stake presidency and High Council, and for holding Priesthood meetings and some of the auxiliary organization meetings. This building also has a spacious vault for preserving records. The close proximity of the celebrated Tetons has suggested names for the two Teton counties and the Teton Stake. These mountains are 13,000 feet high or more. Grand Teton is 13,858 feet high.

After the Snake River Valley had been pretty well filled with settlements of Latter-day Saints, attention was drawn to the beautiful but rather cold elevated Teton Basin or Valley, near by, and as early as 1888 the first settlement named Aline was founded in said valley. Soon afterwards other settlements were commenced, and as the Latter-day Saint population in the Teton country thus increased in number, it was deemed wise by the Church authorities to organize the saints there into a regular stake of Zion. This was done at a special meeting held Sept. 8, 1901, attended by Pres. Joseph F. Smith and Apostle John Henry Smith. On this occasion the following wards and branches, which hitherto had constituted a part of the Fremont Stake of Zion, were organized as the Teton Stake, with Don C. Driggs as president. John D. Killpack, jun., was chosen as first and George S. Young as second counselor in the stake presidency. A High Council, Priesthood quorums, and auxiliary organizations were organized on the same occasion. The names of the wards and branches in the new stake were as follows: Chapin, Darby, Haden, Leigh, Pratt and Victor wards in Idaho, and South Park and Wilson branches in Wyoming. Early in 1904 steps were taken for the erection of a stake office at Driggs, which was built during the following two years, at a cost of $5,000. It was dedicated Feb. 17, 1907. In November, 1913, Counselors Killpack and Young were both released, and William R. Durrant was chosen as first and James F. Griggs as second counselor to Pres. Don C. Driggs. Another change of counselors occurred May 20, 1918, when Second Counselor Griggs was succeeded by James M. Thomas. In 1919 William R. Durrant was succeeded as first counselor by Ralph D. Cordon, and Albert Choules succeeded James M. Thomas as second counselor. Pres. Don C. Driggs moved to Arizona, and at a stake conference held Feb. 20, 1921, he was honorably released, together with his counselors (Ralph R. Cordon and Albert Choules), and Albert Choules was chosen as president of the Teton Stake, with Ralph R. Cordon as his first, and Alma Hansen as second counselor. This presidency acted Dec. 31, 1930. Michael M. Norman was the first stake clerk of the Teton Stake; he was succeeded in 1909 by Walter H. Durrant, who in 1914 was succeeded by Charles Cherrington, who in 1918 was succeeded by Amacy W. Clark, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On this date the Teton Stake had a membership of 3,052, including 672 children. Ralph R. Cordon was the only Patriarch in the stake.
