Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Thatcher

THATCHER, Saint Joseph Stake, Graham Co., Arizona, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Thatcher, situated on the south side of the Gila River in the Gila Valley, and embraces a strip of country three miles wide, extending from the Gila River on the north to the Graham Mountains on the south, and thus parallels Central Ward. But the people all live on the lower end of the strip near the river where the land is fertile and productive. Thatcher is the headquarters of the St. Joseph Stake of Zion and was for many years the principal settlement in Gila Valley, or until Safford outgrew it as a business center. Thatcher abounds with beautiful orchards, fine groves of natural timber, mostly cottonwood and mesquite, extensive alfalfa fields and fine farms, which are irrigated from the Gila River through the Union Canal; the Central Canal and the Montezuma Canal.

John M. Moody and family were the first L. D. S. settlers in that part of the Gila Valley now included in the Thatcher Ward. Brother Moody arrived in the valley July 4, 1881, and commenced to farm at once. James Pace, of Mormon Battalion fame, arrived in 1882, together with others. In December, 1882, Apostle Erastus Snow and Moses Thatcher and others visited this new settlement on the Gila, and enjoyed a Christmas dinner under a bowery adjoining Bro. Moody's house. On this occasion the place was named Thatcher, in honor of Apostle Moses Thatcher. The saints at Thatcher were organized as a ward May 13, 1883, with John M. Moody as Bishop. Bishop Moody died Jan. 27, 1884, and on March 3, 1884, Samuel Claridge was set apart as presiding Elder at Thatcher. On Nov. 4, 1884, the Thatcher Branch was organized as a ward with Samuel Claridge as Bishop. He presided until 1899, when he was succeeded by Isaac E. D. Zundell, who in 1902 was succeeded by William A. Moody, who in 1907 was succeeded by Andrew C. Peterson, who in 1909 was succeeded by Frank M. Tyler, who presided until 1919, when Thatcher was divided and two wards organized, namely, the Thatcher East Ward and the Thatcher West Ward. These two wards existed side by side until 1929, when the Thatcher East and the Thatcher West wards were amalgamated, and the united ward given the original name of Thatcher, with Jesse A. Udall as Bishop. He presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Thatcher Ward had 865 members, including 167 children. The total membership of the Thatcher Precinct in 1930 was 1,374, of which 895 resided in the town of Thatcher.
