Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Box Elder Stake

BOX ELDER STAKE, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the southeast part of Box Elder County, extending north to the Bear River Stake, east to the Wasatch Mountains, south to North Weber Stake and west to the Promontory range of mountains. The headquarters of the stake are at Brigham City, where there is a beautiful stake tabernacle and accommodations for the stake presidency and the High Council. Nearly all the Latter-day Saints within the limits of the stake are farmers and horticulturists. The stake contains the following bishop's wards: Bear River, Brigham City 1st, Brigham City 2nd, Brigham City 3rd, Brigham City 4th, Brigham City 5th, Brigham City 6th, Corinne, Harper, Honeyville, Mantua. Perry and Willard.

Box Elder County was first settled by Latter-day Saints in 1851 and for some time the saints who made their homes in that part of Utah belonged to the Weber Stake of Zion; after Box Elder County was organized from the north part of Weber County, a temporary grouping of the settlements took place, Alvin T. Nichols, of Brigham City, having general jurisdiction in Box Elder County. In 1855 Apostle Lorenzo Snow was called to preside over the county in a Church capacity, and acted in that position until Aug. 18, 1877, when the saints in Box Elder County were organized into a stake of Zion with Oliver G. Snow as president, and. Elijah A, Box as his first and Isaac Smith as his second counselor. At the time of its organization, the stake consisted of 16 wards, viz., Brigham City 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th wards, Three Mile Creek (later Perry), Willard City, Mantua, North Ward (later Harper), Honeyville, Deweyville, Portage, Malad (in Idaho), Bear River City, Curlew, Grouse Creek and Corinne.

In 1883 John D. Burr succeeded Isaac Smith as second counselor. In 1887 Pres. Oliver G. Snow was released, together with his counselors (Elijah A. Box and John D. Burt), and on Feb. 5, 1888, Rudger Clawson was sustained as president of the Box Elder Stake. In April following Adolph Madsen was sustained as first and Charles Kelly as second counselor to Pres. Clawson. In 1888 the Box Elder Stake was divided and the north part of the same organized into a new stake of Zion named the Malad Stake. On this occasion Malad City, Samaria, Portage, Cherry Creek, and other smaller settlements, which hitherto had belonged to the Box Elder Stake, were transferred to the new Malad Stake. This left the following wards in the Box Elder Stake; Brigham City 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th wards, Bear River City, Deweyville, Grouse Creek, Honeyville, Mantua, North (Harper), Park Valley, Snowville, Three Mile Creek (Perry) and Willard.

Pres. Rudger Clawson was chosen as one of the Twelve Apostles in 1898 and was consequently released as president of the Box Elder Stake, together with his counselors (Charles Kelly and Wm. S. Watkins), and on Nov. 19, 1899, Charles Kelly was chosen as president of the Box Elder Stake, with Lucius A. Snow as first and Oleen N. Stohl as second counselors.

Pres. Charles Kelly died April 23, 1905, and on May 29, 1905, Oleen N. Stohl was chosen as president of the Box Elder Stake, with Lucius A. Snow as first and William Clements Horsley a second counselor.

Pres. Oleen N. Stohl died Nov. 28, 1916, after which counselors Lucius A. Snow and William C. Horsley took temporary charge of the stake until March 18, 1917, when Severin Norman Lee was chosen as president of the Box Elder Stake, with Victor E. Madsen as first and Jos. N. Stohl as second counselor.

First Counselor Victor E. Madsen died June 3, 1922, and Joseph N. Stohl was promoted to first and William C. Horsley chosen as second counselor June 9, 1922.

Joseph N. Stohl (first counselor) moved to Salt Lake City and was released Aug. 1, 1926, when William C. Horsley was promoted to first counselor and Hervin Bunderson chosen as second counselor to Pres. Lee. James Bywater was the first clerk of Box Elder Stake; he was succeeded in 1891 by Niels Jensen, who in 1897 was succeeded by Oleen N. Stohl, who later in 1897 was succeeded by Nephi Andersen, who in 1900 was succeeded by Severin N. Lee, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Box Elder Stake had 7,773 members, including 1,356 children.
