Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Thatcher Ward, Bear River Stake

THATCHER WARD, Bear River Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the west part of the so-called Bear River Flat or Bear River Valley. The ward is bounded on the north by the Bothwell Ward, east by the Tremonton Ward, south by the Penrose Ward, and west by the mountains. The center of the ward, where the meeting house and school house stand, is about 11 miles southwest of Garland, 12 miles northwest of Bear River City, and 22 miles northwest of Brigham City. Only a few families reside on the Thatcher townsite; the majority of the people, being farmers, reside on their respective homesteads. The meeting house is situated on the northwest corner of Section 13, Township 11 north, Range 4 west, Salt Lake Meridian.

The first Latter-day Saint settler in that district of country now constituting the Thatcher Ward was Charles J. Rohwer from Park Valley, Utah, who in the spring of 1890 located on the southwest quarter of Sec. 22, of Township 11 north, Range 4 west, Salt Lake Meridian, and commenced dry farming. In sinking a well, only salt water was obtained; yet a small crop of grain was raised without irrigation, prior to the construction of the Bothwell Canal. A few non-Mormon ranchmen had inhabited the valley before Bro. Rohwer. Elder Rohwer belonged to the Bear River City Ward until the Bothwell Ward was organized in 1898, after which he attended meetings there. In the meantime other settlers arrived and a school house was erected in 1897. A Sunday school was organized in the neighborhood July 5, 1896, and a branch, called the West Side Branch of the Bothwell Ward, was also organized. This branch was organized in the fall of 1902 as the Thatcher Ward, thus named in honor of Apostle Moses Thatcher. James Nelson, jun., who had presided over the West Side Branch, was called to act as Bishop of the new ward. He was succeeded in 1911 by Richard G. Watt, who in 1924 was succeeded by Almon N. Wight, who acted as Bishop of the Thatcher Ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Thatcher Ward had 247 members, including 62 children.
