Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"The Times and Seasons"

"TIMES AND SEASONS (The)." After the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from Missouri in the early part of 1839, and after the new headquarters of the Church had been established at Commerce (afterwards Nauvoo), in Hancock County, Illinois, the need of another Church periodical was felt in the new colony of saints planted on the bank of the Mississippi River. Hence, some time during the spring of 1839, messengers were sent from Commerce back to Far West, Missouri, where they, in Brother Dawson's yard, dug up the type which had been used for the publication of the "Elders Journal" the previous year, and brought the material to Commerce, where a printing press was put up in the basement of a building, and the publication of "The Times and Seasons" commenced.

The first number of this periodical is dated November, 1839, after which it was published regularly for nearly six years as the organ of the Church, and like its three predecessors, advocated the principles of the gospel, and the needs of the Latter-day Saints particularly. It also contained choice sermons preached by Joseph Smith the Prophet and others, and communications from the Elders who labored in the different missionary fields throughout the United States and Canada, as well as Great Britain. Each number of the paper consisted of 16 large octavo pages, the printing matter on each page measuring 4 1/4 by 8 inches.

The first volume consisted of 12 numbers issued monthly. With the beginning of Volume 2, the periodical was changed from a monthly to a semi-monthly paper, and was thus continued until the exodus of the saints from Nauvoo, commenced early in 1846. The last number was dated Feb. 15, 1846, a few days after the exodus of the saints from Nauvoo had begun. Altogether 131 numbers of "The Times and Seasons" were published; and the total number of pages in the six volumes summed up to about 2,100.

The first six numbers of "The Times and Seasons" were dated at Commerce; all the rest were dated Nauvoo, Hancock Co., Illinois, the name of the village of Commerce being changed to City of Nauvoo in December, 1840.

The first 15 numbers of "The Times and Seasons" were published by Ebenezer Robinson and Don Carlos Smith, the latter a brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith. On Dec. 1, 1840, the partnership between Elders Robinson and Smith was dissolved, and Brother Smith became the editor. He published nine numbers alone, after which he took in Robert B. Thompson as a partner. This partnership continued until the death of Don Carlos Smith, which occurred Aug. 7, 1841. It seems that Brother Smith, an estimable and promising young man, died from the effects of taking cold while working in the printing office, which had been established in a damp cellar in Commerce. After the death of Don Carlos, Ebenezer Robinson became associated with Robert B. Thompson, but they only published one number as a firm (No. 20 of Vol. 2), as Brother Thompson died Aug. 27, 1841, just 20 days after the death of Don Carlos. After this, Ebenezer Robinson became editor and sole manager, and published nine numbers of the paper. Then he took in Gustavus Hill as assistant editor, and the paper was continued for a month or so, after which Joseph Smith the Prophet became editor pro tem, commencing his editorial labors with No. 8 of Volume 3, and continuing it until Volume 3 was finished.

The first 11 numbers of Volume 4 were edited by John Taylor and published by John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff, but with No. 12 of Vol. 4, John Taylor took complete charge of both the editorial and publishing department, and was advertised as editor and proprietor as long as the publication of the periodical was continued, or until February, 1846.

"The Times and Seasons" became a very popular periodical with the saints and many of their friends; its contents was replete with interesting news from the respective missionary fields, and it also chronicled the growth of the city of Nauvoo. Many of its editorials contained excellent essays on the principles of the gospel and the order of Church organization; also original poetry, and much interesting miscellaneous matter. It is not definitely known what became of the press on which "The Times and Seasons" and other Church periodicals and publications were printed in Nauvoo, but it is understood that the press was sold to the Jack-Mormons, or other purchasers, at the time of the exodus of the saints from Nauvoo.
