Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Timpanogos Ward

TIMPANOGOS WARD, Sharon Stake, Utah Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on the Provo Bench, and extends north to the Sharon Ward, east to the Provo River, south about 1 1/2 miles to Grand View Ward, and west to Lake View and Vineyard wards. It embraces some fine farms and orchards, the farmers paying particular attention to raising strawberries. The Timpanogos meeting house is situated about 50 rods east of the state highway, five miles northwest of Provo, and eight miles southeast of Pleasant Grove.

The Provo Bench was known to the early travelers in Utah as an unoccupied upland covered with sage brush and in places also covered with luxuriant mountain or bunch grass. For many years after Provo was settled there was not a single house to be seen by travelers from the time they left Pleasant Grove until they reached the south edge of the Provo Bench overlooking the lower country in which the city of Provo was nestling. After the arrival of the Johnston Army in Utah in 1858, camp followers attempted to lay off a town at the mouth of Provo Canyon, on the north side of the river, immediately below the bench and near the place where the present Timpanogos Canal taps the river. These non-Mormons named their contemplated town Brown City, in honor of an officer and one of their own numbers. This was done in 1859, when Judge Cradlebaugh held court in Provo. Brown City, however, never amounted to anything but a paper town.

The first attempt to bring water for irrigation purposes upon the Provo Bench was made in 1864, without success, but an irrigation district was organized in 1865, and a canal built, which was finished in 1868. On Independence Day, July 4, 1868, water was first brought onto the bench. Then began the cultivation of the Provo Bench, yet the first house was not built on that highland by settlers until later. In 1883 the settlers on the Provo Bench built a log school house, by donation, in which Miss Ida Patten taught the first day school that year. About the same time the first L. D. S. Sunday school was organized, and on Sept. 16, 1883, a branch organization, named the Provo Bench Branch, was effected with Franklin F. Carter as president, under the jurisdiction of the Provo 3rd Ward. This branch was organized into a ward, to include most of the settlers on the Provo Bench, Nov. 8, 1885, with Peter M. Wentz as Bishop. Brother Wentz presided in that capacity until 1903, when he was succeeded by Otis L. Terry, who in 1917 was succeeded by Otto J. Poulsen, who died Feb. 3, 1920, and was succeeded by James A. Loveless, jun., who in 1924 was succeeded by James Henry Clark, who presided as Bishop of the Timpanogos Ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 626 members, including 198 children.
