Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Tintic Stake of Zion

TINTIC STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the Tintic Mining District in Juab County, Utah, and in the southwest part of Utah County, with headquarters at Eureka, which is the chief mining town in Tintic Valley. The Tintic Ward meeting house is used for stake as well as for ward purposes, and the adjoining stake office, a brick building, affords accommodations for the stake presidency and the High Council. These two buildings are centrally located on the south side of Main Street, Eureka, running east and west. The stake embraces four wards, namely, Eureka and Mammoth in Juab County, and Elberta and Goshen in Utah County. The inhabitants in the Utah County wards are mostly farmers, while those in Tintic Valley are connected to more or less extent with the mining industry in Tintic Valley.

At a special meeting held in Eureka April 22, 1917, a new stake of Zion was organized named the Tintic Stake, consisting at the time of its organization of the following wards which had previously belonged to the Nebo Stake of Zion: Eureka, Knightsville, Mammoth, Silver City and Goshen. Erastus Franklin Birch, Bishop of Silver City, was chosen as president of the new stake, with William John Adams of Eureka as first and Norman E. Dahle of Silver City, as second counselor. Second Counselor Norman E. Dahle died April 15, 1919, and on July 20, 1919, Perry B. Fuller was set apart to fill the vacancy. Second Counselor Perry B. Fuller moved to Provo and on Jan. 16, 1927, Ernest Edwin Pritchett was chosen as second counselor in his stead. Counselors William J. Adams and Ernest E. Pritchett were released, and on July 21, 1928, George N. Finch was chosen as first and John M. Forgie as second counselor. In June, 1930, Second Counselor Forgie, having moved from the stake, was released, and Bishop Thomas E. Chatwin of the Mammoth Ward was chosen to fill the vacancy. The first clerk of the Tintic Stake was Wayland R. Wightman, who in 1919 was succeeded by Robert Alexander Wilkins, who in 1921 was succeeded by Ernest E. Pritchett, who in 1927 was succeeded by Joseph W. Neville, jun., who in 1929 was succeeded by Emron M. Birch, who acted as clerk Dec. 31, 1930. On that date E. Franklin Birch presided over the Tintic Stake with George N. Finch as first and Thomas E. Chatwin as second counselor. On Dec. 31, 1930, the Tintic Stake had a membership of 2,147, including 503 children. Andrew Steadman was the only Patriarch in the stake.
