Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Tooele

TOOELE is the principal town in Tooele County, Utah, and the headquarters of the Tooele Stake. The town is situated on elevated ground overlooking Tooele Valley and part of the Great Salt Lake, near the west base of the Oquirrh Mountains, which separates Tooele Valley from Salt Lake Valley. Tooele is rather a cosmopolitan town with fine public buildings and substantial and comfortable private residences. Tooele is 36 miles by rail southwest of Salt Lake City, and 11 miles southeast of Grantsville. In 1930 the Latter-day Saints in Tooele city were organized into two bishop's wards, namely, the Tooele North and Tooele South wards, with a total membership of 2,670, including 478 children. The total population of Tooele Precinct was 5,160 in 1930, of which 5,125 reside in Tooele city. There is a large non-Mormon population at the International Smelting Company's plant, about four miles east of Tooele.

Tooele was settled by Latter-day Saints in the fall of 1849, and Cyrus Tolman, Judson Tolman, Cyrus Call and Phineas R. Wright (a member of the Mormon Battalion), with their respective families, were among the first settlers. These families, who had recently arrived in the valley and had already taken out a water ditch, built a number of houses about a mile southwest of the present center of Tooele city. These houses were built on the bank of the creek (Settlement Canyon Creek), in a string extending from southeast to northwest. The cabins were built so close together that they were practically covered with one roof, which extended along the whole string. Other settlers followed in 1850 and on April 24, 1850, the saints in the Tooele Valley, who had located on the present site of Tooele city, were organized into a branch of the Church by Apostle Ezra T. Benson, with John Rowberry as president. This branch organization included all the saints in Tooele Valley. When Bishop Rowberry moved his family to the mill (Richville) on Twin Creek, in 1854, Eli B. Kelsey was appointed local president of the Tooele Branch. He was succeeded in 1856 by John Rowberry, who had returned to Tooele. Brother Rowberry presided in Tooele, as well as having jurisdiction as presiding Bishop in all of Tooele County, until June 24, 1877, when the Tooele Stake was organized and Norton Ray Turtle called to preside as Bishop over the Tooele Ward. He was succeeded in 1880 by Thomas Atkin, jun., who in 1905 was succeeded by Silas C. Orme, who in 1911 was succeeded by Edward M. Atkin, who presided until Dec. 12, 1912, when Tooele was divided into two wards, namely, the Tooele North Ward and the Tooele South Ward.
