Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Treasureton Ward

TREASURETON WARD, Oneida Stake, Franklin Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing on or near Battle Creek, a tributary of Bear River. The ward embraces a district of country extending east and west about six miles and nearly ten miles from north to south. The country in that part of Idaho is rolling, hilly and mountainous, and the people constituting the inhabitants of the ward live in a scattered condition in the different nooks, corners and openings among the hills. Nearly all the inhabitants are farmers and stock-raisers. The L. D. S. meeting house, which is located in a snug little opening in the hills on the west bank of Battle Creek, is 15 miles north of Preston, 12 miles east of Oxford, and 20 miles southwest of Thatcher in Gentile Valley. Nearly all the inhabitants within the limits of the Treasureton Ward are Latter-day Saints.

Wilson C. Robbins and family were among the first settlers in that district of country now included in the Treasureton Ward. They settled in 1868 on Battle Creek, about three miles below the place where the Oxford road now crosses that stream. In due course of time other settlers located in the neighborhood, a school house was built, and a L. D. S. Sunday school organized. Treasureton is an outgrowth of Clifton Ward, of which that district of country now included in Treasureton was known as the fifth district of the Oxford Ward, with John Millington as presiding Teacher. Brother Millington was succeeded in the presidency of the district in 1886 by George Sant, jun., who in 1887 was succeeded by Benjamin Hymas, who in 1890 was succeeded by William Treasure, who presided until Dec. 11, 1892, when the Treasureton District was organized as a bishop's ward, with Benjamin Hymas as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1902 by Philip Quayle, who in 1905 was succeeded by Benjamin Hymas. (serving a second term), who in 1911 was succeeded by Charles M. Shumway, who in 1928 was succeeded by Dell Grover Hymas, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Treasureton Ward had 207 members, including 51 children. The total population of the Treasureton Precinct was 245 in 1930, including part of Cottonwood Ward.
