Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Twin Falls Stake of Zion

TWIN FALLS STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Twin Falls County, Idaho, on the south side of Snake River, and includes the following wards, with headquarters at Twin Falls: Buhl, Kimberly, Murtaugh and Twin Falls, and Hollister Branch. At Twin Falls the saints own a fine up-to-date meeting house or tabernacle. Most of the saints within the limits of the stake are engaged in farming, while others are engaged in business enterprises. The existence of Twin Falls and surrounding settlements is due to the activities of the Twin Falls Reclamation Project, under which the former desert country, now included in the Twin Falls Stake, has been transformed from a barren desert to a land of fruitful and prosperous gardens and fields, and where prosperity has followed in the wake of the advance of civilization. Only a minority of the inhabitants residing within the limits of the Twin Falls Stake are Latter-day Saints. The district of country included in the stake extends north to Snake River, east to the Milner Dam beyond Murtaugh, south to the mountain range west of Jarbige, a mining town, and west into Owyhee County.

Twin Falls Stake is an outgrowth of Cassia Stake, Idaho. At a stake conference of the Cassia Stake held July 26, 1919, attended by Apostles Rudger Clawson and Melvin J. Ballard, a part of the country, which up to that time had belonged to the Cassia Stake, was organized into a new stake of Zion, named Twin Falls Stake, a name suggested by its proximity to the Twin Falls of Snake River. Lawrence Gomer Kirkman was chosen as president of the new stake, with Edward Malin Guest as first and Raymond McClellan as second counselor. Second Counselor Raymond McClellan moved to Blackfoot, and on June 1, 1924, he was released and Jesse W. Richins was chosen as second counselor in his stead. At a stake conference held Oct. 26, 1930, Pres. Lawrence G. Kirkman was released, together with his counselors (Edward M. Guest and Jesse W. Richins), and Jesse W. Richins was chosen as president of the Twin Falls Stake, with Mitchell W. Hunt as first and Royal C. Tolman as second counselor. This presidency stood intact Dec. 31, 1930. Lewis L. Allen was the first clerk of the Twin Falls Stake. He was succeeded in 1920 by Wilford Johansen, who in 1923 was succeeded by Charles H. Davis, who in 1928 was succeeded by Rupert Morrill, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the membership of the Twin Falls Stake was 2,575, including 643 children. Among the Priesthood were two Patriarchs, namely, Judson I. Tolman and Lawrence G. Kirkman.

On Oct. 23, 1927, the cornerstone of the Twin Falls Stake and Ward tabernacle was laid. Work on the building was pushed on with vigor, so that the first meetings could be held in it Dec. 20, 1928. This modern house of worship, erected at a cost of about $80,000, contains an auditorium seating 800 people; it also contains an amusement hall with stage, 14 class rooms, a baptismal font, a stake office, a prayer circle room, a bishop's office, a Relief Society hall, and a kitchen. This building is occupied conjointly by the Twin Falls Stake and the Twin Falls Ward.
