Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Twin Groves Ward

TWIN GROVES WARD, Yellowstone Stake, Fremont Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a tract of country lying on the south side of Henry's Fork of Snake River, above and east of St. Anthony. The center of the ward, or the place where the L. D. S. meeting house stands, is in Section 33, Township 8 north, Range 41 east, Boise Meridian, and the saints constitute nearly the entire population in the district living in a scattered condition on their respective farms. The farms and gardens of the settlement are irrigated from Falls River through a canal which taps said river about seven miles northeast of the meeting house.

A small colony of prospective L. D. S. settlers arrived on the ground now included in the Twin Groves Ward April 15, 1887, among whom were James Joseph Willard and family of Salt Lake City, Utah. Other settlers arrived soon afterwards, work was commenced on the Falls River Canal, and a small crop of corn raised in 1888. The canal mentioned was so far completed in 1889 that irrigation could commence. During the first year the settlers at Twin Groves hauled their hay from the Falls River meadow (now in the Yellowstone Park, Wyoming), and they experienced all the hardships incident to locating settlements in a new country. The first L. D. S. settlers of Twin Groves originally belonged to the Wilford Ward, but when the Falls River Branch was organized in 1889, the saints of Twin Groves attended meetings there. When the Falls River Branch became a ward in 1890, Twin Groves became a part of that ward, but the distance being too great for the people to attend meetings at Falls River, a branch organization was effected at Twin Groves, thus named from two little islands in Henry's Fork of Snake River, north of the settlement, covered with cottonwood and quaken asp.

The Twin Groves Branch was organized Oct. 16, 1893, with William David Williams as presiding Elder. He presided until 1896, when the Twin Groves Branch was organized as a ward with William D. Williams as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1900 by James J. Willard, who in 1909 was succeeded by Joseph S. Freer, who in 1914 was succeeded by Sören J. Hansen, who in 1920 was succeeded by Erastus P. Peterson, who in 1929 was succeeded by Preston Floyd Law, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Twin Groves Ward had 170 members, including 31 children. The total population of the Twin Groves Precinct was 192 in 1930.
