Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Union Pacific Railroad

UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD (The) was completed from the Missouri River to Promontory, about 15 miles west from Ogden, Utah, in 1869. At Promontory it connected with the Central Pacific Railroad, construction of which was completed from the Pacific Coast, eastward. Thus was constructed the first great transcontinental railroad, which had been the dream of President Lincoln and other national leaders for many years.

In view of the large immigration to Utah expected by the Church, memorials to the U. S. Congress were submitted by the Utah Territorial Legislature in 1852 and 1854, asking that a national central railroad from the Missouri River to the Pacific Coast, passing through Salt Lake City, might be constructed. The traffic thus guaranteed doubtless carried much weight, and the transcontinental railroad was begun in 1866, when the Union Pacific Railroad Company commenced construction from Omaha, Nebraska, westward, and the Central Pacific Railroad from Sacramento, California, eastward. The two lines met at Promontory .May 10, 1869, the union being signalized by great rejoicing and the driving of a golden spike to unite the two lines.

During the construction of the Union Pacific line, contracts for grading and other work over some of the most difficult part of the road, including 70 miles from the head of Echo Canyon to Ogden, were undertaken by members of the Church under the direction of Pres. Brigham Young, with John Sharp and John W. Young as agents.

As the Union Pacific Railroad progressed the L. D. S. emigration took advantage of facilities offered to shorten the length of their journey by ox or mute trains across the plains. Thus in the early part of 1867 they traveled by rail as far as North Platte and later in the year as far as Julesburg, Nebraska. Early in 1868 the emigration went by rail as far as Laramie and later the same year to Benton, Wyoming, at which point they were met by Church trains from Utah. Early in 1869 the railroad was completed to Ogden and the first emigrant company (saints from Wales), which crossed the plains and mountains entirely by rail, arrived at Taylor's Switch near Ogden, June 25, 1869, under the leadership of Elias Morris.
