Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Utah Posten" (No. 3)

"UTAH POSTEN" (No. 3), the third periodical of that name published in Utah, is a newspaper issued weekly in the interest of the Church in the Swedish language. It was commenced as a political paper during a local campaign, the first number being dated Sept. 20, 1900, but was soon taken over by a company, consisting of a number of gentlemen possessing means and literary ability, which bought the paper and continued it as a weekly newspaper. From the beginning it proved a success. It was published by the company mentioned until March, 1902, when it was taken over by the Church, and still later published for the Church by the "Associated Newspapers."

"Utah Posten" has ever been a reliable and able advocate of the interests of the Church, and has accomplished much good in the intermountain region as well as in Sweden and in many other parts of the world, where there are members of the Church capable of reading the Swedish language.

J. M. Sjödahl was the first editor of "Utah Posten" and much credit is due Messrs. J. M. Sjödahl, A. W. Winberg, Hugo D. E. Peterson and Laurentius Dahlquist, who, with others, shaped the new policy of the periodical, which is still (1930) continued, and thus, in a Church capacity, "Utah Posten" became to the Swedish public what "Bikuben" (published in the Danish-Norwegian language) previously had been to the Danes and Norwegians. Mr. Sjödahl edited and Mr. Winberg managed the paper for some time, giving it a good start, after which Laurentius Dahlquist acted as editor and manager for 13 years.

The type for "Utah Posten" was set by hand for a number of years, but later a type-setting machine, which was introduced into the plant, gave a new impetus to the paper. Hugo D. E. Peterson succeeded Laurentius Dahlquist as editor and manager in June, 1914. Elder Peterson was an experienced printer, linotype operator and newspaper man, who, with Carl A. Krantz as his assistant, managed the paper successfully until May, 1923, when Elder Peterson, who had been called to preside over the Swedish Mission, was succeeded as editor by Carl A. Krantz.

In the meantime, the First Presidency of the Church decided to issue the four foreign language newspapers, "Utah Posten," "Bikuben," the "Beobachter," and the "Utah-Nederlander" under one editorial head and one business management, directed by the Presiding Bishop's Office. The immediate supervision of the papers was intrusted to a committee consisting of the following: John A. Widtsoe, Rulon S. Wells, Andrew Jenson, J. M. Sjödahl and William DeBry. J. M. Sjödahl was appointed the editorial executive of the committee, with the responsibility for the contents of the four papers, and Adam L. Petersen was appointed business manager. When Carl A. Krantz, in July, 1923, tendered his resignation as associate editor of "Utah Posten," J. M. Sjödahl was appointed editor of "Utah Posten," as well as being editorial supervisor over the four papers, in behalf of the Church. On Jan. 24, 1924, the committee was re-organized, Dr. John A. Widtsoe continuing as chairman and Rulon S. Wells as vice-chairman. J. M. Sjödahl was continued as editor and Adam L. Petersen as business manager. After the death of Adam L. Petersen, John S. Hansen became general manager of the four foreign papers, and still acts in that capacity (1930), while J. M. Sjödahl continues in his position as editorial manager of the four papers, and editor-in-facto of "Utah Posten."
