Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Brigham City, Utah

BRIGHAM CITY, Box Elder Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, one of the principal cities of northern Utah, is most beautifully situated on Box Elder Creek near the mouth of Box Elder Canyon, and at the base of the Wasatch Mountains. It is an important station also on the Oregon Short Line Railroad and the Utah and Idaho Railroad, 18 miles north of Ogden, and 59 miles northwest of Salt Lake City. Brigham City is one of the best fruit-growing towns in Utah. It can boast of a fine tabernacle with a lofty tower on the west end. This building adorns the center of the city. Nearly all the inhabitants of Brigham City are engaged in horticulture, farming and stock raising. The great majority of the people are Latter-day Saints, who are organized into six bishop's wards.

Brigham City dates back as a settlement to 1851. In 1853 Apostle Lorenzo Snow was called by Pres. Brigham Young to preside over the saints in Box Elder County, and Brigham City became his headquarters. There he was the leading spirit, not only in spiritual matters, but in every laudable enterprise looking to the development of the town. He commenced a cooperative mercantile association which later developed into the Brigham City Mercantile and Manufacturing Association, under which a number of industries were brought into successful operation, such as a woolen mill, tannery, shoe factory, hat factory, sheep and cattle herds, dairies, cheese factory, saw mills, tailor, furniture, blacksmith, wagon and tin shops, in fact, nearly forty branches of industries are said to have been represented. The products of these operations in 1875 were valued at $260, 000. The enterprise was conducted as nearly as possible in the spirit of the United Order, and its success covering a number of years fully demonstrated that the United Order could be conducted successfully."

William Davis was the first Bishop of Brigham City. He presided from 1852 to 1855 when he was succeeded by Eli Harvey Pierce, who was succeeded in 1857 by Alvin Nichols, who acted until Aug. 19, 1877, When Brigham City was divided into four wards, named respectively the Brigham City 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th wards. Later the 5th and 6th wards were organized.

On Dec. 31, 1930, Brigham City had a Church membership of 4,658, including 678 children. The total population of Brigham City Precinct was 5,228 in 1930.
