Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Walker War

WALKER WAR. A Ute chief named Wahker, or Walker, had previously threatened the settlers in Utah County. In 1854 an Indian squaw visited the cabin of James Ivie of Springville and traded three trout for some flour. But the woman's husband was angry that she had not made a better bargain and began to abuse her. Bro. Ivie interfered and struck the Indian a blow which felled him to the ground and soon afterwards the Indian died. Trouble with the Indians ensued, and they demanded that Ivie should be delivered to them. This the settlers refused to do, and raids were then made by Chief Walker and his band upon various settlements in southern Utah, which caused the deaths of at least nineteen of the settlers. Peace was finally restored.

The Chief, Joseph Walker, was born near the site of the later town of Spanish Fork, Utah, about 1808. When he was 20 years of age a portion of his tribe joined the Shoshones. This his father and a number of others of the tribe were unwilling to do, and as a result, Walker's father was shot in the back while he was seated smoking his pipe. In retaliation Walker and his brother, Arrapeen, shot four of the Shoshones and Walker took charge of his tribe as its acknowledged chief.

In the fall of 1849 Apostle Parley P. Pratt and Elders Dan Jones and Dimick B. Huntington visited Walker's camp, at his request. At that time many of the tribe were sick and when the Elders laid hands upon them some received their health. While visiting Pres. Brigham Young in Salt Lake City in June, 1851, Walker, his brother Arrapeen, and two other Indian chiefs were ordained Elders, having previously been baptized members of the Church. It was Walker's boast that he had never shed the blood of a white man, but he was a man of fiery and warlike nature and the Walker Indian War in 1853 and 1854 caused the massacre of at least nineteen of the settlers in southern Utah. In 1854, just previous to his death on Jan. 29, 1855, Walker made his peace with Pres. Brigham Young and a letter from Pres. Young, which he prized very highly, was buried with him. He was succeeded as chief of his tribe by his brother Arrapeen. (See Route from Liverpool to Great Salt Lake Valley by Linford, p. 105.)
