Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Wallsburg Ward

WALLSBURG WARD, Wasatch Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the agricultural town of Wallsburg, which is situated in the so-called Round Valley, 13 miles by road south of Heber, the county seat and stake headquarters, 25 miles northeast of Provo, and 60 miles by nearest road southeast of Salt Lake City. Nearly all the people of Wallsburg are L. D. S. farmers and stock-raisers. Round Valley (called Shu-ab by the Indians, meaning a little warm) is situated in the Wasatch Range of Mountains; a low range separates it from Provo Valley proper. Round valleys are numerous in the upper system of the Wasatch Mountains, and this particular round valley, in which Wallsburg is located, is about eight miles long from southeast to northwest. The climate is warmer and the snowfall less than in Provo Valley. The village of Wallsburg is situated near the center of the valley and about two-thirds of the people reside in the town and the rest on their farms. Round Valley Creek rises in the mountains southeast, and its headwaters drain the north and west slopes of the so-called Strawberry Peak. The village of Wallsburg is located in a sort of cove and the town survey consists of blocks, 24 rods square, with four lots in each block.

Round Valley was used as a grazing country for the inhabitants of Utah Valley for a number of years, stock from the lower settlements in said valley being driven up into Round Valley to graze during the summer season. Government cattle belonging to Camp Floyd were taken into the valley as early as 1861, but no permanent settlement was made in Round Valley until Sept. 30, 1862, when William M. Wall arrived there with his family. Other families who followed soon afterwards located on the creek where Wallsburg now stands, and raised a small crop that year (1862). Because of supposed danger from Indians and from other causes, the settlement was temporarily vacated in 1862, but was permanently resettled in 1864, and named Wallsburg in honor of William M. Wall, the first settler in the valley. Enock Gurr was the first presiding Elder at Wallsburg, being appointed to that position in the fall of 1864. He was succeeded in 1865 by Edward Stock, who in 1867 was succeeded by William M. Wall, who died Sept. 19, 1869. John C. Parcell succeeded him as presiding Elder pro tem. Later, about 1870, Wm. E. Nuttall, who had acted as Bishop of the Provo 3rd Ward, arrived in Wallsburg and presided there until July 15, 1877, when Wallsburg was organized as a regular bishop's ward with William E. Nuttall as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1886 by Francis Kirkby (presiding Elder), who in 1887 was succeeded by Franklin Fraughton (Bishop), who in 1903 was succeeded by George Peter Garff, who in 1912 was succeeded by William Price Fullmer, jun., who in 1916 was succeeded by George A. Gardner, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Wallsburg Ward had 351 members, including 55 children. The total population of the Wallsburg Precinct was 367 in 1930, of which 240 resided in the town of Wallsburg.
