Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Washakie Ward

WASHAKIE WARD, Malad Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints, mostly Indians, who have left their old nomadic habits to cultivate the soil and live like white people. The village of Washakie is situated on the west side of the Malad River, in Malad Valley, on the Malad branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad, five miles southeast of Portage, 20 miles south of Malad, 35 miles north of Brigham City, and 70 miles northwest of Salt Lake City. The ground on which the town of Washakie is located slopes gently towards the south and east.

That part of the Malad Valley in which Washakie is now located was for many years, like the rest of the valley named, a favorite herd-ground for the settlements further south. The Brigham City Industrial Corporation established a farm in the Malad Valley, which in due course of time was purchased by the Church and given to the Indians. Most of the Indians who now reside at Washakie are descendants of a branch of that powerful tribe of Indians known as the Shoshones, whose chief was the great Washakie, known all over the western country as one of the most intelligent and able Indian chiefs. He is sometimes termed the "George Washington" of the Indians, and became acquainted with the Latter-day Saints soon after their first entry into the Rocky Mountain country. He was their friend from the beginning. These Shoshone Indians, under Washakie, roamed over the country extending from Bear Lake to Great Salt Lake and as far to the northwest as Raft River. The Indians, who are the pioneer settlers of Washakie, had formerly occupied an Indian farm on Bear River in Box Elder County, but were located, by the assistance of the Church, at Washakie in 1880, and Isaac E. D. Zundel was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Washakie Ward, which was organized at that time. Brother Zundell was succeeded in 1890 by Moroni Ward, who in 1902 was succeeded by George M. Ward, who in 1929 was succeeded by Joseph Parry, who still presided Dec. 31, 1930. At that time the Washakie Ward had a membership of 124, including 19 children, nearly all Indians.
