Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Washington (D.C.)

WASHINGTON, in the District of Columbia, was established by acts of Congress in 1790 and 1791, when it was decreed that a district, not to exceed ten miles square, should be set apart as the seat of government of the United States, over which Congress was to exercise exclusive legislation. The selection of a site was made by a committee of three with Pres. George Washington at the head, and a tract of land was selected at the confluence of the Potomac and the Anacostia rivers which lies in Lat. 38° 53' 38" and Long. 76° 58' 77" west of Greenwich. The district at the time included the villages of Washington and Georgetown, both of which later became part of the city of Washington. The site for the national city was called by George Washington the "Federal City," but later it became known as the City of Washington in the Territory (or District) of Columbia. The city of Washington contains the nation's Capitol, the Congressional Library, the White House (the official residence of the President of the United States), and many other government buildings which are considered among the most imposing of any nation in the world. The population of the City of Washington, the area of which since 1895 has been made coextensive with that of the District of Columbia, was 278,718 in 1900; 331,069 in 1910; 437,571 in 1920, and 486,869 in 1930.

The history of the introduction of the restored gospel into the City of Washington, D.C., may be said to commence in 1839, when the Prophet Joseph Smith and Judge Elias Higbee visited Washington for the purpose of laying before the President of the United States and the national representatives a recital of the wrongs suffered by the saints in Missouri, and to plead for redress and compensation. But the object of their visit was not obtained, Pres. Martin Van Buren remarking, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you." During the same year Parley P. Pratt published an address in the form of a printed circular, in Washington, D.C., setting forth the principles of the gospel, a copy of which was presented to the President of the United States and to every individual member of his cabinet, while action upon the petition for redress from Missouri, presented by the Prophet Joseph Smith, was pending.

At a council meeting held in Nauvoo, Ill., Aug. 10, 1841, the Prophet Joseph Smith directed that missionaries should be sent to Washington, D.C., and on the 16th of the same month Samuel James was appointed to labor as a missionary there. In 1843 Apostle John E. Page, was called by revelation to preach the gospel in Washington, D.C., and shortly afterwards he baptized one convert and reported that three more were about ready for baptism.

In 1844 Apostles Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt were in Washington, D. C., representing the cause of the saints before Pres. John Tyler and his cabinet; later these brethren were joined by Apostles Heber C. Kimball, Wm. Smith and Lyman Wight.

In 1846 Elder Jesse C. Little was called by Pres. Brigham Young to go to Washington and endeavor to secure for the saints the privilege of carrying freight for the U. S. Government to the Pacific Coast, and in this way assist the Latter-day Saints in their proposed migration to the Rocky Mountains. This resulted in the call of the Mormon Battalion.

As soon as the saints had established themselves in Salt Lake Valley they petitioned the U. S. Government for a state government under the name of Deseret, and as early as 1849 Dr. John M. Bernhisel and Almon W. Babbitt were sent to Washington to present the petition of the saints for this recognition. In this they were ably assisted by Col. Thomas L. Kane, with the result that Utah was created as a territory of the United States Sept. 9, 1850.

In 1852 Apostle Orson Pratt was called to labor as a missionary in Washington, D.C., and also to preside over the saints in the Eastern States. Later in the year he was joined by Jedediah M. Grant, and together they interviewed Pres. Millard Fillmore.

In February, 1853, the first number of "The Seer," a 16-page octavo magazine, published semi-monthly by Apostle Orson Pratt in behalf of the Church, was issued from the press in Washington, D. C. Publication was continued for about a year and a half, after which the office of the periodical was transferred to England. In 1852 Apostle John Taylor visited and preached in Washington, D.C., when returning from his mission to France.

In January, 1857, Apostles George A. Smith and John Taylor visited Washington, D.C., endeavoring to secure the admission of Utah as a state of the Union. Many other territorial representatives, including William H. Hooper, George Q. Cannon and John T. Caine, labored unceasingly to attain this end, and finally on Jan. 4, 1896, Utah was admitted into the union as a state. Since that time many prominent legislators, including Senator Reed Smoot, one of the Council of Twelve Apostles, and Senator Wm. H. King, have represented Utah at the national capitol.

Prominent Elders visiting or stationed in Washington, D.C., and missionaries laboring in the District of Columbia have from time to time preached and held meetings in Washington, and for several years there has been a flourishing branch of the Church in the city. The Sunday school, attended largely by students of the various institutions of learning at the nation's capital, or members of the Church holding government positions, is the largest of any in the Eastern States Mission.

In 1924 a valuable building site was secured at the intersection of Columbia Road and 16th St., on which a magnificent L. D. S. chapel is being erected, constructed of Utah marble. This edifice, when finished, is expected to be the most imposing building of its kind ever erected by Latter-day Saints.
