Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Wellsville

WELLSVILLE, Cache Co., Utah, is a prosperous town on a branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad and of the Utah Idaho Central Railroad. Wellsville is the first town founded in Cache Valley and was for some time the only settlement in Cache County. Wellsville is pleasantly situated in the southwest part of Cache County, nine miles by state highway southwest of Logan, eight miles south of Mendon, and 78 miles by nearest road north of Salt Lake City. The ward has a fine meeting house, or tabernacle, capable of seating 800 people, erected in 1903, at a cost of $60,000. Nearly all the inhabitants of Wellsville are Latter-day Saints.

In 1856 Peter Maughan was appointed by Pres. Brigham Young to take a colony of saints into the recently organized Cache County and make a settlement there. Accordingly, in September of that year, a settlement was established on the site of what is now Wellsville, which was known as Maughan's Fort from the fact that these pioneers erected their cabins in fort style as a protection against Indians. In 1858, at the time of the "Move," the fort was vacated, but later the same year several of the settlers returned to take possession of their homes and harvest their crops. Among these were John Maughan, William Gardner, Francis Gunnell, Joseph Woodward, John Reese, Cooper Cummings, Zial Riggs, Alexander R. Hill, Timothy Parkinson, sen., and their families. After this settlers from all directions began to come into Cache Valley, and other settlements sprang up, under the direction of Peter Maughan.

On Nov. 13, 1859, on the occasion of a visit from Apostle Orson Hyde and Ezra T. Benson, the saints at Maughan's Fort were organized as the Wellsville Ward, thus named in honor of Daniel H. Wells, counselor to Pres. Brigham Young. William H. Maughan was appointed Bishop of the new ward, while his father, Peter Maughan, continued to have general supervision over the whole valley. In 1860 there were about one hundred inhabitants in Wellsville. During that year a grist mill, the first erected in Cache Valley, was built by Daniel and John Hill; a saw mill was also erected by Ira Ames and George G. Snyder. In 1875 a branch of the United Order was organized at Wellsville, which, among other achievements, established a boot and shoe factory. Bishop William H. Maughan, after having served 41 years, was honorably released in 1900, and was succeeded by Evan R, Owen, who was succeeded in 1909 by Franklin L. Gunnell, who was succeeded in 1916 by Charles Nibley Maughan, who acted until July 18, 1920, when Wellsville was divided into two wards, namely, Wellsville 1st Ward and Wellsville 2nd Ward. On Dec. 31, 1930, the membership of the two Wellsville wards was 1,403, including 228 children. The total population of the Wellsville Precinct in 1930 was 1,452, of whom 1,270 resided in the city of Wellsville. Wellsville belonged to Cache Stake until 1901, when it became a part of the Hyrum Stake.
