Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

West Bountiful Ward

WEST BOUNTIFUL WARD, South Davis Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the southwest part of Davis County, Utah, or in a district lying between Centerville on the north and South Bountiful Ward on the south. The center of the ward is about three miles east of the Great Salt Lake.

A canning factory and creamery at Woods Cross give employment to many of the inhabitants, while others are engaged in raising small vegetables and fruits, which are used in the factory. Dairy products are also produced quite extensively.

West Bountiful Ward was organized June 20, 1877, when Bountiful Ward was divided into three wards, namely, the East Bountiful, the West Bountiful and the South Bountiful wards. Wm. S. Muir, jun., was sustained as Bishop of the West Bountiful Ward.

As early as 1860 a school house was erected in that part of North Canyon (Bountiful) Ward, which later became West Bountiful Ward, in which evening meetings were held occasionally in charge of Elders William C. Mann and Joseph Argyle, sen. In 1868 a Sunday school was organized there and two years later (1870) regular meetings were commenced under the direction of the bishopric of the Bountiful Ward. After the organization of the West Bountiful Ward a larger school house, a brick building, was erected in the district, which was also used by the members of the ward until an adobe meeting house was erected in 1882.

West Bountiful Ward belonged to the Davis Stake of Zion until that stake was divided in 1915 into the North Davis and the South Davis stakes, when West Bountiful Ward became part of the South Davis Stake.

Bishop Wm. H. Muir, jun., was succeeded in 1885 by Joseph H. Grant, who, being called into the stake presidency, was succeeded in 1891 by Lewis M. Grant, who died Nov. 10, 1902, and was succeeded by Dan Muir, who was succeeded in 1909 by Wm. Moss, who was succeeded in 1915 by Win. W. Winegar, who was succeeded in 1923 by Thomas E. Winegar, who presided over the ward as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 529 members, including 82 children.
