Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Brigham City, Arizona

BRIGHAM CITY, Little Colorado Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, originally called Ballenger's Camp, consisted of a number of Latter-day Saints residing at Brigham City, a small settlement founded by the saints on the Little Colorado River, l 1/4 miles southwest of the Sunset Ford, on the west side of said river, or about three miles north of the present railroad station of Winslow, on the Atchinson, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad. The Brigham City Fort was built about sixty rods below the mill dam and enclosed an area of 12 rods square surrounded with rock walls. There were large gateways in the center of the south and north walls and small gates in the east and west walls, which were constructed of rock (8 feet high). There was also a well in the center of the fort. Apostle Erastus Snow and others visited Brigham City in September, 1878, on which occasion George Lake was chosen as Bishop of Brigham City. L. John Nuttall, the correspondent of the Snow Company, described the place as follows:

"Brigham City is located about 400 yards west or northwest of the dam built across the Little Colorado River. This dam is a substantial work 125 feet long, 18 feet wide and 10 feet high, built on a rock foundation and so arranged that in high water the middle can be left open to the stream and allow the water and drift wood to pass by. Below the dam a grist mill is built, a good substantial frame building, two and a half stories high. The fort is 200 feet square, and there is a driveway on the north and south sides and narrow entrances on the east and west. There are 36 dwelling houses, 13 by 15 feet, inside the fort. On the north side there is a dining hall, 20 by 80 feet, with two rows of tables capable of seating from 150 to 200 persons. Adjoining the dining hall on the outside is a kitchen, 20 by 25 feet, also a bake house and oven. There are also six dwelling houses adjoining the west side and six partly built on the south side of the fort. Inside the fort is a good cellar, 18 feet square, and a store house built thereon; also a good well, 25 feet deep, furnishing sufficient water for culinary purposes. Inside the fort also is another well, 23 feet deep, near the kitchen. This summer (1878) 150 acres of land are planted, 50 in corn, 12 in sugarcane, 4 in potatoes, 12 in oats, 5 in barley, 1 in rye, and 25 in garden stuff and vegetables, making 274 acres in all. From Aug. 20th to Sept. 7th, a heavy rain and flood were experienced, causing the Little Colorado River to overflow its banks from one to three miles wide and one to three feet deep for a period of two weeks. This flood did much damage to the settlements of the saints on the Little Colorado. There are this year (1878) 43 men, 46 women, 61 boys and 60 girls in Brigham City. They milk 74 cows at the dairy and 67 at home. Two men are employed in the blacksmith shop, seven men and eight women at the dairy, one man in the wagon shop and one family at the saw-mill. Others are engaged at farm and other labors, as required. One commissary or superintendent has charge of the eating department and four of the sisters serve with him three days at a time as cooks."

George Lake succeeded Jesse O. Ballenger as presiding officer at Brigham City in the fall of 1878. During his administration the people kept getting discouraged and moved away gradually, and in 1881 the settlement was practically broken up. The people had lived in the United Order throughout the existence of the settlement, but everything was settled up satisfactorily between the different families. Some of the saints who left Brigham City afterwards settled at Forest Dale on the south slope of the Mogollon Mountains; others located on the Gila River, Arizona, while still others left Arizona altogether. While the people lived together in the United Order they usually all ate together and sometimes as many as three hundred people sat down to eat at the same time. The saints as a rule were very earnest in their desire to carry out the rules of the United Order. The best feelings prevailed, although some left and moved away before the final vacation of the settlement took place. In 1882 there were only a couple of families left at Brigham City, and in 1890 Sidney Wilson's family was the only family of saints left on the townsite. The United Order mill at Brigham City was given to the people at Woodruff, but it was allowed to go to ruin. Being left without any apparent owner, people broke into the mill taking away parts of the iron and destroying the building before it was moved.
