Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

West Jordan Ward

WEST JORDAN WARD, West Jordan Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Salt Lake County which is bounded on the north by the Bennion Ward, east by the Jordan River (which separates it from Midvale and Sandy), south by the South Jordan Ward, and west by Tooele County. The ward contains about 48 square miles of valley and mountain country. The ward meeting house, a beautiful white pressed brick building, is located on the corner of the Redwood Road and the Bingham Highway, and is about 12 miles southwest of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City. Within the limits of the ward there is a sugar factory a flouring mill, three stores, and fine private residences. There are also two brick school houses, and another was being built in 1930. The Orem Line of the Bingham branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad passes through the ward.

The first settler in Salt Lake Valley west of the Jordan River was Joseph Harker, who built the first log house at a point opposite what later became known as the Church Farm, in the beginning of December, 1848. Early the following spring (1849) a number of other settlers, including Samuel and John Bennion, located farms along the river near the place where Bro. Harker had settled. An attempt was made to bring water onto their farming lands from the Jordan River, but the undertaking being too laborious, the settlers changed their location and moved south about a mile, locating near the bend of the river opposite the point where the Big Cottonwood Creek empties into the river (now Taylorsville). There the nine families, of which the little settlement consisted, made a farm co-jointly, conducted water on to it from Bingham Creek, and raised a small crop that year. Later in 1849 a number of Welsh saints, who had arrived in the Valley that year in charge of Capt. Dan Jones, founded what was known as the Welsh Settlement (see Brighton). Not being successful in their irrigation operations, they finally abandoned their camp and moved away.

In 1850 Archibald and Robert Gardner built a saw mill on the site where the West Jordan Mill now stands. They made a mill race 2 1/2 miles long, which was the first canal of any importance ever dug in Utah. The same year, a number of families located farms at various points along the river, both above and below the Gardner mill site. In January, 1852, the first ward organization was effected with John Robinson (ordained Jan. 19, 1852) as Bishop. Bishop Robinson was called on a mission to Nova Scotia and his counselors (John Harker and Reese Williams) took charge of the ward during his absence, calling John Bennion to their assistance. When Bishop Robinson returned from his mission, he again took charge of the ward for a few months and then removed to Ogden. After this Elder Harker once more presided over the settlement. In October, 1853, the West Jordan Ward contained a membership of 361, the settlement having been strengthened that year by a number of other families. In 1854 the settlers built what was later known as the North Jordan Canal, a continuation of the Gardner mill race. The same year a small fort was commenced near the mills, and in the fall another fort was started below on the grounds now occupied by the Taylorsville graveyard. This forting was done as a means of protection against the Indians. The upper fort was never completed while the lower one, containing about thirty rods square, was built within a short time of commencing it. A meeting house, an adobe building, 20x30 feet, was erected in the center of the fort, and the majority of the people (some thirty families) moved in from their farms and spent one winter within the enclosure. Previous to the building of the meeting house within the fort, religious services were held in private houses. About this time the name of North Jordan was given to that part of the ward now embraced in Taylorsville Ward. A post office was also established, but this was subsequently discontinued for a number of years and then reopened under the name of Taylorsville. In 1858 most of the West Jordan saints moved in a body to Pondtown (Salem) and Spanish Fork, Utah Co., because of the Johnston Army troubles, but returned to their homes on the Jordan River after peace had been established between Utah and the Federal Government. After the "Move" a log school house was built near the spot where the Jordan Mill stands. This served for all school and meeting purposes until 1866, when a more substantial rock building was erected. Elder Harker presided until the fall of 1858, when Archibald Gardner was ordained a Bishop to preside over the West Jordan Ward. Before this change in the bishopric there was a branch organization in the upper part of the ward comprising that tract of country now included in the West Jordan, South Jordan, Riverton 1st, Riverton 2nd, and Bluffdale wards.

At a special meeting held June 17, 1877, the West Jordan Ward was divided into four wards, namely, Herriman, North Jordan, South Jordan, and West Jordan. Other wards were subsequently organized. By closer study it will be seen that the West Jordan settlement is practically mother of eleven organized bishop's wards, including South Jordan, Riverton 1st, Riverton 2nd, Bluffdale, Herriman, North Jordan (or Taylorsville), Bennion, Granger, Bingham, Hunter and Lark.

Bishop Gardner was succeeded in 1892 by John A. Egbert, who in 1911 was succeded by William H. Gardner, who in 1919 was succeeded by William J. Leak, who was succeeded Dec. 14, 1930, by Willard W. Malmstrom, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 1,024 members, including 106 children.
