Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Brigham Young Express & Carrying Company (B. Y. X.)

BRIGHAM YOUNG EXPRESS & CARRYING COMPANY. (B. Y. X.) Early in 1857 a four years' contract for carrying mail from Independence, Mo., to Salt Lake City and return, was awarded by the U. S. Postal authorities to Hiram Kimball of Salt Lake City at a compensation of $23,000 per annum.

In consultation with Governor Brigham Young, it was proposed to establish stations on the route where, by securing a change of animals, carriers might make the trip each way in twenty days. It was also proposed that in connection with the mail service an "Express and Carrying Company" should be established for transportation of goods and passengers.

On February 8, 1857, the first mail eastward, in charge of Wm. A. Hickman and seven other men, left Salt Lake City, and on March 1st Orrin Porter Rockwell was preparing to leave Salt Lake City with another mail. On April 21st, nineteen of the brethren were appointed to assist the Express Company in establishing stations along the route between Fort Bridger and Fort Laramie.

The Eastern Mail arrived in Salt Lake City May 29th, having left Independence, Mo., on the 1st of May, in charge of John Murdock as far as Fort Laramie, and of Orrin Porter Rockwell from that point to Salt Lake City. This was the first mail from Independence which had been received since Nov. 13, 1856, and consisted of twenty-four sacks.

Under date of May 1, 1856, Mr. P. McClanahan, postmaster at Independence, reported that the two mails forwarded from Salt Lake City in February and March had arrived "all in good order" under almost, if not altogether, unprecedented circumstances owing to lack of forage and bad weather.

But the mail route on Hiram Kimball's contract only functioned about three months, as in July, 1857, on account of the coming of Johnston's Army to Utah, the postmaster at Independence refused to hand over the mail to the newly organized Express and Carrying Company, and the establishment of mail stations by that company then became unnecessary. The brethren were called home, and in a short time their labors were obliterated. The Deer Creek settlement, which had been the headquarters of the enterprise, later became an important telegraph station.
