Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Weston Ward

WESTON WARD, Franklin Stake, Franklin Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Weston and vicinity. Weston is situated on elevated ground 2 1/2 miles west of Bear River, in Cache Valley, and commands a beautiful view of that valley looking east and south. It is 26 miles by road northwest of Logan, Utah, 25 miles by mountain road southeast of Malad, ten miles south of Clifton, three miles north of the boundary line between Utah and Idaho, and eight miles southwest of Preston, Idaho, the headquarters of the Franklin Stake. Weston is bounded on the north by Dayton and Linrose wards, east by Bear River, south by the Idaho Utah line, and west by Cedarville Ward.

Weston as a settlement dates back to the spring of 1865, when Christopher Funk and others located farms, agreeable to a call from the authorities of the Church, at a point three miles west of the present Weston townsite. John Maughan built a small log cabin that year, which example was followed by others the same season. Christopher Funk was the first presiding Elder at Weston, he having been appointed to take charge of the new settlement before the actual founding took place. The locality was named Weston by Apostle Ezra T. Benson. A grist mill was built on the Weston Creek by James Mack in 1867. That year also the present townsite of Weston was located and surveyed, and the settlement was organized into a regular branch of the Church with John Maughan as presiding Elder. Brother Maughan was succeeded in 1875 by Christian Olsen (pro tem), who was succeeded in 1876 by Alexander A. Allen as Bishop, who in 1886 was succeeded by John H. Clarke, who was succeeded in 1889 by James P. Michelsen as presiding Elder, who in 1891 was succeeded by John H. Clarke, who served a second term as Bishop. Bishop Clarke was succeeded in 1902 as Bishop by Otto Gassman, who in 1911 was succeeded by Yeppa (Jeppe) Benson, who in 1919 was succeeded by Thomas E. Rose, who in 1929 was succeeded by Nels S. Bastian, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Church membership of the Weston Ward was 654, including 131 children. The total population of the Weston Precinct was 878 in 1930, of which 429 were residents of the Weston village.
