Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Widtsoe Ward

WIDTSOE WARD, Garfield Stake, Garfield Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the upper end of the valley through which the east fork of the Sevier River runs from south to north. The town of Widtsoe is located on the edge of the timber at the west base of the mountains which separate the East Fork Valley (also called Johns Valley at this point) from Potato Valley or Escalante. Widtsoe is 25 miles south of Antimony, the headquarters of the Garfield Stake, and 25 miles east of Panguitch, the county seat. Farming and stock raising are the principal industries of the people. Widtsoe is situated on Sweetwater, a tributary of the East Fork of the Sevier River, about three miles east of the East Fork, the valley at this point being seven miles wide. The townsite is surveyed into regular blocks, 26 rods square, with four lots in a block, and the streets five rods wide.

Isaac Riddle, assisted by others, located a temporary ranch on Sweetwater on or near the present site of Widtsoe in 1876, but that ranch was vacated after a short existence. Several years later a Mr. Hammeker located a sheep ranch on Sweetwater, but he, in turn, also vacated. John R. Campbell, another sheep man, next located a ranch in Johns Valley, and Jedediah Adair and his wife, Julia Ann, and eight children located on Sweetwater and bought out John R. Campbell's claim. Sister Adair, a plural wife of Jedediah Adair, took up a homestead of 160 acres and the family moved on to the land April 15, 1902, taking temporary shelter in a wood shed which had been built by a former sheep man. A garden spot was cultivated that year and a few vegetables raised by using the water of Sweetwater for irrigation purposes. Sister Adair and her four daughters did the first plowing in the settlement and, tearing down the wood shed, they used the material to erect a more comfortable dwelling, which still stands on the Widtsoe townsite. When it became known that grain would grow in that locality, other settlers arrived in Johns Valley, and the infant colony was named Houston, in honor of James Houston, president of the Panguitch Stake. These settlers were organized as a branch of the Church July 30, 1911, with Quince K. Kimball as presiding Elder. A post office called Winder was opened Feb. 1, 1912, and that year Carol Henry Mangum succeeded Bro. Kimball as presiding Elder. Carol Henry Mangum presided until Nov. 8, 1914, when the branch was organized as the Houston Ward with Quince K. Kimball as Bishop. On June 24, 1915, the name of the ward was changed from Houston to Widtsoe. Bishop Kimball presided until 1918 when he was succeeded by Elmer Hans Jørgensen, who in 1920 was succeeded by Robert W. Pinney, who in 1925 was succeeded by Carol Henry Mangum (serving a second term), who in 1929 was succeeded by Milton E. Steed, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the membership of the Widtsoe Ward was 210, including 61 children. The total population of the Widtsoe Precinct was 220 in 1930.
