Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Brigham Young University

BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY (originally the Brigham Young Academy), the oldest and most important of the L. D. S. Church schools, was founded in 1875 by Pres. Brigham Young, as the Provo Branch of the Deseret University, with Karl G. Maeser, a German convert and prominent educator, in charge. This thorough German scholar equipped the students under his charge with self-propelling power, and, today, very many of the leading men in the state of Utah, and other states throughout the Union, owe their success largely to the splendid foundation, both from a scholastic and moral standpoint, given to them by that most beloved and efficient teacher, Karl G. Maeser. The college at the time of its organization was placed in charge of twelve trustees, elected triennially by the vote of the Latter-day Saints, in general conference assembled. For many years the institution was dependent upon proceeds derived from the original grant of land donated by President Brigham Young, but of recent years an annual Church appropriation has been the chief source of its financial support.

The first home of the institution was in the upper part of a store in the city of Provo. This building being destroyed by fire the basement of the Utah Stake Tabernacle and part of the First National Bank building housed the college for a time. The upper story of the Z. C. M. I. warehouse near the railroad station was also used until 1891, when the school moved to what is now known as the Education Building, a structure costing $75,000. Adjacent to this building the College Building was erected in 1898, the Training School Building in 1911, the Gymnasium and Recreation Building in 1913, the Mechanic Arts Building (on University Hill) in 1919, and the Heber J. Grant Library Building in 1925.

The degrees of Bachelor of Pedagogy, Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science were authorized previous to 1919, and since that time Master Degrees have also been authorized. In connection with the College of Education, elementary and secondary training schools are maintained. A number of scholarships and medals are awarded annually for proficiency in scholarship, arts and sciences. An enrollment of about 2,500 students was recorded for the year 1930. The faculty numbers over one hundred educators of high scholastic attainments.

Dr. Karl G. Maeser acted as principal of the academy and later as president of the university from 1875 to 1891, when he was succeeded by Benjamin Cluff, jun., who was succeeded in 1903 by Dr. George H. Brimhall, who was succeeded in 1921 by Dr. Franklin Stewart Harris, who still held this position in 1930.
