Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Wightites

WIGHTITES was a name given to an apostate sect, followers of Lyman Wight, a member of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles from 1841 to 1849. During the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Lyman Wight was an active member of the Church, a successful missionary and a valiant supporter of the Prophet. He was a member of Zions Camp, was with the Prophet and his brother Hyrum in prison in Missouri and on several occasions was called by revelation to perform important missions. He became one of the Twelve Apostles in April, 1841, but after the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum in 1844 he ceased to be in harmony with the brethren of his quorum.

Having gained a number of followers among disaffected members of the Church, he led a colony into Texas, locating on the Colorado River, about four miles above, or north of Austin. A terrific flood, however, washed away his mill and improvements on the Colorado, after which he with his colony moved over to the Padernales River, about four miles south of Fredericksburg in Gillespie County, Texas, where in 1847 he built another mill and made other improvements. But there the colonists fared even worse than on the Colorado, their mill being entirely swept away by the flood and the burrs covered in the sand. Their village was also inundated. Fredericksburg is about 65 miles in a straight line southwest of Austin. While at this location, in December, 1848, the colony was visited by Elders Preston Thomas and William Martindale, who found Lyman Wight in poor health and holding bitter feelings against Pres. Brigham Young and the other Apostles. Lyman Wight's followers at that time numbered only 142; at one time there were 250 of them.

Undaunted by their losses on the Padernales River, the Lyman Wight Colony moved over to Hamilton Creek, below Burnett, and settled at a place about forty miles northwest of Austin. Here was another good mill site and the colonists erected another mill and, besides the flouring mill, they put up a saw mill and turning lathes and manufactured tables, chairs, bedsteads, etc., with which they supplied the surrounding country. They also established a farm, but finally, because of being crowded with debts, sold out to Noah Smithwick, after which Lyman Wight and the few who still followed him went over to the Medina River, south or southwest of San Antonio, where they again planted a colony.

Henry W. Miller writes under date of Aug. 21, 1855, from Indian Territory, that he had baptized four of Lyman Wight's flock, and that his company had scattered and only a few families were left with him in Texas.

Lyman Wight died March 31, 1858, as a drunkard, at a place called Mountain Valley in Texas.

When Lyman Wight moved away from Hamilton Creek, a few of his followers remained there and assisted the non-Mormon settlers in erecting a school house and in making other improvements. According to Mr. Smithwick's statement, there were in 1861 only five families of Lyman Wight's colony there, and these soon left for California. It may be said that nearly all the followers left Lyman Wight before he died, and many of them subsequently found their way to the gathering places of the saints in the mountains and identified themselves with the Church.
