Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Wilford Ward, Little Colorado Stake

WILFORD WARD, Little Colorado Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, consisted of a few families of saints who founded a little settlement in the Little Colorado Stake of Zion in 1883, at a place called Wilford, which was located in a wash leading down from the Mogollon (Mokeone) Mountains to Dry Lake and was 50 miles southwest of St. Joseph. Wilford was settled by people from Sunset and Brigham City with a view of making it a center for stock-raising and dry factoring. Heber was another small settlement, in the timber, six miles northeast of Wilford on the same wash. It was settled in 1883 by people from St. Joseph. Both places were founded in the midst of pine timber, high up near the mountain tops.

At a conference of the Little Colorado Stake, held at Wilford Aug. 25, 1883, the place was named Wilford in honor of Pres. Wilford Woodruff, and the saints who had located there and at Heber were organized as a ward with Joseph H. James as Bishop. Some farming was done in 1883 and 1884, and stock-raising was quite successful from the beginning. It happened, however, that a number of those who had settled in the timber at Wilford and Heber were polygamists, and when the anti-polygamy raid was instituted in 1885 the brethren who were in danger of arrest moved to Mexico. This exodus discouraged the remaining families, both at Heber and Wilford, so that both settlements were broken up in 1885. During the existence of Wilford a log school house had been erected there besides a number of private dwellings. This school house was later moved to St. Joseph. Heber was continued as a branch by a few of the saints who remained there; hence, there were a few families of saints still residing at Heber in 1894. The official statistical report of the Little Colorado Stake, dated Feb. 25, 1887, gives to the Wilford Branch a membership of 65, including 26 children. Jerome J. Adams was the presiding Elder.
