Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Wilford Ward, Yellowstone Stake

WILFORD WARD, Yellowstone Stake, Fremont Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Wilford, which is beautifully situated in a tract of country lying between Henry's Fork of Snake River and the Teton River three miles south of St. Anthony, the headquarters of the Yellowstone Stake, and five miles northeast of Rexburg.

Wilford was first settled in 1883 by a small corps of saints from Utah, among whom were Harold P. Heninger, John E. Pincock and others, who arrived on the ground where Wilford now stands May 20, 1883. A townsite was located and named Wilford in honor of Leonard Wilford Hardy, one of the presiding bishopric of the Church. The ground upon which Wilford now stands was at the time of settlement covered with a luxuriant growth of bunch grass, except a strip bordering the rivers, which represented a beautiful carpet of green. This gave a veritable Eden-like appearance to the locality. All kinds of game were found in vast numbers in the early days of the settlement. Bears were quite an annoyance for several years. The rivers in some places were enriched with wild fruits which grew among the trees and brush along their banks, among which were haws, choke-cherries, serviceberries, strawberries, currants and gooseberries.

The saints who had settled at Wilford were organized as a branch of the Church in the fall of 1883, with James Henry Pincock as presiding Elder. The Wilford Branch was organized as the Wilford Ward Aug. 16, 1884, with Thomas S. Smith as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1887 by George Davis, who in 1893 was succeeded by Reuben Belnap, who in 1898 was succeeded by Geo. A. Pincock, who in 1903 was succeeded by Samuel W. Orme, who in 1916 was succeeded by Charles E. Murri, who in 1920 was succeeded by William D. Hollist, who in 1926 was succeeded by Joseph Roy Orme, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Wilford Ward had 351 members, including 82 children. The total population of the Wilford Precinct was 565 in 1930.
