Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Wilson Branch

WILSON BRANCH, Teton Stake, Teton Co., Wyoming, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Wilson and the surrounding district of country. This farming district is situated on the west side of Snake River, and also on the west side of Jackson Valley (Jackson Hole). The village of Wilson is about eight miles west of the town of Jackson, 20 miles east of Victor, the nearest railroad station, and 30 miles southeast of Driggs, the headquarters of the Teton Stake.

Among the first L. D. S. settlers in Jackson Valley was Elijah N. Wilson, who later acted as the first presiding Elder in the Wilson Branch. Brother Wilson is the author of a book entitled "Uncle Nick Among the Shoshones."

As the families of saints in Jackson Valley increased in number, it became necessary to organize a second branch in said valley, where the saints lived so scattered that it was inconvenient for them to meet for worship in the same place. Consequently, a branch of the Church was organized in 1898, called the Wilson Branch, with Elijah N. Wilson as presiding Elder.

During Brother Wilson's administration he built the first L. D. S. meeting house in Jackson Valley, a small log building, in which meetings and Sunday school sessions were held until Ephraim Johnson became presiding Elder. In 1900 the branch had 65 members, or 14 families.

Elijah N. Wilson was succeeded as presiding Elder in 1903 by Abraham Ward, who presided as late as 1905. It seems that the branch was disorganized at the close of 1907, and that for seven years there was no presiding Elder. During that period the saints at Wilson attended meetings in Jackson or South Park Branch.

On July 10, 1921, the Wilson Branch, which had hitherto constituted a part of the Jackson Ward, was organized as an independent branch with Ephraim Johnson as presiding Elder. During his administration a small meeting house, having a seating capacity of 50 people, was built in the Wilson Branch. Ephraim Johnson presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Wilson Branch had 46 members, including 15 children.
