Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Winter Quarters

WINTER QUARTERS was a temporary settlement founded by the Latter-day Saints, exiles from Nauvoo, Illinois, in September, 1846, and here thousands of saints spent the winters of 1846-1847 and 1847-1848. This settlement, which was the first Anglo-Saxon settlement in what is now the state of Nebraska, was situated on the west bank of the Missouri River, about six miles north of Omaha, Nebraska. In December, 1846, the place consisted of 548 log houses, and 83 sod houses, inhabited by 3,483 souls. The place was also divided into 22 wards, each presided over by a Bishop. Winter Quarters was abandoned in the summer of 1848, and the improvements which had been made became the property of the Indians. Some years afterwards an attempt was made to build a city on the site of old Winter Quarters; streets and lots were laid out; the city was called Florence, and for a brief period it was hoped by some that it would become a place of importance. Land went up in price, city lots were sold at fancy figures, and a number of good dwellings were erected. But the excitement soon died out and the place fell into decay; it being near Omaha, that city soon completely overshadowed Florence, which is now a suburb of Omaha. There are still a number of foundations of the houses erected by the saints to be seen at Florence, and there are also traces of the dug-outs in the side of the hill, and the lines of some of the streets and lots can easily he traced. For a number of years (1859 to 1863) Florence was the chief outfitting place for the Mormon emigration crossing the Plains. The old so-called Mormon graveyard, situated on the bluffs immediately west of Florence, is supposed to contain the remains of about 600 Mormon emigrants, including exiles from Nauvoo, who died from exposure, privation and want, and a number of the emigrants from Great Britain and other parts of Europe who, having been attacked by malaria and other diseases in coming up the rivers, died with sickness, fatigue and destitution.
