Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Woodland Ward, Portneuf Stake

WOODLAND WARD, Portneuf Stake, Bannock Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the southwest part of Marsh Valley, on the two small streams known respectively as Marsh Creek and Birch Creek. Nearly all the inhabitants are farmers and stock-raisers who irrigate their lands and gardens from Birch Creek and Cherry Creek. Dry farming is also carried on. The center of the ward is the district school house, situated on the bench between Marsh Creek and Birch Creek, commanding a fine view of Marsh Valley. It is two miles south of the point where Birch Creek empties into Marsh Creek, 5 1/2 miles southwest of Downey, the headquarters of the stake, 15 miles southwest of Garden Creek, and 20 miles south of McCammon.

The first settlers in that part of Marsh Valley now included in the Woodland Ward were William West Woodland and others who came from Willard and Brigham City, Box Elder Co., Utah. They arrived in Marsh Valley April 15, 1864, and settled on Birch Creek at a point about 11/2 miles above the junction of that stream with Marsh Creek. There were eight men in the company. Two women and a few children arrived later. In 1864 there was not a ranch or a station of any kind in Marsh Valley, only a few straggling Indians. Only three men (David Whittaker, and William and Henry Woodland) spent the winter of 1864-1865 in Marsh Valley. Thus it will be seen that Woodland, though now (1930) a small ward, was the first place in Marsh Valley to be settled by the Latter-day Saints. No grain was raised in the valley for several years, owing to the hard frosts. In 1876 a sawmill was built on Birch Creek by William W. Woodland and others, which was the first sawmill in the valley. A shingle mill was added the next year. The first L. D. S. settlers in Marsh Valley affiliated with the saints of the Malad Ward, where they attended meetings and paid their tithing, all the original settlers of Marsh Valley being members of the Church. During the following year other settlers located in the valley, and the first school house was built in 1877. As early as 1882 the saints in Marsh Valley were organized as a branch of the Church, which branch became a part of the Marsh Center Ward, where it belonged until Dec. 5, 1891, when the Woodland part of the Marsh Valley Ward was organized and called Woodland, in honor of Wm. W. Woodland, the first settler. William Henry Harrison Wakley was chosen as Bishop of the Woodland Ward. He was succeeded in 1909 by Jacob L. Hartvigsen, who in 1912 was succeeded by Asael D. Blanchard, who in 1915 was succeeded by George E. Webb, who in 1923 was succeded by Willard Wakley, who still presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Woodland Ward had 120 members, including 19 children.
