Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Woodruff Stake of Zion

WOODRUFF STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the south part of Rich County, Utah, the southwest part of Uinta County and the south part of Lincoln County, Wyo., with headquarters in Evanston, Uinta Co., Wyo. The stake consists of five fully organized bishop's wards, namely Diamondville and Kemmerer wards in Lincoln County, Wyoming, Randolph and Woodruff wards in Rich County, Utah, and Evanston Ward and Almy and Hilllard branches in Uinta County, Wyo. Evanston is a railroad town on the Union Pacific Railroad and the seat of Lincoln County, Wyo. Almy, Kemmerer and Diamondville are coal mining camps, and Randolph, Woodruff and. Hilllard are farming communities. There is no regular stake tabernacle within the limits of the stake, but most of the stake conferences and other large gatherings are held alternately in Evanston, Randolph, Woodruff and Kemmerer. There is a convenient stake office in Evanston, affording accomodations for the stake presidency, High Council, etc.

Woodruff is the only stake of Zion which contains three county seats. Evanston, the seat of Uinta Co., Wyo., Randolph, the seat of Rich Co., Utah, and Kemmerer, the seat of Lincoln Co., Wyo., are all within the limits of the Woodruff Stake.

At a special conference held at Almy, Wyo., June 6, 1898, attended by Apostles John Henry Smith, Heber J. Grant, Matthias F. Cowley and Abraham O. Woodruff, William Budge, president of the Bear Lake Stake, and Alma Eldredge, of the Summit Stake presidency, a new stake of Zion was organized with the following wards: Randolph, Argyle, Woodruff and Diamondville, formerly belonging to the Bear Lake Stake, and Almy, Evanston, Fort Bridger and Rock Springs, hitherto parts of the Summit Stake. The new stake was called the Woodruff Stake, thus named in honor of Pres. Wilford Woodruff. John M. Baxter, Bishop of the Woodruff Ward, was chosen as president of the new stake, with Byron Sessions, of Woodruff, Utah, as first, and Charles Kingston, of Evanston, Wyo., as second counselor. A High Council and stake auxiliary organizations were also organized.

In 1901 Archibald McKinnon succeeded Byron Sessions as first counselor, and in 1904 Thomas J. Tingey succeeded Charles Kingston as second counselor. In 1914 Thomas J. Tingey was promoted to first counselor, succeeding Archibald McKinnon, and James Brown, sen., of Evanston, was chosen as second counselor. First Counselor Thomas J. Tingey died July 16, 1918, and James Brown, sen., was promoted to first counselor and Geo. A. Neville chosen as second counselor. John M. Baxter, who had presided over the stake for thirty years, was honorably released July 1, 1928, together with his counselors (James Brown, sen., and George A. Neville), and William R. Smith was chosen as president of the Woodruff Stake, with James Brown, jun., as first and John M. Peart as second counselor. This presidency stood intact Dec. 31, 1930. At the time of his release Pres. Baxter was, as to length of service, the oldest stake president in the Church. Thomas J. Tingey was the first stake clerk; he was succeeded in 1904 by Peter McKinnon, who in 1917 was succeeded by John Neilson, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Woodruff Stake had a total membership of 3,272, including 826 children. Among the Priesthood were three Patriarchs, namely, James Brown, sen., John C. Gray and Andrew Easton.

At a stake conference held July 19, 1926, the Woodruff Stake was divided, and a new stake called the Lyman Stake (thus named in honor of the late Apostle Francis M. Lyman) was organized consisting of the following wards and branches: Lyman, Millburne, Mountain View, McKinnon and Fort Bridger, in Uinta County, Wyo., Green River, Rock Springs and Superior in Sweetwater County, Wyo., and Manilla in Daggett County, Utah. After this division the following wards and branches were left in the Woodruff Stake: Evanston, Almy, Randolph, Woodruff, Diamondville, Hilllard, Kemmerer and Cumberland.
