Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Woodruff Ward, Snowflake Stake

WOODRUFF WARD, Snowflake Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a snug little valley on the Little Colorado River, 12 miles southeast of Holbrook and 21 1/2 miles north of Snowflake, the headquarters of the Snowflake Stake of Zion. In December, 1876, Joseph H. Richards, Lewis P. Cardon, James R. Thurman and Peter O. Peterson came from Allen's Camp (later Joseph City) to select a site for a dam in the Colorado River. Others came out to work on the dam and a ditch was surveyed and dug to carry water onto the land that crops might be raised. Among these settlers were Ammon M. and Nathan Tenney. Nathan Tenney was called to act as presiding Elder over the settlement, which for some time was known as Tenney's Camp. In February, 1878, Lorenzo H. Hatch was appointed to succeed Bro. Tenney, who was called to Mexico, and at the same time the name of the settlement was changed to Woodruff in honor of Apostle Wilford Woodruff. The dam was erected, but soon after its completion it was washed away. Other attempts were made to erect dams until seven structures had been carried away by the swollen river: Finally a dam was erected to shut off the water of Silver Creek, about three miles south of, Woodruff, at a cost of $50,000, to which the state of Arizona contributed $10,000, the Church through the First Presidency, $21,000, and surrounding ward members and friends $3,000; the balance was contributed by the people of Woodruff. After the completion of this dam, Woodruff commenced to prosper, and the dry land responded to cultivation. A ward was organized at Woodruff Sept. 26, 1880, with James C. Owens as Bishop; he was succeeded in 1889 by Edward M. Webb, who was succeeded in 1891 by Levi M. Savage, who was succeeded in 1918 by James Brinkerhoff, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Woodruff Ward had 216 members, including 62 children.
