Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Yellowstone Stake of Zion

YELLOWSTONE STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Fremont County and the west part of Clark County in the northeast part of Idaho. It extends to Montana on the north, Yellowstone Park on the east, to the Teton and Fremont stakes on the south, and to Idaho Falls Stake on the west. It consists of eleven organized wards, namely, Ashton, Chester, Egin, Farnum, Heman, Marysville, Parker, Saint Anthony 1st, Saint Anthony 2nd, Twin Groves, and Wilford wards, and the Idmon Branch. Most of the inhabitants within the limits of the stake are L. D. S. farmers and stock raisers. All kinds of cereals are raised and some of the hardier fruits are also grown successfully, notwithstanding the high altitude, which varies from 4,971 to 5,225 feet above sea level. The headquarters of the stake are at Saint Anthony, where there is a stake tabernacle shared by the saints of the Saint Anthony wards.

St. Anthony, situated on Henry's Fork of Snake River, is 60 miles southwest of the west entrance of the Yellowstone Park, 35 miles northeast of Idaho Falls, and 258 miles by rail northeast of Salt Lake City.

Yellowstone Stake came into existence at a special meeting held at Parker, Idaho, Jan. 10, 1909, attended by Apostles George F. Richards and David O. McKay, and the Fremont Stake presidency. On that occasion the Fremont Stake was divided and its northern part organized as a new stake named the Yellowstone Stake, this name being suggested on account of its close proximity to the Yellowstone National Park. The following named wards, which hitherto had constituted a part of the Fremont Stake, were transferred to make the new or Yellowstone Stake, to-wit: Ashton, Chester, Egin, Farnum, Kilgore, Marysville, Ora, St. Anthony, Parker, Twin Groves, Warm River, and Wilford. Daniel G. Miller, Bishop of Parker Ward, was chosen as president of the Yellowstone Stake, with Marion J. Kerr as first and James E. Fogg as second counselor. In 1913 Charles E. Lloyd succeeded James E. Fogg (who died Aug. 29, 1913) as second counselor. In 1925 Pres. Daniel G. Miller was honorably released, together with his counselors (Marion J. Kerr and Charles E. Lloyd), and John M. White was chosen as president of the Yellowstone Stake, with George H. Lowe as first and Karl C. Klingler as second counselor. In 1927 Willard W. Spiers succeeded George H. Lowe as first counselor. John M. White presided over the Yellowstone Stake Dec. 31, 1930, with Willard W. Spiers as first and Karl C. Klingler as second counselor. Chester B. Walker was the first clerk of the Yellowstone Stake; he was succeeded in 1910 by Fred H. Mason, who in 1924 was succeeded by Leonard Kingsford, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Yellowstone Stake had a total membership of 3,969, including 803 children. Henry W. Miller was the only Patriarch in the stake.
