Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Yost Ward

YOST WARD, Raft River Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on George Creek, in the extreme south part of Upper Raft River Valley, in Cassia County, Idaho, and Box Elder County, Utah. The settlement consists of a string of farms extending into the canyon on the south and down George Creek about seven miles. The meeting house is about 2 1/2 miles south of the Utah-Idaho line.

Chas. Yost, a non-Mormon, was the first settler on George Creek. He located about 1 1/2 miles northwest of the present Yost meeting house.

The first L. D. S. settler was Joseph F. Tracy of Park City, Utah, who arrived in 1880, and was soon followed by other members of the Church, who were attached to the Almo Ward of the Cassia Stake. A school house was erected soon afterwards in which Sunday school and some meetings were conducted under the direction of Ebenezer Richardson, appointed by the presidency of the Box Elder Stake. Yost, at that time, constituted a part of the Park Valley Ward of that stake, but was later transferred back to Almo Ward. Bro. Richardson was succeeded by John Beus, and Joseph F. Tracy was made superintendent of the Sunday school at Yost. Pres. Beus was a very enthusiastic worker and took an active part in the erection of a meeting house at Yost, laying the rocks with his own hands, and while thus laboring he contracted a severe cold and died of pneumonia in the fall of 1899. He was succeeded in the presidency of the branch by Joseph A. Montgomery, under whose direction the meeting house was soon completed. On July 26, 1903, the saints residing on Clear Creek, George Creek, One Mile Creek and in Junction Valley were separated from the Almo Ward and organized as the Yost Ward, with Thomas H. Blackburn, jun., as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1907 by Joseph A. Montgomery, who was succeeded in 1918 by Don Chester Loveland, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time the ward had a membership of 176, including 46 children. Yost Ward became part of Raft River Stake in 1915, when that stake was organized from part of the Cassia Stake.
