Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association

YOUNG LADIES MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION. President Brigham Young realized that the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869 would result in making the people of Utah more cosmopolitan in their views and that the effect upon the younger women might be to make them discontented with the simple, chaste lives they had been leading. After consultation with Sister Eliza R. Snow, Pres. Young called his family together at the Lion House, Salt Lake City, on the evening of November 28, 1869, and, after addressing them in an inspired manner upon the responsibilities that rested upon the women of Zion, he organized his daughters into a "Retrenchment Society", the members of which were pledged to avoid all extravagant practices, to retrench in regard to dress, eating, and even in speech. The time had come, he assured them, when the sisters must agree to give up their follies of dress and cultivate a modest apparel, a meek deportment and to set an example before the world. He did not desire that the sisters should wear a uniform, but only that they should dress modestly, each according to her individual taste. Such an organization represented sacrifice, but the young women nobly endeavored to do their part. They were also to receive instruction in the principles of the gospel, such as the young men received in their Priesthood activities. By the end of the next year the Retrenchment Association was established on a firm basis. There were associations in nearly every ward in Salt Lake City while work in other towns and settlements had commenced. The older women were also anxious to be represented and the Retrenchment Association developed into Senior and Junior Retrenchment Societies.

After the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations were organized, President Young expressed the desire that the name of the Retrenchment Association should be Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association, but it was not until 1878 that the name was permanently changed.

Tuesday evening is generally recognized throughout the Church as the time for M. I. A. meetings, the young men and young ladies usually meeting together for the opening and closing exercises and separating for class work.

The work of the Y. L. M. I. A. is divided into four groups, namely, Beehive, Junior and Gleaner Girls, and the adult class, the first three paralleling the Scout, Vanguard and M Men groups of the Y. M. M. I. A. The Beehive girls (ages 12-16) endeavor to fill a certain number of cells by the performance of duties which will tend to give them more knowledge, more spirituality, and prepare them more fully for the great future which lies before them as daughters of Zion and future mothers. These girls are known as Gatherers of Honey and are presided over by a Beekeeper. The project of the Junior Girls (16-17) is to develop beautiful and vigorous minds and bodies through right thinking and right living. They study the subject of ideals for Latter-day Saint homes and home life, and are taught consistent behavior in public. The Gleaner Girls (ages 17-23) study the subject outlined for the year, that for 1930 being "A Century of Progress". They also give dramatic performances and are taught to assume responsibility in arranging social functions in connection with the M Men group. The adult classes also study the topic for the year.

The first issue of the "Young Woman's Journal", the organ of the Y. L. M. I. A., appeared in October, 1889, as a monthly magazine, with Mrs. Susa Y. Gates as editor, acting under the direction of the General Board of Y. L. M. I. A. In 1929 this periodical was discontinued, being merged with the "Improvement Era" and published as the organ of both the Y. M. M. I. A. and the Y. L. M. I. A.

On Dec. 31, 1930, Mrs. Ruth May Fox presided over the General Board of Y. L. M. I. A., with Mrs. Lucy Grant Cannon as first, and Miss Clarissa A. Beesley as second counselor and treasurer. Miss Elsie Hogan was secretary. The number of Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Associations on that date was 1,277, with a membership of 56,497.
