Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association

YOUNG MEN'S MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION. The Y. M. M. I. A. was established by President Brigham Young in June, 1875. Long prior to this, the necessity for such an institution had been recognized and a few literary and debating societies functioned. But, in the year named, President Young appointed Elder Junius F. Wells to organize Mutual Improvement Associations throughout the Church. Thus, on June 10, 1875, Elder Wells called a meeting in the 13th Ward chapel, Salt Lake City, when, after being instructed as to the aims of the proposed association, an organization for that ward was effected. It was desired in these organizations to develop the young men intellectually and spiritually and to provide needed recreation under proper supervision. On Nov. 6th of the same year (1875) letters of appointment were also issued by the First Presidency to John Henry Smith, Milton H. Hardy and B. Morris Young, calling them to assist Elder Wells in visiting the settlements of the saints and make general the work already begun. Such good work was accomplished by these brethren that, at a conference of the M. I. A. held April 8, 1876, in Salt Lake City, the number of associations had increased to 57, with a membership of about 1,200.

In the beginning, a great deal of the association work was necessarily left with the ward presidents and the programs were disconnected and spasmodic in character, but in 1876 a central committee was formed with Junius F. Wells as president. This committee later became the General Board of Y. M. M. I. A., under whose direction a regular program and course of study is now outlined.

The earliest age of membership in the Y. M. M. I. A. is 12 years, at which time a boy, upon recommendation of his Bishop, may receive the Aaronic Priesthood. After a while four grades were established, namely, Scouts (12-14 years of age); Vanguards, (15-16); M Men (17-23), and adults. The Scout group engage in activities as members of their quorum in the Lesser Priesthood of the Church and also as prescribed in national Scout practice. The Vanguards begin the study of ideals of manhood as taught by the Latter-day Saints and engage in troop activities in which they are taught leadership. The M Men are encouraged to engage in baseball and other manly sports, give entertainments in connection with the Gleaner Girls of the Y. L. M. I. A. and lead the younger groups in their activities. Preparation to respond to a call as missionaries in the Church is also part of their training. They and the adult group follow the line of study mapped out for them in their Manuals, which in 1930 was "A Century of Progress."

Tuesday evening is usually devoted throughout the Church to M. I. A. meetings, the young men and the young women meeting together for opening and closing exercises and separating for class work.

In October, 1879, the "Contributor", a monthly periodical, was commenced, with Junius F. Wells as editor, and served as the organ of the Y. M. M. I. A. until October, 1899, soon after which publication of the "Improvement Era" was commenced by the General Board of Y. M. M. I. A.

On Dec. 31, 1930, Apostle George Albert Smith was president of the General Board of Y. M. M. L. A., with Apostles Richard R. Lyman and Melvin J. Ballard as counselors. Alma H. Pettigrew was secretary and Ole B. Peterson treasurer. There were 1,253 associations in the Church, with a membership of 58,104.
