Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Young Stake of Zion

YOUNG STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the southwest part of Colorado and the northwest part of New Mexico, with headquarters at Burnham, New Mexico. The stake consists of four organized wards, namely, Burnham Ward in New Mexico, and Kline, Mancos and Red Mesa in Colorado. At Burnham there is a modern L. D. S. meeting house, affording accommodation for the stake presidency and the High Council. Stake conferences are held in the different settlements. The stake also includes the Durango Branch in Colorado as a branch of the Kline Ward.

The Young Stake was organized at a special conference held at Mancos, Colorado, May 21, 1912, when the San Juan Stake was divided into two stakes, named respectively the San Juan Stake and the Young Stake, the Young Stake to embrace the saints residing in Montezuma and La Plata counties in Colorado, and San Juan County, New Mexico, and to include within its boundaries the Burnham, Hammond, Kline, Mancos and Red Mesa wards. David Halls, who had acted as a counselor in the San Juan Stake presidency, was chosen as president of the Young Stake, with Hiram M. Taylor as his first and John H. Hammond as his second counselor. In 1921 Elmer F. Taylor, who had acted as Bishop of the Burnham Ward, was chosen to act as first counselor in the Young Stake presidency, succeeding Hiram M. Taylor. Pres. David Halls was honorably released on account of ill health and on Nov. 30, 1924, Elmer F. Taylor was chosen as president of the Young Stake, with Willard C. Stalworthy as first and Henry Behrmann as second counselor. This presidency still stood intact Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Young Stake had 1,440 members, including 403 children. Among the officers of the stake were two Patriarchs, namely, Elmer F. Taylor and Elihu K. Ball. Herbert Halls was the first stake clerk. He was succeeded in 1914 by James Lewis Halls, who in 1927 was succeeded by Elmer Alphonzo Taylor, who in 1929 was succeeded by J. Lewis Halls, who acted Dec. 31, 1930.
