Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Zion National Park

ZION NATIONAL PARK, Washington Co., Utah, is one of the most famous natural parks of America. It consists of Zion Canyon and vicinity, the canyon being a spectacular gorge 14 miles long, between cliffs of gorgeous multicolored rock. The south entrance to the canyon is located about a mile north of Springdale, Washington County.

Joseph S. Black was the first L. D. S. settler to draw attention to the natural wonders of the locality and, on account of his enthusiastic description, the place became known about 1862 as "Joseph's Glory." Later, Isaac Behunin (the first settler of Ephraim, Utah) took up land there in the canyon and he, enthused with the grandeur of the scenery, called the district "Zion" and it is thus named on some of the early maps of Utah. In 1913 Hon. Wm. Spry, governor of Utah, and a party visited Zion Canyon and were so pleased with the magnificent scenery that they reported their findings to Senator Reed Smoot in Washington, D.C., through whose influence an appropriation of $15,000 was made by the federal government to build a road from the nearest main thoroughfare to the entrance of the canyon. In 1917 a summer camp was established at the base of the so-called "Mountain of the Sun" by Wm. W. Wylie, who for many years had operated camps in Yellowstone Park. As the wonders of Zion Canyon became more widely known, tourists in large numbers came to see it, and in 1919 the district was set apart as a National Park by the United States Government and officially opened to the public by Gov. Geo. H. Dern May 15, 1925. Since that time splendid roads have been constructed, connecting the canyon with great highways between Los Angeles and Salt Lake City, and camps and hotels have been constructed in the very shadows of the gigantic cliffs. A number of well kept foot and horse trails lead to the various points of vantage from which to view these natural wonders.

The Latter-day Saints residing in Zion Canyon and vicinity belong to the Springdale Ward of the Zion Park Stake, and are mostly engaged in farming, or are employed in the tourist camps, or as guides or bus drivers, etc., by the Zion Park officials.
