Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Zion Park Stake of Zion

ZION PARK STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the east part of Washington County, Utah, with headquarters at Hurricane. Northward the stake is bounded by the Parowan Stake, and eastward by the Kanab Stake. South the stake extends to the Grand Canyon of the Colorado in Arizona, and west to the Saint George Stake. Zion Park Stake consists of seven organized bishop's wards, viz., Hurricane North, Hurricane South, LaVerkin, Rockville, Springdale, Toquerville and Virgin. Most of the settlements in southern Utah were founded by colonizing missionaries called by Pres. Brigham Young, who desired to redeem from the desert parts of southern Utah, which possessed a milder climate than the settlements further north. His main object was to raise cotton and other plants and cereals which thrive in a semi-tropical climate. Under this arrangement the settlements of Grafton, Toquerville, Leeds, Washington, St. George, and others were founded, constituting from the beginning what was locally termed Utah's "Dixie," and the work was manipulated under the presidency of what was known as the Southern Utah Mission, in which the late Apostle Erastus Snow took a most prominent part. This state of affairs continued until 1877, when a general reorganization of stakes of Zion took place and the creation of a number of new stakes was accomplished. This was during the last year of Pres. Young's administration. Thus that part of Utah, which had formerly constituted the Southern Utah Mission, was organized into two stakes of Zion, viz., the St. George Stake and the Kanab Stake.

The Saint George Stake was organized April 7, 1877, and the Kanab Stake April 18, 1877. The boundary line between these two stakes was changed several times, and at a stake conference held at St. George Dec. 8, 1929, attended by Apostle David O. McKay, the St. George Stake was divided into an eastern and a western part, the western part to continue as the St. George Stake, and the eastern part organized as the Zion Park Stake, to comprise the following wards, which had all belonged to St. George Stake: Hurricane North, Hurricane South, LaVerkin, Rockville, Springdale, Toquerville and Virgin. Also Short Creek Branch and Cane Beds Branch in northern Arizona were included. Claudius Hirschi was chosen as president of the new stake, with James Judd as first and Russell B. Swenson as second counselor. The dividing line between the new stake and the old St. George Stake was established on a line running north and southeast of the Leeds Ward, placing all the settlements lying east of that line in the new stake. The line in Arizona diverged so as to include Mount Trumbull in the St. George Stake. At the time of the organization of the Zion Park Stake the Church population consisted of 2,580.

In May, 1930, Alvin Englestead was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Hirschi, succeeding Russell B. Swenson, who had moved away. Robert P. Woodbury was chosen as stake clerk, and he acted in that position Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Zion Park Stake had 2,604 members, including 653 children. Benjamin F. LeBaron was the only Patriarch in the stake.
