Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Zion's Camp

ZION'S CAMP was a semi-religious and military organization organized in 1834 for the purpose of rendering aid to the saints who had been expelled from their homes in Jackson County, Missouri, in 1883. In the fall of 1883, after the saints had been driven out of Jackson County, and were locating temporarily in Clay County, Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight were sent as messengers by the exiled saints to Kirtland, Ohio, were they gave a report of the persecutions and mobbings to the Prophet Joseph, who asked of the Lord what to in the matter. In answer to his inquiry he received a revelation on Feb. 24, 1834, in which the Lord commanded him to gather the strength of his house, the young and middle-aged men from the various branches and conferences of the Church in the East and march with, them to Missouri, to assist the brethren (who had been driven out of Jackson County a few months previous) to return to their inheritances. The Lord called for five hundred men to go on this important mission, if they could be obtained, but if not, less would do, only he gave a strict commandment that no less than one hundred men should go up. (Doc. & Cov. See. 103.) Two days later (Feb. 26) Joseph Smith and Parley P. Pratt left Kirtland to obtain volunteers for the purpose named, while other Elders started out two and two on a similar mission in other directions. Before starting, a council was held in which Joseph was accepted as commander-in chief of the armies of Israel and leader of those who should volunteer. The Elders visited the various branches of the Church in the East, pleading the cause of Zion, asking the saints to assist in her redemption by contributing of their substance, and thus relieve the distress of their brethren who had been driven from their homes and now were exiled in a land of strangers, largely dependent upon the kindness and charity of friends for means of living. The response to this call was quite general and the spirit of the Lord also rested upon a number of young men belonging to the Church, who cheerfully volunteered to go on that great and important mission. They commenced to assemble in Kirtland, Ohio, in April and May, and on the 1st of May more than twenty of the brethren left Kirtland for Missouri, accompanied by four baggage wagons, and traveled to New Portage, a village about thirty miles southwest of Kirtland, which had been selected as the place of rendezvous. They were followed by others, and on May 5th Joseph the Prophet started from Kirtland with about one hundred men, well supplied with clothing and other necessities to carry to their brethren and sisters in Missouri, who had been robbed of nearly all their effects. They had also provided themselves with horses and wagons, firearms, and all sorts of ammunition for war of the most portable kind for self-defense. Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery and a few of the brethren working on the temple were all that were left in Kirtland, save the aged and the women and children, when the camp started for Missouri. Joseph's Company arrived at New Portage May 6, 1834, where about fifty other brethren awaited their arrival. On the 7th preparations were made for traveling. All the money in possesion of the several members of the Camp was gathered and placed in the hands of Frederick G. Williams, who was appointed paymaster of the company. Zerubbabel Snow was appointed commissary general, and the whole company now consisted of 150 men and 20 baggage wagons, but, before it arrived in Missouri, a number of brethren from Michigan and other parts of the country joined the Camp at different points along the road of travel. The company consisted mostly of young men, and nearly all were Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons. On the 7th the company was more fully organized by the Prophet, who divided the whole band into companies of twelve, each company electing its own captain, who assigned each man in their respective company his part and duty, which was generally as follows: Two cooks, two firemen, two tent-makers, two watermen, one runner, two wagoners and horsemen and one commissary. The brethren purchased flour, baked their own bread and cooked their own provisions, which were good, though sometimes scanty. Sometimes they had Johnny-cake, or corn dodgers, instead of flour bread. Every night before time to rest, at the sound of the trumpet, the brethren bowed before the Lord in the several tents, and at the sound of the morning trumpet every man was again on his knees before the Lord imploring His blessings for the day.

The company started from New Portage on the 8th for Missouri. They traveled by way of Chippeway, Mansfield, and Richfield, in Ohio, Vandalia in Indiana, Decatur and Jacksonville in Illinois; crossed the Mississippi River into Missouri, into the Salt River country and arrived in Clay County, Missouri, June 16th. On their arrival at this point they found the Missourians excited and prepared to oppose the Camp. A terrific storm saved the brethren, but cholera broke out among them from which many suffered most severely, and thirteen of the members of Zion's Camp died. Finally a revelation was given-the revelation on Fishing River-in which the Lord said that the time had not come for the redemption of Zion, i.e., for the saints to return to their homes in Jackson County. But the Lord said He had accepted the sacrifice made by His faithful servants in undertaking the long march from the East to assist their fellow-religionists. Consequently, Zion's Camp was disbanded and soon afterwards most of the members returned to the East, while a few, such as Wilford Woodruff and others, engaged in missionary labors. Some of the brethren constituting the membership of Zion's Camp murmured on several occasions during the journey, and were much disappointed at the apparent failure of the expedition, but it gave an opportunity for the Church leaders to find out what element to be relied upon was found in the Church even at that early day. When the members of Zion's Camp were called together in February, 1835, to receive special blessings, twelve men, nearly all former members of Zion's Camp, were chosen to constitute the first Quorum of Twelve Apostles and seventy others from the same band were chosen to constitute the First Quorum of Seventy. It may be said that from the time of Zion's Camp until Pres. Wilford Woodruff's death in 1898, members of Zion's Camp were numbered among the general authorities of the Church, including such men as Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, Charles C. Rich, Joseph Young, Willard Snow, Lorenzo D. Barnes, Zebedee Coltrin, Luke S. Johnson, and Lyman E. Johnson. For many years after the saints settled in Utah, the members of Zion's Camp held annual reunions, which were always very enjoyable and it also reminded all participants of the Missouri , persecutions and the terrible trials through which the early members of the Church passed. (See Historical Record, Vol. 7, pp. 577-591.)
