Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Brooklyn"

"BROOKLYN" is the name of a ship which carried about two hundred and thirty Latter-day Saints from New York, by way of Cape Horn, to San Francisco Bay, in 1846. The exodus from Nauvoo having been planned, some of the saints residing in the Eastern States, including several families in New York and vicinity, were advised to charter a vessel and reach California by water, instead of undertaking the long overland journey to the Rocky Mountains, or to the places where the saints intended to locate. Consequently, Samuel Brannan, who, after Apostle Orson Pratt had presided over the branches of the Church in the eastern and middle states, was authorized to charter a vessel and take the press and fixtures which had been used for printing the "Messenger" in New York, as well as farming implements, etc., and lead a company of saints from the eastern branches by way of Cape Horn to California.

In compliance with these instructions, Samuel Brannan chartered the ship "Brooklyn," which sailed from New York Feb. 4, 1846, the same day that the actual exodus of the saints from Nauvoo, Ill., began. The "Brooklyn" carried, besides the saints and their belongings, considerable freight, some of which was destined for the Sandwich Islands. After an eventful voyage, on which several of the passengers died, and two children were born, the "Brooklyn", having touched at the island of Jaun Fernandez off the coast of South America, and Honolulu (Hawaiian Islands), arrived in the Bay of San Francisco July 31, 1846. There the saints found a little Mexican colony named Yerba Buena, where Samuel Brannan set up his press brought from New York and commenced the publication of a newspaper called the "California Star". In a short time the name of the village of Yerba Buena was changed to San Francisco, the "Brooklyn" company of saints being at that time about equal in number with the former Spanish or Mexican population of the village.

Some of the passengers who had arrived in California on the "Brooklyn" were farmers from the New England States, and on their arrival on the Pacific Coast looked for a suitable locality to found a farming settlement. Such a place they selected near the junction of the Stanislaus and San Joaquin rivers, where they founded a small settlement named Port Hope. (See Port Hope.)

Most of the "Brooklyn" saints in due course of time migrated to Salt Lake Valley and cast their lots with the saints there, while others remained in California and became numbered among the earlier Anglo-Saxon inhabitants of that state. (For further details see "Historical Record," Vol. 8, pp. 784-876.)
