Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Bunkerville Ward

BUNKERVILLE WARD, Moapa Stake, Clark Co., Nevada, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Bunkerville, which is pleasantly situated on the south banks of the Rio Virgen, 45 miles northeast of Overton, the stake headquarters, 30 miles northeast of Moapo, the nearest railroad station on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad, and 55 miles southwest of St. George, Utah. Bunkerville is six miles west of the boundary line between Nevada and Arizona, and the altitude is about 1,400 feet above sea level; hence all kinds of semi-tropical fruits are raised successfully. The open flat on which Bunkerville occupies a somewhat central location (including Mesquite Flat on the opposite side of the river) commences about seven miles above Bunkerville and narrows into a mere canyon, about three miles below the town, having an average width of 1 1/2 miles.

Bunkerville as a settlement was founded in 1877 by Edward Bunker and family, who were desirous of entering once more into the United Order, which organization at Santa Clara had been broken up; thus, Edward Bunker organized a company for carrying out the United Order elsewhere, and the place chosen for the new location was on Mesquite Flat, on the Rio Virgen, where the brethren in January, 1877, located and immediately commenced making improvements. They built a canal, or water ditch, to convey water for irrigation purposes from the Rio Virgen on to a flat which had been selected for a townsite and farms on the south side of the river, and called their settlement Bunkerville, in honor of Edward Bunker, the leading man in the settlement. Soon a prosperous village came into existence and the principles of the United Order were adopted by the settlers and proved successful for a number of years. The first families located on the surveyed townsite in 1878, and a small portable burr mill was erected that year. Articles of the Bunkerville United Order were drawn up by representatives of about 20 families. The townsite was surveyed into 12 blocks, four lots in a block. A terrific flood washed away a part of the town June 28, 1882.

Edward Bunker, sen., was succeeded as Bishop of Bunkerville in 1883 by Edward Bunker, jun., who in turn was succeeded in 1908 by Joseph I. Earl, who in 1912 was succeeded by Edward I. Cox, who in 1919 was succeeded by William Wittwer, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. At that time the membership of the Bunkerville Ward was 317, including 85 children.
