Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Burton Ward, Grant Stake

BURTON WARD, Grant Stake, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Salt Lake City, Utah, which is bounded on the north by 21st South St., from the Jordan River to 3rd East St., thence the boundary line runs to the Park City branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, thence east along said track to 5th East St. This boundary separates Burton Ward from the Cannon, McKinley and Wells wards. On the east the Burton Ward extends to 3rd East St., from 21st South St. to the railroad, but from 5th East St. the boundary line runs to a point 10 rods north of Stratford Ave., or Wells and Nibley Park wards. The south boundary of the Burton Ward is a line running east and west 10 rods north of Stratford Ave., or Southgate and Central Park wards; west the ward extends to the Jordan River.

In 1919 that part of the ward lying between 21st South St. and the railroad racks and between 3rd and 5th East streets was transferred to the newly organized Wells Ward. And in 1925 all that part of Burton Ward lying south of a line running east and west, 10 rods north of Stratford Avenue, was transferred to the newly organized Central Park and Southgate wards.

Burton Ward, an outgrowth of Farmers (now McKinley) Ward, was organized Feb. 25, 1914, with Henry F. Burton (who had presided over the Farmers Ward for 28 years) as Bishop. The ward was named in honor of General Robert T. Burton, who owned and operated one of the first farms located in that part of Salt Lake Valley which later became Burton Ward.

For a time after the organization of the Burton Ward the saints met for worship in the Farmers Ward, but a building spot having been donated to the ward on Burton Avenue between Main and State streets, a small lumber building, to be used as a temporary chapel, was erected thereon and known as Unity Cottage which was used until a substantial chapel, erected at a cost of $35,000, was completed in 1915. To this chapel an amusement hall was added in 1923.

When first organized Burton Ward belonged to Granite Stake, but when Grant Stake was organized in 1924, it became part of that stake. Bishop Henry F. Burton was succeeded in December, 1914-a few months after his appointment-by Matthew A. Miller, who was succeeded in 1923 by George H. Söderborg, who was succeeded in 1929 by Alma Kasteler, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Burton Ward had 1,156 members, including 210 children.
