Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Cache Ward

CACHE WARD, Teton Stake, Teton Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district lying east of the Teton River in Teton Valley, the center of the ward being the village of Cache, which lies about half way between Driggs on the south and Tetonia on the north. The surrounding country is a beautiful plain covered with grain fields and fine meadows. A large part of the district sub-irrigates and produces fine crops, and is also a splendid dairy section. In the district there is a fine L. D. S. meeting house, a modern school house, and a number of good substantial residences.

Cache Ward is an outgrowth of the original Leigh Ward and its early history is interwoven with that of the Leigh Ward. The name Cache was given to that part of the original Leigh Ward, which is now included in the Cache Ward, owing to the fact that most of the people who first settled in this locality came from Cache Valley, Utah, and so they chose this name for their ward. Among the first settlers was Joseph Gale, who in the spring of 1889 located at the edge of the bench, near the Teton River bottom, but later moved on to the townsite, where he erected a store building and commenced store-keeping. In 1891 the post office, which was called Haden, was moved to Cache, and the mail at that time was carried from Rexburg to Jackson Hole by Samuel Moffatt. On March 20, 1903, it was decided to divide the Leigh Ward and to select two new townsites, one on the south side and one on the north side of South Leigh Creek, and Hans P. Mack was chosen as presiding Elder over the Leigh (later Cache) district, including those living on the flat south of Leigh Creek. A townsite was chosen March 27, 1904, (dedicated June 17, 1907), and on May 22, 1904, the Cache Branch was organized as a bishop's ward, with Robert G. Meikle as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1916 by Niels H. Hansen, who in 1917 was succeeded by James Nielsen, who in 1919 was succeeded by John Christoffersen, who in 1925 was succeeded by Canute H. Mickelsen, who in 1929 was succeeded by John M. Buxton, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Cache Ward had 140 members, including 36 children.
