Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Carbon Stake

CARBON STAKE consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Carbon County, and also a few in Emery County, Utah. The headquarters of the stake are at Price, an important town on the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, 126 miles by rail southeast of Salt Lake City. At Price there is a beautiful tabernacle, in which stake conferences and other large stake gatherings convene, and where there are also accommodations for the stake presidency and the High Council.

In 1930 the Carbon Stake consisted of eight organized bishop's wards and five independent branches. The wards were Castle Gate, Clear Creek, Green River, Price, Spring Glen, Storrs, Sunnyside and Wellington. The branches were Columbia, Garden Creek, Helper, Hiawatha, Kenilworth and Standardville. The population of Carbon Stake is divided between miners and farmers, and in Price quite a number of the brethren are engaged in business and are carrying on different kinds of industries.

All the saints in the so-called Castle Valley belonged originally to the Sanpete Stake of Zion, but in 1880 the Emery Stake was organized containing all the saints residing in Emery County. In the meantime the coal mining population in the north end of Emery County increased so rapidly that the state authorities, through the legislature, divided Emery County, and created of its northern part Carbon County, thus named because of the great quantity of coal found in the mountains adjacent to Price. At a conference of the Emery Stake held May 8, 1910, attended by Apostles Francis M. Lyman and Anthony W. Ivins, the Emery Stake was divided into two stakes, the north part of the stake to become a new stake called Carbon Stake, with the same boundaries as the previously organized Carbon County. The south part of the Emery Stake was continued under the old name. When first organized the new Carbon Stake included Castle Gate, Green River, Pleasant Valley, Price, Scofield, Spring Glen, Sunnyside and Wellington. Gustave E. Iverson was sustained as president of the Carbon Stake, with Arthur W. Horsley as his first, and James Rex Miller as his second counselor. Ernest S. Horsley was appointed stake clerk soon afterwards. On Aug. 13, 1913, Pres. Iverson and counselors were released, and Arthur W. Horsley, who had acted as first counselor to Pres. Iverson, was chosen as president of the Carbon Stake, with John H. Pace as first, and Henry G. Mathis as second counselor. First counselor John H. Pace died Nov. 2, 1922, and soon afterwards Henry G. Mathis was promoted from second to first counselor and John E. Pettit was chosen as second counselor. First counselor Henry G. Mathis was honorably released because of advanced years Sept. 29, 1929, and John E. Pettit was promoted from second to first counselor and Orson H. Guymon was chosen as second counselor in the stake presidency. Arthur W. Horsley acted as president of the Carbon Stake Dec. 31, 1930, with John E. Pettit as first and Orson H. Guymon as second counselor; Ernest S. Horsley was the stake clerk.

The Carbon Stake Tabernacle, which was built at an expense of $93,000, was dedicated July 1, 1893. This modern building has an auditorium with gallery capable of seating 800 people; it also has a commodious Relief Society room, an amusement hall, eight class rooms and a baptismal font. It is heated by steam and electrically lighted. The first meeting was held in the new building April 13, 1893. The Church membership of the Carbon Stake Dec. 31, 1930, was 5,291, including 1,523 children. The total population of Carbon County was 17,798 in 1930.
