Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Cassia Stake of Zion

CASSIA STAKE OF ZION consists (1930) of the Latter-day Saints residing in the south part of Goose Creek Valley, Cassia Co., Idaho. Northward the stake extends to the Burley and Minidoka stakes, east to the Raft River Stake, south to the boundary line between Utah and Idaho (or Box Elder County, Utah), and west to the limits of Cassia County. It contains the following wards: Basin, Marion, Oakley 1st, Oakley 2nd, Oakley 3rd, and Oakley 4th.

In April, 1879, Wm. C. Martindale and a company from Tooele County, Utah, came to Goose Creek Valley to explore this part of the newly organized Cassia County, Idaho, and locate places for settlements, and report back to President Francis M. Lyman of the Tooele Stake. They found some non-Mormon stockmen in the valley with their herds, and in a cove known as "Little Basin" they found that James Dayley and his two sons (Heber C. and Thomas J.) a Latter-day Saint family, had already staked out claims and built cabins. Upon his return, Wm. C. Martindale made a favorable report, and soon afterwards a number of people from Tooele County expressed their desire to take up land in the newly selected location and Bro. Martindale was appointed to go with them, organize them into a branch of the Church and preside over them. On May 9, 1880, Pres. Martindale held a meeting in the log cabin of Thomas Dayley in the Little Basin, on which occasion he presented his letter of appointment from Pres. Lyman, and the saints present sustained him in his position, after which he chose Enoch R. Dayley, sen., as one of his counselors. The total number of members of the Church in the neighborhood at that time was 14, but more arrived later that year and the site of Oakley became the central part of the new colony. On Sunday, Sept. 24, 1882, on the occasion of the visit of Apostles Francis M. Lyman and John Henry Smith, the branch was organized as the Cassia Ward of the Box Elder Stake with Horton D. Haight as Bishop. Wm. C. Martindale and George C. Whipple were set apart as his counselors. On Nov. 19, 1887, the saints residing in the Cassia Ward and vicinity were separated from the Box Elder Stake and organized as the Cassia Stake of Zion with Horton D. Haight as president. He chose Moroni Pickett and Wm. T. Brim as his counselors. This presidency remained intact until the death of Pres. Haight, Jan. 19, 1900.

At a meeting held May 13, 1900, Wm. T. Jack was set apart to preside over the Cassia Stake. He chose John L. Smith and Wm. T. Harper as his counselors. This presidency stood intact for 28 years, or until Oct. 20, 1928, when they were honorably released and Chas. S. Clark was sustained as president of the Cassia Stake with Moses S. Martin and Wm. G. Hardy as his counselors. These three brethren acted in the positions named Dec. 31, 1930. The first clerk of the Cassia Stake was Joseph Y. Haight, who in 1899 was succeeded by John J. Millard, who was succeeded in 1904 by Marcus L. Funk, who in 1910 was succeeded by J. Earl Whiteley, who acted at the close of 1930, at which time the membership of the stake was 1,528, including 301 children. Cassia Stake is the mother of all the other stakes in south and central Idaho, including the Boise Stake, organized Nov. 3, 1913; Raft River Stake, organized April 26, 1915; Twin Falls Stake organized July 26, 1919; Burley Stake organized July 27, 1919; Blaine Stake, organized Aug. 3, 1919, and Minidoka Stake organized May 11, 1924. At Oakley is located the stake tabernacle, a rock building; also a stake office building. In 1929 a stake recreation hall was built, said to be one of the finest in Idaho. The same year Cassia Stake purchased and remodeled a theatre building now called the Cassia Stake Playhouse; this building also is said to be one of the best of its kind in Idaho. The stake also owns a seminary building, a brick edifice, erected in 1926 on the corner east of the Oakley Rural High School.
