Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Castle Gate

CASTLE GATE, Carbon Stake, Carbon Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the coal-mining camp of Castle Gate, situated in Price River Canyon, three miles north of Helper, and ten miles northwest of Price, the headquarters of the Carbon Stake of Zion. A great number of the brethren are employed in the coal mines at Castle Gate and immediate neighborhood, while others are engaged in business or employed in different capacities in the town. Castle Gate is one of the most important mining camps in Carbon County.

In August, 1888, Alexander McLean and a few others made the actual discovery of coal in the mountains adjacent to the location of Castle Gate and commenced work at once. The first test of making coke was undertaken by these men in October, 1888, and as the experiment proved successful, a coal-mining town soon sprang into existence, and before the year was ended the first carload of coal was shipped from the mine so recently opened. Among the employees at the mines were Latter-day Saints, who were organized into a branch of the Church in November, 1888, with Wm. T. Lamph as presiding Elder; he acted under the direction of Bishop Heber F. Stowell of the Spring Glen Ward, which was organized at the same time. Immediately after the organization of the branch, meetings and Sunday school sessions were held regularly. Auxiliary organizations were also established. As presiding Elder William T. Lamph moved to Castle Valley in 1891, William Stokes succeeded him as presiding Elder at Castle Gate. Bro. Stokes was succeeded in 1892 by Thomas Cox, who presided until May, 1893, when the Castle Gate Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward, with Wm. T. Lamph (who had returned to Castle Gate) as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1899 by Andrew Young as presiding Elder, who was succeeded as Bishop by John F. Aamodt, who in 1903 was succeeded by Andrew Young (second term) as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1906 by Morgan D. Evans, who later the same year was succeeded by Wm. Evans, who in 1909 was succeeded by Morgan D. Evans (second term). In 1911 the branch was once more organized as a ward with Morgan D. Evans as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1921 by Benjamin Foster Thomas, who was killed in a terrible explosion which took place in the mines at Castle Gate March 8, 1924. His successor was William B. Stapley, who presided as Bishop at Castle Gate Dec. 31, 1930. The Church membership of the Castle Gate Ward Dec. 31, 1930, was 575 souls, including 181 children. The total population of the Castle Gate Precinct or town was 923 in 1930.
