Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Cedar Valley Ward

CEDAR VALLEY WARD, Lehi Stake, Utah Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the north end of Cedar Valley, which is a fine but poorly watered valley extending north and south for 22 miles; it is seven miles wide. Cedar Valley comprises the west part of Utah County and is separated from the Utah Valley proper on the east by a low range of mountains, and from Rush Valley in Tooele County on the west by another low range of mountains. Cedar Fort and Fairfield are the only settlements in the valley and they are both small. As water there is very scarce, dry farming has been tried quite successfully. Cedar Fort is situated in the north end of the valley, 40 miles by nearest road southwest of Salt Lake City and 15 miles southwest of Lehi. Most of the people in the north end of Cedar Valley reside in Cedar Fort.

Cedar Valley was first settled by Latter-day Saints in October, 1852, when Alfred Bell and others located a settlement in the north end of the valley, which was called Cedar Fort. In 1853 other settlers moved in and on April 3, 1853, the saints who had located at Cedar Fort were organized into a ward called Cedar Fort Ward, with Allen Weeks as Bishop. Because of Indian troubles, the settlement was temporarily broken up three times, but a stone fort, 133 feet square, with walls ten feet high and four feet thick, was built in 1855. At that time the Church membership of the little settlement was 115 souls. Through scarcity of water the settlers in Cedar Valley have had a hard struggle to live, but the settlement nevertheless has survived all difficulties. Bishop Weeks presided until 1876, when he was succeeded by Henry F. Cook, who in 1882 was succeeded by Eli Bennett, who in 1906 was succeeded by William Cook, who in 1911 was succeeded by James E. Garn, who in 1917 was succeeded by Orson E. Hacking, who in 1922 was succeeded by Jacob L. Hales, who presided Dec. 31, 1930; on that date the ward had 179 members, including 35 children.
