Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Alma Ward

ALMA WARD, Maricopa Stake, Maricopa Co., Arizona, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in a certain part of the great Salt River Valley lying west of Mesa. The ward embraced a strip of country two miles wide running north and south. Northward it extended to Salt River and southward as far as any inhabitants were found in Maricopa County, Arizona. The inhabited part of this strip extended north and south about four miles. Alma was also called Stringtown and the people all lived on their respective farms in a scattered condition. The population was a mixture of Mormons and non-Mormons. The Alma meeting house, which still stands, is located near the northwest corner of Sec. 28, Township 1 north, of Range 5 east, Gila and Fall River Meridian. Most of the farmers and horticulturalists irrigate their lands from the Mesa and Utah Canal, the water from this canal runs south and west. The same facilities for raising cereals, vegetables and fruit that characterize the flourishing town of Mesa, also existed at Alma, the latter being practically a suburb of Mesa. A gradual and gentle slope of the land, which is fertile and rich, produces a novelty, the water running east on one side of the street and west on the other. Southward the land has a fall of about 11 feet to the mile.

Alma Ward was an outgrowth of the Mesa Ward. The first settlers in that section of country later embraced in the Alma Ward were Henry Standage, of the Mormon Battalion, Hyrum W. Pugh, Chauncey F. Rogers and Wm. M. Standage with their families. These four families came from Lewiston and Richmond, Cache Co., Utah, and arrived at Mesa, Dec. 19, 1880. In January, 1881, they moved into that district of country later included in the Alma Ward and all located in Sec. 20 of Township 1 north of Range 5 east, Gila and Salt River Meridian. The first settlers made a ditch tapping the Mesa Canal to bring water out upon the land which they had claimed. They commenced work on this ditch in December, 1880, and moved their tents out upon their lands Jan. 2, 1881. Other settlers who arrived in 1881 located near the first settlers, and they all planted trees, put in grain and raised a good crop that year. In 1882 Henry Standage and Hyrum W. Pugh built the first houses on their lands and all the settlers raised good crops that year. In fact, good crops have been raised in that part of Salt River Valley ever since.

At a stake conference of the Maricopa Stake held June 16, 1885, the Alma Ward was organized from a part of the Mesa Ward, with Oscar Marion Stewart as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1889 by Alexander Hunsaker, who in 1906 was succeeded by Edgar Hunsaker who presided until Nov. 7, 1920, when the Alma Ward was disorganized, and the saints who had formerly constituted the membership of said ward, as well as other saints who had belonged to the Mesa 3rd Ward were organized as the Mesa 4th Ward with Lafayette Hill as Bishop.
