Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Chuichupa Ward

CHUICHUPA WARD, Juarez Stake, Chihuahua, Mexico, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a beautiful valley, or plateau, near the top of the Sierra Madre Mountains, 37 miles southwest of Garcia, 47 miles southwest of Pacheco and 82 miles southwest of Colonia Juarez, the headquarters of Juarez Stake. The nearest railroad station is Chico, on the Mexican Northwestern Railroad (Ferrocarril Nor. Oeste de Mexico), 20 miles east of the settlement. The valley in which Chuichupa is located is about three miles long from north to south with an average width of one and a half miles. It is surrounded by low timber-covered mountains.

Dry farming is the rule except a few garden spots that are irrigated from an adjacent spring and reservoir, which also furnishes water for culinary purposes. The townsite is laid out in five-acre blocks, four lots in a block, and the farms are laid out in 160-acre blocks, each block containing four 40-acre lots. The principal products of the settlement are corn, potatoes, oats, cattle and hogs. Considerable cheese is also made in the fall of the year. Some wild hay is cut in the valley and on the surrounding mesa. The land owned by the colonists covers an area three miles square, situated mostly in the Chuichupa Valley. The surrounding country is owned by the Mexican Northwestern Railroad Company from which the colonists rent their pastures and farming lands at nominal rental. The saints at Chuichupa own a meeting house, the only brick building in the valley, erected in L shape and containing an auditorium capable of seating 300 people.

Chuichupa was settled by an organized company of Latter-day Saints from Colonia Dublan in 1894. Sixtus E. Johnson, the only High Priest in the company, took charge of the ecclesiastical affairs of the colony from the beginning. He was succeeded in 1895 by Benjamin J. Johnson, who acted until Nov. 10, 1900, when the Chuichupa Branch was organized into a regular bishop's ward with George M. Haws as Bishop.

Brother Haws was succeeded in 1904 by Benjamin Julius Johnson (who had formerly presided over the branch), who in 1911 was succeeded by George Thomas Sevy, who presided until the exodus of the saints from Mexico took place in 1912. When the place was re-settled in 1919, Bishop Sevy, who was one of the resettlers, again became Bishop at Chuichupa and acted as such until 1923, when he was succeeded by Clifford Leon Whetten, who in 1926 was succeeded by Jerome John Judd, who acted as Bishop on December 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 190 members, including 58 children.

CHURCH ARCHITECTS. Four architects have been recognized officially in this position, namely, Wm. Weeks (1841-1847), Truman O. Angell (1850-1861 and 1867-1887), Wm. H. Folsom (1861-1867), and Joseph Don Carlos Young (1887 to 1893).

At a conference held in Commerce (Nauvoo, Ill.) October 6, 1840, the Church voted to commence the erection of a temple, and a committee, consisting of Alpheus Cutler, Elias Higbee and Reynolds Cahoon, was appointed to carry the business into operation and oversee the work. Shortly afterwards the Prophet employed Wm. Weeks, a convert from Massachusetts and an expert architect, to serve as architect and draughtsman under his direction. Wm. Weeks continued to act in this supervisory capacity until the Nauvoo Temple was completed in 1846, and in 1847 he, with his family, came to Great Salt Lake Valley, arriving in the Old Fort with Jedediah M. Grant's company in September of that year. But he chafed at the necessary regulations that had to be enforced in a pioneer settlement in an Indian country, and returning east the next year, was finally excommunicated from the Church.

Truman O. Angell, an architect and a convert to the Church from the state of Rhode Island, came to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1835, and worked on the Kirtland Temple until the dedication in 1836. With the body of the Church he located in Missouri and later in Nauvoo, Ill., where he acted as foreman over the joiners in the erection of the temple there. After the Nauvoo Temple was completed, he united with the saints in Iowa and, as one of the original pioneers of Utah, entered Great Salt Lake Valley with President Brigham Young in July, 1847. On January 26, 1850, in Salt Lake City, Pres. Brigham Young appointed him to the position of Church architect, which position he held until his death in 1887, except during the years 1861-1867 when, on account of poor health, he resigned from this office and suggested Wm. H. Folsom as his successor. In April, 1867, Truman O. Angell was again sustained as Church architect, with Wm. H. Folsom as his assistant. During all his term of office Brother Angell was regularly sustained in his position by the saints in conference assembled. He was the architect of the Salt Lake Temple, the Old Tabernacle, the St. George Temple and many other buildings.

Wm. H. Folsom, a convert from New Hampshire, located in Nauvoo in 1840, where he established himself as an architect and builder. He assisted in the construction of the Nauvoo Temple and after the completion of this edifice located in Keokuk, Iowa, where he remained until 1860, when he came to Utah and located in Salt Lake City. At the general conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City in October, 1861, Wm. H. Folsom was sustained in the position of Church architect, an explanation being made that on account of ill health Truman O. Angell had resigned, and upon his recommendation Wm. H. Folsom was appointed his successor. Brother Folsom was regularly sustained in that office until April, 1867, when Truman O. Angell was again sustained Church architect with Wm. H. Folsom as his assistant. Later, Truman O. Angell, jun., was also sustained as one of the assistant Church architects.

Wm. H. Folsom supervised the erection of the great Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. He was the designer and architect of the Salt Lake Theatre and the Manti Temple and other buildings. He died in Salt Lake City March 20, 1901.

Joseph Don Carlos Young (known as Don Carlos Young) was the last man to hold the position of Church architect, this department being now under the supervision of the Presiding Bishop's Office.

Don Carlos Young, a son of President Brigham Young and his wife Emily Partridge Young, succeeded Truman O. Angell as Church architect. After graduating from the Deseret University (later the University of Utah) he attended the Rensselaer Polytechnic School at Troy, N.Y., where he studied civil engineering and architecture, graduating from that institution in 1879. After being engaged in architectural and building pursuits in Salt Lake City, in 1887, he was appointed Church architect and set apart to this position by Pres. Wilford Woodruff. From Oct. 6, 1889, to Oct. 6, 1892, he was sustained in this position by vote of the saints in conference assembled in Salt Lake City.

For five years, in his position as Church architect, he supervised the erection of the Great Salt Lake Temple, which being completed, was dedicated on April 6, 1893, with impressive ceremonies. On the day previous, in a session of the general conference when the general authorities of the Church were presented, Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon remarked that as the temple was then completed, there would be no need for any longer retaining the services of Elder Don Carlos Young as Church architect. It was due to him, however, that the conference should accept his past labors as Church architect and tender him a hearty vote of confidence and esteem. After this Elder Young continued his architectural labors in a private capacity for several years.

In 1921 Colonel Willard Young, a brother of Don Carlos, was appointed Church supervisor of buildings and commodious offices were fitted up for the architectural department in the Church administration building, this department acting under the direction of the Presiding Bishopric of the Church. Soon afterwards, Don Carlos Young was employed to take charge of the architectural work of this division, which position he still holds (1930).
