Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Church Schools

CHURCH SCHOOLS. About a year after the Church was organized, a revelation was received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in regard to the teaching of L. D. S. children, and he was instructed to have books prepared for their use. (Doc & Cov. Sec. 55, verse 4.) In December, 1832, a school, called the School of the Prophets, was commenced in Kirtland, Ohio. In 1834 a school for the special benefit of the Elders was opened in the basement of the Church printing office at Kirtland, Ohio, in which penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar and geography, as well as theological subjects, were taught to adults. Hebrew was also taught in Kirtland by a Prof. Joshua Seixas. In Nauvoo, Ill., schools for children were established from the beginning, and in December, 1840, a charter was obtained from the governor of the state of Illinois founding the University of Nauvoo and the board of regents was authorized to take charge of educational matters generally in the city of Nauvoo.

A few months after the arrival of the Utah pioneers in Salt Lake Valley, a school was established in the Old Fort taught by Mary Jane Dilworth, and after the city was divided into 19 ecclesiastical wards, small adobe school houses were erected in each of them. As the people spread out and settlements north and south were founded, school houses, which were generally used also as places of worship, were often erected before most of the colonists had built cabins for themselves. In 1850 a charter was granted by the Provisional Government of the State of Deseret for the founding of the Deseret University, an institution which later became the University of Utah.

The Brigham Young Academy (now the Brigham Young University) at Provo was established in 1875 and to this was added a number of Church academies, which in due time gave full high school courses in addition to theology. Following is a list of these schools with the year of their organization: Brigham Young College at Logan, Utah in 1877; L. D. S. University in Salt Lake City in 1886; Fielding Academy at Paris, Idaho, in 1887; Ricks Academy at Rexburg, Idaho; Snow College at Ephraim, Utah; Oneida Stake Academy at Preston, Idaho; Snowflake Stake Academy at Snowflake, Arizona; St. Johns Stake Academy at St. Johns, Arizona, and Uintah Stake Academy at Vernal, Utah, in 1888; Cassia Stake Academy at Oakley, Idaho, and Weber Stake Academy at Ogden, Utah, in 1889; Emery Stake Academy at Castle Dale, Utah, in 1890; Gila Academy at Thatcher, Arizona in 1891; Juarez Stake Academy at Colonia Juarez, Mexico, in 1897; Murdock Academy at Beaver, Utah, in 1898; San Luis Stake Academy at Manassa, Colorado, in 1905; Summit Stake Academy at Coalville, Utah, in 1906; Big Horn Academy at Cowley, Wyoming, in 1909; Millard Stake Academy at Hinckley, Utah; Knight Academy at Raymond, Alberta, Canada, in 1910, and Dixie Academy at St. George, Utah, in 1911.

In 1921, on account of the excellent facilities offered by state boards of education to high school students in places where many of these Church schools were located, it was considered unnecessary to duplicate the curriculum. But as theology is not taught in the state schools, theological seminaries were established in close proximity to a large number of the high schools, attended by L. D. S. students. (See Seminaries.)

Only seven of the Church schools were functioning at the close of 1930, namely, the Brigham Young University, Dixie College, Gila Junior College, Juarez Stake Academy, Ricks College, Snow College and Weber College. Institutes, or theological schools for college students, were also in operation in Logan, Utah, and Moscow and Pocatello, Idaho.
