Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Clay County

CLAY COUNTY, Missouri, the temporary home of nearly a thousand Latter-day Saints from 1833 to 1836, is situated on the north side of the Missouri River, opposite Jackson County. It is bounded on the west by Platte, north by Clinton, and east by Ray counties, and has an area of 410 square miles. The number of its inhabitants was 8,282 in 1849, and 26, 811 in 1930.

When the saints were expelled from Jackson County, Missouri, in November, 1833, the greater part of them found temporary shelter in Clay County, though some of them were also scattered through Ray, Lafayette and Van Buren counties. The people in Clay County were in the beginning, as a rule, very kind to the saints, who were thrown so unceremoniously upon their hospitality. Thus the exiles were permitted to occupy every vacant cabin and to build others for temporary shelter. Some of the sisters obtained positions as domestics in the homes of well-to-do farmers, while some others taught school. Quite a number of the exiled saints made comfortable homes for themselves and families and remained in possession of them until 1836, when they, through mob influence, were compelled to leave the county and seek homes elsewhere. These were next established on the prairies of what soon afterwards became Caldwell and Daviess counties, and also in the surrounding counties in Missouri. Quite a number of saints died in Clay County during the years 1833-1836, among others about 14 members of Zion's Camp, in 1834. Christian Whitmer and Peter Whitmer, jun., two of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, died in Clay County. After the saints had left Clay County, Joseph Smith the Prophet, his brother Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wright, Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin were incarcerated on trumped-up charges in the Liberty Jail during the winter of 1838-39, awaiting trial, which never took place.

Clay County ranks as the third gathering place established for the saints, the two former places being Kirtland, Ohio, and Jackson County, Missouri, respectively. (For further details of Clay County, Missouri, see "Historical Record," Vol. 8:648-671.)
