Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Clinton Ward

CLINTON WARD, Weber Stake, Davis Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Clinton and vicinity. Clinton Ward is located at the northeast end of Davis County, the northern boundary of the ward being the dividing line between Davis and Weber counties.

Dry farming having proved successful on the so-called "Sand Ridge" lying between the Weber River on the north and Kaysville on the south, land which had hitherto been considered of little value was taken up in that section of country in 1879-80 and farmers located their families in the district. For the benefit of these settlers a Sunday school was organized near Summit, July 3, 1881. A railroad station had already been established by the Utah Central Railroad on the summit of this high land.

In 1884 a branch of the Church was organized called the Summit Basin Branch, by the bishoprics of South Hooper and South Weber wards, the district included within the limits of the new branch covering the east part of South Hooper Ward and the west part of South Weber Ward. James Burnett was chosen as presiding Elder of the branch. A lumber school house was erected soon afterwards in the Summit Basin which was used for school and all public purposes by the fifteen families in the branch. Presiding Elder Burnett died in March, 1895, and was succeeded by John Fife, who was succeeded soon afterwards by Orlando D. Hadlock, second counselor to Bishop Christensen of the South Hooper Ward, who had charge of the branch until May 29, 1897, when it was organized as a regular bishop's ward named Clinton. This name, it appears, had no particular reference to any individual, but being suggested was satisfactory to the members of the new ward. Orlando D. Hadlock was sustained as Bishop of the Clinton Ward and acted in that position until 1915, when he was succeeded by Fred E. Mitchell, who was succeeded in 1925 by John Child, who was succeeded on June 8, 1930, by David A. Johnston, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 514 members, including 128 children. The total population of the Clinton Precinct was 795 in 1930.

The area of Clinton Ward was somewhat diminished in 1908 when the western part was given back to the South Hooper Ward, and in 1916 the south part of Clinton Ward was organized as the Sunset Ward of the Davis Stake. At the time of its organization the Clinton Ward belonged to the Davis Stake of Zion, but owing to its geographical position was in 1909 transferred to the Weber Stake.
