Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Clover Ward

CLOVER WARD, Tooele Stake, Tooele Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on Clover Creek in Rush Valley. The center of the ward, or the point where the meeting house is located, is 1 1/2 miles south of Saint John, and 18 miles southwest of Tooele City, the county seat and stake headquarters. The entire population of Clover are farmers who live on their respective farms scattered along Clover Creek, from which they get water for irrigation purposes.

The first settler in Rush Valley was, as near as can be learned, John Bennion who wintered with a few cattle in the north end of the valley in 1854-1855, and built a cabin immediately west of the Rush Valley Lake. In the fall of 1855 Luke S. Johnson (one of the original members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles), Enos Stookey, and William A. Hickman located for the winter at the so-called Hickman Spring, immediately west of Rush Lake. Luke S. Johnson occupied the cabin built by John Bennion the previous year. In 1856 a few more settlers located in Rush Valley and a settlement was formed about two miles southwest of the present site of St. John and on the farm later occupied by Mrs. Johnson, widow of the late Luke S. Johnson. Other settlers followed who built log cabins or made dugouts in the side hill. In honor of Luke S. Johnson they named their little hamlet Johnson's settlement.

During the spring and summer of 1856 the U. S. survey was extended over that locality by G. S. Craig, who from a species of wild clover which he found growing in the locality named the stream Clover Creek. In January, 1856, a new county was created by the Utah Legislature called Shambip County, and the name of the settlement on Clover Creek was changed from Johnson to Shambip, (the Indian name for bullrush), and made the county seat. Luke S. Johnson was chosen as probate judge. Later in 1856 the saints were advised to build a fort and were organized as a branch of the Church in that year with Luke S. Johnson as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1859 by David H. Caldwell, who later the same year was succeeded by Robert Miller, who in 1860 was succeeded by Willian McIntosh, who in 1865 was succeeded by Enos Stookey, who presided until 1867, when the Clover Branch became a part of the St. John Ward and remained thus until July 21, 1882, when what was then known as the upper settlement on Clover Creek, or the south end of the St. John Ward, was separated from said ward and organized into a new bishop's ward named Clover, with Francis De Saint Jeor as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1901 by Mahonri M. Stookey, who in 1912 was succeeded by Joseph W. Russell, who in 1913 was succeeded by Richard N. Bush, who in 1927 was succeeded by G. Noel Anderson, who on January 19, 1930, was succeeded by John W. Green, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Clover Ward had 98 members, including 16 children. The total population of the Clover Precinct was 128 in 1930.
