Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

College Ward

COLLEGE WARD, Logan Stake, Cache Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a scattered condition on what is known as the College Farm and surrounding country. It lies immediately west of the Nibley Ward, northwest of Hyrum and northeast of Wellsville. All the inhabitants within the limits of the ward are Latter-day Saints. The center of the ward, or the place where the meeting house and the College school house stand, is on the main road leading in a north-easterly direction from Wellsville to Logan, 5 1/2 miles northeast of Wellsville and 4 1/2 miles southwest of Logan. The ward embraces a level tract of country containing as good and fertile soil for gardening and farming purposes as can be found anywhere in Cache Valley.

The College Ward embraces that part of Cache Valley which was originally known as the Church Farm. As early as 1855 the Church sent stock from Salt Lake Valley to be herded in Cache Valley, and most of the herd houses and whatever improvements were made for the accommodations of the herders were erected on Spring Creek, within the limits of the present College Ward, while a few of the improvements were within the limits of the present Nibley Ward. Subsequently, when the Brigham Young College of Logan was established as a high school, Pres. Young endowed the school with the so-called Church Farm Consisting of 9,543 acres of land, which, since that day, has been known as the College Farm. Several years after Millville was founded, a number of families settled on their farms immediately west of Millville, adjacent to the Church Farm, and as these settlers increased in number they were organized into a branch of the Church belonging to the Millville Ward in 1881, with James Chantrill as presiding Elder. The locality was then known as West Millville of Farmers Branch. A school house was built there at an early day. In 1886 Presiding Elder Chantrill was succeeded by Christian C. Bindrup, who presided until June 28, 1891, when the Farmers Branch, or West Millville, was organized as a regular bishop's ward, named College, with Charles Oscar Dunn as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1912 by Charles W. Dunn, who in 1913 was succeeded by Joseph Henry Olsen, who in 1929 was succeeded by John H. Schenk, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Church membership of the College Ward was 414, including 110 children. The total population of the College Precinct was 431 in 1930. The College Ward belonged to the Cache Stake of Zion until 1901, when it became a part of the Hyrum Stake and in 1920 it was transferred from the Hyrum to the Logan Stake.
