Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Colorado Mission

COLORADO MISSION embraced not only the state of Colorado, but parts of New Mexico, Wyoming, Arizona, Nebraska, North Dakota and South Dakota.

In December, 1896, Apostle John W. Taylor was appointed to open up a mission in the state of Colorado, and on Dec. 15, 1896, he left Salt Lake City in company with three Elders, namely, John H. Boshard of Provo, Herbert A. White and Prof. Wm. C. Clive (a violinist) of Salt Lake City. A few days later these were followed by eight more missionaries called to assist Pres. John W. Taylor. One of them was Horace S. Ensign, a fine singer. Soon afterwards other missionaries were called, among whom were Dr. Fred J. Pack of the University of Utah and several other prominent young professional men and also Fred C. Graham, a popular young tenor singer. In the summer of 1897 Dr. George H. Brimhall of the B. Y. University of Provo spent some weeks on Church history and other topics.

A branch of the Church was organized in Denver, Colo., Jan. 3, 1897, and missionary labors were shortly afterwards extended to Colorado Springs, Pueblo, and other places, where branches of the Church were raised up, Sunday schools organized and in some places also Mutual Improvement Associations. In November, 1900, the states of Nebraska and North and South Dakota were added to the Colorado Mission, and the work of the missionaries extended into New Mexico, Arizona and Wyoming. In 1901 Lucy Grant and Fannie Woolley arrived in Denver as missionaries; they were the first ladies, except the wives of missionaries, to labor in that capacity in the Colorado Mission. On March 1, 1901, Jos. A. McRae succeeded John W. Taylor as president of the mission. He labored in that capacity until April, 1907, when the name of the Colorado Mission was changed to that of the Western States Mission, Elder McRae being continued as president. (See Western States Mission.)
