Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Concho Ward

CONCHO WARD (also called Erastus, honoring Apostle Erastus Snow), St. Johns Stake, Apache Co., Arizona, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in the so-called Concho Valley, situated 15 miles west of St. Johns, the headquarters of St. Johns Stake, and 35 miles east of Snowflake. The valley in which the settlement of Concho is located is about 2 1/2 miles long from north to south with an average width of 1 1/2 miles. It is surrounded by malpais (lava) hills on the south, while hills of cobble rock and gravel formation form the boundary of the valley on the east. Only a part of the land in Concho Valley is brought under cultivation. The town of Concho (Erastus) is situated in the south end of the valley and watered from a spring which furnished 36 inches of water, said water having a fall of 300 feet which suggests that it could be utilized for power.

The Mexican town of Concho is quite old. In March, 1879, Bateman H. Wilhelm, a Latter-day Saint, settled among the Mexicans at Concho. He was followed by others and before the end of the year there were 30 souls belonging to the saints in the place, among whom were Jesse J. Brady and Wm. J. Flake, both Mormons, who purchased the main part of the valley in the spring of 1879. Brother Flake paid for his half interest eight cows, one mule, one set of harness and a set of blacksmith's tools. Jesse J. Brady settled on the land purchased by Wm. J. Flake in 1879. George Killian and George G. Curtis, formerly residents of Brigham City, on the Little Colorado River, arrived at Concho August 7, 1879, and moved into empty houses in the Mexican town. The saints at Concho were organized as a branch of the Church, March 14, 1880, with Bateman H. Wilhelm as presiding Elder. He presided until September 26, 1880, when the Concho Branch was organized as a ward named Erastus with Sixtus E. Johnson as Bishop, Brother Johnson was succeeded in 1886 by Christopher Jensen Kempe, who in 1895 was succeeded by Henry Lyman Marble, who about 1901 was succeeded by Elam George Cheney, who presided until Oct. 2, 1904, when the ward organization was discontinued and Ezekiel C. Pulsipher appointed to act as presiding Elder. He was succeeded June 4, 1905, by David Pulsipher, on which occasion the Concho Branch organization was discontinued and the saints at Concho were organized as a branch of the St. Johns Ward with David Pulsipher as presiding Elder. This condition continued for five years, or until March 13, 1910, when the Concho Branch organization was discontinued and the few remaining saints at Concho and a few families at Hunt were organized as the Hunt Ward with Asahel H. Smith as Bishop. After this, Concho was continued as a branch of the Hunt Ward and meetings were held alternately at Hunt and Concho. In 1930 there were scarcely any saints left in Concho, and no Church organization existed there. The few saints still remaining belonged to the St. Johns Ward. The total population of the Concho Precinct was 458 in 1930, nearly all of whom were Mexicans.
