Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Alton Ward

ALTON WARD, Kanab Stake, Kane Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the mountain settlement of Alton, which is situated immediately south of the Rim of the Basin, about three miles northeast of the neighborhood formerly known as Ranch, 28 miles north of Kanab, the stake headquarters, and 18 miles southwest of Hatch in Garfield County. It is also 13 miles northeast of Glendale, in Long Valley, and 35 miles southwest of Panguitch. Most of the inhabitants are engaged in farming and stock raising. Cereals of different kinds and the hardier fruits are raised, notwithstanding the high altitude.

The east part of the former Graham Ward was first settled in 1865 by Lorenzo W. Roundy and others, who hailed from different parts of the country seeking homes in southern Utah. Brother Roundy built two log houses that year; others also made preparations to build cabins. The place was known at the beginning as Upper Kanab. Most of the first settlers had their families with them, but owing to danger from Indians, and also on account of deep snow in the mountains, all the people moved to Lower Kanab to spend the winter of 1865-1866. In the spring of 1866 all the settlers who had located at Upper Kanab were called by Apostle Erastus Snow to strengthen the settlements in Long Valley, where two small villages known respectively as Berryville (the present Glendale), and Winsor (the present Mount Carmel), had been founded. After the Indian war, Upper Kanab was resettled in the spring of 1872, when a dairy company called the Canaan Coop bought out nearly all the old claims at Upper Kanab and located a dairy. They also built several houses and made many other improvements near the first location. Among these settlers was Byron D. Roundy, the first presiding Elder of the branch which was organized about 1876 consisting of the saints living in Upper Kanab. He was succeeded by Richard S. Robinson. The branch belonged to the Glendale Ward. About the same time that Upper Kanab was settled, in the spring of 1872, Gustavus Williams located a ranch on the Upper Rio Virgen, in what later became part of the Graham Ward. Joseph W. Young built a sawmill, which was moved from the Buckskin Mountains. Other settlers arrived, a school house was built, and John Whitehead Seamon took local charge of the saints at West Graham. The two branches, namely, Upper Kanab and Ranch (west part of Graham) belonged to the Glendale Ward, until 1887 when the saints on the Upper Rio Virgen and Upper Kanab were organized as the Graham Ward with Graham Duncan McDonald as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1907 by Jonathan B. Heaton, who in 1928 was succeeded by Quimby Roundy, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. About 1908 the name of the Graham Ward was changed to that of Alton, the new name being suggested due to its high altitude. The Church membership of the Alton Ward, Dec. 31, 1930, was 194, including 49 children. The total population of the Alton Precinct was 193 in 1930.
