Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Cottonwood Stake

COTTONWOOD STAKE embraces that part of Salt Lake Valley, or county, in Utah, which is bounded on the north by the Oquirrh and Grant stakes, on the east by the Wasatch mountains, on the south by the East Jordan and West Jordan stakes, and on the west by the Oquirrh Mountains. It contains the following wards: Bennion, Cottonwood (Brinton), Grant, Holladay, Mill Creek, Murray 1st, Murray 2nd, South Cottonwood, Taylorsville and Winder. On Dec. 31, 1930, the Cottonwood Stake had 8,041 members, including 1,600 children.

The settlements of the saints in Salt Lake Co., Utah, belonged to the Salt Lake Stake of Zion until 1900, when all the wards outside of Salt Lake City were organized into the Granite and Jordan stakes, and in 1904 the city was divided into four stakes (Salt Lake, Ensign, Liberty and Pioneer). The next change was that of dividing Granite Stake into two stakes and organizing the south part of the same into a new stake, called the Cottonwood Stake, the Cottonwood creeks running through that part of the country suggesting the name as appropriate.

The creation of the Cottonwood Stake took place Nov. 29, 1914, when the following wards were separated from the Granite Stake and organized as the Cottonwood Stake: Bennion, Brinton (now Cottonwood), Grant, Granger, Holladay, Hunter, Mill Creek, Murray 1st, Murray 2nd, South Cottonwood, Taylorsville (formerly North Jordan), and Winder.

Uriah G. Miller was chosen as president of the new Cottonwood Stake, with William E. Erekson as first and Joseph Lindsay, jun., as second counselor. Heber B. Smith was chosen as stake clerk. The headquarters of the stake were established at Murray. The Granite Stake tabernacle, which was dedicated in 1903, continued as the place for holding general conferences and other gatherings for both Cottonwood and Granite stakes. Second Counselor Lindsay died July 31, 1921, and soon afterwards Hyrum Bennion, jun., (Bishop of Taylorsville) was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Miller.

When the Oquirrh Stake of Zion was organized June 3, 1923, Granger and Hunter wards were transferred from the Cottonwood to the new Oquirrh Stake. At a stake conference held Nov. 20, 1927, Uriah G. Miller, together with his counselors (Wm. B. Erekson and Hyrum Bennion, jun. ), were honorably released, and Henry D. Moyle was sustained as president of the Cottonwood Stake with Ralph Cutler as his first and Heber Grant Ivins as his second counselor. Second Counselor Ivins was succeeded in 1929 by Irvin T. Nelson.
