Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Council Bluffs

COUNCIL BLUFFS, Pottawattamie Co., Iowa, originally founded as Kanesville by Latter-day Saints in 1846, is situated on the east bank of the Missouri River, opposite Omaha, Nebraska. It was called Kanesville in honor of the late Gen. Thomas L. Kane, who, on various occasions, befriended the Latter-day Saints. When the saints left Nauvoo as exiles in February, 1846, they traveled through the prairies of Iowa in organized caravans, locating on their way the temporary settlements of Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah, and reached the Missouri River June 16, 1846. Here they were overtaken by Captain James Allen of the U. S. Army. He represented the government of the United States, and called for volunteers among the Mormons to participate in the war with Mexico. Responding, the Mormon Battalion was raised and marched from Council Bluffs to Fort Leavenworth, and thence across the continent to California. In the meantime the majority of the exiled saints crossed the Missouri River and located at Winter Quarters on its west bank, while a number of the saints remained as pioneer settlers of the Pottawattamie County, where a county organization was effected in 1851, and a post office established.

After the evacuation of Winter Quarters in 1848, the saints who did not cross the plains that year to the mountains, recrossed the Missouri River to the Pottawattamie country, where some 40 temporary branches of the Church were organized. Orson Hyde, one of the Twelve Apostles, was placed in charge and a High Council organized. The town of Kanesville was founded at the mouth of the so-called Miller's Hollow, where a large log cabin was erected in December, 1847, and where the First Presidency, consisting of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, was organized Dec. 27, 1847.

Many of the saints who had located in Pottawattamie County migrated to the "Valley" in the years 1849, 1850 and 1851. In 1852, according to instructions from Pres. Brigham Young, the great majority of the saints left the Pottawattamie country for the "Valley," which move discontinued all the branches of the Church which had formerly existed in the western part of Iowa. For several years there were more saints in Pottawattamie County, Iowa, than in Great Salt Lake Valley, and from 1849 to 1852, a newspaper called the "Frontier Guardian" was published in Kanesville, with Orson Hyde as editor. When most of the saints moved to the "Valley" in 1852, the paper was disposed of to Jacob Dawson and Company.

In 1853 the name of Kanesville was changed to that of Council Bluffs, which is now the eastern terminus of the Union Pacific Railroad. Ever since 1846 there have been Latter-day Saints in Council Bluffs and in due course of time missionary work was commenced there by the Elders. Halls were rented at first and afterwards purchased, and at present the saints at Council Bluffs and vicinity constitute an important branch of the Church in the Western States Mission.

As Council Bluffs has been more or less connected with the history of the Latter-day Saints since the founding of Kanesville in 1846, it may be interesting to notice the growth of the town. It had 3,000 inhabitants in 1850, 25,802 in 1900, and 42,048 in 1930.
