Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Cove Fort

COVE FORT, Millard Co., Utah, is located on Cove Creek, near the boundary line between Millard and Beaver counties, 35 miles southwest of Fillmore and 25 miles north of Beaver. It stands on the south slope of a lofty ridge, 5,950 feet above sea level, and is built of volcanic rock, laid up in lime mortar. The walls are 18 feet high and four feet thick at the base, narrowing to two feet at the top. On the east and west sides are gates, that on the east being framed in a good, substantial arch, that on the west being a smaller gate. The fort is 100 feet square and contains 12 rooms, six on the north and six on the south side. In building the fort 2,250 perch of rock and 34,342 feet of lumber were used. The cost of construction was about $25,000.

The site of Cove Fort was well known to the early pioneers of Utah as a favorite camping place for travelers, but no attempt was made to effect improvements there until 1860, when Charles Willden and his son, Elliot, came to the location with a view of making homes. The following year Charles Willden brought his family there, and in the month of May of that year there were two houses, one dugout and a corral erected for the accommodation of three families, including five men, who had also sown nine acres of grain. The place was known thereafter as Willden's Fort, and Pres. Brigham Young and parties, as well as other travelers, found it a convenient resting place when traveling between Salt Lake City and southern Utah. In 1867 the Church bought the property and Ira N. Hinckley was called by Pres. Young to erect a fort there as protection against Indians and also in the interest of the mail route and general travel. A telegraph station was also opened there. Bro. Hinckley had charge of the fort until 1877, when he was called to preside over the Millard Stake of Zion, after which his sons took charge, and as late as 1930 Cove Fort, although private property, was still used as a house of entertainment for travelers but occupied by only one family.
