Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Cowley Ward

COWLEY WARD, Big Horn Stake, Big Horn Co., Wyoming, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Cowley, which is situated about three miles north of the Shoshone River, one mile northeast of the railroad station on the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad, and the same distance from the highway running from Casper, Wyoming, to Billings, Montana. The town is seven miles northwest of Lovell, eight miles northeast of Byron, and about 95 miles south of Billings, Montana. It is the center of a prosperous agricultural and stock-raising community, and is the largest ward in the Big Horn Stake. There is a fine stake office building in Cowley, having a vault capable of taking care of the records of the stake; there is also a fine school house built of sandstone, and a commodious meeting house erected in 1902. The Cowley townsite is surveyed into regular five-acre blocks, four lots in a block, and covers considerable ground. The pioneers of Cowley anticipated quite a city on this location, but while the town has grown, it has scarcely come up to the expectation of its founders. Nearly 90 per cent of the population are Latter-day Saints. Within the limits of the ward is a canning factory, the property of the Big Horn Canning Company.

Cowley was founded by Latter-day Saints in 1900, and organized as a branch of the Church Oct. 14, 1900, called the Shoshone Branch, with Wm. C. Partridge as presiding Elder. Soon after the organization of the Big Horn Stake in 1901, the Shoshone Branch was organized as a ward named Cowley, in honor of Apostle Matthias F. Cowley, with Wm. C. Partridge as Bishop. On the same occasion the Cowley townsite was dedicated. Bishop Partridge presided over the Cowley Ward until 1910, when he was chosen as president of the Big Horn Stake. His successor, John H. Hinckley, acted as Bishop until 1923, when he was succeeded by Ernest W. Marchant, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 821 members, including 197 children. The total population of the Cowley Precinct was 975 in 1930; of these 526 resided in the town of Cowley.
