Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Crooked River Battle

CROOKED RIVER BATTLE. Late in the evening of Oct. 24, 1838, news reached Far West, Caldwell Co., Mo., that the Rev. Samuel Bogart (a Methodist) with a mob of about 75 men were committing depredations on Log Creek, destroying property and taking prisoners. On hearing the report, Elias Higbee, the judge of Caldwell County, ordered Lieut. Col. Geo. M. Hinkle, the highest military officer in command at Far West, to raise a force to disperse the mob and retake the prisoners whom it was reported they intended to murder that night. The trumpet sounded and the brethren assembled on the public square in Far West about midnight. Capt. David W. Patten, Parley P. Pratt and Charles C. Rich, with about 40 other volunteers, responded, which number the judge thought sufficient, but, upon the suggestion of Charles C. Rich, who believed a battle was inevitable, more men were raised by him in the small settlements on Goose and Log creeks, which increased the force to about 75 men, who all met together about six miles from Far West. The company was divided into smaller companies of ten, and then proceeded by the main road four miles to a point near Crooked River, where the company dismounted and, leaving a few men to guard their horses, the remainder proceeded on foot toward the enemy's camp. Capt. Patten divided the expedition into three companies, taking command of the first himself, and placed Charles C. Rich in charge of the second and James Durfee of the third. Capt. Patten made a short speech exhorting the brethren to trust in the Lord for victory. During the battle that ensued Capt. Patten was mortally wounded and Gideon H. Carter and Patrick O'Banion were killed and others wounded. The mobbers claimed the loss of one man and some wounded. The mobbers were dislodged and the men kept as prisoners were rescued; the posse then returned to Far West with their dead and wounded. David W. Patten was one of the Twelve Apostles and in his military experience he was known among his comrades as "Capt. Fear Not." In combating the attacks of the mobocrats he made the remark that he would rather die than to witness such a condition in his country. (For further details see "Historical Record," Vol. 5:54.)
