Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Crystal Ward

CRYSTAL WARD, Pocatello Stake, Power Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of the county which irrigates from a number of small creeks rising in springs near the base of that range of mountains which separate Portneuf Valley from Bannock and Crystal valleys on the west. The main streams heading in these springs are Rattlesnake, Muddy, Clofter's, Crystal and Midnight creeks. All these form Rattlesnake Creek, which is a tributary of Bannock Creek. About one-half of the inhabitants within the limits of the ward are non-Mormons. Some of the farms are irrigated from the streams mentioned, but the people rely chiefly on dry-farming, which is only successful when rain is plentiful; there has been much loss of crops by drought. The center of Crystal Ward, or the place where the L. D. S. meeting house stands, is about 11 miles northeast of the Meadow meeting house, 18 miles northeast of Arbon, 21 miles southwest of Pocatello, and 33 miles by nearest road southeast of American Falls. Near the center of the ward, in the forks of Rattlesnake and Muddy creeks, is a small village, about three-fourths mile southwest of the L. D. S. meeting house. The area of the ward is about 50 square miles; it extends north and east to the mountains, south to Meadow Ward, and west to the Indian reservation.

The first settlers in that part of the country now included in the Crystal Ward were non-Mormons. Among the first Mormon settlers were Lorenzo S. Whiting and others, with their respective families, some of whom arrived there as early as 1909. A school house, a frame building, was erected in 1912. On May 17, 1913, the saints who had settled in the Rattlesnake Creed district were transferred from the Malad Stake to the Pocatello Stake, and on May 25, 1913, they were organized into a branch of the Church named Crystal with John A. Brown as presiding Elder. This branch was organized as a regular ward Oct. 15, 1916, with John Wesley Staley as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1920 by Moses Fannin, who first Mormon settlers were Lorenzo S. Whiting, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 91 members, including 17 children. The total population of the Crystal Precinct was 219 in 1930.
