Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Curlew Stake of Zion

CURLEW STAKE OF ZION consists (1930) of the Latter-day Saints residing in Curlew, Black Pine and Bannock valleys, in Idaho, and Park Valley in Box Elder County, Utah. The headquarters of the stake are at Holbrook in Curlew Valley, a prosperous little settlement 25 miles west of Malad, the nearest railroad station, and 18 miles north of Snowville, Box Elder Co., Utah. Stake conferences, as well as union meetings, are mostly held at Holbrook, although occasionally conferences are held at Snowville. Nearly all the inhabitants of the stake are Latter-day Saint farmers, and there is only a sprinkling of non-members in the stake, which, described politically, is mainly in Oneida Co., Idaho, and Box Elder Co., Utah, and just one settlement (Arbon) in Power Co., Idaho. The Curlew Stake in 1930 consisted of the following wards: Arbon, Black Pine, Holbrook, Juniper, Mountain View, Park Valley, Rosette, Snowville, Stone and Summit. Curlew Valley, which is partly in Utah and partly in Idaho, is about 42 miles long and from ten to 26 miles wide. It reaches to Great Salt Lake on the south and is separated from Park Valley on the west by a low spur of mountains.

At a special meeting held at Snowville, Box Elder Co., Utah, May 17, 1915, attended by Apostles Rudger Clawson and David O. McKay, a new stake of Zion was organized under the name of the Curlew Stake, to include the following wards and branches, which up to that time had formed a part of the Malad Stake, namely: Arbon, Black Pine, Holbrook, Mountain View, Snowville and Stone wards, and Canyon and Juniper branches; also Park Valley and Rosette wards which had belonged to the Box Elder Stake of Zion.

Jonathan C. Cutler was chosen as president of the new stake with Joseph J. Larkin as first and Thomas W. Roe as second counselor; Amos L. Fuller was chosen as stake clerk. Second Counselor Roe died April 17, 1920, and on May 16, 1920, David Hirschi was chosen as second counselor in his stead. Pres. Cutler died June 22, 1922, and on Aug. 6, 1922, Joseph J. Larkin was chosen as president of the stake with Colen H. Sweeten as first and Ira Baker as second counselor. Pres. Larkin was released, together with his counselors, Oct. 19, 1924, and Colen H. Sweeten was chosen as president of the Curlew Stake with Willard R. Smith, jun., as first and Newel J. Cutler as second counselor in his stead. Amos L. Fuller, the first stake clerk, was succeeded in 1926 by William C. Pack, who in 1927 was succeeded bu Arthur G. Willie. Colen H. Sweeten presided over the Curlew Stake Dec. 31, 1930, with Willard R. Smith, jun., as first and Austin S. Tolman as second counselor. On that date the Church membership in the Curlew Stake was 1,306, including 330 children. Among the brethren holding the Priesthood was Patriarch Joseph J. Larkin.
