Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Currency and Coins

CURRENCY AND COINS. As early as the fall of 1848, the necessity of some negotiable medium of exchange was recognized by President Brigham Young and his associates. Gold dust was offered by members of the Mormon Battalion, returning from California, and by traders going East, but the difficulty of handing and the loss entailed in weighing it, made it impracticable. Coinage was the only solution of the difficulty, but in the meantime, Pres. Young proposed to issue paper currency against the gold deposited, until the dust on hand could be coined. The municipal council of Salt Lake City authorized the issuance of such currency and appointed Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Newel K. Whitney to issue it.

In December, 1848, bills were being written by hand, Thomas Bullock transcribing them and one of the Elders appointed to do so, signing them. On January 1, 1849, the first printed bills were issued and this was the first printing done in Great Salt Lake Valley.

Early the same year, a mint was established by Pres. Young in Salt Lake City where the coinage of $2.50, $5.00, $10.00 and $20.00 pieces was commenced.

This money, which was coined purely for local use, bore no resemblance in finish to the U. S. government issues. The coins were make of virgin gold, to which only a very little native silver was added as alloy. Engraved on the obverse side of these coins was an eye surmounted by a mitre and surrounded by the legend: "Holiness to the Lord." On the reverse side were two hands clasped and the legend: "G. S. L. C. P. G." (Great Salt Lake City, Pure Gold) date of the year of issue and value of coin.

In 1858 Pres. Brigham Young had a new die prepared for coining five dollar pieces, which had upon the obverse side an eagle with outspread /b wings, a beehive upon its breast, also the legend "Deseret Assay Office, 5 D, Pure Gold." On the reverse side was a lion couchant, surrounded by the legend: "Holiness to the Lord," in the Deseret Alphabet; also date of minting. The last issue of this local coinage is dated 1860, Governor Alfred Cumming, in 1861, forbidding further minting in Utah. Most of the coins, however, were dated 1849 and 1850. (See also under Mint.)
