Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Czechoslovak Mission

CZECHOSLOVAK MISSION (The) comprises the independent republic of Czechoslovakia, incorporating the lands formerly included in the old Czech province of Bohemia, the Slovak territory of Hungary, Moravia, Ruthenia (or sub-Carpathian Russia) and part of Silicia. During the adjustment of boundaries in Europe, after the World War, the republic of Czechoslovakia was formed and its constitution ratified Oct. 18, 1918. Later, this action was officially confirmed by the peace treaties of Versailles, etc. The population of Czechoslovakia in 1930 was 14,725,000. Czech is the Slovak word for Bohemia, hence the name of the republic means "Bohemian Slovakia." The Czech and Slovak languages are somewhat similar but German is largely spoken so that state documents are written in both the Czech and German languages.

As early as 1883 an attempt was made to preach the gospel in Hungary, and Elders Paul E. B. Hammer and Thomas Biesinger were called by the president of the Swiss and German Mission to open up missionary work in Austria and Hungary. Elder Hammer baptized some converts in Vienna and Elder Biesinger went to Prague where for a few months he labored with great fidelity, or until he was arrested, imprisoned and banished from the country. As a missionary in the German-Austrian Mission, Bro. Biesinger made a second attempt to open up missionary work in Prague in 1928, he being 84 years of age at the time. During his visit to this city he obtained permission from the Minister of the Interior, the Chief of Police and other officials for himself and other missionaries to preach in the city of Prague and in other parts of Czechoslovakia, provided they obeyed the restrictions imposed by the laws and ordinances of the republic.

The Czechoslovak Mission was organized July 24, 1929, by Dr. John A. Widtsoe, president of the European Mission, in cooperation with Hyrum W. Valentine, president of the German-Austrian Mission, and Fred Tadje, president of the Swiss and German Mission. Arthur Gaeth, one of the Elders laboring in the German-Austrian Mission, was chosen to preside over the new mission with Alvin G. Carlson, Charles Josie, Joseph I. Hart, Willis A. Hayward and Wallace F. Toronto as his assistants.

At that time there were only seven members of the Church in Czechoslovakia, namely, three in Prague, two in Cercany, one in Zmaimo and one in Carlsbad. No state religion having been proclaimed in the new republic, considerable religious liberty was enjoyed. Meetings were commenced at the home of Sister Brodil in Prague, who with her two daughters were faithful members of the Church. During the visit of Prest. Widtsoe, the missionaries made the acquaintance of the leading officials of the government and two radio lectures, prepared under the direction of Dr. Widtsoe, were delivered in the Czech language by one of the professors of the Masaryk Institute. Other radio lectures followed at intervals, and illustrated lectures in English, German and Czech were frequently delivered. The people in Prague being greatly interested in sports, the missionaries played baseball and basketball with the young people, and also became closely acquainted with the leaders of the Boy Scout movement there. A school was organized where Czech literature, the Bible, the Book of Mormon and religious philosophy were taught. Some German tracts and songs were translated and published in the Czech language and several favorable newspaper articles appeared. The people of Czechoslovakia belong to a hardy race and are strong advocates of the laws of health and generally receive the "Word of Wisdom" with enthusiasm.

On Dec. 31, 1930, the mission had been in operation eighteen months and the translation of the Book of Mormon into the Czech language was nearly completed. Many persons were earnestly investigating the principles of the gospel, but the actual Church membership was only ten souls, including one child. Twelve Elders were laboring in the mission over which Arthur Gaeth. still presided. Mission headquarters had been established in Prague, the capital of the Czechoslovak Republic.
