Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Dayton Ward

DAYTON WARD, Oneida Stake, Franklin Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Cache Valley lying between Weston and Clifton, on the west side of Bear River. The ward extends north and south about 5 1/2 miles. The mountains form the boundary on the west, the Bear River on the east. The center of the ward consists of the village of Dayton, which is situated on the state highway running north and south on the west side of Cache Valley. The village is situated on the so-called Five Mile Creek, which crosses the road about five miles north of Weston and about the same distance south of Clifton, Dayton is six miles west of Preston, the headquarters of the Oneida Stake, and about 32 miles by wagon road northwest of Logan, Cache Co., Utah. Only a few of the people live on the townsite; the balance reside in a scattered condition on their respective farms, Dayton being strictly a farming district. The orchards, gardens and some of the farms are irrigated from Five Mile Creek, which rises in the mountains west of the settlement; also from the Twin Lake Reservoir, fed by Mink Creek and from artesian wells. The ward has a modern meeting house.

Dayton is an outgrowth of Weston. There was a stage station on the Montana road at an early day near the point where Deep Creek empties into Bear River, about five miles northeast of the present village of Dayton. George M. Mendenhall and family were the first permanent Mormon settlers on Deep Creek, locating there in the spring or summer of 1868. Other settlers arrived in 1872, and a number of log cabins were built and oats and wheat raised. The locality now called Dayton was originally known as the Franklin Meadows. The new settlement grew slowly, and Fred Jensen, the first presiding Elder at Dayton, presided from 1877 to 1880, when he was succeeded by Stephen Callan. For some time the little settlement was known as Five Mile Creek; later as Chadville (honoring Joseph Chadwick), and still later named Dayton.

On Oct. 15, 1893, the Dayton Branch, which had hitherto existed as a part of the Weston Ward, was organized as a separate ward called Dayton, with Philo W. Austin as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1907 by Stephen James Callan, who in 1909 was succeeded by Alma L. Jensen, who in 1920 was succeeded by Charles Jones, who in 1925 was succeeded by George A. Griffith, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time the ward had a membership of 518, including 116 children. The Dayton Precinct in 1930 had a total population of 721; of these 271 were residents of Dayton village.
