Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deep Creek Branch

DEEP CREEK BRANCH, Tooele Stake, Tooele Co., Utah, consisted of a few L. D. S. families who resided in the Deep Creek country, about 130 miles southwest of Tooele, the county seat of Tooele County, and 170 miles southwest of Salt Lake City, near the boundary line between Utah and Nevada. This valley is about four miles wide and about 250 miles long. It is bordered on the east by mountains and on the west by rolling hills covered with cedar. Deep Creek Valley is just beyond the Salt Desert, or on the very edge of the same. The stream known as Deep Creek is formed by three smaller streams known respectively as the East, the Middle, and the West Fork, which come together on the lower or north part of what was once called the Indian Farm.

Deep Creek was once an important station for the Overland Mail; Major Howard Egan was the pioneer mail-carrier over this route. In the spring of 1859 Wilford Hudson and several others from Grantsville commenced a settlement on Deep Creek called Ibapah; an Indian farm was also opened by Harrison Severe, who acted as government agent, the place being a government reservation. The settlement was temporarily abandoned in 1860 because of Indian hostilities. During this Indian war, several people were killed.

At a meeting held at Tooele Dec. 30, 1882, attended by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, the settlement on Deep Creek was again established as an Indian mission and William Lee and others with families were called by the Apostles to locate on Deep Creek, where land was purchased and a farm opened at the expense of the Church for the benefit of the Indians. This move became known as the Deep Creek Indian Mission. This Indian farm consisted of 400 acres of land. William Lee presided over the mission at the beginning. He was succeeded in 1885 by Owen H. Barrus, who in 1889 was succeeded by John E. Erickson, who presided as late as 1893. In 1900 there were still a few families of saints in the Deep Creek country, but no regular Church organization. Frank C. Prince is mentioned as president of the branch in 1916, and there were still a few saints at Ibapah in 1930, where there is a school house, a post office, etc.

The Deep Creek Indian Mission kept up by the Church was a failure financially, although the Church, through the Elders who were called to assist the Indians in their farming, made great sacrifices to elevate the red sons of the desert to a higher mode of living. The Indian Farm, situated about four miles south of Ibapah, is a government reservation, where there is an Indian school and farm, with a local Indian agent.
