Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deer Creek

DEER CREEK, a tributary of the North Platte River, flows into said stream at a point where the town of Glenrock, Wyoming, is now located. Deer Creek was well known to the thousands of L. D. S. emigrants who crossed the plains and mountains with ox trains from 1847 to 1867, after which the route of travel was changed owing to the advent of the Union Pacific Railroad. The original pioneers of Utah, under the leadership of Pres. Brigham Young, camped on Deer Creek on the night of June 10, 1847, and nearly all later companies also mention their encampment at that place. When in 1860 and later ox trains were sent from the headquarters of the Church in Utah to the Missouri River to fetch emigrants, flour and other supplies, brought from Salt Lake Valley, were cached at Deer Creek to be taken up on the return journey when the food stuffs of the companies had become almost exhausted.

In the fall of 1856 the contract for carrying mail between Salt Lake City and Independence, Mo., was awarded to Hiram Kimball of Salt Lake City. In connection with this enterprise, Pres. Brigham Young suggested the establishment of a regular service of ox and mule trains to carry passengers and freight between these two points. The intention was to found a string of settlements which might be used as mail and freight stations and where fresh animals and supplies might be obtained by mail carriers and emigrants. Work was commenced at several of the selected points, and at Deer Creek, during the spring of 1857, a fort, 150 feet square, constructed of logs and containing 42 houses, a corral (well stocked with mules) and a stock yard (well filled with cattle) were built, while a considerable amount of food stuffs was stored, including ten tons of flour, while fifty tons more were expected. A canal was dug and a supply of hay cut and stored for the winter. Seventy-two men had been employed in this labor at Deer Creek, but on account of misrepresentations, an army of about 3,000 men was sent west by the U. S. Government in the fall of 1857 to suppress a supposed rebellion in Utah. On this account Mr. Kimball lost his mail contract, and Deer Creek and other stations on the mail route were vacated, but later Deer Creek became an important point for the Pony Express, and continued to be a favorite camping place for the emigrant companies.

When in 1861 the overland telegraph line between San Francisco, California, and the Missouri River was completed, Deer Creek became an important telegraph station on the line, but the buildings were burned by Indians on Aug. 19, 1862. They were, however, rebuilt and used until the transcontinental railroad was completed. The prosperous town of Glenrock now occupies the site of the original Deer Creek settlement.
