Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Delta

DELTA, Deseret Stake, Millard Co., Utah, is the largest and most important town on the lower Sevier River, situated in the midst of an agricultural district. It is the main shipping point in Millard County, on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. A branch railroad connects Delta with Fillmore. The town has many attractions and yet is retarded in its prosperity because of the scarcity of water for irrigation purposes. All kinds of cereals can be raised at Delta with irrigation, but so far fruit-growing has been unsuccessful, and the town is conspicuous because of the absence of orchards; even shade trees are not numerous.

Delta is 32 miles northwest of Fillmore, the county seat, six miles northeast of Oasis, 17 miles southwest of Lynndyl, 135 miles southwest of Salt Lake City, and 649 miles northeast of Los Angeles, Calif. The town has fine school houses, two modern meeting houses and other public buildings. Ecclesiastically Delta is divided into three wards, viz., the Delta 1st, 2nd and 3rd. Nearly 80 per cent of the inhabitants of the town are Latter-day Saints. A number of the people are engaged in the poultry and dairy business besides farming and stock raising.

In March, 1906, a number of brethren from different parts of Millard County organized the Melville Irrigation Company and bought a one-half interest in the Sevier Bridge Reservoir, which was then under construction, for the purpose of irrigating a large tract of desert land lying northeast of Oasis. Fred M. Lyman was made president of the company. A dam was built in the Sevier River for the purpose of taking out water for irrigation. A townsite was surveyed named Melville in honor of James Melville, one of the promoters of the Delta project. Early in 1906 construction work on the dam was resumed with vigor. Town lots were sold and settlers commenced to locate upon them. Nelson S. Bishop built the first house on the townsite in the spring of 1907. A post office was established at Delta Jan. 18, 1908, named the Burtner post office. The post office department had objected to the name Melville for the post office, owing to the fact that there was already a post office in Cache Valley by the name of Millville. A telephone line was completed to Burtner in 1908.

The first Latter-day Saint settlers in Delta belonged to the Hinckley Ward, where most of them attended meetings. The first L. D. S. Church organization at Melville was a Sunday school organized Sept. 6, 1908. That fall a school house (a frame building, 20 by 30 feet) was moved from Hinckley to Melville. The saints who had settled on the Melville townsite were organized as a branch of the Church Feb. 1, 1909, with Hiett E. Maxfield as presiding Elder. Prior to that the name of the place had been changed from Melville to Burtner, and hence the branch was also named the Burtner Branch. The Burtner Branch was organized into a ward Oct. 19, 1909, with Hiett E. Maxfield as Bishop. In 1911 the name of the settlement was changed from Burtner to that of Delta, its present name. Hiett E. Maxfield presided over the Delta Ward until March 22, 1924, when the ward was divided into two wards, namely, the Delta 1st and the Delta 2nd wards. On the same occasion the South Delta Branch was organized as the Delta 3rd Ward.
