Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deseret, State of

DESERET, STATE OF, or the Provisional State of Deseret, was the title given by the pioneers of Utah to that part of the Rocky Mountain region and vicinity in which they had established and hoped to still further establish colonies as the nucleus for a prosperous inter-mountain state, to be a part of the great American Union.

After the return of Pres. Brigham Young to the mountains from the Missouri River in 1848, affiliation with the U. S. Government was given grave consideration and plans laid to formulate a constitution and petition the general government for recognition. A call for a convention to consider the political needs of the community was issued, which met early in March, 1849, at which it was decided to petition Congress for a state or territorial form of government and to organize (pending Congressional action upon the petition) a provisional government. A committee was appointed to draft and report a constitution for such a temporary government. This committee consisted of Albert Carrington, Joseph L. Heywood, Wm. W. Phelps, David Fullmer, John S. Fullmer, Charles C. Rich, John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, John M. Bernhisel and Erastus Snow. As outlined in this document, the boundaries of the proposed Provisional State of Deseret were as follows:

"Commencing at the 33rd degree of north latitude, where it crosses the 108th degree of longitude west of Greenwich, thence running south and west to the boundary of Mexico; thence west to and down the main channel of the Gila River and on the northern boundary of lower California to the Pacific Ocean; thence along the coast north-westerly to the 118 deg. 30 min. of west longitude; thence north to where said line intersects the dividing ridge of the Sierra Nevada Mountains; thence north along the summit of the Sierra Nevada Mountains to the dividing range of mountains that separate the water flowing into the Columbia River from the waters running into the Great Basin; thence easterly along the dividing range of mountains that separate said waters flowing into the Columbia River on the north, from the waters flowing into the Great Basin on the south, to the summit of the Wind River chain of mountains; thence southeast and south by the dividing range of mountains that separate the waters flowing into the Gulf of Mexico from the waters flowing into the Gulf of California, to the place of beginning, as set forth in a map drawn by Charles Preuss and published by order of the Senate of the United States in 1848."

The Constitution provided that the seat of government should be at Great Salt Lake City and that the powers of the government should be divided, as in other states, into three branches, namely, the legislative, executive and judiciary. The legislative authority was to be vested in a General Assembly consisting of a Senate and a House of Representatives, both to be elected by the people. The executive power was to be vested in a governor, a lieutenant-governor, a secretary of state, an auditor and a treasurer. The judiciary was to consist of the Supreme Court and such inferior courts as the General Assembly might establish. A chief justice and two associate judges were to be elected by joint vote of the Senate and House of Representatives.

On the 12th of March, 1849, a general election was held in the bowery in G. S. L. City, this being the first occasion on which the people in the Valley had met for such a purpose; 624 votes were polled. Brigham Young was elected governor; Willard Richards, secretary; Newel K. Whitney, treasurer; Heber C. Kimball, chief justice; John Taylor and Newel K. Whitney, associate justices; Daniel H. Wells, attorney general; Horace S. Eldredge, marshal; Albert Carrington, assessor and collector, and Joseph L. Heywood, surveyor of highways. At the same time the Bishops of the several wards were elected magistrates.

The General Assembly first convened July 2, 1849, and on the 3rd, Willard Snow, being appointed speaker of the House of Representatives, administered the oath to the executive officials. Thus did the pioneers of Utah establish the State of Deseret in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake.

On the 5th of July, 1849, Almon W. Babbitt was elected delegate to Congress, in a joint session of the Senate and House of Representatives, and on the 6th, a memorial was adopted by the representatives, in which the senate concurred three days later, asking for admission into the Union as a state. Almost immediately after the organization of the Provisional State of Deseret, the officers proceeded to pass laws and ordinances for the government of the people. The first county organizations were effected and chartered, namely, those of Great Salt Lake, Weber, Utah, Sanpete, Juab, Tooele, Iron, Davis, Desert, Green River, Millard and Washington. Charters of incorporation were issued to the cities of Great Salt Lake, Ogden, Provo, Manti and Parowan. The Provisional Government also passed an act incorporating the University of the State of Deseret, which later became the University of Utah. A state militia, under the name of the Nauvoo Legion, was organized comprising all males between the ages of 18 and 45. Among other notable acts of the General Assembly were the following:

An ordinance prohibiting the sale of arms and ammunition to the Indians, approved March 28, 1850. An ordinance to control the waters of Twin Springs and Rock Springs in Tooele County for mills and irrigation purposes. An ordinance granting the waters of North Mill Creek Canyon and the waters of the next canyon north to Heber C. Kimball, approved Jan. 9, 1851. (This appropriation of water was for running a saw mill, grist mill and other machinery.) An ordinance to incorporate G. S. L. City, approved Jan. 9, 1851, and ordinances to incorporate Ogden City, Manti, Provo and Parowan, all approved Feb. 6, 1851.

The General Assembly of the State of Deseret dissolved on April 5, 1851, and the Provisional Government merged into that of the Territory of Utah.

The petition of the people for a Territorial Government under the title of Deseret was not approved by Congress, but the name Utah substituted, this being the general name of the tribes of Indians located in Great Salt Lake Valley and vicinity.

One of the first acts of the legislative assembly of the Territory of Utah was to approve of, or legalize, everything that had been done by the Provisional State of Deseret.

It may here be stated that at no time in the history of Utah has life and property been more secure than under the Provisional Government of the State of Deseret. (Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. 1:395-455.)

To show how justice was administered in the self-constituted State of Deseret to Mormons and non-Mormons alike, we may note that the principal routes to the gold-fields of California passed through Salt Lake City and while some of the emigrant parties arrived with no effects save their jaded cattle, their wagons, and a scant outfit, others brought with them valuable merchandise, for which they hoped to find a market in the mining camps. When they made a division of their property, as frequently happened on arriving in the Valley, difficulties arose among them, and the discontented parties applied for redress to the courts of Deseret. In these instances there is sufficient evidence that impartial justice was rendered. Lieut. John W. Gunnison in his book entitled "The Mormons" (p. 65) says: "There was every appearance of impartiality and strict justice done to all parties." And Capt. Howard Stansbury in his report of the "Expedition to the Valley of G. S. Lake" (p. 130) says: "Justice was equitably administered alike to saint and gentile." (Bancroft's Hist: of Utah p. 447.)
