Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deseret Iron Company

DESERET IRON COMPANY (The). Iron County, Utah, was created March 3, 1852, iron ore having been discovered in the vicinity of Cedar City on Coal Creek, during the winter of 1851-52, by some of the L. D. S. colonists who were endeavoring to found settlements in the southern part of the territory of Utah. Some missionaries of the Church laboring in England, being anxious to promote the iron industry in Utah, collected means in England, and the Deseret Iron Company was organized at a meeting held at 15 Wilton Street, Liverpool, England, April 28, 1852. A subscription of four thousand pounds sterling was raised and soon afterwards Apostles Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards, who had been appointed general agents and managers of the company, sailed for America. After consultation with the First Presidency of the Church in Salt Lake City they proceeded to Iron County and in behalf of the company erected a small blast furnace on Coal Creek and endeavored to concentrate the efforts of all the brethren who were acquainted with the manufacture of iron in the enterprise.

On Jan. 17, 1853, the legislature of the Territory of Utah passed an act incorporating the Deseret Iron Company, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, and George A. Smith being named among the organizers. Isaac C. Haight was appointed general manager, assisted by Elias Morris and a number of skilled mechanics. In 1855 1,700 pounds of good iron were produced at the Deseret Iron Mill in 24 hours. Fire dogs, flat irons, stoves and a number of other articles were also manufactured. Many disastrous floods swept down Coal Creek, carrying with them much of the company's property. This, combined with expensive blowouts, and the difficulty of securing skilled workmen, caused the company to be dissolved about 1860.

The town known as Iron Springs, situated about eight miles west of Cedar City, adjacent to Iron Mountain, came into existence when the Deseret Iron Company functioned.
