Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deseret Museum

DESERET MUSEUM. This museum was the outcome of a private enterprise by John W. Young, a son of Pres. Brigham Young, who in 1869 collected a number of specimens of minerals, etc., and some birds and small animals and established the "Salt Lake City Museum and Menagerie" on South Temple Street, a little east of where the Hotel Utah now stands. In 1871 he moved his exhibit a block further west, where the Vermont Building was later erected. Soon afterwards, the Church came into possession of the enterprise and fostered it as a public educational feature and in charge of Prof. Joseph L. Barfoot the exhibit became known as the Deseret Museum. In 1882 Prof. Barfoot died; he was succeeded by Guglielmo C. R. Sangiovanni, who also did much to increase the value of the collection.

In 1890 the site of the museum building, with other property, being sold, the collection was moved to the recently erected Templeton Building and opened in 1891 with Dr. James E. Talmage as curator. Here it remained until 1893 when the museum was moved to the Church University building on 1st North Street and east of 2nd West Street. From 1903 to 1911 the exhibits were stored awaiting a suitable place in which to exhibit them, but in 1911, the Vermont Building having been completed, one entire floor with offices on two floors were provided and suitably equipped, and the Deseret Museum was reopened in charge of Dr. James E. Talmage and his son Sterling. Here a small entrance fee was charged.

The museum remained in the Vermont Building, with Sterling B. Talmage, B. S., as curator, until the fine museum building, erected in connection with the Bureau of Information on the Tabernacle Grounds, was finished in 1919, when most of the exhibits were moved to their permanent home, where, under the direction of the officials of the Bureau of Information, visitors are admitted daily, free of charge, and the specimens, displayed in fine glass cases, are viewed with interest by thousands of visitors yearly. The title Deseret Museum is no longer used.
