Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deseret Stake

DESERET STAKE, Millard Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the northeast part of Millard County, Utah, with headquarters at Delta, where there are accommodations for the stake presidency and High Council. The stake in 1930 consisted of twelve fully organized bishop's wards, namely: Abraham, Delta 1st, Delta 2nd, Delta 3rd, Deseret, Hinckley, Leamington, Lynndyl, Oak City, Oasis, Sugarville and Sutherland. The inhabitants within the limits of of the Deseret Stake are almost without exception farmers, who for many years have struggled hard and put forth their best efforts to redeem this arid region of Utah.

The stake includes a great area of desert country, interspersed with mountain ranges. The inhabited parts of the stake consist of settlements located on the lower end of the Sevier River, on which stream the farmers depend nearly altogether for water for irrigation purposes. The Sanpete and Sevier Reservoir system supplies nearly all the settlements in the Deseret Stake with water. The reservoir, which depends upon the Sevier River for filling, was constructed at a cost of about half a million dollars. It is situated on the state highway leading from Nephi to Fillmore, about 20 miles southeast of Leamington, and 30 miles northeast of Delta.

All the settlements of the saints in Millard County belonged to the Millard Stake of Zion until Aug. 11, 1912, when said stake was divided, and only the southeast part of the same was continued as the Millard Stake, while the northeast part was organized as a new stake of Zion, named the Deseret Stake, with Alonzo A. Hinckley as president, and Joseph T. Finlinson as first counselor. In December, 1912, William F. Pratt was chosen as second counselor. He was succeeded in that position in 1918 by Ellis Eugene Robison. On Sept. 29, 1929, President Hinckley and counselors were released, and Joseph T. Finlinson was chosen as president of the Deseret Stake, with Edward Leo Lyman, jun., as first, and Lafayette Cox Lee as second counselor. These brethren presided on Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Deseret Stake had 4,353 members, including 940 children. Among the priesthood were three Patriarchs, namely, Willis E. Robison, Peter Anderson and Samuel W. Western. Willis E. Robison was the first stake clerk; he was succeeded in 1918 by James M. Rigby, who acted in 1930.
