Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deseret University

DESERET UNIVERSITY (The) was the first institution of higher learning in what is now the state of Utah.

On Feb. 28, 1850, about two years and a half after the arrival of the pioneers into Great Salt Lake Valley, the Legislative Assembly of the Provisional Government of the State of Deseret passed an act incorporating the Deseret University. This act, among others of the Provisional Government, was ratified by the Legislative Assembly of the Territory of Utah Oct. 4, 1851. A chancellor and a board of twelve regents were appointed by Brigham Young, the governor of the territory; Orson Spencer was appointed chancellor. Having in perspective the future greatness of the institution, these founders of the future University of Utah gave to the small school, which had its beginning in the home of John Pack on the southwest corner of West Temple and 1st North streets in Salt Lake City, the modest title of the "Parent School." This school was opened Nov. 11, 1850, with Cyrus W. Collins, M. A., as instructor, who was authorized to teach all branches of education usually taught in high schools. Forty students were enrolled the first year and each one was required to pay $8 every ten weeks. Tuition was payable in advance and (in lieu of money) wheat, potatoes, flour, building rock and lumber were taken.

In 1851 the school met for a short time in the Council House located on the present site of the Deseret News Building, and later moved to the 13th Ward hall. Here classes in advance of other schools in the locality were taught, but owing to lack of means to secure books and mechanical equipment it was impossible to advance as fast as desirable. Lectures on scientific subjects were frequently delivered in the evenings by Chancellor Orson Spencer, Prof. Orson Pratt, John M. Bernhisel, Albert Carrington, Daniel H. Wells, Hosea Stout, William W. Phelps, Elias Smith and Zerubbabel Snow of the board of regents, all of whom were college graduates. The "Parent School" emphasized a normal class to prepare teachers for the grade (or ward) schools, free instruction to such students being covered by a grant appropriated by the territorial legislature. The board of regents of the Deseret University also acted as a general board of education for the territory, having supervision of the territorial schools.

On account of the varied labors consequent upon building up a new country, the Deseret University, as an educational unit, was little more than a name until 1868, when David O. Calder, one of the regents of the university, opened a commercial college in the Council House, Salt Lake City. The following year (1869) Dr. John R. Park, an educator of experience, was appointed by the board of regents to reopen the university and classes for normal, scientific and classical instruction were added to the already organized commercial course. The success of the institution under Dr. Park's direction was phenomenal. An enrollment of 250 students is recorded for the year 1869, which had increased in 1870 to 550 with a faculty of 14 instructors, teaching advanced courses in mathematics, science and arts. A normal department with attached training school was soon afterwards established. The natural resources of the intermountain region were fostered in the early 70's by the introduction of a mining department. The school continued to function in the Council House, but as necessity demanded, other buildings and rooms were secured for departmental work. In 1881 a large building was erected on Union Square, a 10-acre block bounded on the north by 2nd North St., on the east by 2nd West St., on the south by 1st North St., and on the west by 3rd West St. Here the scope of the institution was enlarged and even included a school for the deaf and dumb.

In 1892 Dr. John R. Park resigned and shortly afterwards the name of the institution was changed to University of Utah. Its numerous buildings now occupy a large tract of land on the bench in the northeast part of the city. Thus it is pointed out with pride that the University of Utah can trace its history back to the earliest period in the annals of the territory of Utah.
