Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deseret Ward

DESERET WARD, Deseret Stake, Millard Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a part of the Pauvant Valley on the Sevier River about 30 miles northeast of the Sevier Lake, or Sink of the Sevier. The village stands on both sides of the Sevier River and is the center of an extensive farming district. The Deseret meeting house is located on the north side or right bank of the Sevier River.

The Great Pauvant Valley was known to the early pioneers of Utah as a favorite rendezvous for the Pauvant Indians who pitched their wickiups on the banks of the Sevier River at different points. A number of white explorers passed through the country in the early Utah days, but not much attention was paid to that desert country until Capt. John W. Gunnison and his surveying party entered the valley for the purpose of exploration and surveying. The tragedy in which Captain Gunnison lost his life by the hands of Indians Oct. 26, 1853, together with a number of his men, forms a sad chapter in the history of Utah.

The settlement of Deseret dates back to the summer of 1858, when a company of saints was organized for the purpose of settling on the Sevier River. Most of these first settlers hailed from Fillmore. Some crops were raised in 1859 by prospective settlers. In 1860 the founding of the settlement took place, and a dam was built in the Sevier River for the intent of obtaining water for irrigation purposes. A townsite was also surveyed that year, on which the settlers commenced to build at once. The settlement bid fair for success, as the settlers found the land rich and productive, but high water in the Sevier washed away the dams of the settlers repeatedly, until the people got discouraged and most of them moved away in 1868.

Jacob Croft was the first presiding Elder in the Deseret settlement. He was succeeded in 1864 by Benjamin H. Robison, who in 1869 was succeeded by John Lovell. From 1868 to 1874 Deseret was entirely vacated; only a few stockmen who wintered in the neighborhood lived in the houses built by the original settlers. In 1874 a company of non-Mormons, principally from the Tintic Mining District, made preparations to build a new dam across the Sevier River. They hauled considerable timber on to the ground and made other improvements, which they subsequently sold to Latter-day Saint settlers.

In the spring of 1875 another effort was made by Gilbert Webb and others to erect a dam across the Sevier River. This dam was built mostly of rocks and willows, the latter being bound in bundles and sunk with large rocks until it was raised to the surface of the water. Sills were laid, and four V cribs, 30 feet long and 16 feet wide, were built of logs, leaving a space between each crib of 16 feet, which was divided into four parts by upright posts mortised into a sill. Gates were placed into each space so that the water could be raised and lowered at pleasure. The cribs were built up to high water mark and filled with large rocks. While this dam was being constructed, Joseph S. and William V. Black, who had resided at Kanosh, settled at Deseret, and took up land where the present town of Deseret now stands, the non-Mormons having claimed all the land lying adjacent to the old townsite.

In June, 1877, the saints who were resettling Deseret were organized into a branch of the Church with William V. Black as presiding Elder. This branch was organized as a ward July 22, 1877, with Joseph S. Black as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1891 by Milton Moody, who in 1898 was succeeded by Frank Hinckley, who in 1903 was succeeded by Hyrum S. Cahoon, who in 1908 was succeeded by Joseph W. Dameron, jun., who presided 18 years, or until 1926, when he was succeeded by A. Woodruff Sorensen, who in 1930 was succeeded by Ephraim J. Eliason, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Deseret Ward had 354 members, including 79 children. The total population of the Deseret Precinct was 411 in 1930.
