Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Deweyville Ward

DEWEYVILLE WARD, Bear River Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Deweyville and adjacent farms at the foot of the Wasatch Mountains, about 15 miles north of Brigham City and eight miles southeast of Garland. North the ward extends to Collinston, east to the mountains, south to Honeyville and west to Bear River. Most of the inhabitants are farmers, who irrigate their lands and gardens from the Hammond Canal, which taps Bear River in Bear River Canyon, and also from the Dewey Springs. Deweyville consists of a regular string town. The Oregon Short Line and the Utah-Idaho Railroad pass through the settlement. Meetings and Sunday school sessions are held in a meeting house (also used for social purposes), built in 1910.

That part of Box Elder County which is now included in the Deweyville Ward was for many years used as a grazing country by the people of Brigham City, but no attempt was made to make a settlement there until March 18, 1864, when John C. Dewey with his family located at a spring, afterwards called Dewey's Spring. Other settlers soon followed, and on Aug. 15, 1869, the saints in that locality (including those who had located at Hampton's Bridge) and, in fact, all the saints in Box Elder County living north of these points, were organized as a branch of the Church with John C. Dewey as president. A post office, named Deweyville, was established in 1873, with John C. Dewey as postmaster.

On Aug. 19, 1877, the Deweyville Branch was organized as the Deweyville Ward, with John C. Dewey as Bishop. In 1892 the Deweyville Ward was divided into two wards, the south part retaining the name of Deweyville, and the north part being organized as a separate ward called Beaver Ward. Bishop John C. Dewey died Oct. 8, 1895, and, about a year later, George Carlos Dewey was chosen as Bishop. He was succeeded as Bishop in 1911 by Daniel B. Marble, who in 1913 was succeeded by James Ernest Dewey, who in 1919 was succeeded by George C. Dewey (serving a second term), who in 1920 was succeeded by Charles J. Dewey, who in 1926 was succeeded by Marion Gilbert Perry, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date Deweyville Ward had 259 members, including 56 children. The total population of the Deweyville Precinct was 334 in 1930.
