Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Diaz (Colonia Diaz)

DIAZ (COLONIA DIAZ), Juarez Stake, state of Chihuahua, Mexico, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing at Diaz, which was situated near the center of a large valley extending north and south about 70 miles with an average width of 25 miles. Through this valley the River Casas Grandes flowed from southwest to northeast. The town was built on a mesquite flat about two miles north of the river, about 40 miles in a straight line south of the boundary line between Mexico and the United States, but only about 16 miles in an airline south of the Gadsden Purchase.

Diaz was about 60 miles north of Colonia Juarez, the headquarters of the Juarez Stake, and about 90 miles southwest of Deming on the Southern Pacific Railroad. It is also about 60 miles east of the base of the Sierra Madre Mountains. The townsite of Colonia Diaz constituted a square containing 144 blocks, each block being 27 rods square, separated by streets six rods wide following the cardinal points of the compass. The land surrounding Colonia Diaz is quite fertile and productive, but the place is very windy, annoying dust storms being quite frequent.

Colonia Diaz was settled by Latter-day Saints in the early part of 1885, near the Spanish town of La Ascencion, and on March 7th of the same year a larger company, in charge of Jesse N. Smith and Lot Smith, hailing from Snowflake, Arizona, arrived on the Casas Grandes River. The settlement was founded under the direction of Apostles Francis M. Lyman and Geo. Teasdale. Farming was commenced at once and the saints agreed upon a common herd ground and went into stock raising to a considerable extent. A townsite was surveyed in 1886, and at a meeting held Nov. 5, 1886, it was named Diaz in honor of the president of the republic, Porfirio Diaz. About 45,000 acres of land at Diaz and vicinity had been secured by the Latter-day Saints' Mexican Colonization Company for the benefit of the Mormon exiles.

The saints at Colonia Diaz were organized into a regular bishop's ward Oct. 24, 1886, with William Derby Johnson, jun., as Bishop. Brother Johnson acted as Bishop of the Diaz Ward until 1911, when he was succeeded by Ernest Van Romney, who presided until the exodus of the saints from Mexico took place in July, 1912. In February, 1913, the principal houses of Diaz were burned by the revolutionists, and no attempt was made to re-settle the place until 1928, when Flay Peterson obtained permission from a number of Latter-day Saint owners to reclaim the property and hold it for his own until they should need it.
