Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Dingle Ward

DINGLE WARD, Montpelier Stake, Bear Lake Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing on the east side of Bear Lake Valley, southwest of Bear River, and opposite Wardboro, eight miles southeast of Montpelier. The center of the ward is about two miles by nearest road southwest of Dingle Station, on the Oregon Short Line Railroad. Dingle is a prosperous farming district, and the ward has a substantial meeting house and school house.

Bear River, as it passes through the ward, is fringed with willows and cottonwoods.

In early pioneer days a man known as "Peg Leg" Smith lived on what is now known as Peg Leg Island, a small island in Bear River, between Dingle and Wardboro. He was a mountain trader, a blacksmith and surgeon. On one occasion he made a saw wherewith he cut off his own leg, which had been frozen on one of his expeditions. He was still living on his island in Bear River when the Latter-day Saints settled Bear Lake Valley in 1863, occupying two log cabins. The first permanent settler in Dingle Ward was William L. Lee, who in the spring of 1871, in the employ of Quincy Knowlton of Salt Lake City, took up a land claim and built a cabin on the spot where the townsite of Dingle now is. Other settlers soon followed, and a few families of saints were organized as a branch of the Church in 1875. The locality was first known as Dingle Dell, and when the Paris Ward was divided into two wards in 1877, Dingle Dell was attached to the Paris 1st Ward, and thus continued until June 11, 1882, when the Dingle Dell Branch was organized as the Dingle Ward with Samuel Allen Wilcox as Bishop; he was succeeded in 1886 by Samuel Humphreys, who in 1914 was succeeded by James Warren Sirrine, who in 1917 was succeeded by Edwin C. Cook, who in 1919 was succeeded by James Warren Sirrine (serving a second term), who in 1929 was succeeded by Hyrum Oakley, who still presided Dec. 31, 1930.

On that date the Dingle Ward had 273 members, including 70 children; the total population of the Dingle Precinct was 317 in 1930.
