Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Downey Ward

DOWNEY WARD, Portneuf Stake, Bannock Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in and near the town of Downey, an important station on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, in the south end of Marsh Valley. Downey, the business center and headquarters of the Portneuf Stake of Zion, is 17 miles south of McCammon, 15 miles north of Oxford and 130 miles by rail northeast of Salt Lake City. About half the people live in Downey, the rest on farms and ranches nearby. The saints constitute about four-fifths of the population of Downey, which town has a number of well-stocked stores, three grain elevators, an electric light plant, waterworks, telephone exchange, etc. The saints in Downey own a fine meeting house (a frame building), and the town has also a modern school house. The Downey Ward extends on the north to Virginia and Cambridge, east to the mountains, south to the Grant Ward, and west to the Woodland Ward.

Downey is named for a Mr. Downey, one of the directors of the Union Pacific Railroads and the town dates back to the construction of the broad guage railroad track through Marsh Valley. William Alonzo Hyde was the first Latter-day Saint settler at Downey. He took up a farm and started a store in 1894. His brother George Tilton Hyde joined him in 1895. The Hyde brothers built a hotel and a blacksmith shop and did a good business from the beginning. Irrigated farming not being promising, dry farming was commenced in 1894. A townsite was surveyed in 1894, which was enlarged in 1910.

The members of the Church in Downey originally belonged to the Cambridge Ward, but on June 16, 1907, the Cambridge Ward was divided and the south part of the same organized as the Downey Ward. George T. Hyde, the former Bishop of the Cambridge Ward, was chosen as Bishop of the new Downey Ward. He was succeeded in 1915 by Orrin P. Merrill, who in 1917 was succeeded by Martin A. Thomas, who in 1923 was succeeded by Joakim F. Hartvigsen, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Downey Ward had 598 members, including 101 children. The total population of the Downey Precinct was 1,485 in 1930; of these 553 resided in the village of Downey.
