Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Dublan (or Colonia Dublan)

DUBLAN (or COLONIA DUBLAN), Juarez Stake, state of Chihuahua, Mexico, the largest colony of Latter-day Saints in Mexico in 1930, is situated on the Ferrocarril Nor-oeste de Mexico (Mexican Northwestern Railroad), in Casas Grandes Valley, 16 miles northeast of Colonia Juarez and 150 miles west of El Paso, Texas. The products of the colony are alfalfa, wheat, corn, oats, potatoes, sugar cane, apples, and a very fine quality of cheese. The saints in Dublan own a fine meeting house, recently completed.

George M. Brown, formerly of Provo, Utah, in search of a place to locate his family, entered into negotiations in the fall of 1887 with a German-Mexican, who owned a large tract of land in Casas Grandes Valley. Instead of disposing of a small section of land, the owner made quite liberal terms, if Brother Brown could induce colonists to the number of 500 to locate in the district. In counsel with Alexander M. Macdonald, Elder Brown returned to Utah and invited colonists to locate on the proposed purchase. Soon quite a number of L. D. S. families arrived in the Casas Grandes Valley, who on April 14, 1889, were organized as a branch of the Church with Frederick W. Jones as presiding Elder. The settlement became known as San Francisco. The settlers commenced to plant fruit and shade trees and raised crops of corn, wheat, oats and other cereals and also potatoes and other garden products. They pronounced the climate ideal, the winters being without snow and the summers agreeable.

In December, 1890, a townsite was surveyed by Alexander F. Macdonald to which the name of Dublan was given in honor of Emanuel Dublan, secretary and treasurer of the Mexican Republic.

On July 18, 1891, upon a visit of Apostle George Teasdale, a ward organization was effected with Winslow Farr as Bishop. At this time there were fifty Mormon families in the settlement, or 351 souls. Winslow Farr was succeeded as Bishop of the Dublan Ward in 1899 by Samuel John Robinson, who in 1907 was succeeded by Albert D. Thurber, who presided until the exodus of the saints from Mexico in July, 1912. After the place was re-settled in 1914, Niels Frederiksen was chosen as presiding Elder of the Dublan Branch which was reorganized into a ward in 1915, with Anson B. Call as Bishop. He acted in that capacity Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the total membership of the ward was 335, including 116 children.
