Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Eastern Arizona Stake of Zion

EASTERN ARIZONA STAKE OF ZION consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in Apache County, Arizona, and Valencia and Socorro counties, New Mexico, with headquarters at Snowflake, Arizona.

The saints who located settlements on the Little Colorado River in 1876, finding it very difficult to control the waters of said river in the interest of irrigation, soon had their attention drawn to the country lying further up the Little Colorado River and its tributaries. On July 18, 1878, a purchase was made of the Stinson Ranch on Silver Creek, a tributary of the Little Colorado, and purchases were also made at St. Johns, on the Little Colorado. Still further up said stream a colony of saints settled in Round Valley (now Eagar) and a commencement for planting colonies of saints in Alpine (Arizona), and Luna Valley (New Mexico) was made. These settlements being far removed from the first settlements of the saints founded on the Little Colorado River, it was deemed wise to divide the Little Colorado Stake and organize the east part of the same into a new stake called the Eastern Arizona Stake. This took place in the early part of 1879, and Jesse N. Smith was chosen as president of the new stake. The Eastern Arizona Stake at the time of its organization consisted of the infant colonies of saints at Snowflake, Forest Dale, Round Valley, Frisco (now Alpine), and St. Johns in Arizona, and Savoia in New Mexico. The first conference of the Eastern Arizona Stake was held at Snowflake in a temporary bowery which had been erected between Bro. Flake's two rooms on the old Stinson Ranch. At this conference Lorenzo H. Hatch was set apart as a counselor to Pres. Jesse N. Smith and Joseph Fish was chosen as stake clerk. Several missionaries were also called to labor among the Indians. Before the close of 1882 there were eight organized wards and two branches in the Eastern Arizona Stake, namely, Snowflake, Woodruff, Taylor, Forest Dale, Erastus, St. Johns, Round Valley (Eagar), Bush Valley (Alpine), Nutrioso, Smithville (on the Gila River) and Pleasanton. Oscar Mann had in the meantime been chosen as second counselor to Pres. Jesse N. Smith. In 1882 the Round Valley Ward was divided into two wards, named respectively Amity and Omer, and the Meadow Ward in Arizona and the Navajo Ward in new Mexico were organized. In July, 1886, the Omer and Amity wards were united into one ward called Union.

At a special conference held at St. Johns July 24, 1897, the Eastern Arizona Stake was divided into two new stakes, named respectively the St. Johns Stake and the Snowflake Stake. The St. Johns Stake contained from the beginning the following wards which had formerly belonged to the Eastern Arizona Stake: Ramah, Erastus, St. Johns, Union, Nutriosa, Alpine and Heber. The Snowflake Stake came into existence with the following wards which had formerly belonged to the Eastern Arizona Stake: Pinedale, Showlow, Snowflake, Taylor and the remnant of the Little Colorado Stake, including St. Joseph, Tonto and Tuba City. Jesse N. Smith presided over the Eastern Arizona Stake during the entire period of its existence (1879-1887).
