Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Echo Ward

ECHO WARD, Summit Stake, Summit Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing at Echo, a small railroad town on the Union Pacific Railroad, located at the mouth of Echo Canyon, five miles north of Coalville, the headquarters of the Summit Stake. Echo Canyon has been renowned as a singular opening in the mountains on the route of the L. D. S. emigration ever since the pioneers under Pres. Brigham Young passed through it in July, 1847.

The first person who located at the mouth of Echo Canyon with the idea of farming and making a permanent home there was Elias Asper who took up a claim in that part of Weber Valley in the fall of 1861. At that time there was a mail station at Echo, and also a blacksmith shop for the accommodation of travelers. Bro. Asper built a comfortable home for himself and family. When in 1868 the Union Pacific Railroad was constructed through Echo Canyon, a town called Echo City sprang up around the Asper homestead. When the first locomotive steamed into "Echo City" Jan. 16, 1869, a great celebration was held, and for a time after this Echo was a very lively, if not a very peaceful town to live in. A few meetings were held in the home of Bro. Asper and in other private houses and occasionally also in the railroad camps, but it was not until 1873 that a branch of the Church was organized at Echo with Elias Asper as presiding Elder. This organization became a ward in 1877 with Elias Asper as Bishop. He acted in that position until his death, which occurred March 15, 1894. After that Edward Richins acted as presiding Elder until 1900, when Joseph Hopkins was appointed Bishop of the Echo Ward. He was succeeded in 1907 by Richard Wickel, jun., who acted until 1922, when the ward was reduced to a branch of the Henefer Ward with Harvey W. Richins as presiding Elder. He acted until Feb. 5, 1928, when a ward organization was again effected at Echo with Moroni Richins as Bishop. He presided in that position Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 109 members, including 49 children. The population of the Echo Precinct in 1930 was 457, owing to the many employees working on the Echo Reservoir.
