Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Elberta Ward

ELBERTA WARD, Tintic Stake, Utah Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district in the south end of Utah valley, on a plain sloping gently from the mountains on the west to Salt Creek on the east. The township of Elberta is about three miles west of Goshen and 2 1/2 miles north of another surveyed townsite called Verda, which is also included in the Elberta Ward. Most of the saints reside on their respective landholdings, while a fraction of the non-Mormon population are residents of the village of Elberta. Elberta was thus named because of the thrifty growth of the now well known Elberta peaches, which are raised successfully in that part of Utah Valley.

Elberta was settled by eastern non-Mormon people, who surveyed two townsites named respectively Elberta and Verda, on the bench land lying immediately west of Goshen and some distance west of Salt Creek. These people who had organized a land and water company sold land and water to prospective settlers, with the assertion that the location of their two new townsited and the natural facilities of the country pointed in the direction of excellent success in raising fruit. But the adventure proved rather far-fetched speculation, money-making seemingly being the chief objective of the promoters, and the enterprise did not prove a success. The whole project passed into the hands of receivers.

In 1918 a number of L. D. S. families located at Elberta and bought out some of the claims of the non-Mormons, among them being Lewis Thomsen, who bought the project mentioned at auction sale, and induced other L. D. S. settlers to locate in the vicinity independent of the land project. After a while he sold his holdings to Jesse Knight, of Provo, whose heirs still own considerable land at Elberta and vicinity and operate under the title of Utah Valley Land and Water Company. This company obtains water for irrigation purposes from a reservoir located in the upper valley or the north end of Juab Valley, where a dam has been constructed about six miles north of Mona.

As the Latter-day Saints increased in number and some of them had settled in the vicinity of the townsite of Verda, they were organized into a branch of the Church called Verda Branch of the Goshen Ward June 26, 1921, with David A. Cook as presiding Elder. This dependent branch continued operations until July 16, 1922, when the saints at Verda and vicinity were organized into a so-called independent branch. When this organization was effected, nearly all the saints resided in the vicinity of Verda, and this also included the Jesse Knight project, while the non-Mormon population made their headquarters at Elberta. In due course of time, most of the non-Mormons sold out to the Latter-day Saints, who now constitute the majority of the precinct.

Oliver A. Penrod was the first presiding Elder in Verda Branch; he presided until April 15, 1928, when the Verda Branch was organized into a regular bishop's ward, named Elberta, . with Henry H. Hintze as Bishop. He still presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Elberta Ward had 188 members, including 52 children. The total population of the Elberta Precinct was 278 in 1930.
