Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Amsterdam Conference

AMSTERDAM CONFERENCE of the Netherlands Mission consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the city of Amsterdam (population 750,000 in 1930) and vicinity. Amsterdam is the capital of the Netherlands, the Hague being the government seat, and the residence of the royal family.

The Amsterdam Conference or District in 1930 included the Amsterdam I, Amsterdam II, Haarlem, Ymuiden, Alkmaar, Den Helder and Hilversum branches. Amsterdam has always been one of the best proselyting districts in the Netherlands Mission.

The first baptisms in Amsterdam were performed by Elder Paul A. Schettler, Dec. 23, 1861, one of the candidates being Hendrik van Steeter, who performed a good mission in the Netherlands before emigrating to Utah.

On May 10, 1862, a branch of the Church was organized in Amsterdam with 14 members. In September of that year Apostle George Q. Cannon, while visiting the mission, spent a few days in Amsterdam and attended several meetings.

In 1872, the so-called Palestine party in charge of Elder Geo. A. Smith, and including Lorenzo Snow and his sister Eliza R. Snow, visited Amsterdam.

In 1895 there were about 150 members of the Church in Holland's capital. Elder Ruurt E. Beima was branch president, with Elders Eiso van Boerum and Jan B. Bernards as counselors -all local men.

For several years, prior to June, 1891, the headquarters of the mission were located. at Amsterdam.

The Amsterdam Conference was organized Nov. 1, 1897, Elder Richard N. Hill being the first conference president. The conference went through a series of changes and included at different times the following branches: Amsterdam No. I and No. II, Haarlem, Ymuiden, Alkmaar, Den Helder, Utrecht, Hilversum and Amersfoort. Utrecht in due time became the headquarters of the Utrecht Conference, while Amersfoort also was added to the latter division.

The total Church membership in the conference in 1930 was 619, including 40 children.
