Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Elk Mountain Mission

ELK MOUNTAIN MISSION (The) was established in southeastern Utah in 1855 for the purpose of educating and converting to true Christianity a tribe of Ute Indians who occupied a region of country in the vicinity of the Elk Mountains (now the La Salle Mountains). These Indians occupied among other places the little valley on the Colorado River in which the flourishing little settlement of Moab is now located, 35 miles southeast of Thompson's Springs on the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, or 252 miles southeast of Salt Lake City. The brethren (41 in number) who went on this mission were called at the general conference of the Church held in Great Salt Lake City in April, 1855; and on May 7, 1855, those of the missionaries who were ready, left Great Salt Lake City for Manti, Sanpete Co., which had been chosen as the place of rendezvous. Alfred N. Billings was appointed president of the mission by Pres. Brigham Young.

After being partly organized for traveling, the company started from Manti on Monday, May 21, 1855, and consisted of 41 men, 15 wagons, 65 oxen, 16 cows, and 13 horses. The expedition carried 14,656 pounds of flour, 32 bushels of wheat, a quantity of corn, potatoes, peas and oats, also a whip-saw, axes, scythes, ironbars, trowels, hoes, shovels and plows. Oliver B. Huntington was chosen as clerk of the expedition. A thorough discipline was accepted by the brethren and prayers and meetings were held regularly. The company traveled south as far as the present location of Salina, Sevier Co., Utah, thence up Salina Canyon to the divide, or the Rim of the Basin, where the waters begin to run eastward towards the Green and Grand (now Colorado) rivers; thence the journey was northeast across the creeks on which Ferron, Castle Dale and Huntington are now located. Green River was crossed not far from where the town of Green River on the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad now stands; thence the journey was continued in a southeasterly direction over a desert country to the valley where Moab afterwards was built. This valley was reached after crossing Grand River (now Colorado).

On the arrival at their destination, Joseph S. Rawlins and Wm. R. Holden were chosen as counselors to Pres. Billings and the brethren at once went to work building, making water ditches and putting in grain. The Indians were friendly and seemed pleased with the brethren who settled among them. On June 26th the settlers commenced cutting logs for a corral and designated a place for a fort near a spring on the east side of the valley, about two miles from a grove in which the settlers had first made their encampment. The corral was built of logs cut nine feet long and set three feet in the ground, leaving six feet out of the ground. The corral measured 130 feet by 60 feet, and the fort was designated to be 60 feet square, joining the east end of the corral. The west end of the fort was to form the east end of the corral. The fort was built of stone which had to be hauled some distance.

The corral was finished on three sides on June 30, 1855. On July 2nd the brethren moved their camp to the corral, and two days later they commenced to haul stone for the fort which on that morning was staked out 64 feet square, the walls, four feet thick at the bottom, tapering off to two feet at the top. George Petty commenced laying stone on the fort July 6. Work on the fort was continued until it was completed. In the meantime the Indians began to show signs of hostility. The erection of houses within the fort was soon commenced and a few weeks later all the members of the mission were comfortably housed and protected within the walls of the fort. On Aug. 23, 1855, a gate seven feet long and four feet wide and eight inches thick was finished; this gate was made of cottonwood logs, hewn four inches thick, with four pieces pinned crossways, also four inches thick. The gate was hung on the west side of the fort leading into the cattle corral.

On Sunday, Sept. 23, 1855, the Indians attacked the little settlement and killed James W. Hunt, William J. Behunin and Edward Edwards; Pres. Alfred N. Billings and others of the brethren were wounded. The Indians stole cattle and burned the hay which belonged to the settlement. The following day the colonists left their fort and started for Manti, where they arrived Sept. 30, 1855, after suffering severe hardships on the way. Thus ended the Elk Mountain Mission. (A detailed history of the Elk Mountain Mission is on file in the Historian's Office in Salt Lake City.)
