Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

El Paso Ward

EL PASO WARD, St. Joseph Stake, El Paso Co., Texas, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the city of El Paso, which, in 1930, had a population of 102,421. Most of the saints residing in the city are engaged in mercantile pursuits or other kinds of business, some of them in Ciudad Juarez in Mexico on the other side of the Rio Grande del Norte. El Paso is an important city on the Southern Pacific Railroad, 240 miles southeast of Thatcher, the stake headquarters.

The first L. D. S. missionaries who entered Mexico found El Paso a natural gateway into that country when attempts were made by them to preach the gospel to the inhabitants of our neighboring republic on the south. In 1897 Isaac Washington Pierce, a former resident of Colonia Diaz, Mexico, located with his family at Ciudad Juarez (City of Juarez), Mexico, across the Rio Grande, for the purpose of marketing lumber sawed by the Mormon colonists in the Sierra Madre Mountains, near, or southwest, of the colonies. Bro. Pierce and his family were the only Latter-day Saints residing in that town for many years, but he employed a few Mormon boys in his business, and a few girls from the L. D. S. Mexican colonies came to El Paso to find employment at housework. The hospitable home of Bro. Pierce was the headquarters of Latter-day Saints in Ciudad Juarez, where Bro. Pierce kept a hotel. Meetings were held there occasionally, and as Apostles and other Church officers passed through that part of the country, they always stopped at Bro. Pierce's house.

Ciudad Juarez must not be confounded with the L. D. S. settlement of Colonia Juarez; these two towns are 160 miles apart.

About 1904 Jos. Hills Johnson and family from Colonia Dublan, Mexico, located at El Paso, working for a furniture company; James Mortensen and family also located there in 1906 and later engaged in business in Cuidad Juarez.

Bro. Isaac W. Pierce died Aug. 21, 1906, and his business in Ciudad Juarez was continued by his son, Arwell L. Pierce, and an older brother. Bro. Arwell L. Pierce is still (1930) carrying on a lumber and mercantile business at Ciudad Juarez, but his home is in El Paso, Texas.

About 1906 a Sunday school was organized in Ciudad Juarez with Arwell L. Pierce as superintendent, and about 1909 the saints at El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, were organized as a branch of the Church with James Mortensen as presiding Elder. After that meetings and Sunday schools were held conjointly for some time.

In July, 1912, the exodus of the Latter-day Saints from Mexico took place and about 3,000 of the refugees located temporarily in El Paso and vicinity. Although the Juarez Stake was disorganized on account of the exodus, Hyrum S. Harris, who had acted as first counselor to Stake President Junius Romney, was appointed by the Church authorities to take charge of the refugees in El Paso and vicinity. Most of the refugees from the Mexican colonies arrived in El Paso in a destitute condition, and those who could not afford to rent houses to live in occupied lumber sheds on McGoffin Ave., in the so-called Cotton Addition.

For several weeks, and perhaps for months, some of these exiled saints received hospitality from the citizens of El Paso, until they finally scattered to many parts of the United States.

In addition to the kindness shown by the citizens of El Paso generally, the military officers at Fort Bliss (situated immediately east of El Paso) placed scores of government tents at the disposal of the exiles in which they could be protected against cold in the night and heat in the day.

Quite a number of the saints lingered near the Mexican border for some time after the exodus, hoping that peace would be restored in Mexico so that they could return to their homes there and in the meantime temporary camps were established by them at Hachita and Columbus, New Mexico, Douglas in Arizona, and other towns near the border (both in Arizona and New Mexico), where the inhabitants showed kindness and hospitality to the exiles. But when it was discovered that there was no immediate hope for the cessation of hostilities between the federal government of Mexico and the so-called rebels, most of the exiled saints left their temporary homes, or camps, near the border, and scattered to other parts of the United States. Only a part of them returned years later to their former homes in Mexico to continue the Juarez Stake of Zion.

Although the government placed tents at the disposal of the saints in El Paso and Hachita and otherwise aided the refugees, the exiles suffered a great deal from exposure and want of comfort. Many of the Mormon boys and girls found employment at El Paso and elsewhere, and finally the government furnished free transportation on the railroads for the exiles to any part of the United States where they wanted to go or where they had relatives or friends to receive them.

At a conference held in El Paso May 16, 1915, Philip H. Hurst was chosen as president of the El Paso Branch. Prior to this change of officers Hyrum S. Harris had taken charge of ecclesiastical affairs in El Paso and elsewhere. He had in the meantime rented a private residence on one of the boulevards at El Paso for which he purchased furniture, and meetings were held there for about two years.

In 1913 Arwell L. Pierce organized a Sunday school in El Paso, and in 1918 he succeeded Bro. Hurst as president of the El Paso Branch. On Oct. 11, 1918, the El Paso Branch was organized as a ward with Arwell L. Pierce as Bishop; he still acted in that capacity Dec. 31, 1930. Meetings have been held for a number of years at El Paso, in the I. O. O. F. hall on the corner of Santa Fe and Franklin streets, but in 1930 the breaking of ground for the erection of a modern L. D. S. Chapel in El Paso took place.

In 1919 the El Paso Ward and the saints scattered along the Mexican border, who for some time previously had belonged to the Juarez Stake of Zion, were officially transferred to the St. Joseph Stake, where they belonged Dec. 31, 1930.

From 1919 to 1929 the headquarters of the Mexican Mission were at El Paso, but early in 1929 Pres. Rey L. Pratt, who presided over that mission, moved his headquarters from El Paso to Los Angeles, Calif. El Paso Ward on Dec. 31, 1930, had 442 members, including 120 children.
