Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Elsinore Ward

ELSINORE WARD, South Sevier Stake, Sevier Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the Elsinore Precinct and a small part of Monroe Precinct. Most of the people live in the town of Elsinore, while a few families reside on the opposite or south side of the Sevier River, and a few others on their farms east and west of the townsite. The village of Elsinore is pleasantly situated in a part of the Sevier Valley which slopes gently towards the south between the mountains on the north and the Sevier River on the south. The village is 4 1/2 miles northwest of Monroe, the South Sevier Stake headquarters, seven miles southwest of Richfield, the county seat of Sevier County, and 168 miles by nearest wagon road south of Salt Lake City. The lands used for farming and garden purposes are principally irrigated from the Richfield, the Elsinore, and the Sevier Valley canals. Shade trees are more abundant than fruit trees in Elsinore. More wheat and other grains are raised in Elsinore than in any other settlement in Sevier County, according to its population.

In the spring of 1874 Jens Iver Jensen and a number of other young men with families took up land for farming purposes east of where Elsinore now stands and under the Richfield Irrigating Canal. These brethren had given up their former lands in the United Order in Richfield, which had commenced operations there the year before, but in taking up the new lands they still intended to reside in Richfield However, when they harvested their grain in the fall they decided to make a new settlement somewhere adjacent to their lands and so Elsinore was founded, a townsite was surveyed and improvements commenced. After the townsite was located Pres. Joseph A. Young, in passing through that part of the country, saw something in the landscape formation which reminded him of Elsinore in Denmark, which city he had once visited, and he suggested to the brethren, who were nearly all of Danish descent, to name their new town after the Danish city Elsinore (Helsingør).

This was accordingly done, and when a post office was applied for, that name was accepted by the post office department. In December, 1847, the brethren at Elsinore were organized into a branch of the United Order, but they only worked one year in that organization. The Elsinore Precinct was created in 1875. Rasmus Raphelsen was the first presiding Elder at Elsinore; he was succeeded in 1876 by Joshua W. Sylvester, who presided until July 15, 1877, when the Elsinore Branch was organized as a ward with Joshua W. Sylvester as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1887 by Jens I. Jensen, who in 1911 was succeeded by Joseph L. Staples, who in 1917 was succeeded by Ernest M. Greenwood, who in 1919 was succeeded by Joseph L. Staples, (serving a second term), who in 1921 was succeeded by J. Albert Bateman, who in 1925 was succeeded by Henry J. Kotter, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Elsinore Ward had 605 members, including 130 children. The total population of the Elsinore Precinct was 819 in 1930; of these 654 resided in the town of Elsinore.
