Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Annabella Ward

ANNABELLA WARD, South Sevier Stake, Sevier Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the Annabella Precinct, which includes that part of Sevier Valley that lies southeast of Richfield and northeast of Monroe, on the east side of the Sevier River. It includes the village of Annabella and the scattered settlers living north and south of the same. The village is six miles southeast of Richfield, six miles by nearest road across the mountains southwest of Glenwood, and six miles northeast of Monroe, the headquarters of the South Sevier Stake. The gardens and farms in Annabella are mostly irrigated from the Annabella Canal which taps the Sevier River about six miles southwest of Annabella. Irrigation water is also obtained from two small mountain streams (Cottonwood and Red Butte), which rise in springs in the mountains southeast of the village. The ward owns a neat modern chapel.

Annabella was named after Ann S. Roberts, wife of Edward K. Roberts, and Isabella Dalton, wife of Harry Dalton, two of the first women settlers of the place. Harry Dalton settled in the Sevier Valley in the spring of 1871, taking up the springs (with adjacent land) which afterwards became known as Annabella Springs. Brother Dalton built the first log cabin there in the summer of 1871, and soon afterwards brought his family out. Other settlers arrived the same year. An irrigation ditch was commenced and many improvements made, though only a limited crop of grain was raised in 1871 by irrigating from the Annabella Springs. This, formerly known as Omni Point, was organized into an irrigation district in 1871, when the Annabella Precinct was also created. When the Sevier Stake was fully organized in 1877 Annabella was made a part of the Inverury Ward, and Tora Thurston was appointed presiding Elder of the Annabella district. He presided until May 24, 1885, when the saints belonging to the Annabella district, and who had belonged to the Inverury Ward, were organized into a regular bishop's ward with Joseph S. Staker as Bishop. On the same occasion a school house, which had been moved to the townsite, and also the townsite itself, was dedicated. Bishop Staker was succeeded in 1893 by Joseph W. Fairbanks, who in 1911 was succeeded by William Spafford Daniels, who in 1920 was succeeded by Herbert F. Roberts, who in 1930, was succeeded by Glen W. Thurston, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Annabella Ward had 352 members, including 60 children. The whole population of the Annabella Precinct in 1930 consisted of Latter-day Saints, of which 180 lived in the village of Annabella.
