Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Escalante

ESCALANTE, Garfield Stake, Garfield Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Escalante and surrounding country containing all the saints in the so-called Potato Valley. The town of Escalante is situated in Sections 7, 8, 17 and 18, Township 35 south, Range 3 east, Salt Lake Meridian, on the south side of Escalante Creek, a mile above the point where Pine Creek empties into Escalante Creek and two miles above the place where the Escalante enters a box canyon. Escalante is 60 miles by road southeast of Panguitch, 18 miles north of the boundary line between Garfield and Kane counties, and 20 miles east of the Rim of the Basin. The valley in which Escalante is situated is six miles long with an average width of three quarters of a mile. Southward the valley opens out on to a desert extending 60 miles to the Colorado River. There are ranches on different points of the tributaries of Escalante Creek, but most of these ranches are vacated during the winter months, when the people, as a rule, move their families to the town. Escalante Creek is formed by the junction of North Creek, Birch Creek and Upper Potato Valley Creek. It takes the name of Escalante where North Creek comes in as a tributary, five miles west of the town of Escalante. All these streams rise on the east slope of the Escalante Mountains. The creek is named after Juan Escalante, the noted Spanish explorer.

In February, 1875, Wm. J. Flake and others from Beaver, Utah, entered Potato Valley for exploration purposes. Their report led to the settlement of the valley that same year by a number of families who had formerly lived on the upper Sevier but were in search of a warmer climate to make homes. These first settlers entered the valley June 29, 1875, and commenced immediately to make improvements. Canals were dug, a bowery erected, the "Stars and Stripes" raised July 14, 1876, a townsite surveyed and other improvements made.

Andrew P. Schow was appointed in the beginning by Bishop Geo. W. Sevey of Panguitch to take charge of the proposed colony. When the Panguitch Stake was organized April 23, 1877, the saints who had settled in Potato Valley were organized as a ward with Andrew P. Schow as Bishop. He presided about 37 years (until 1911) when he was succeeded by Ernest A. Griffin, who acted until 1921, when the Escalante Ward was organized into two wards, namely, the Escalante South and the Escalante North wards. In 1939 Escalante had two bishop's wards which contained a total membership of 1,009, including 251 children. The total population of the Escalante Precinct in 1930 was 1,016; of these 862 resided in the town.
