Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Eureka Ward

EUREKA WARD, Tintic Stake, Juab Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the mining town of Eureka, which is situated in a canyon opening from the east into Tintic Valley. Eureka, one of the most important mining camps in Utah, is located half a mile down or west from the summit of the mountains which separate Tintic Valley from Utah Valley. A spur of the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad connects Eureka with the main line of that road at Eureka, while a branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad approaches Eureka from the east. Eureka is 35 miles by nearest road northwest of Nephi, the county seat of Juab County, 16 miles by nearest road west of Goshen in Utah County, and 90 miles by nearest road southwest of Salt Lake City. The business part of Eureka consists chiefly of rock and brick buildings, and is throughout an attractive mining camp, being of a more permanent character than mining camps generally. Homansville, now defunct, was situated across the divide eastward. Mammoth is situated around the mountain to the southward, and Silver City is five miles to the south.

Precious ore was first discovered in or near the present town of Eureka in 1869 by Sidney W. Worsley and others. In the spring of 1870 precious ore was found in what afterwards became the first Eureka Mine and the celebrated Beck Mine. This was the beginning of the rich Tintic Mining District. Among those who were employed in opening the mines were some Latter-day Saints, and when the Bullion Beck and Champion mines commenced active operations, these saints, including a number of German brethren, were organized into a temporary branch of the Church in November, 1883. This branch was more fully organized April 27, 1884, with John Beck as presiding Elder. The members of the branch in the beginning were mostly those employed by the Bullion Beck and Champion mining companies. These mines for a number of years proved very profitable to the owners. In 1887, presiding Elder John Beck was called on a mission to Germany, and Robert Gillespie succeeded him as president of the Eureka Branch, which was organized into a regular bishop's ward June 15, 1893, with Peter Loutensock as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1900 by Daniel Connelly, who in 1908 was succeeded by Peter Borup, who in 1921 was succeeded by George Nephi Finch, who in 1927 was succeeded by Pearson H. Corbett, who in 1928 was succeeded by Jesse Osroe Webb, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Eureka Ward had 956 members, including 241 children. The total population of the Eureka Precinct was 3, 216 in 1930; of these 3,041 resided in Eureka.
