Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Evanston Ward

EVANSTON WARD, Woodruff Stake, Uinta Co., Wyoming, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the city of Evanston and vicinity. Evanston is an important railroad town on the Union Pacific Railroad situated on Bear River, 76 miles east of Ogden and 86 miles by nearest road northeast of Salt Lake City. The saints at Evanston own a fine modern meeting house, a brick building, centrally located in the town. Many of the brethren are engaged in various business enterprises, and others are the owners of farms in the vicinity.

Evanston, which is the headquarters of the Woodruff Stake of Zion, dates back to the building of the Union Pacific Railroad through that section of country in 1868, and when a round house and machine shops were built there in 1870 it became a railroad town and a shipping point of considerable importance. Among the first inhabitants of Evanston were a number of Latter-day Saints who in the fall of 1872 were organized as a branch of the Church by the presidency of the Bear Lake Stake of Zion, with William G. Burton as president. L. D. S. meetings were first held in hired halls.

On May 13, 1877, the Evanston Branch was organized as a. regular bishop's ward by the presidency of the Bear Lake Stake, with William G. Burton as Bishop. In the latter part of 1877 both the Evanston Ward and the Almy Ward, which had formerly belonged to the Bear Lake Stake, were transferred to the Summit Stake. This was done for the convenience of the saints residing in these places as the headquarters of the Summit Stake, Coalville, was much nearer to Evanston and Almy than Paris, Idaho, the headquarters of the Bear Lake Stake. Bishop Burton was succeeded in 1881 by James Brown, sen., who in 1882 was succeeded by Alfred I. Blackburn, who in 1883 was succeeded by James Brown, sen. (second term), who in 1915 was succeeded by Percy G. Matthews, who in 1925 was succeeded by Harold E. Brough, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Evanston Ward had 1,373 members, including 247 children. The total population of the town of Evanston was 3,075 in 1930.
