Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Evening and Morning Star (The)"

"EVENING AND MORNING STAR" (The) was the first periodical published by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As the early Elders of the Church progressed with their missionary labors in different parts of the United States, holding meetings, baptising and organizing branches, they soon discovered the need of suitable Church literature in the shape of books, pamphlets, tracts etc., not to speak of modern revelations in printed form, in addition to the Bible and the Book of Mormon. Hence, the authorities of the Church decided to establish a printing office and publish a periodical in the interest of the Church, and William W. Phelps, one of the early converts to the restored gospel who possessed literary ability, was called by the Prophet Joseph Smith to purchase a press and the necessary printing material in Cincinnati, Ohio, as he traveled from Kirtland, Ohio, to Independence, Jackson Co., Missouri, which place had been chosen the previous year as a gathering place for the saints. Elder Phelps made the necessary purchases, continued his journey to Missouri, and established himself as a printer in a two story brick building near the center of Independence, where he at once commenced to print sheets of the intended "Book of Commandments," or the revelations which the young Prophet up to that time had received; and in June, 1832, William W. Phelps issued from the printing office in Independence the first number of the "Evening and Morning Star". This first number consisted of an 8-page sheet, quarto size, the printing matter on each page measuring 8 1/4 by 11 inches. Thirteen other numbers of the periodical were published in Independence, the last number being dated June, 1833. The following month the printing office was destroyed by a mob, which with brutal force entered the building, broke the press, scattered the type and destroyed most of the printed matter. Thus ended the first attempt to publish a periodical advocating the principles of the gospel as preached by the Latter-day Saints.

The printing office at Independence was 120 miles further west than any other printing office in the United States. It is sometimes asserted that this printing office at Independence was destroyed by fire, but such was not the ease. The press and printing materials were otherwise partly destroyed and the building nearly reduced to a ruin by the mob.

In December, 1833, a L. D. S. Church printing office was established in Kirtland, Ohio (distant from Independence about 900 miles), where the publication of the "Evening and Morning Star" was recommenced by Oliver Cowdery. Ten numbers of the periodical, in addition to the 14 numbers published in Independence, Mo., were printed in Kirtland, Ohio, making 24 monthly numbers, or two volumes in all agregating 394 pages in its reprinted form. The first number of the periodical printed in Kirtland was dated December, 1833 and the last number September, 1834. As the 14 numbers printed at Independence only supplied a small list of subscribers, all the numbers of the "Evening and Morning Star" were reprinted in Kirtland, with smaller type and on an octavo sheet of paper, instead of on a quarto sheet, and the pages of the periodical in its changed form were reduced in size to about 4 1/2 by 8 1/2 inches of printed matter.

The main contents of the two volumes of the "Evening and Morning Star" were articles on Church doctrines, revelations as they had been received by the Prophet Joseph Smith, reports of Elders who labored as missionaries in different parts of the country, conference reports, statistics and miscellaneous matter. The "Star" proved a great help to the Elders and to all members of the Church and their friends, as it gave cheering reports about the missionaries who were advocating the principles of the restored gospel.
