Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Fairfield Branch, Lehi Stake

FAIRFIELD BRANCH, Lehi Stake, Utah Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in and near the village of Fairfield, which is situated in Cedar Valley about five miles south of Cedar Fort. The springs on which the village of Fairfield is situated are the source of a small creek which originally was known as South Creek. Fairfield is somewhat centrally located in Cedar Valley and is a better grazing country than a farming district.

Fairfield was first settled in the spring of 1855 by John Carson and others. Amos Fielding, well known in early Church history, was entrusted with the task of locating the settlement, but never moved his family into the valley. He, however, selected the place for a settlement and had a survey made of forty building lots and 40 five-acre lots for farming, in order to make room for forty families. The townsite constituted the southwest corner of the survey on the north side of the creek, about half a mile below the spring. The first settlers built a stone fort, getting rock for that purpose at a quarry situated near the mountains about three miles northwest of the site of the fort. The fort was four rods square and the walls ten feet high and three feet thick. The settlement was named Fairfield in the beginning, honoring Amos Fielding, the founder of the place. The first syllable "Fair" was chosen because of the beautiful location of the settlement, and the other syllable, "field," featured part of Amos Fielding's surname.

When the Johnston Army arrived in Utah and selected their camp at Fairfield, nearly all the saints evacuated the place in favor of the soldiers. (See Camp Floyd.) But when the soldiers took their departure in 1861-1862, Fairfield again became a little Mormon settlement (some of the settlers returning) and has continued so ever since. William Cunnington presided over the ecclesiastical affairs at Fairfield from the beginning until the "Move" in 1858, but after the settlers returned to their homes, John Carson became the presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1895 by Samuel D. Carson, who in 1897 was succeeded by Hans R. Peterson, who was succeeded in 1903 by Andrew Park, who soon afterwards moved to Idaho, when Fairfield became a branch of the Cedar Valley Ward.

At a meeting held in Fairfield May 20, 1923, the saints there were organized as an independent branch, with Ralph L. Dubois as presiding Elder. He presided over the Fairfield Branch Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the branch had 67 members, including 36 children.

Fairfield had 223 inhabitants in 1870, 168 in 1900, and 129 in 1930.
