Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Fairview

FAIRVIEW, North Sanpete Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the incorporated city of Fairview, which is situated on the Marysvale branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, six miles north of Mt. Pleasant, 29 miles northeast of Manti, the county seat, and 98 miles by rail southeast of Salt Lake City. Fairview is the center of a wealthy agricultural district and enjoys many advantages for climate, fertility of soil and beauty of location. Farming and sheepraising are the chief pursuits of the people. All kinds of small grains and hardy vegetables are raised in abundance. Fairview contains a bank, several stores, hotels and shops. It contains three splendid Latter-day Saint meeting houses, modern school buildings and many comfortable homes.

Fairview is one of the original eight Latter-day Saint settlements founded in Sanpete Valley, and dates back to 1859, when the place was settled by Ole C. Olsen, James Naylor Jones, Lindsay A. Brady, sen., Jehu Cox, jun., and others, at what was originally called North Bend. They built two log cabins in what is now the center of the city of Fairview. During the winter (1859-1860) these pioneer settlers quarried rock for the erection of a fort. The new settlement was called North Bend from the fact that the Sanpitch River at this point changes its course from a southerly to a more southwesterly direction. But when a post office subsequently was established, it was very properly changed to Fairview because of the excellent view had from this point of the Sanpete Valley looking southwest. In 1860 the inhabitants of Fairview were augmented by the arrival of many families, and since that year the population of the town has steadily increased. Cottonwood Creek was the first stream used by the settlers for irrigation purposes, but in 1860 the first ditch canal was dug conveying water from the Sanpitch River onto the lowlands lying west of that stream. A good crop of wheat, oats and potatoes was raised in 1860. A precinct was organized at Fairview in that year.

James M. Jones was the first presiding Elder in the new settlement. Pres. Brigham Young visited Fairview the first time in 1862. In 1864 Andrew Petersen succeeded James M. Jones as presiding Elder. During the years 1865 to 1867 the settlement suffered much because of the Black Hawk Indian War, and a number of brethren were killed and wounded by the savages in the immediate vicinity of Fairview. In 1866 the saints at Fairview were organized into a regular bishop's ward, with Amasa Tucker of Mt. Pleasant as Bishop. He presided until 1889, when Niels Larsen succeeded him as presiding Elder; he acted one year. In 1890 James C. Peterson was installed as Bishop of Fairview, who in 1913 was succeeded by Hans P. Hansen, who presided until June 20, 1921, when the Fairview Ward was divided into two wards, namely, the Fairview South and the Fairview North wards, which together on Dec. 31, 1930, had a total membership of 1,376, including 203 children. The total population of the Fairview Precinct in 1930 was 1,400, of which 1,120 resided within the corporate limits of Fairview City.
