Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Antwerp Conference

ANTWERP CONFERENCE, Belgium, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in the city of Antwerp (population about 1,000,000 in 1930) and vicinity. Antwerp is the English name for the large Belgium harbor city called Anvers by the French, and Antwerpen by the Flemish and Dutch.

Antwerp conference existed from January, 1913, to May, 1914, with Elders John W. Jones and Estel L. Wright presiding successively. It included the city of Antwerp in northern Belgium, and the cities of Breda and Middleburg in southern Holland.

Antwerp was known to Latter-day Saint missionaries at an early day, but is not specially mentioned in Church literature until September, 1888, when Elder Mischa Markow, a Serbian by birth, arrived in Antwerp, where he made the acquaintance of a family named Esselman. Through this family a number of persons joined the Church. Before returning to his native land, Elder Markow reported his labors in Antwerp to the presidency of the Swiss and German Mission. As early as January, 1891, there was a branch of the Church in Antwerp composed partly of German and Netherland saints, who had moved there from Holland. It was in this city that Paul Roelofs was baptized, Nov. 15, 1891, by Elder Jacob Grimm. Elder Roelofs subsequently filled two missions to the Netherlands and assisted in editing the mission paper, "De Ster," and also in publishing a hymn book in both the Dutch and French languages.

Elder Edwin Bennion, who became president of the Netherlands-Belgian Mission in May, 1893, labored in Antwerp during the years 1892 and 1893, Belgium having been added to the Netherlands Mission in 1891.

During the year 1892, Elder Henry G. Gelderblom published a Dutch hymn book in Antwerp, a small collection of sacred songs, the second one published in the mission.

During the World War (1914-1918) missionary work in Belgium was dormant. On August 27, 1914, a Sister Kleinman and four children arrived at Rotterdam from Antwerp. They had previously been advised by Pres. LeGrand Richards to come to Holland, they being, so far as was known, the only family of saints in Antwerp at that time.

In 1930 there were only a few saints in Antwerp who were visited occasionally by Elders of the French mission laboring in Brussels.
