Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Fairview Ward, Franklin Stake

FAIRVIEW WARD, Franklin Stake, Franklin Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district known as Fairview, lying north of Lewiston, Utah, and south of Preston, Idaho. The ward extends north and south five miles and from east to west four miles, bounded on the north by Preston and east by Whitney and Franklin wards; south it extends to the state line between Utah and Idaho, and west to Bear River. The center of the ward is the Fairview townsite, which is four miles by road west of Franklin, 3 1/2 miles northwest of the Lewiston center, in Utah, about six miles south of Preston, Idaho, and six miles in an air line southeast of Weston, Idaho. The gardens and farming lands of Fairview are mostly irrigated from Cub River, through the Lewiston Canal, which taps Cub River about six miles northeast of Franklin. A number of the farms are, however, irrigated from Bear River by pumping. As some of the crops will now mature without irrigation, dry-farming is carried on very successfully. Fairview has a fine brick meeting house, erected in 1926 at a cost of $35,000. It will seat about 400 people.

Fairview is thus named from the fact that its location commands a fair view of the Logan Temple, and nearly all of Cache Valley, both north and south. The first settler in that district of country now included in the Fairview Ward was Patterson Delos Griffith, who located a land claim on Bear River near the boundary line between Utah and Idaho, in the fall of 1869. Other settlers soon followed, and these settlers, who originally belonged to the Franklin and Lewiston wards, were organized into a branch of the Church in the fall of 1877 with James Bodily as presiding Elder. The branch was called Upper Lewiston, and included what is now Preston and Riverdale. The North Lewiston Branch was organized as a bishop's ward named Fairview July 20, 1884, with Heman Hyde as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1887 by Moroni W. Pratt, who in 1904 was succeeded by Edwin Bodily, who in 1919 was succeeded by William Harvey Wiser, who in 1920 was succeeded by Henry H. Rawlings, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Church membership of the Fairview Ward was 456, including 105 children. The total population of the Fairview Precinct was 500 in 1930.
