Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Fayette Ward

FAYETTE WARD, Gunnison Stake Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing within the limits of the Fayette Precinct, on both sides of the Sevier River. North the ward extends to the boundary line between Sanpete and Juab counties, east to the mountains which separate the ward from the Manti and Sterling precincts, south to the Gunnison Ward, and west to Millard County. Most of the inhabitants in the Fayette Ward are farmers and stockraisers. The headquarters of the ward is the village of Fayette, which is pleasantly situated on Warm Creek, near the west base of the Sanpitch Mountains and nearly a mile east of the Sevier River, five miles northwest of Gunnison and 20 miles by nearest road southwest of Manti, the county seat. On the west side of the Sevier is the neighborhood known locally as Dover, which also belongs to the Fayette Ward. Only a part of the people live in Fayette on the townsite, while the majority reside on their farms in a scattered condition. Warm Creek is a small stream heading in springs about one mile east of Fayette.

Fayette was settled in the spring of 1861 by Joseph Bartholomew and others. The first settlers located on the present site of Fayette and conducted the water from Warm Creek to their lands with but little difficulty. Later, water was obtained also through canals tapping the Sevier River at different points. For fear of Indians, the people of Fayette made temporary homes in Gunnison, but in the spring of 1862 Fayette was permanently re-settled, since which time it has been a flourishing little settlement, and as early as 1864 the little village contained 20 families.

The saints on Warm Creek were organized as a branch of the Church in 1862, with Branch Young as president. He acted under the direction of the Gunnison Ward bishopric and was succeeded in 1864 by John E. Metcalf, sen., who, after the Indian troubles in 1865-1867, was succeeded by John Bartholowmew as presiding Elder. The first meeting house (a small log building) was erected at Fayette in 1864. In 1866 the settlement was temporarily vacated because of the Black Hawk War, but the settlers soon returned to their own homes, after spending a few months in Gunnison. The present rock meeting house at Fayette dates back to 1874; it was dedicated Aug. 1, 1875. On Sept. 6, 1867, John Hay, a militia man belonging to Wm. L. Binder's company of Salt Lake City, was killed by Indians about a mile east of the settlement. That part of Fayette Ward now known as Dover was first settled in 1875 by the late John E. Forsgren, who, upon his own responsibility and in his own way, attempted to build a "city of Enoch," assisted by others from Santaquin, Utah County, Utah. These people commenced a canal and made other improvements, but failed in their scheme.

When the Sanpete Stake of Zion was organized July 4, 1877, the Fayette Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward with John Bartholowmew as Bishop. He presided 37 years, or until 1914, when he was succeeded by Archie M. Mellor, who in 1923 was succeeded by George M. Bartholomew, who in 1930 was succeeded by Harry L. Bartholomew, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, when the Church membership of the Fayette Ward was 242, including 61 children. The total population of the Fayette Precinct was 260 in 1930.
