Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Apostles

APOSTLES. In a revelation, given through Joseph the Prophet, in June, 1829, at Fayette, Seneca Co., New York, the Lord made known that twelve Apostles should be called in this dispensation (Doc. & Cov. Sec. 18). Nearly six years later, on Feb. 14, 1835, at a special meeting held in Kirtland, Ohio, Joseph the Prophet, in accordance with that revelation, blessed Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon to select 12 men who should constitute the Council of the Twelve Apostles. They were chosen by the Three Witnesses in the following order: Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, Orson Pratt, William Smith, Thomas B. Marsh, and Parley P. Pratt. Most of these brethren the previous year (1834) had proved their faithfulness and integrity to the Church as members of Zion's Camp, who journeyed from Kirtland, Ohio to Missouri and back, /b subject to much suffering and many privations. They were ordained to the Apostleship under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris as follows: Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball on Feb. 14, 1835; Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. McClellin, John F. Boynton, and William Smith, on the following day (Feb. 15th); Parley P. Pratt on Feb. 21st, and Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Pratt, who had been absent on missions in April, 1835. At a grand council held at Kirtland, Ohio, May 2, 1835, at which the First Presidency were in attendance, the Twelve were arranged according to their age, after which they stood as follows, commencing with the oldest; Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, William E. McLellin, Parley P. Pratt, Luke S. Johnson, William Smith, Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson.

Following are the names of the Apostles chosen later, as vacancies in the quorum have occurred: John E. Page, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, Willard Richards, Lyman Wight, Amasa M. Lyman, Ezra T. Benson, Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, Brigham Young, jun., Albert Carrington, Moses Thatcher, Francis M. Lyman, John Henry Smith, George Teasdale, Heber J. Grant, John W. Taylor, Marriner W. Merrill, Anthon H. Lund, Abraham H. Cannon, Matthias F. Cowley, Abraham Owen Woodruff, Rudger Clawson, Reed Smoot, Hyrum M. Smith, George Albert Smith, Charles W. Penrose, George F. Richards, Orson F. Whitney, David O. McKay, Anthony W. Ivins, Joseph F. Smith, jun., James E. Talmage, Stephen L Richards, Richard R, Lyman, Melvin J. Ballard and John A. Widtsoe.
