Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Florence

FLORENCE, Douglas Co., Nebraska, was once a flourishing little settlement built on the old site of Winter Quarters, six miles north of the city of Omaha and now (1930) a part of that municipality. In 1848, after many Latter-day Saints had resided about two years at Winter Quarters, those of the saints who did not emigrate to Great Salt Lake Valley that year were, through hostile pressure on the part of Indian agents, compelled to vacate Winter Quarters and move across the river into Pottawattamie County, Iowa, where they had already founded the town of Kanesville (afterwards Council Bluffs). After the evacuation of Winter Quarters the place reverted back to the Indians who became the owners of all the houses erected by the Mormons except a few small cabins which were taken across the river by their owners. In 1856, however, a company of organized settlers located a town on the old site, sold lots at a fabulous price expecting to make their new town, which they named Florence, a great commercial center. In that year (1856) Florence was described by Elder William H. Kimball as a village of promise situated on a beautiful site some 40 feet above high water mark on the west bank of the Missouri River, opposite the so-called Pigeon Valley. At this point the Missouri River was about 700 feet wide, perfectly clear of sand bars, snags and all other obstructions, with a rock bottom all the way across, with an island nearly in the middle of the stream and rock bound shores on both sides. Consequently, these permanent banks afforded decidedly the best steamboat landing and ferry point on the river. That year (1856) Iowa City (distance about 275 miles east of the Missouri River and the western terminus of the railroad) was made the outfitting place for the Latter-day Saints who crossed the plains that year, with the understanding that the new town of Florence would be the ideal place for perfecting the outfits to cross the plains and mountains to the new home of the saints in the Rocky Mountains. Thus we find that the five handcart companies of 1856 stopped at Florence to repair their handcarts and to rest a few days before the longer journey was commenced. Besides the five handcart companies, a number of wagon trains carrying L. D. S. emigrants crossed Iowa from Iowa City, via Fort Des Moines to Florence, which was made the main outfitting place for L. D. S. emigrants also during the years 1857, 1858, 1859, 1860, 1861, 1862 and 1863. During these years, Florence was a flourishing and growing town containing a bank, a number of stores and good residences, but being so close to the new city of Omaha, the city of Florence, notwithstanding the great efforts of its citizens to hold their own, soon had to yield to Omaha as a commercial center, and, as stated, in due course of time became part of Omaha. It is estimated that about 600 Latter-day Saint emigrants, including many of the exiles from Nauvoo, Illinois, were buried in the old Mormon cemetery at Florence.
