Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Fort Supply

FORT SUPPLY was a temporary settlement of the saints located between Willow Creek and Smith's Fork of Green River in what is now known as Uinta County, Wyoming, but which at that time was called Green River County, Utah. The fort was 12 miles south of Fort Bridger. Farming and stock-raising were the principal avocations of the inhabitants.

In 1853 Apostle Orson Hyde was called by the Church authorities to take a number of families and locate a settlement on Green River or on one of the tributaries of that stream, for the purpose of raising grain which could be turned into flour for the benefit of the incoming Latter-day Saint emigration. It was done as an experiment, for if wheat could be raised in that high altitude and food thus provided for the emigrants, it would save hauling flour and other necessities from Salt Lake City east to meet the emigrant companies.

Two distinct companies were called to settle near Fort Bridger. The first left Salt Lake City Nov. 2, 1853, in charge of Capt. John Nebeker, and the second company left said city Nov. 16, 1853, under the leadership of Capt. Isaac Bullock. The two companies joined their forces and located a settlement which they called Fort Supply on Willow Creek, a tributary of Smith's Fork of Green River, about two miles above the confluence of Smith's Fork and Willow Creek, and about 12 miles south of Fort Bridger. These pioneers built houses and made other improvements at once and raised their first crop in 1854. A better crop was raised in 1855, and in 1856 a number of other families were called from the older settlements in Utah to strengthen the pioneer colony of Fort Supply. The experiment of raising wheat in that high altitude proved a success, and the settlement, though experiencing hardships and some trouble with the Indians, promised a good future up to the fall of 1857, when both Fort Bridger and Fort Supply were abandoned because of the Johnston Army troubles, Fort Supply was never re-settled, and at present (1930) only traces of the old fort are left in the shape of stumps sticking out from the ground marking the outlines of the original fort.
