Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Forts

FORTS. From the time of the exodus from Nauvoo, Ill., in 1846, the Latter-day Saints have been accustomed to sojourn and locate settlements in Indian countries and in order to protect themselves against hostile savage tribes they learned early in their experience to erect forts and stockades as a protection against the red man. In traveling through Iowa in 1846 they became acquainted with Fort Montrose and Fort Desmoines, and in passing through what are now the states of Nebraska and Wyoming, they became well acquainted with Fort Kearney, Fort Laramie, Fort Bridger and a number of smaller forts or fortified trading posts along the route.

On their first arrival in Great Salt Lake Valley they found it necessary, owing to the presence of Indian tribes, to commence their parent settlement with the erection of a fort on the present site of Salt Lake City. This original fort, containing ten acres, was soon extended or enlarged so that it contained four ten-acre blocks.

When the pioneers of Utah, early in 1848, settled what is now Weber County, Utah, they found already in existence the so-called "Goodyear Fort", constructed by Miles Goodyear, a trapper and hunter, some years previously. This fort being purchased by Capt. James Brown of Mormon Battalion fame in January, 1849, was considerably enlarged and improved by the new inhabitants, who soon afterwards erected another fort nearby called "Brown's Fort" or Brownville. When the city of Ogden was founded in 1850 and the settlers extended their land holdings to the north side of the Ogden River, "Farr's Fort" came into existence and a little later also "Mound Fort" and "Bingham's Fort."

Provo, the third important settlement founded by the Latter-day Saints in the Rocky Mountains, was commenced early in 1849 by the erection of Fort Utah on the Provo River, about two miles west of the present center of Provo.

When later the same year the first pioneers of Sanpete County located the city of Manti, they fortified themselves south of what is now known as "Temple Hill", and when the first settlers in Tooele Valley commenced the building of Tooele City they erected their cabins in fort style on the so-called "Settlement Creek". When George A. Smith and his company of colonists traveled southward nearly 300 miles to locate a settlement in Little Salt Lake Valley, they commenced the present city of Parowan by erecting a fort on Center Creek, named Fort Louise, in honor of Louise Beeman, the first woman in the Church known to have entered into the order of plural marriage.

As the Indians, as a rule, remained friendly to the Mormon settlers for some time, a number of new and smaller settlements were commenced both north and south of the parent colony without the apparent necessity of building forts, but as the so-called "Walker War" broke out in 1853, the advice from the general authorities of the Church was to "fort in." This counsel was heeded in most of the settlements by surrounding a block or two of the different town surveys with a wall built of sun-dried brick or mud, or a timber stockade made of posts stuck in the ground and rising to an elevation of from ten to fifteen feet. This process was repeated again during the "Black Hawk War" in 1865 to 1867. In some instances these forts were built around the public square of a town or the square containing the meeting (or school) house. By studying in detail the history of the Latter-day Saints during the first twenty years of their pioneer life in the mountains, we find that nearly every settlement of the saints had more or less to do with fortifying against possible attacks of the savages.

As a distinct class of forts erected by the Latter-day Saints may be mentioned Fort Supply, near Fort Bridger, founded in 1853, and Fort Limhi, founded in 1855 as the first Anglo-Saxon settlements in Wyoming and Idaho respectively.

The Elk Mountain Mission, which was commenced by building a fort in what is now Grand County, Utah, Cove Fort, in Millard County, Winsor Castle at Pipe Springs, Fort Santa Clara in southern Utah, Fort Harmony, Fort Sanford (near Panguitch), Fort Kanara, used as a military fort in 1863, Fort Cameron in Beaver County and numerous others elsewhere might be added to the list. These forts consisted largely of adobe or log cabins, built around a square with the doors and windows facing inward, while the rear walls formed the outer portion of the fort and were usually pierced with port holes. The roofs were generally constructed of hand-sawed lumber puncheons covered with mud, and the floors were often made of the same material. The windows were in the earlier days covered in many cases with "factory," or coarse cloth, instead of glass.

As the number of settlers increased, they began to spread out and, having secured farming land, erected log cabins or adobe or stone houses on their holdings. A city plat was then usually surveyed and most of these first settlers were given a city lot on which to build a home. In many cases the houses in the forts were moved on to the city lots, and when finally abandoned, the old forts fell into decay. An effort is being made at this time to place markers on the sites of these old forts.
