Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Franklin Stake of Zion

FRANKLIN STAKE OF ZION, Franklin Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the south part of Franklin County. It extends northward to the Oneida Stake and east to the Wasatch Mountains. South it extends to the boundary line between Idaho and Utah, and west to a range of mountains which separate it from the Malad Stake. The whole district of country within the limits of the stake is in the north end of Cache Valley, which valley is partly in Utah and partly in Idaho. The Franklin Stake of Zion consists (1930) of the following organized bishop's wards: Cedarville, Fairview, Franklin, Linrose, Mapleton, Preston 5th, Preston 6th, Weston and Whitney. The headquarters of the stake are in Preston, Franklin Co., Idaho, where stake conferences and union meetings are usually held. In 1930 there was no regular stake house for the use of the stake presidency or High Council, but rooms were hired in the upper story of the Barton Business Block which had been remodeled temporarily for the use of the stake. The stake conferences are generally held in the commodious Opera House in Preston, in which building also the saints of the Oneida Stake hold most of their stake conferences. This building is now generally designated as the Joint Stake House and is used by the Franklin and Oneida stakes.

That part of Cache Valley which now is included in the Franklin Stake originally constituted a part of the Cache Stake of Zion, but when the Oneida Stake was organized in 1884, it became a part of that stake and thus remained until June 6, 1920, when (at a conference of the Oneida Stake held at Preston, attended by Apostles David O. McKay and Richard R. Lyman) the Oneida Stake was divided, and that part of the same which contained Cedarville, Fairview, Franklin, Mapleton, Preston 1st, Preston 2nd, Preston 5th, Weston, and Whitney wards, and the Roosevelt section of Dayton was taken from the Oneida Stake and organized into 3 new stake of Zion named Franklin, in honor of the late Apostle Franklin D. Richards. The town of Franklin, founded by the Latter-day Saints in 1860, the oldest Anglo-Saxon settlement in what is now the state of Idaho, was also named in honor of Apostle Franklin D. Richards. Samuel W. Parkinson was chosen as president of the new Franklin Stake of Zion, with Charles D. Goaslind as his first and Walter K. Barton as second counselor. In 1922 First Counselor Chas. D. Goaslind moved to Salt Lake City, and Second Counselor Walter K. Barton was promoted to first counselor, and Leonidas A. Mecham chosen as second counselor. Pres. Samuel W. Parkinson moved away from the stake, and on Nov. 27, 1927, Walter K. Barton, who had acted as first counselor to Pres. Parkinson, was chosen as president of the Franklin Stake, with George T. Benson as first and Carl H. Carlson as second counselor. These three brethren acted in the positions named Dec. 31, 1930. Jesse P. Rich was the first stake clerk; he was succeeded in 1921 by Jesse T. Wilson, who in 1923 was succeeded by Joshua Rallison, who acted at the close of 1930. On that date the Church membership of the Franklin Stake was 4,469, including 970 children.
