Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Freedom Ward, Star Valley Stake

FREEDOM WARD, Star Valley Stake, Lincoln Co., Wyoming, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the central and western part of Salt River Valley, partly in Wyoming and partly in Idaho. The valley is about 20 miles long and from two to eight miles wide. It extends from the low mountains which separate it from Star Valley on the south to the point where Salt River empties into the south fork of Snake River on the north. The village of Freedom is situated on the boundary line between the states of Wyoming and Idaho, Main Street running north and south through the center of the town being the state line. The center of the village is Mile Post No. 138. Freedom townsite, surveyed into ten-acre blocks with streets six rods wide, is situated on the west bank of Salt River, a short distance above the point where Tin Cup Creek empties into it, and near the mountains west of the valley. It is about 22 miles northwest of Afton by nearest road.

Freedom was first settled in June, 1879, by Latter-day Saints, some of the early settlers hailing from St. Charles, Bear Lake Co., Idaho. Stock-raising was the principal occupation of the first settlers, but no farming to any extent was undertaken until 1885. Arthur Benjamin Clark, who arrived in the valley in 1886, was appointed the first presiding Elder in the Freedom settlement in December, 1886. He acted in that capacity until June 17, 1891, when the Freedom Branch was organized as the Freedom Ward with Arthur B. Clark as Bishop. He acted in that capacity until 1894, when he was succeeded by Osborn Low, who in 1899 was succeeded by Eugene Weber, who acted as presiding Elder until 1900, when Aaron F. Bracken was chosen as Bishop of the Freedom Ward. He presided in that capacity until 1919, when he was succeeded by Carl Robinson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 386 members, including 77 children.
