Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Arco Ward

ARCO WARD, Lost River Stake, Butte Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Arco and vicinity. Arco is a railroad town on the Mackay Branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad, situated in the lower end of the Big Lost River Valley, nine miles southeast of Moore, 26 miles southeast of Mackay, and 60 miles northwest of Blackfoot. The majority of the saints reside in a scattered condition in the country districts surrounding Arco. Parts of the lands in the ward are irrigated and other parts dry-farmed. Arco Ward extends north to Lost River Ward and south to the desert indefinitely. Arco Ward has a fine brick meeting house, built in 1917, at a cost of about $9,000.

In 1878 a trading post known as the Kennedy Crossing, also called the Lower Crossing of Lost River, was established about four miles south of the present town of Arco. The little hamlet consisted of a store and a boarding house for the accommodation of travelers. In 1879 a mail station was established about three miles below the present Arco, on the road running from Blackfoot to Salmon City. In due course of time everything was moved down to the Kennedy Crossing, which place was then called Arco. In 1901 a railroad was built from Blackfoot to Mackay. When Otto B. Fleischer arrived in Arco in April, 1883, the Lost River Valley was a howling desert, with nothing in the shape of human habitation except the Arco mail station. From that time, however, settlers began to arrive, among whom were several Latter-day Saints. They were visited by missionaries from the Northwestern States Mission, who organized a Sunday school in the valley. A small log school house was built in 1898. In 1903 the saints in Arco and vicinity, who hitherto had belonged to the Lost River Branch, were organized into a separate branch with Ephraim Kidman as presiding Elder. Until August, 1912, all the saints in the Big Lost River Valley belonged to the Lost River or Moore Ward, but on Aug. 11, 1912, that ward was divided, and the saints residing in the south part, or lower end of said ward, were organized as a separate Ward called Arco, with William B. Lowry as Bishop. He was succeeded in that capacity in 1919 by Henry M. Mickelsen, who in 1920 was succeeded by Thomas Chamberlain, who in 1923 was succeeded by John A. Johnson, who in 1930 was succeeded by Ira Wayne Boyer, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Arco Ward had a membership of 286, including 60 children. The total population of the Arco Precinct was 834 in 1930, of which 572 resided in the Arco village.
