Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Garcia

GARCIA (Colonia Garcia), Juarez Stake, Chihuahua, Mexico, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in a beautiful circular valley situated on an eastern slope near the top of the Sierra Madre Mountains. The private residences of Garcia are mostly pioneer dwellings built of adobes, logs or sawed timber. The ward has a meeting house, an adobe building, with a seating capacity of about 200 persons. Water for culinary purposes and also for irrigating gardens is flumed for a distance of about two miles from a reservoir built on Garcia Creek, a tributary of the Casas Grandes River. The valley in which Garcia is located contains about 1,300 acres of land surrounded by timber-covered mountains. Garcia is ten miles south of Pacheco, 38 miles, by nearest road, southwest of Juarez, 35 miles southwest of Pierson, the nearest railroad station on the Mexican Northwestern Railroad, and about 36 miles east northeast of Chuichupa. Garcia manufactures and ships considerable lumber cut from timber which grows on the property of the settlers. The Garcia townsite is three miles square with railroad-owned land on all sides. The colonists rent their pasture land from said company.

Alonzo L. Farnsworth and wife (Annie D. Farnsworth), who located in Colonia Garcia in 1894, were the first L. D. S. settlers on the land which later became the flourishing settlement of Garcia. Other settlers, who formerly belonged to the Pacheco Ward, followed. As the settlers increased in number, they were given a branch organization Dec. 11, 1895, with John T. Whetton as presiding Elder. Land was purchased by the Mexican Colonization and Agricultural Company for the settlers from Mr. Telieforo Garcia, a former owner of the ranch, in whose honor the settlement was named. Garcia Ward was organized March 9, 1898, with John T. Whetton as Bishop. He presided until July, 1912, when on account of the Mexican revolution the saints left Mexico.

Garcia was resettled in 1917 and the ward reorganized with Lester B. Farnsworth as Bishop. He acted until 1928, when he was succeeded by James E. Whetton, who in 1930 was succeeded by Elmer David Farnsworth. The ward membership on Dec. 31, 1930, was 149, including 48 children.
