Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Garfield Stake of Zion

GARFIELD STAKE OF ZION consists of Latter-day Saints residing in Piute and Garfield counties, Utah, and in 1930 had seven organized bishop's wards and one independent branch. The wards are Antimony, Circleville, Escalante North, Escalante South, Junction, Kingston and Widtsoe and the branch is named Boulder. The headquarters of the stake in 1930 were at Antimony, where the stake president resided. The settlements named are scattered so that the distances between the different wards are of considerable length, and mountain ranges have to be crossed in order to reach them all. Most of the settlements are within the Great Interior Basin, while two of them are on the Green River slope. Nearly all the inhabitants of the Garfield Stake are Latter-day Saint farmers and stockraisers. The settlements on the Sevier River are located at a high altitude, while Escalante and Boulder are situated on a lower level, hence, the products raised in the different localities are of many varieties.

The Garfield Stake of Zion came into existence on Aug. 29, 1920, when the Panguitch Stake was divided and its eastern and northern parts were organized as the Garfield Stake, thus named in honor of the late Pres. James A. Garfield. The new stake was organized with the following settlements, which had formerly constituted a part of the Panguitch Stake, to-wit: Circleville, Junction and Kingston, in Piute County; Escalante, Marion and Widtsoe, in Garfield County, all organized bishop's wards, and the Boulder Branch in Garfield County, with a total population of 2,659, including children, grouped into 509 families. The stake at its organization included nearly all of Piute County, and the east part of Garfield County. Charles E. Rowan, jun., was chosen as president of the new stake, with Marion King as his first and Allen Cameron as his second counselor. First Counselor Marion King moved to Manti, Utah, on account of poor health, and in 1922 Allen Cameron was promoted to first counselor, and Thomas A. King chosen as second counselor. First Counselor Allen Cameron also moved away and on May 26, 1924, Thomas Arthur King was promoted to first counselor and Joseph Ipson (Bishop of the Junction Ward) was chosen as second counselor. Charles E. Rowan, jun., presided Dec. 31, 1930, with Thomas Arthur King as first and Joseph Ipson as second counselor. Benjamin L. Matthews, who was chosen stake clerk in the beginning, still acted in that capacity in 1930. The Church membership of the Garfield Stake Dec. 31, 1930, was 2,577, including 586 children. Among the Priesthood was one Patriarch, namely, Ernest A. Griffin.
