Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Garland Ward

GARLAND WARD, Bear River Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Box Elder County centrally located in Bear River Valley, west of Malad River, extending north and south four miles. Northward the ward extends to Riverside, eastward to Malad River, southward to Tremonton and westward to the mountains. The town of Garland, the headquarters of the Bear River Stake, is situated immediately west of the Malad River, 8 1/2 miles, by nearest road, northwest of Deweyville, 12 miles northwest of Bear River City, and 23 miles by way of Corinne, northwest of Brigham City. The sugar factory belonging to the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company has contributed much to the success of the settlement.

Most of the extensive tract of country lying west of Bear River in the Bear River Valley was for many years used by the people of Brigham City and other settlements as grazing land. No real attempt was made to settle there until 1890 when the Bothwell Canal was contemplated and began to promise success, when a number of brethren, seeking homes, took up land claims in that part of the valley, relying upon the Bothwell Canal for water with which to irrigate their farms. Among the first settlers was David E. Manning, who located with his family in 1890. Other settlers followed in 1891 and 1892, and, in the fall of 1893 the saints who had settled northwest of Bear River City were organized as a branch of the Church called Sunset, with Walter L. Grover as presiding Elder. As the settlers continued to increase, the Sunset Branch was organized as the Sunset Ward Nov. 15, 1898, with Walter L. Grover as Bishop. Later, when the question of a post office was under consideration, the name of Sunset Ward was changed to that of Garland. The building of a sugar factory in Garland in 1903 was the means of bringing that part of the Bear River Flat into prominence, and a new village sprang up three-quarters of a mile west of where the sugar factory now stands. In 1904 the Garland Ward was divided and the east part of the same organized as the East Garland Ward.

A beautiful stake tabernacle, dedicated Dec. 13, 1914, was erected in Garland, which place since has been the headquarters of the Bear River Stake.

Bishop Walter L. Grover was succeeded as Bishop of Garland Ward in 1908 by Arthur Capener, who in 1917 was succeeded by Charles Munns, who in 1927 was succeeded by Wilford W. Richards, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Garland Ward had 1,044 members, including 138 children. The total population of the Garland Precinct was 1,234 in 1930; of these, 824 resided in the city of Garland.
