Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Genoa

GENOA, Nance Co., Nebraska, was a settlement founded by Latter-day Saints in the spring of 1857. In the fall of 1856 Pres. Brigham Young took a contract for carrying the U. S. mail between Salt Lake City and the Missouri River, for which purpose a company known as the B. Y. X. Company was organized. In connection with this contract it was contemplated to make temporary settlements of saints along the route of travel and Erastus Snow, who at that time presided over the different branches of the Church in the East and had his headquarters at St. Louis, Mo., was appointed to superintend the location of some of these temporary settlements, among which was one on Beaver Creek, near the junction of that stream with Loup Fork. About sixty saints traveling from St. Louis, Mo., arrived at Florence in April, 1857, and Wm. C. Martindale, an Elder in the Church who had labored as a missionary in the Southern States, purchased oxen for the company which were broken to haul wagons to Beaver Creek. But prior to the arrival of this company, Nathan Davis and others had gone ahead under the direction of Andrew Cunningham with 17 men and 4 wagons, and when the St. Louis company arrived, he and others had already spent some time surveying a townsite. The pioneer settlers immediately commenced to plow and put in grain in the spring of 1857. They also established a steam saw mill in a cottonwood grove below the settlement on Loup Fork from which the settlers obtained lumber, and they also erected a meeting house of cottonwood logs. Up to June, 1857, the settlers had enclosed about 750 acres of land on Beaver Creek, near the old ford, and plowed and planted 200 acres.

The new town, which was named Genoa, was located on a slight eminence three-fourths of a mile north of the ford, and laid out in blocks of ten acres with eight lots 18x9 rods to the block. The streets, four rods wide, crossed each other at right angles. Genoa was about 102 miles from Florence and is now a station on a branch of the Union Pacific Railroad, 103 miles west of Omaha.

At the time that Genoa was founded in the spring of 1857, there was only one house between Florence on the Missouri River and the new settlement, and that lonely house, located on the Elkhorn River, belonged to an Indian trader. Soon after Genoa was founded, the citizens of the place erected a liberty pole on which they hoisted the flag ("Stars and Stripes.") Apostles John Taylor and Erastus Snow, en route for the "Valley," spent the 4th of July, 1857, in Genoa, Elder Taylor delivering an oration while standing in his carriage. During the visit of these Apostles Brother Alburn Allen, one of the handcart missionaries en route for Canada, was stopped temporarily and appointed to preside at Genoa. Brother Henry Peck, one of the Genoa brethren, furnished the handcart missionaries going east with 400 pounds of flour, besides other cereals and vegetables.

When the missionaries were called home early in 1858 on account of the Johnston Army troubles, Album Allen returned to Salt Lake Valley with a number of the saints. Others had already left the place for the mountains. For a short time after that, Joel Johnson, and, still later, Wm. Poppleton, one of the original settlers of Genoa, were appointed to preside over the settlement. The latter took charge until the place was entirely abandoned by Latter-day Saints. During the life of the settlement as a Mormon town, meetings were held regularly on Sundays and Thursday nights and the settlement could boast of a good choir.
