Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Georgetown Ward, Nevada Stake

GEORGETOWN WARD, Nevada Stake, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in the Steptoe Valley, White Pine Co., Nev. The center of the ward was about three miles north of the present city of Ely.

Georgetown was one of the three settlements founded by the Latter-day Saints in White Pine County, Nev., on ranch land ceded to the Church in 1897, in lieu of other property escheated by the federal government of the United States in 1887. A company, operating under the title of the "Nevada Land and Livestock Company," was organized and opportunities given to settlers to locate on townsites surveyed for the purpose. Georgetown was named in honor of George Q. Cannon (first counselor to Pres. Wilford Woodruff), a man of keen business ability who was associated with the enterprise. Morten Petersen of Moroni, Sanpete Co., Utah, made the first purchase of land in the vicinity in February, 1898, and with him came Stephen Ballinger and Wilford Draper of Freedom, Sanpete County. Soon afterwards, Edward E. Crips, who had resided temporarily at Ely, arrived on the townsite, followed by George F. Morley of Moroni, Utah, and his two sons, James Orlando and Isaac. These settlers immediately commenced to make improvements and build houses on the townsite. They made a canal, enlarged former water ditches and conveyed water on to their land from Murray (or Ely) Creek.

As more settlers arrived, meetings, conducted by George F. Morley, were held in the old ranch house, but in 1899 a log school house was erected, which was then used for all public purposes. George F. Morley acted under the direction of the bishopric of the White Pine Ward, of which Georgetown constituted a part, until 1901, when the parent ward was divided into three wards, namely, Georgetown, Preston and Lund. Pres. George F. Morley was ordained Bishop of the Georgetown Ward with Andrew Peterson and Erastus Sörensen as his counselors. This bishopric remained intact until the settlement was broken up in 1903, owing to the water rights owned by the settlers being purchased by mining companies which operated in the vicinity. There never were more than 25 families of saints at Georgetown.
