Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

German-Austrian Mission

GERMAN-AUSTRIAN MISSION (The) comprises the Republic of /b Austria and the eastern part of Germany, or that part of the German Republic lying east of an imaginary line beginning just east of Rostock on the shore of the Baltic Sea, thence running southward to Kof, then curving below Kof to the German-Czecho-Slovakian frontier; thence the German-Czechian and German-Austrian border constitutes the dividing line which continues from the most southerly point on the German-Austrian border directly southward. The mission is divided into 17 districts, or conferences, namely, Berlin, Breslau, Chemnitz, Dresden, Gorlitz, Hindenburg, Königsberg, Leipzig, Masuren, Plauen, Schneidermuhl, Spreewald, Magdeburg, Stettin, Weimar and Zwickau in Germany, and Vienna in Austria.

On May 7, 1925, the Swiss and German Mission was divided, eight conferences in the eastern part, namely, Königsberg, Breslau, Stettin, Berlin, Leipzig, Chemnitz, Dresden and Vienna, with a Church population of 6,125, being taken from the Swiss and German Mission to form a new mission to be known as the German-Austrian Mission, with Hugh J. Cannon as president. Pres. Cannon was succeeded in 1926 by Hyrum W. Valentine, and during the latter's administration (on July 24, 1929) the area of the mission was somewhat diminished by the organization of the Czecho-Slovak Mission, with Arthur Gaeth, a former missionary in the German-Austrian Mission, as president. In August, 1929, Pres. Valentine was succeeded by Edward P. Kimball, who in 1930 was succeeded by Oliver H. Budge. On Dec. 31, 1930, the German-Austrian Mission had a total membership of 7,431, including 154 Elders, 197 Priests, 218 Teachers, 398 Deacons, 5,523 lay members and 941 children. One hundred and thirty-eight Elders from Zion were laboring in the mission, and also one sister (wife of Pres. Budge). There were also 13 local missionaries, including two sisters, who devoted their entire time to missionary work.
