Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Gibraltar Mission

GIBRALTAR MISSION, Spain. At a special conference held in Great Salt Lake City Aug. 28, 1852, Elders Edward Stevenson and Nathan T. Porter were called on a mission to Gibraltar, the place of Elder Stevenson's nativity. These two Elders took leave of their wives, children and friends in Utah Sept. 16, 1852, and crossed the plains with a company of Elders, who arrived at the Missouri River Nov. 1, 1852. There Elders Stevenson and Porter, after selling their animals, embarked at St. Joseph, Mo., Nov. 10, 1852, for St. Louis, where they arrived on the 15th and thence continued the journey by way of Cincinnati, Cleveland and Dunkirk, to New York, arriving there Nov. 6th. Together with other Elders they crossed the Atlantic in the sailing vessel "American Union", which sailed from New York Nov. 17, 1852, and arrived at Liverpool Jan. 5, 1853. From Liverpool the two Elders (Stevenson and Porter) continued the journey Jan. 12, 1853, and traveled to Southampton, where they took passage on the steamship "Iberia" for Gibraltar, via the coast of Spain and Portugal.

The brethren arrived at their destination March 7, 1853, and began preaching the gospel and visiting Elder Stevenson's friends, of whom they, after a lapse of 25 years, found only a few remaining. Elder Stevenson attended Methodist meetings, but was forbidden to hold public meetings, either in apartments or in the open air, without permission from the governor. On the other hand, Elder Stevenson was summoned on March 15, 1853, to meet at the Colonial secretary's office, where he was subjected to a close interrogation as to the nature of his mission. Instead of being permitted to do missionary work, he was abused in various ways and accused of not appearing in true colors, when he, instead of introducing himself as a Mormon, said he represented the Latter-day Saints. Elder Stevenson's application to the American Consul, Mr. Sprague, was equally fruitless, though that officer promised to help him all he could. He appeared before his Lordship Mr. Paget, police magistrate, who gave him permission to remain in Gibraltar, but emphasized the fact that if he was caught preaching in any way, he would immediately be taken prisoner.

Elders Stevenson and Porter left a few tracts in the police office but were only allowed to say a few words. They then proceeded to the summit of the Gibraltar Rock, to their private retreat, which they had named Mount Edward, and entered their complaint to a "much higher court", asking the Lord to guide them in their efforts. They returned to their lonely room, a small apartment which they had hired for $2 per month. On March 19, 1853, the Elders distributed tracts, and before night 200 of these were scattered throughout the garrison. Elder Porter, being an American, obtained permission from the American Consul, Mr. Sprague, to remain for 15 days, but if he was found preaching he would be put in prison. Elder Porter left Gibraltar April 1, and arrived at Southampton, England, June 6, 1853, leaving Elder Stevenson to continue the work in Gibraltar alone. Elder Stevenson distributed tracts and soon won the hearts of two families, and baptized a dockyard policeman. On May 4th he was arrested and marched to the guard-house as a prisoner; he soon began preaching to the guards in the room, where there were several men, and the officers in charge finding out that Elder Stevenson was about to convert the guard released him and Elder Stevenson afterwards sold some books to the guard. Continuing his labors, Elder Stevenson baptized two persons June 28, 1853. Finally on Sept. 29th, 1853, he received an official order to appear before the police magistrate, Mr. Paget, where he, after being closely questioned, was released on bonds. On Oct. 28, 1853, Elder Thomas Obray called on Elder Stevenson, being on his way to Zion from the Malta Mission. Bro. Stevenson petitioned the governor for permission to deliver eight lectures on specified subjects, but the petition was denied.

Continuing his labors, Elder Stevenson baptized a few more persons and organized a branch of the Church Jan. 23, 1854, containing 10 members. On July 5th, 1854, the Gibraltar Mission numbered 18 persons, including 1 Seventy, 1 Elder, 1 Priest and 1 Teacher, but six of the members had recently left the mission, mostly for Asia, with the British army. Elder Stevenson had not been allowed to preach a single sermon publicly during his stay in Gibraltar; he was not even allowed to visit some of the brethren. Sometimes he was obliged to desist from private teaching. Soon after this Elder Stevenson left Gibraltar, returning to England.

Thus ended the attempt to open up a permanent mission on the Rock of Gibraltar, although the garrison there was British, representing a country where there was religious liberty. No further attempt has since been made to preach the gospel at Gibraltar, as far as is known.
