Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Glendale Ward, Kanab Stake

GLENDALE WARD, Kanab Stake, Kane Co., Utah, consists of the saints residing in the upper end of Long Valley, most of them living in the village of Glendale, which is pleasantly situated on the east fork of the Rio Virgen, which runs through Long Valley. The village is regularly laid off in blocks 30 rods square, with streets six rods wide. Long Valley, at the point where Glendale is situated, is about half a mile wide. On the east, adjacent to the village, are rolling hills, the higher mountains being on the west. The surrounding country is excellent for grazing purposes. The ward has a fine meeting house, a good school house, a tithing office, a social hall, and a cooperative store. Glendale is three miles northeast of Orderville, and 26 miles, by nearest road, northwest of Kanab, the headquarters of the stake.

Glendale, originally called Berryville, was first settled in the spring of 1864 by John Berry and family and others. A townsite was surveyed on which the early settlers built several log cabins. A primitive water-power mill was also erected. In 1865 other settlers arrived in Long Valley, most of them being called from other places, by the Church Authorities, to strengthen Berryville and the lower settlement Winsor (now Mount Carmel), the Indians, at that time, being on the warpath. In the fall of 1865 a stockade was built at Glendale as a protection against the Indians.

In the summer of 1866 all the settlements in Kane County, including Berryville, were vacated because of Indian troubles, and the exiled saints made temporary homes in St. George and other places. During the Indian troubles two men and one woman, namely, Robert Berry and his wife Isabella, and Joseph Berry, an unmarried man, were killed by Indians, on Short Creek. Both Berryville and Winsor remained vacated, so far as white settlers were concerned, till the spring of 1871, when the settlements on the Muddy, now in Nevada, were broken up, and most of the people from that locality settled in Long Valley. Among these was Royal James Cutler. A new meeting house was built in 1884.

The first settlers of Berryville arrived as an organization from Saint Thomas on the Muddy with James Leithead as Bishop, and he took charge, together with his counselors, in Long Valley from the beginning in 1871. Brother Leithead was succeeded in 1874 by Warren M. Johnson (presiding Elder), who was succeeded by George Baker. In 1877 the Glendale Ward was organized with James Leithead (serving a second term) as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1879 by Royal James Cutler, who died Aug. 3, 1894, and was succeeded by Moses David Harris, who moved away in 1900, and James W. Watson was then appointed presiding Elder. Later in 1900 Elder Watson was succeeded by Royal J, Cutler, jun., who in 1908 was succeeded by James S. Carpenter, who in 1913 was succeeded by Joseph H. Swapp, who in 1919 was succeeded by Joseph Walter Hopkins, who died Jan. 22, 1926, and was succeeded by Charles C. Anderson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Glendale Ward had a membership of 246, including 53 children.
