Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Arizona Temple

ARIZONA TEMPLE is the ninth temple built by the Latter-day Saints and the seventh erected in the United States; the other two are in Canada and Hawaii, respectively.

A site for a temple having been selected at Mesa, Maricopa, Co., Arizona, the ground was dedicated Nov. 28, 1921, by Pres. Heber J. Grant. Construction work was commenced April 25, 1922, and the building dedicated by Pres. Heber J. Grant Oct. 23, 1927. This temple is of strictly fireproof construction, modern in plan, rectangular in shape, and designed in the American-Colonial style. It is built with an independent reinforced concrete frame of columns, beams, floor slabs, and roof. The exterior walls are made of brick with terra cotta facing.

Terraces and a low annex forming the base of the temple, together with engaged columns in the upper portion, give an imposing appearance to the structure. The annex is formed with small building units at the corners of the temple proper and between these are open courts on the east, north and south sides. Colonnades are formed here through which. a fine view is obtained of the temple and grounds. Between the columns are placed ornamental iron railings and gates separating the grounds and courts. In the courts and surrounding grounds an abundance of flowers, shrubs and trees are planted.

At the four corners of the temple, in the frieze portion of the cornice, are sculptural panels depicting the gathering of Israel from all nations in this dispensation. On the interior walls are some splendid mural paintings and in the baptismal room, which is finished in beautifully colored faience tiles, is the baptismal font which rests on the backs of twelve life-size sculptured oxen.

The exterior of the temple proper measures 81x105 feet and rises three stories high. The entire building including the annex is 128x184 feet. The estimated cost of the structure is $800,000.
