Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Gold Discovery

GOLD DISCOVERY in California. In September, 1847, about 40 discharged members of the Mormon Battalion /b arrived at Sutter's Fort on the American River in search of employment, having been warned by a message from Pres. Brigham Young that food would be scarce in Salt Lake Valley that winter. Mr. Sutter and his partner, Mr. James W. Marshall, were contemplating the erection of a saw mill and were glad to secure skilled men, who were willing to work in any capacity and able to direct the labors of the Indians attached to the camp. A mill race seven or eight miles long was dug, which was completed in January, 1848. In the tail race at the base of the mill, on Jan. 24, 1848, Mr. Marshall discovered some yellow metal, which he showed to a few of the brethren and the first recorded statement in regard to the discovery of gold in California is from the journal of Henry W. Bigler, one of the Battalion men, who wrote under date of Jan. 24, 1848: "This day some kind of metal was found in the tailrace that looks like gold." On Jan. 30th he wrote: "Our metal has been tried and proves to be gold * * We have picked up more than a hundred dollars worth last week." (See Mormon Island and also Life of a Pioneer, p. 96.)

This discovery of gold in California stirred the whole civilized world, and thousands of gold-seekers passed through Salt Lake City en route for the gold fields and brought to the inhabitants who were struggling for an existence in the Valley a liberal supply of clothing and dry goods which they exchanged with the people for fresh horses and cattle and provisions. Thus was fulfilled a prediction made by Heber C. Kimball early in 1849, at a time when the saints scarcely knew where to look for the next crust of bread or for rags to hide their nakedness, that, within a short time, "states goods" would be sold in the streets of Great Salt Lake City cheaper than in New York and that the people should be abundantly supplied with food and clothing. (Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 401; Journal of Discourses, Vol. 10: 247.)
