Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Grafton Ward

GRAFTON WARD, Zion Park Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in the little settlement of Grafton situated on the south side of the Rio Virgen, two miles west of the town of Rockville, to which ward the saints of Grafton belonged for many years. An old log school house built in Grafton at an early day is still standing, now used as a barn. The more modern school or meeting house, erected later in Grafton, is also standing, but not used as a house of worship.

In 1859 Nathan C. Tenney, with some four other families from Virgin City, commenced a settlement about six miles above Virgin, which was named Grafton, about a mile below the present village of Grafton. More settlers arrived in 1860-1861; dams in the Rio Virgen were built and agriculture commenced, but floods caused by the overflow of the river washed away nearly all the lands claimed by the early settlers, and so New Grafton, so-called, was located in the spring of 1862. Considerable grain was raised for a number of years, but the Rio Virgen continued to wash away the soil, the ditches were filled up with sand and dams washed away continuously, until the settlement was reduced to a minimum in size and became a part of the Rockville Ward. Owing to Indian troubles the settlement was vacated in 1866, but was resettled in 1868.

In 1877 the saints at Grafton were organized as a ward with Alonzo H. Russell as Bishop. He acted until 1887 and was succeeded by James Munroe Ballard as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1900 by William Isom, who was succeeded in 1903 by James M. Ballard (serving a second term), who presided until 1907, when the ward was disorganized and the saints at Grafton were transferred to the Rockville Ward. James N. Stanworth was then chosen as presiding Elder of the Grafton Branch, to act under the direction of the Rockville Ward bishopric. He was succeeded in 1919 by Philetus Jones, who acted as presiding Elder at Grafton until 1921, when he was chosen as Bishop of the Rockville Ward. With this change the Grafton Branch ceased to exist altogether.
