Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Graham Ward

GRAHAM WARD, St. Joseph Stake, Graham Co., Arizona, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district on the north side of the Gila River, opposite Thatcher. The settlers lived scattered for about four miles along the river. Most of the land in that district is irrigated from the so-called Graham Ditch which taps the Gila River about three miles above the townsite. The Graham townsite (thus named after the Graham Mountains and Graham County) is four miles, by nearest road, northeast of Thatcher, the headquarters of the St. Joseph Stake, and eight miles southeast of Bryce. The saints in the Graham district constitute a part of the Safford Precinct.

Some of the settlers of Brigham City on the Little Colorado River in northern Arizona, who had become discouraged on account of repeated failure of crops and poor prospects, established new homes on the Gila River in that district of country later included in the Graham Ward in January, 1881. Among the arrivals were George Lake, Andrew Anderson, George Skinner, Jørgen Jørgensen, J. J. Adams and Moses Curtis. Andrew Anderson built the first stockade house in Graham in 1881, while the rest of the people lived for some time in sheds, tents and wagon boxes. In 1882 other settlers arrived and located near the first settlers. Good crops were raised in the beginning. Moses Curtis was the first presiding Elder in the district described, and in May, 1883, the Graham settlement was organized as a bishop's ward with Jørgen Jørgensen as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1885 by Peter O. Peterson, who in 1892 was succeeded by George Skinner as presiding Elder and in 1898 as Bishop. Bishop Skinner died Oct. 21, 1918, after which James T. Talley acted as presiding Elder until 1919, when he was succeeded by Francis M. Skinner, who was succeeded in 1921 by Robert Reed, who acted as presiding Elder from 1921 to 1922 and as Bishop from 1922 to March 13, 1927, when the Hubbard and Graham wards of the St. Joseph Stake were disorganized, and a new ward, named Kimball, organized in their stead with the saints who had formerly belonged to the two aforesaid wards.
