Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Granger Ward

GRANGER WARD, Oquirrh Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Granger, a farming district traversed by a branch of the Salt Lake and Utah Railroad. The Granger meeting house is situated on the south side of the main highway, about eight miles southwest of the Temple Block in Salt Lake City.

In the fall of 1849 a company of saints from Wales, in charge of Capt. Dan Jones, arrived in Salt Lake City and some of these located on the west side of Jordan River in what later became the Granger Precinct. They and others who joined them built a canal, tapping the Jordan River, which canal was known for many years as the "English Canal." It was not very successful, and many settlers dug wells from which some very brackish water was obtained. When more water was secured from other canals which were made above, the ground became more moist which proved for a time very beneficial, so much so that in 1879 as many as 47 bushels of wheat were raised to the acre. On account of this fertility the precinct was named by Judge Elias Smith the Granger Precinct, which later gave the name to the ward. After a time too much alkali was deposited which destroyed the crops on lower lands. The street on which the Granger meeting house now stands was the boundary line between the Brighton Ward and the North Jordan Ward, and when the Granger Ward was organized Feb. 24, 1884, from the south part of Brighton Ward and the north part of North Jordan Ward, this road became the center of Granger Ward. Daniel McRae was the first Bishop of Granger Ward; he acted in that capacity for 30 years and was succeeded in 1914 by William A. Grant, who was succeeded in 1920 by Wm. Henry Bangerter, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 993 members, including 225 children.

When the Granger Precinct was established in 1878, a lumber school house was erected which served for meetings and all public gatherings until 1889, when a substantial brick meeting house was erected. This building was destroyed by an explosion in 1905, after which a modern brick chapel was erected with an amusement hall in the basement, immediately east of the old building. Granger belonged to Salt Lake Stake until 1900, when it became part of the Granite Stake and in 1914 it was transferred to the Cottonwood Stake. When the Oquirrh Stake was organized June 3, 1923, Granger Ward became part of that stake.
