Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Granite Ward

GRANITE WARD, East Jordan Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Granite, Salt Lake Co., Utah, located at the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canyon, 15 miles southeast of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City.

Little Cottonwood Canyon was known to the pioneers of Utah soon after their arrival in Salt Lake Valley for its excellent timber, and several saw mills were erected in the canyon in the fifties and sixties, A stone quarry was established in the canyon in 1859 to furnish granite for the erection of the Salt Lake Temple. Work of quarrying rock from different points in the canyon was continued until the temple was completed in 1893. Rich mining deposits having been discovered in Little Cottonwood Canyon in the sixties, Alta, Silverton, Tannersville, and other mining camps and smelters were established on the hillsides and the mouth of the canyon was used as a camping place for the miners. A town named Granite sprang into existence there and for some time it was a place of considerable importance; thus a telegraph office was established, stores, saloons, boarding houses and cabins were erected, and as many of the inhabitants belonged to the rougher element much disorder and lawlessness prevailed. About 1882, when most of the mines closed down, the town was deserted.

In the meantime the surrounding country had been settled by Latter-day Saint farmers and for their benefit a ward was organized July 1, 1877, called Granite Ward. A new location for a townsite was soon afterwards established about a mile west of the former town; a school house was built and regular meetings commenced. At the time of its organization the ward included the Granite, Butler, Little Cottonwood and Silverton precincts and extended up Big Cottonwood and Little Cottonwood canyons wherever members of the Church were employed in the mining camps. In 1890 a substantial rock meeting house was erected on the new townsite of Granite. In 1901 Granite Ward was divided and the north part organized as the Butler Ward. Solomon Despain, the first Bishop of the Granite Ward, acted from 1877 to 1887, when he was succeeded by Alva Butler, who acted until 1901, when the ward was divided and he was called to preside over the newly organized Butler Ward. James A. Muir succeeded him as Bishop of the Granite Ward; Bishop Muir was succeeded in 1917 by Alvin A. Despain, who was succeeded in 1926 by George F. Despain, who was succeeded in 1928 by Rigo S. Hawkins, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Granite Ward had 163 members, including 35 children.

Granite Ward belonged to the Salt Lake Stake until 1900, when it was transferred to the newly organized Jordan Stake of Zion. In 1927, when the Jordan Stake Was divided, Granite Ward became a part of the East Jordan Stake.
