Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Grant Ward, Portneuf Stake

GRANT WARD, Portneuf Stake, Bannock Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the extreme south end of Marsh Valley, partly on an elevated plateau which separates Marsh Valley from Cache Valley. The people in the settlement live on their respective farms and the ward extends north to the Downey Ward, east to the mountains, south to the Swan Lake Ward, and west to the state highway, following the railroad track. The distance from the extreme south to the extreme north end of the ward is about four miles and from east to west the ward extends six miles. The ward meeting house is located on high ground about five miles southeast of Downey, the headquarters of the Portneuf Stake.

The first settler in that part of the country now included in Grant Ward was Captain Jefferson Hunt, of Mormon Battalion fame, who located at Red Rock early in the sixties. After him Joseph Henry Byington came next in 1877, and located on lands now included in the Oxford Ward. But only a few families resided in that part of the country for a number of years, and they affiliated with the saints of the Oxford Ward. Later, when Marsh Valley was settled by the saints, they became a part of the Marsh Valley Ward, and still later a part of the Cambridge Ward. In due course of time they were organized into a regular branch of the Church and meetings were commenced under the presidency of Hyrum Elliot Byington, though he was not regularly appointed as president of what was known for a number of years as the Calvin Branch. These meetings as well as Sunday school sessions were held in private houses until a school house was built in 1885, about two miles west of the present village of Grant. Thomas Henry Larson was the first man appointed to act as a regular presiding Elder. He was set apart in 1895. At that time there were only about a dozen families of saints living in that part of the country. On Aug. 27, 1899, the south branch of the Cambridge Ward (also called Calvin) was organized as a separate ward, named Grant, in honor of Apostle Heber J. Grant. James Franklin Hunt, who was chosen as the first Bishop, was succeeded in 1908 by John P. Bright, who in 1915 was succeeded by William H. Stoddard, who in 1917 was succeeded by Joseph D. Stoddard, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Grant Ward had a membership of 90 souls, including 30 children.
