Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Grays Lake Ward

GRAYS LAKE WARD, Idaho Stake, Bonneville Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in Grays Lake Valley, Williamburg Flat, and a tract of country situated on the headwaters of Blackfoot River. The ward extends north and south about 35 miles. Grays Valley is about 25 miles long from northwest to southeast and consists of a continuous valley almost as level as a floor surrounded by hills or low mountains. Near the valley on the east is the so-called Caribou Mountain, about 10,000 feet high. Grays Lake is 6,420 feet above sea level, but is a mere marsh bordered all around by meadowland, and the surface of the lake consists of rushes and flags, more than water, there being only a few patches of open water on the entire surface, and the lake does not exceed three feet in depth anywhere, though it is 16 miles long. There are ranches and farms scattered between the foothills and the lake. Several mountain streams enter the lake both from the east and the west. All kinds of hardier cereals grow in the valley and some of the smaller fruits; the principal crop raised by the farmers is hay, and the main industry is stock-raising. The center of the ward, where the meeting house (a lumber building) is located on the east side of the lake in the central part of the valley is about a mile north of the boundary line between Bonneville and Bannock counties, 40 miles northeast of Soda Springs, 20 miles by mountain road west of Freedom, in Salt River Valley (Wyoming), and 60 miles southeast of Idaho Falls.

Among the first Latter-day Saints who located in Grays Lake Valley was a company of people who left Davis County, Utah, in search of a country where there was more room for making homes than in Davis County, Utah. These settlers who arrived in Grays Lake Valley May 17, 1887, found a few non-Mormon settlers in the valley already. Other settlers followed.

The first L. D. S. missionaries entered the valley in December, 1895, and on Feb. 23, 1896, the Grays Lake Branch was organized with Albert Dewey as presiding Elder. This branch was organized into a regular bishop's ward Aug. 10, 1896, with George H. Muir as Bishop. This was done under the direction of the presidency of the Bingham Stake of Zion. Brother Muir was succeeded as Bishop in 1915 by Ephraim C. Schneider, who in 1927 was succeeded by William Wiley Tingey, who acted Dec. 31, 1930, when the Grays Lake Ward had 95 members, including 23 children. The total population of the Grays Lake Precinct was 131 in 1930.

Grays Lake Ward was transferred from Bingham Stake to Bannock Stake in 1910, and to the Idaho Stake in 1916.
