Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Great Salt Lake

GREAT SALT LAKE, a body of salt water in the northwest part of the state of Utah, is the principal drainage center of the "Great Interior Basin." The lake is about 80 miles long by 35 miles wide and is about 4,200 feet above sea level; it has no apparent outlet save evaporation. In 1850 the amount of saline matter held in solution was 22.4 per cent; in 1867 only 14.8 per cent. Between these dates the amount of water flowing into the lake annually exceeded the evaporation and the surface of the lake raised about 12 feet, which increased the area from a total of 1,700 to 2,360 square miles. From 1855 to 1861 the volume of water decreased; then for several years there was an increase of volume until 1874, since which time, with variation in different years, the volume has finally decreased to its present level, and on Dec. 31, 1930, the level of the Great Salt Lake was about the same as in 1847, when the pioneers of Utah arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley. The saline content in 1930 was estimated at 20 per cent.

No fish exist in the lake but several species of insects and brine shrimps have been found in the water; also water fowl, in large numbers, frequent the shore. The lake has several islands, the largest of which is Antelope Island, 18 miles long. The principal streams flowing into the lake are the Bear, Weber and Jordan rivers.

At one time the Great Salt Lake was much larger than it is now, the bars, cliffs and beaches formed by the waters of the ancient lake, called Lake Bonneville, still being plainly seen along the base of the mountain ranges. Lake Bonneville had an area estimated at 19,750 square miles. The principal divisions of Lake Bonneville were the main body (comprising the area of the existing lake and that of the Salt Lake Desert), Cache Bay to the north and Sevier and Escalante bays to the south. The waters of Lake Bonneville reached the ocean through the Columbia River, the outlet from the Great Interior Basin being from the north end of Cache Valley to a tributary of Snake River. (For further details see "The Great Salt Lake" by Dr. J. E. Talmage.)
