Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Artesia Branch

ARTESIA BRANCH, St. Joseph Stake, Graham Co., Arizona, consisted of a few families of Latter-day Saints residing on ranches situated on the east side of the Graham Mountains. These ranches were scattered for a distance of four miles along the base of said mountains. The meeting house belonging to the branch was situated near the center of the district on the edge of the desert near an artesian well. This place is 12 miles south of Safford, the nearest station on the Globe-Bowie branch of the Southern Pacific Railroad, 15 miles southeast of Thatcher, the headquarters of the stake, and 25 miles northwest of Bowie Station on the Southern Pacific Railroad. All the settlers in that part of the country have artesian wells, used both for culinary and irrigation purposes, but in the spring of the year the farms are irrigated from small mountain springs. In August, 1901, Daniel J. Sparks settled in a district of country locally known as the Upper Seniga, about 1 1/4 miles northeast of the present Artesia district school house. At that time there were only two non-Mormon settlers in the neighborhood. About two years later, other settlers arrived, both Mormon and non-Mormon, who built a school house in 1904. The first artesian well was drilled in 1901, and a school district organized in 1903, called Artesia, the name being suggested by the artesian wells which made the settlement possible. A postoffice was established in 1912. Before the organization of the Artesia Branch Nov. 26, 1905, the saints in the Artesia district generally attended meetings at Lebanon, about five miles north of the center of Artesia. Aldo A. Allred was chosen as the presiding Elder of the Artesia Branch. He acted until 1915, when the branch was discontinued, owing to the moving away of several families of saints. Those who remained became members of the Lebanon Ward. A new branch organization was effected at Artesia Feb. 11, 1923, with Brigham Elmer as presiding Elder. This branch was discontinued in 1926 and in 1930 there were only a few scattered saints in the district who belonged to the Lebanon Ward.
