Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Greer Ward

GREER WARD, St. Johns Stake, Apache Co., Arizona, consisted of a few families of Latter-day Saints who had settled at different points along the Little Colorado River, about 12 miles southwest of Eagar on small patches of land found in the opening of the canyon, or in the so-called Lee Valley. The houses of the settlers extended up the canyon for a distance of about two miles, nearly to the top of the White (or Mogollon) Mountains, above the timber line.

In 1879 Richard Lee and sons, Lehi Smithson and others, all Latter-day Saints, took up claims in the little valley lying along the upper Little Colorado River, which subsequently became known as Lee's Valley. These first settlers attended meetings in Round Valley, later in the Amity Ward and still later at Eagar, but there was no Church organization in Lee's Valley until July 26, 1896, when the saints there were organized into a branch of the Church with Ellis W. Wiltbank as presiding Elder. He presided until March, 1897, when the Greer Branch was organized as the Greer Ward with Ellis W. Wiltbank as Bishop. He presided until 1910, when the Greer Ward organization was discontinued and the saints who remained in the locality were annexed to the Eagar Ward.

In 1916 the saints in the Greer district were organized as a dependent branch of the Eagar Ward with Hyrum D. Nelson as presiding Elder. Bro. Nelson moved away, and for some time afterwards there was no L. D. S. organization of any kind at Greer, but about 1923 John T. Butler was appointed to take charge of the few families of saints living there. In 1930 about nine L. D. S. families resided at Greer, which had become a tourist resort, frequented by people from different parts of the country who desired to spend the summer months in the mountains. Others came to enjoy outdoor sports and to engage in hunting and fishing in the mountain streams. The few L. D. S. families there were mostly associated with the tourists camps. In 1930 John T. Butler was the presiding Elder and a Sunday school was in running order, sessions of which were held in the district school house.
