Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Gunnison Stake of Zion

GUNNISON STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the south part of Sanpete County, Utah, consisting of the following bishop's wards: Axtell, Centerfield, Clarion, Fayette, Gunnison, Hamilton and Mayfield. The headquarters of the stake are at Gunnison, where there is a commodious meeting house, and where rooms are rented for the accommodation of the stake presidency and the High Council. Nearly all the inhabitants within the limits of the stake are L. D. S. farmers, who irrigate their gardens and land from Sanpitch and Sevier rivers and their tributaries. Good and substantial meeting houses have been erected in all the Wards; none of them, however, are very modern.

Gunnison Stake dates back only to 1923. Most of the wards which now constitute the Gunnison Stake originally belonged to the Sanpete Stake. From 1900 to 1923 they formed a part of the South Sanpete Stake, and at a quarterly conference of the South Sanpete Stake held at Gunnison May 6, 1923, the South Sanpete Stake of Zion was divided, and the southwest part of the same, including the wards of Axtell, Centerfield, Fayette, Gunnison and Mayfield and the Clarion Branch were organized into a separate stake of Zion called the Gunnison Stake. Allen E. Park was chosen as president of the new stake, with Charles A. Rasmussen as his first, and Leo D. Bardsley as his second counselor. A High Council was also organized and auxiliary officers chosen. In 1924 John M. Anderson succeeded Leo. D. Bardsley as second counselor. First Counselor Chas. A. Rasmussen was released in 1926 and John M. Anderson was promoted to first counselor and Charles S. Hansen chosen as second counselor. Pres. Allen E. Park was released March 9, 1930, and Charles S. Hansen, who had acted as second counselor to Pres. Park, was chosen as president of the stake, with Hans C. Olsen as first and Sidney J. Fjeldsted as second counselor. These three brethren acted in the positions named Dec. 31, 1930. Charles G. Whitlock, the first clerk of the Gunnison Stake, was succeeded in 1924 by Nephi Gledhill, who in 1930 was succeeded by J. Clayton Watts. The Church membership of the Gunnison Stake on Dec. 31, 1930, was 2,711, including 569 children. Among the Priesthood was one Patriarch (Brigham Jensen).
