Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Gunnison Ward

GUNNISON WARD, Gunnison Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Gunnison, which is situated on the Sanpitch River, near the junction of that stream with the Sevier River, 13 miles southwest of Manti, the county seat. It consists of a farming district in which the farmers irrigate their lands principally from Sanpitch River and from a reservoir which depends upon said river for filling. The saints in the Gunnison Ward have a substantial ward meeting house and the town is the headquarters of the Gunnison Stake of Zion.

Gunnison, one of the eight original settlements founded by Latter-day Saints in Sanpete County, dates back to 1859, when it was settled under the direction of George Peacock of Manti with the advice of Pres. Brigham Young. It was at that time a dry barren and forbidding tract of country, which intimated to the early settlers that they would have a hard struggle to turn it into fruitful fields. But by determined effort the settlers made a success of their town, and although as a frontier settlement it suffered greatly from hostile Indians, yet the settlement survived. For a short time, during the Black Hawk War, the saints had to vacate their homes in Gunnison temporarily to seek protection in the stronger settlement of Manti. Being a frontier town Gunnison was first surveyed in fort style; hence, the original name of Fort Gunnison, thus named in honor of Lieut. John W. Gunnison, a U. S. topographical surveyor, who was killed by Indians near the Sevier Lake in 1853. Gunnison was made a precinct of Sanpete County June 3, 1861.

Jacob Hutchinson was the first presiding Elder in Gunnison. He was succeeded in 1862 by Hamilton H. Kearns, who in 1867 was succeeded by Joseph S. Horne, who presided until July, 1877, when the settlements of Gunnison, Mayfield and Fayette, which for some time had belonged to the Sevier Stake, were transferred to and made a part of the Sanpete Stake, and Gunnison was organized as a ward with Christian A. Madsen as Bishop. He presided until 1903, when he was succeeded by Joseph Christensen, who in 1912 was succeeded by James Rasmussen, who in 1915 was succeeded by Ernest L. Swalberg, who in 1924 was succeeded by Leslie J. Kidman, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Church membership of the Gunnison Ward was 501, including 110 children. The total population of the Gunnison Precinct was 1,396 in 1930, of which number 1,057 resided in the town of Gunnison.
