Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hamilton Branch

HAMILTON BRANCH, Parowan Stake, Iron Co., Utah, consisted of a few families of Latter-day Saints residing in a small village situated on Shirts Creek, six miles south of Cedar City and seven miles north of Kanarra, the branch belonging to the Cedar City 2nd Ward. Farming and stock raising are the principal occupations of the inhabitants, and the farming land which is irrigated from Shirts Creek is of good quality. The valley in which Hamilton is located is about eight miles wide.

Hamilton Fort dates back to the spring of 1852, when Peter Shirts, a noted frontiersman, located a ranch about half a mile below the present Hamilton, where he built a log cabin and raised some corn and vegetables. He remained there on his land about one year, but after the Indian war of 1853 he sold his claim to John Hamilton and Peter Fife. These two men and their families moved on to Shirts Creek and built a log house. According to a report dated Dec. 8, 1852, three families, with nine men capable of bearing arms, resided in a fort called Walker, the present Hamilton. In 1857 the little settlement was known as Sidon. In 1869 the present location of Hamilton was selected, and the name Hamilton Fort suggested in honor of John Hamilton, afterwards known as Grandfather Hamilton. He was the first presiding Elder in the little settlement and took charge of the ecclesiastical affairs of the place until 1877, when the Parowan Stake of Zion was organized, and Thomas N. Thornley was chosen as presiding Elder at Hamilton. It appears that he did not preside very long, as it is generally understood that John Hamilton presided continuously over the settlement from 1859 to 1881. Thos. Thornley was sustained as presiding Elder of Hamilton's Fort March 26, 1881. In 1882 he was succeeded by George Condie, who still presided in 1900. As early as 1919 Rodney Cox acted as presiding Elder of the Hamilton Fort Branch, which in 1930 belonged to the Cedar West Ward.
