Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Handcart Travel

HANDCART TRAVEL. In the Thirteenth General Epistle of the First Presidency dated Great Salt Lake City Oct. 29, 1855, the following instructions were given:

"Let all the Saints, who can, gather up for Zion, and come while the way is open before them; let the poor also come * * * let them come on foot, with handcarts or wheelbarrows; let them gird up their loins and walk through, and nothing shall hinder or stay them. In regard to the foreign emigration another year, let them pursue the northern route from Boston, New York or Philadelphia, and land at Iowa City or the then terminus of the railroad; there let them be provided with handcarts on which to drag their provisions and clothing; then walk and draw them, thereby saving the immense expense every year for teams and outfit for crossing the plains. We are sanguine that such a train will out-travel any ox team that can be started. They should have a few good cows to furnish milk, and a few beef cattle to drive and butcher as they may need. In this way the expense, risk, loss and perplexity of teams will be obviated and the Saints will more effectually escape the scenes of distress, anguish and death which have often laid so many of our brethren and sisters in the dust. We purpose sending men of faith and experience with some suitable instructions to some proper outfitting point, to carry into effect the above suggestions; let the Saints, therefore, who intend to emigrate the ensuing year, understand that they are expected to walk and draw their luggage across the plains, and that they will be assisted by the Fund [Perpetual Emigrating Fund] in no other way."

The "Millennial Star" of Feb. 23, 1856, published a lengthy circular about that season's emigration. It stated that Iowa City, Iowa, had been selected as the outfitting place for the plains, to which point all emigrants from Europe would be forwarded from the point of debarkation via Chicago and Rock Island. "The P. E. Fund emigrants," said the circular, "will use handcarts in crossing the plains in which they will convey their provisions, tents and necessary luggage. * * * There will, of course, be means provided for the conveyance of the aged, infirm and those unable for any cause to walk. * * * The Saints who go in the handcart companies need not expect to take any chests, trunks-excepting the tin trunks mentioned in the circular-or boxes across the plains with them because, if strong enough for the trip, they would be too cumbersome and heavy, and if made sufficiently light they would soon be broken to pieces. * * * The first two hundred miles of the journey from [Iowa City] will be through a settled grain-growing country where it is expected that supplies of provisions can be obtained without the labor of hauling them any considerable distance. By traveling this distance with the carts lightly loaded, the Saints will have an excellent opportunity of becoming accustomed to camp life and walking, and thereby be better prepared for starting out on the plains."

The handcart project became very popular with the British Saints, especially among those who hitherto had been unable to raise sufficient means to emigrate. Many of these, carried away with the idea of gathering to Zion that made for their transportation. The season, left their various employments even before arrangements had been result was that some of them were left to choose between the alternatives of remaining in Great Britain during the winter to starve or go to the poor house, or else run the risk of a late journey across the plains. They chose the latter course, in which the presidency of the British Mission, seeing no better way out of the difficulty, acquiesed, and chartered the ships "Horizon" and "Thornton", which brought over the Atlantic most of the ill-fated emigrants, who suffered so much crossing the plains and mountains in Captain Willie's and Captain Martin's handcart companies.

The first of the handcart companies to arrive in Salt Lake Valley were led by Capt. Edmund Ellsworth with 275 souls, and Daniel D. McArthur with 222 souls. Capt. Ellsworth's company left Iowa City, Iowa, June 9, 1856, and Capt. McArthur's two days later. One in the first company is known to have died and seven in the second company-a small percentage when the distance (1300 miles), the fatigue of travel, the extreme youth of some of the emigrants and the age of others is considered. Both companies arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 26th, and near the foot of Little Mountain were met by Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Daniel H. Wells and other prominent citizens with their wives; also by Pitt's brass band and Hiram B. Clawson's company of lancers. Here the tired travelers were treated to a feast of water melons, after which they marched to Pioneer Square in Salt Lake City and were greeted by a large assembly who had come to welcome them. Pres. Brigham Young complimented them upon their courage and was much gratified that the possibility of crossing the plains in this manner had been established.

Another company, numbering about 300, left Iowa City June 23rd, 1856, led by Capt. Edward Bunker, and arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 2nd. The journey of this company too was quite successful; and if this had been the last handcart company of the season, a phenominal success in handcart travel would have been recorded. But, as before stated, two more ships had been chartered from Great Britain, bringing 850 more emigrants, so that the resources of the officers at the outfitting station at Iowa City were severely taxed. Lumber was secured, more handcarts were made and two more companies, who were to make the most tragic part of the history of handcart emigration, were outfitted and started out on their disastrous journeys.

On July 15, 1856, the fourth handcart company, consisting of 500 passengers, 120 handcarts, 25 tents, five wagons, five mules and twelve yoke of oxen, left Iowa City in charge of Capt. James G. Willie. On Sept. 7th, a severe frost was experienced on the Platte River. The handcarts, being hurriedly made, often needed repairs. While crossing the Rocky Ridge and the South Pass, a heavy snowstorm, with a fierce north wind, was encountered and fifteen persons died that night.

The survivors of the Willie Company, after much suffering, arrived in Salt Lake City on November 9th; a total of sixty-six deaths had taken place; also three births and three marriages are recorded.

The last handcart company of 1856, led by Edward Martin, consisted on the start of 575 persons, 146 handcarts, 7 wagons, 6 mules and horses and 50 cows and beef cattle. The company left Iowa City July 28th. Leaving the Missouri River on Aug. 12, 1856, the company made good headway until they passed Fort Kearney, when, during the night, they lost fifteen head of cattle. These had been used to haul provisions, which had to be taken from the wagons and added to the already heavy loaded handcarts of the company. Some time was spent in searching for the lost cattle, but they were not found. Stormy weather continued and after arriving at Deer Creek the death rate began to increase nightly.

Meantime word was received in Great Salt Lake City of the danger of bad weather which faced the emigration still on the road. The semi-annual conference was in session, but all other business was at once dropped and a call made for sixty mule and horse teams to be sent immediately to the relief of the companies. Twelve tons of flour and forty extra teamsters were called for, also food, clothing and bedding. On Oct. 7th the relief train was ready to start, in charge of Capt. George D. Grant. On the 19th and 20th they encountered a severe snowstorm, and when they met the Willie Company on the 21st the snow was from 6 to 8 inches deep. Some of the relief train remained with that company while the rest continued eastward to help Capt. Martin's handcart company and two wagon companies in the rear.

The advance part of the relief train appointed to go back to meet the Martin Company found these emigrants on Oct. 28th, 16 miles above Platte Bridge. Capt. Martin informed the brethren that 56 out of 600 emigrants had died. On the 31st the relief wagons were met and clothing, etc., which they had brought, was distributed. After stowing the wagons full of the sick, the children and the infirm, the relief company started westward the next day. By the 2nd of November the snow was eight inches deep at Devil's Gate and the weather very cold. An express was sent back to Salt Lake City for more wagons and to report the determination of the emigrants to complete their journey, the Lord helping them, if they had to shovel snow every foot of the way. Some teams were immediately sent out and every day more teams were prepared and in due time met the company. But it is estimated that 135 members of the Martin handcart company died on the journey from Iowa City to Great Salt Lake City. On Nov. 30th most of the survivors arrived at their destination, and it is reported that within an hour every member was comfortably housed and cared for by loving hands.

The sad experience of the Willie and Martin handcart companies grieved President Young, but he still believed that handcart travel could succeed, and to prove it, a company of missionaries made a journey with handcarts from Salt Lake City to the Missouri River in 1857 in 40 1/2 days, having spent less time on the journey than any ox, horse or mule drawn train crossing the plains up to that time.

That year (1857) two other handcart companies crossed the plains with immigrating Saints. The first, led by Captain Israel Evans, left Iowa City in the latter part of May. It consisted of 149 persons, with 28 handcarts and an excellent four-mule team to haul their extra provisions. In the company were 28 children under eight years of age and two adults over 60, the oldest a woman 68 years of age. En route the company was reported to be very lively and making good progress. No deaths are reported. They arrived in Salt Lake City on the 11th and 12th of September. The second handcart company of 1857, in charge of Captain Christian Christiansen, consisting of 330 persons, with 68 handcarts, three wagons and ten mules, left Iowa City about June 15, 1857. The emigrants were mostly Scandinavians. The mortality in this company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 12, 1857, was quite considerable.

In 1858 there was no L. D. S. handcart emigration, but in 1859, Capt. George Rowley led a company of saints with handcarts across the plains. These emigrants, 235 in number, were mostly from Great Britain and Scandinavia. When they left Florence with 60 handcarts, they were better provided for than the previous companies had been, having eight wagons drawn by oxen, which carried part of the provisions and gave aged or sick passengers an opportunity to ride occasionally. There were also a number of singers in the company and a good spirit prevailed; no deaths are recorded. When the company arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 4, 1859, provisions were provided and great rejoicing was manifested.

On June 6, 1860, a handcart company, chiefly composed of British Saints and a few families from the Eastern States, in all 233 persons, left Florence in charge of Capt. Daniel Robinson. The company had 43 handcarts, and were accompanied by six wagons, 38 oxen and ten tents. Only one death is reported, that of a child, two years old. The company arrived in Salt Lake City Sunday afternoon, Aug. 27th where they were greeted by Capt. Ballo and his band and thousands of citizens. A large quantity of fruit and vegetables and other edibles had been sent by the bishops and a hearty welcome was accorded the weary travelers. On July 6, 1860, the last company of L. D. S. emigrants that ever crossed the plains and mountains with handcarts, left Florence, Neb., in charge of Capt. Oscar O. Stoddard. They were mostly Scandinavians and numbered 126 persons, with 22 handcarts and six wagons. Not one of this company died on the road, but there was some sickness, and some died who had attached themselves to the company after it was on the road. This company arrived in Salt Lake City on Monday, Sept. 24, 1860, and were gladly welcomed by relatives and friends.

In 1860 Joseph W. Young was sent to the Missouri River with an ox train, returning with a company of immigrants the same year, by which it was learned that oxen raised on mountain grass in Utah could make the double trip across the plains easier than the oxen raised on the more abundant but less nutritious grasses of the prairies of Iowa and Nebraska could make the one way trip. This led the Church to discontinue handcart emigration and send teams from Utah after the poor in 1861, 1862, 1863, 1864, 1866 and 1868, or until the Union Pacific Railroad was built.

The following data in regard to the L. D. S. handcart companies of emigrants has been compiled:

316No. Year Captain Persons

1 1856Edmund Ellsworth 275 2 1856 Daniel D. McArthur 222 3 1856 Edward Bunker about 300 4 1856 James G. Willie about 500 5 1856 Edward Martin 575 6 1857 Israel Evans 149 7 1857 Christian Christiansen 330 8 1859 George Rowley 235 9 1860 Daniel Robinson233 10 1860 Oscar O. Stoddard 126 TOTAL about 2945
