Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Harmony Ward

HARMONY WARD, Parowan Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Harmony, which is pleasantly situated on the north side of Ash Creek, on a fine level tract of country which slopes gently towards the south and Ash Creek, while the northeast extremity of the Pine Valley Mountains rise majestically southwest of the settlement about a mile distant. The town lies in a large cove, there being mountains on the south and north, and only six miles west of the main Wasatch Range. The farming land around Harmony is plentiful, but water for irrigation purposes scarce. The place is healthy and produces good grain and all kinds of fruits of the hardier sorts. Harmony is ten miles southwest of Kanarra, 21 miles by nearest road southwest of Cedar City, and 42 miles northeast of St. George.

Harmony as a settlement dates back to the beginning of 1852, when John D. Lee settled, with his family, in a place subsequently known as Old Harmony. In December, 1852, John D. Lee and others built a fort on Ash Creek called Harmony. At that time there were 15 men in the little colony capable of bearing arms, and six teams were constantly employed for some time in building the fort, which was surrounded by some excellent grazing land. Owing to Indian difficulties the settlement was temporarily abandoned in 1853, when the people moved to Cedar City, but in 1854, when the settlers returned, another location for a town was chosen and a fort called Fort Harmony built. This fort became a noted rendezvous for Indians who affiliated with the whites and John D. Lee was the Indian agent as well as the presiding Elder of the settlement at the beginning. This Fort Harmony was washed away in 1862. In 1864 John D. Lee was succeeded as presiding Elder by James H. Imlay, who presided until Aug. 20, 1867, when the Harmony Branch was detached from the Cedar City Ward and organized as a separate ward called Harmony with Wilson D. Pace as Bishop. This organization was continued until 1888, when Lemuel A. Redd took temporary charge of the ward and acted thus until 1890, when William A. Redd was chosen as Bishop of the place. He was succeeded in 1905 by Gottlieb Schmotz, who in 1906 was succeeded by Henry A. Pace, who in 1926 was succeeded by Elmer Taylor, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On this date the ward had 151 members, including 34 children. The total population of Harmony Precinct was 169 in 1930.
