Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Haun's Mill

HAUN'S MILL, Caldwell County, Mo., on the east bank of Shoal Creek, is where one of the most cruel and bloody tragedies ever enacted in the history of religious persecution took place Oct. 30, 1838. Haun's Mill site is about 22 miles by road or 15 miles in a straight line due east of Far West, and 12 miles northeast of Kingston, the county seat. According to a recently published history of Caldwell County, Jacob Haun, who came from Green Bay, Wisconsin, built his mill on Shoal Creek in 1835 or 1836, it being the second mill built in Caldwell County. In 1836-1837 the saints entered considerable land and made settlements or opened farms up and down Shoal Creek. By October, 1838, as many as 75 families, all Mormons, were living in what is now Fairview Township; some of these, however, were newcomers and were living in tents or wagons and in the houses of brethren who had come before them.

The little settlement of the saints at Haun's Mill in October, 1838, consisted of a mill, a blacksmith shop and about a dozen houses. All told, there were perhaps thirty families of saints located around the mill, several of whom had just recently arrived from the Eastern States and were camped in their wagons and tents behind the blacksmith shop, adjacent to the mill. The banks of the stream were lined with a growth of scattered timber, and an undergrowth of hazel and other brush, while back from the banks was the rolling prairie which extended northward for several miles toward the place where Breckenridge now stands. The little body of saints had been threatened by mobs for some time, and were, therefore, on their guard. The country, in fact, was full of marauding bands of mobbers, who were engaged in burning the houses of the saints, and otherwise destroying life and property. About 4 o'clock in the afternoon a company of mobbers, numbering 240 men, under the leadership of William O. Jennings and Nehemiah Comstock, advanced through the scattered trees that stood on the edge of the prairie, where they seemed to form themselves in a three-square position, forming a vanguard in front.

The leader of the mob on approaching the hamlet cried out to the brethren: "All who desire to save their lives and make peace, run into the blacksmith shop." But this was done treacherously. Elder David Evans, who had command of the brethren who had organized for self-defense, ran out to meet the mob, swinging his hat and crying, "Peace, peace." Unheeding this request, the mob continued to advance, and one of them fired a gun, which was followed by a solemn pause of 10 or 12 seconds, when all at once the mobbers discharged about 100 rifles, aiming at the blacksmith shop, into which a number of the brethren had fled for safety.

The infuriated assailants immediately surrounded the shop and commenced firing between the logs, the cracks between which were sufficiently large to enable them to aim directly at the brethren who had fled there for refuge, there being no chinking between the logs. The assailants also fired through a long opening made at one side of the shop by one of the logs being sawed out to admit light, and at the same time they fired through the door which was standing open. In the meantime several families who lived in tents pitched in the rear of the shop fled for their lives to the woods in different directions, amid a shower of bullets.

The mob continued firing until they thought all inside the blacksmith shop had been killed or mortally wounded; they then entered and among the dead and dying they found Sardius Smith, a lad 12 years old, who in his fear had crawled under the bellows for safety. He was dragged from his place of concealment by William Reynolds, a Livingston County man, who placed the muzzle of his gun near the boy's head and literally shot off the upper part of it, leaving the skull empty and dry, while the brains and hair of the murdered boy were scattered around and on the walls of the building. The inhuman murderer afterwards boasted of his dastardly deed, and as a justification for his barbarous act, said, "Nits will make lice, and if he had lived he would have become a Mormon." A seven-year-old brother of the murdered boy (Alma L.) was shot through the hip. He had seen his father and brother shot down, and fearing that if he moved the heartless wretches would shoot him again, he remained quiet among the dead until he heard the voice of his mother quietly calling his name in the darkness. This boy was subsequently healed in a most miraculous manner and lived to become a missionary for the Church, and a prominent citizen of Summit County, Utah. Another boy (Charles Merrick) was killed in the same manner as Sardius Smith. He begged piteously for his life, exclaiming beseechingly, "Oh, don't kill me, I am an American boy!" But this touching appeal to their patriotism was unheeded, and the innocent and noble boy, while thus appealing to the memory of his native country, had his brains dashed out.

Thomas McBride, an old gray-haired veteran of the American Revolution, was met by a number of the mob in front of Brother Haun's house. The old man, trembling with age rather than with fear, surrendered his gun, saying, "Spare my life; I am a Revolutionary soldier." But the inhuman murderers to whom he made this pathetic appeal shot the veteran down with his own gun, and then a Mr. Rogers of Daviess County fell upon him and hacked him to pieces with an old corn cutter, leaving the veteran soldier of the Revolution covered with a score of unsightly wounds, either of which alone would have been fatal his brains oozing from his cracked skull and his white hair sprinkled with gore. A Miss Rebecca Judd was an eye-witness to this terrible butchery. Austin Hammer was mortally wounded, seven balls were shot into his body, breaking both thigh bones. After the firing had ceased, he was found among the dead by the surviving brethren and carried into Haun's house, where he died about 12 o'clock the following night. Isaac Laney was wounded by five bullets, which passed through different parts of his body, but strange to say it never crippled him for life, although he suffered the most excruciating pains afterward. During the first few days after he was wounded he lay entirely helpless and could neither open his eyes, nor mouth, nor move a limb. Upon examining his clothing, 23 bullet holes were found in his underwear. Jacob Foutz, one of the brethren who ran into the blacksmith shop, was shot in the thigh. William Yokum was shot in the leg, which was subsequently amputated. Altogether, seventeen men and boys were killed outright, or were fatally wounded in this inhuman butchery, and about fifteen were wounded, more or less severely.

Following are the names of the killed or mortally wounded: Thomas McBride, Levi N. Merrick, Elias Benner, Joseph Fuller, Benjamin Lewis, Alexander Campbell, Warren Smith, George S. Richards, William Napier, Austin Hammer, Simon Cox, Hyrum Abbott, John York, John Lee, John Byers, Sardius Smith and Charles Merrick. Among the wounded who recovered were Isaac Laney, Nathan K. Knight, William Yokum, Jacob Myers, George Myers, Tarlton Lewis, Jacob Haun (founder and owner of the mill), Jacob Foutz, Jacob Ports, Charles Jimison, John Walker, Alma L. Smith, Miss Mary Stedwall and two others.

(For further particulars see "Historical Record," Volume 7, pages 671-684.)
