Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hawaiian Temple

HAWAIIAN TEMPLE (The), on the island of Oahu, Hawaiian Islands, is the seventh temple erected by the Latter-day Saints and the first one built on an island of the sea.

The Hawaiian Mission, commenced in 1850, has been a successful mission of the Church, and at the present time there are about 15,000 members of the Church on the Hawaiian Islands. Many of the faithful Hawaiian saints came at different times to labor in the temples in Utah, but the climate not being suited to them it was considered best by Pres. Joseph F. Smith, who had filled several missions in Hawaii and was loved by the people, to erect a temple for them on one of their native islands, to which also Polynesians from other parts of the Pacific Ocean might have easier access.

This temple is located near the L. D. S. settlement of Laie, and being erected on an eminence, can be seen from the ocean for many miles. The site was dedicated on June 1, 1915, by Pres. Joseph F. Smith and the building, strictly modern in design, was dedicated Nov. 27, 1919, by Pres. Heber J. Grant. The temple, built in the form of a Grecian Cross, measures 102 feet from east to west and 73 feet from north to south. It is constructed of cement concrete made from the lava rock found in the district. In the center of the edifice rises a square building, 50 feet high, at the top of which, on the four sides, is a handsome sculptured frieze representing historic events. The interior of the building is handsomely finished and contains some valuable paintings. The grounds are elaborate in design, including miniature lakes with fountains, tiers of stone steps and stone receptacles for flowers. At the entrance to the temple is a splendid piece of statuary representing "Maternity" in the persons of a Hawaiian mother and her three children. Another fine piece of statuary represents a Book of Mormon incident. The cost of the Hawaiian Temple is estimated at $215,000, $60,000 of which amount was donated by members of the Church and their friends on Hawaii.

(For further details see "The House of the Lord in Hawaii," by D. M. McAllister.)
