Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Auburn Ward

AUBURN WARD, Star Valley Stake, Lincoln Co., Wyoming, consists of Latter-day Saints residing at Auburn and vicinity.

Auburn Ward, the oldest L. D. S. settlement in the Star Valley Stake, is located in the north end of Star Valley on the west side of Salt River. The people are mostly stockraisers, as that whole section of the valley consists of beautiful meadow land, which extends from Salt River on the east to the foot-hills on the west. Only a very little farming is done. Auburn townsite consists of 24 ten-acre blocks occupying a part of a flat lying below the mouth of Stump Creek Canyon, about 1 1/2 miles west of the river and about nine miles by the county road northwest of Afton.

August Lehmberg, a Russian by birth and a member of the Church, arrived in Star Valley in 1879 and located a ranch about two miles south of the present site of Auburn. He and Joseph W. Welch, who a little later settled about five miles further down the river, were the only two families in that locality for a number of years. A number of other prospective settlers arrived later with a view to making homes, but became dissatisfied with the country and prospects generally, and left for other parts. Mr. Lehmberg and the Welch family lived as the only inhabitants on the west side of the river, engaged in ranching, until 1886, when other settlers who located on different quarter sections commenced to arrive. The locality at that time was called Stump Creek. About a dozen families spent the winter of 1886-1887 in that part of Star Valley. Other settlers arrived in 1887, and in the fall of that year the first L. D. S. meeting house, a log building, 18x28 feet, was erected at a point about two miles south of the present townsite of Auburn. Previous to this, early in 1887, Bishop Charles D. Cazier, of Afton, had appointed William Corbridge to preside over the saints in the north end of Star Valley and hold meetings with them as the deep snow covering the valley early in 1887 made it almost impossible for the people living in that locality to attend meetings in Afton. In the spring of 1888 the townsite of Auburn was surveyed, laid out in 24 ten-acre blocks with streets six rods wide, and in the fall of 1889 a new meeting house was erected. It was a substantial rock building, 30x50 feet, and was the first house built on the townsite. On July 1, 1889, the saints residing on and near Stump Creek, and who had existed as a branch organization since 1887, were organized as a ward with William Corbridge as Bishop. The name Auburn was suggested by Wesley K. Walton, who was born in Auburn, Maine.

Bishop Corbridge was succeeded in 1891 by Joseph H. Holbrook, who in 1894 was succeeded by Herman Hyde, who in 1913 was succeeded by Daniel T. Wood, who in 1928 was succeeded by Joseph Ezra George, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had a membership of 271, including 70 children.
