Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hebron Ward

HEBRON WARD, St. George Stake, Washington Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Hebron, situated on Shoal Creek in a small valley at the junction of the south and west forks of Shoal Creek. The valley along the creek is from 50 rods to half a mile wide; the farming land belonging to the village consists of narrow strips lying on both sides of the creek and is irrigated from the stream. All kinds of small grain were raised successfully, but only some of the hardier fruits. The altitude is 5,475 feet above sea level. At one time about a dozen families resided on the Hebron townsite, which consisted of one street running east and west. It had some fine brick buildings and could boast of good water. Shoal Creek, on which Hebron was situated, is formed by numerous springs in the mountains south and west of Hebron.

John and Charles Pulsipher, who had charge of the St. George stock, started from the Santa Clara in March, 1862, to look for a better herd-ground, taking with them horses and a cart. They crossed the Rim of the Basin, and after traveling about 50 miles northward from Saint George they came to a creek which they named Shoal Creek, which they thought a suitable place for a herd-ground. In examining the locality they found a band of Piute Indians encamped below the present site of Hebron; they entered into a mutual agreement with these Indians, who seemed very willing to have the whites come and live with them. The brethren then returned to Saint George after their families and arrived on Shoal Creek April 27, 1862, with their cattle, horses and sheep. They built houses on Shoal Creek the same fall. Later Zera Pulsipher and others cast their lot with the first settlers on Shoal Creek.

At a conference of the Southern Utah Mission held at St. George May 6, 1866, the saints in the mountain districts were organized into two wards. Pine Valley, Pinto, Mountain Meadows and Shoal Creek were organized into a ward named Hebron; and Clover. Meadow Valley, Eagle Valley and Spring Valley were organized into another ward later called Panaca. Later in 1866, when some of these small settlements were vacated on account of Indian troubles, the people on Shoal Creek built a fort on the present site of Hebron. Pres. Erastus Snow visited Shoal Creek in 1868, held a meeting with the saints and suggested the surveying of a townsite, which was done. On that occasion the place was named Hebron after the ancient Hebron in Palestine. According to the Bible narrative it was the place where Abraham separated from his nephew Lot on a certain occasion. Something similar happened to the people of modern Hebron when Erastus Snow gave some of the brethren a mission to take care of the stock belonging to St. George. They moved on to Shoal Creek, the first place they found suitable for their business, there being good water and plenty of feed for their flocks and herds, and like the Israelites in ancient Hebron, they located themselves and named the place Hebron and gave thanks unto the Lord. Soon after the survey was made most of the people moved on to their lots. Dudley Leavitt presided at Hebron until November, 1869, when the saints there were organized into a ward called the Hebron Ward, of which the saints in Clover Valley became a part, with George H. Crosby as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1877 by Thomas S. Terry, who later was succeeded by Zera B. Terry, who in 1894 was succeeded by George A. Holt, who presided until most of the people vacated Hebron and moved down to the edge of the Escalante Desert, where they founded Enterprise. While the moving process was going on gradually the old town up in the canyon retained its name Hebron, but at a meeting held Oct. 18, 1905, the two settlements, Hebron and Enterprise, were amalgamated and organized as the Enterprise Ward, with George Albert Holt, the former Bishop of Hebron Ward, as Bishop. (See Enterprise.)
