Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Herriman Ward

HERRIMAN WARD, West Jordan Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, commands a fine, elevated location in the southwest corner of Salt Lake County, containing about 40 square miles of valley and mountain country. It is bounded on the north by South Jordan Ward, on the east by the Riverton and Bluff Dale wards, on the south by Utah County and west by the Oquirrh Mountains, or the Lark Branch. The village of Herriman, containing nearly all the inhabitants, is situated on Butterfield Creek, 22 miles southwest of Salt Lake City and three miles west southwest of Riverton, the nearest railroad station. Herriman can boast of a recently constructed meeting house, a fine brick building, centrally located in the village at a cost of about $25,000.

Herriman was first settled in the spring of 1851 by Henry Harriman, Thomas Butterfield and John J. Stocking. These three brethren built a log cabin each, fenced some land, raised a crop and called their location Butterfield Settlement. They also made a mountain road up what they called Butterfield Canyon, where they found some timber. In the fall of 1853 the settlement was strengthened by the arrival of some twenty other families who were called by Pres. Brigham Young to locate there. This increased the population to 71 souls. The following year a fort, enclosing 2 1/2 acres of ground, was built of concrete as a protection against Indians, who stole several bands of horses and cattle from the settlers. In the spring of 1858 the settlement was abandoned because of the Johnston Army troubles, but was reoccupied the same year when peace was restored. Shortly afterwards the present townsite was surveyed and called Herriman in honor of Henry Harriman, one of the first settlers of the place and one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy. Since then the population has increased slowly as scarcity of water has retarded the growth of the settlement to a great extent. Henry Harriman was the first presiding Elder in the settlement; he was succeeded by Thomas Butterfield, who in 1855 was succeeded by McGee Harris, who took charge until 1858 under the direction of the West Jordan bishopric. After "the Move" in 1858, Herriman was organized as a ward with Alexander F. Barron as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1861 by Henry Arnold, who took charge as presiding Elder until the spring of 1866, when he was succeeded by Ensign I. Stocking, who, after returning from a four years' mission to Europe, was appointed Bishop of Herriman. He presided about ten years, or until 1876, when Herriman again became a branch of the West Jordan Ward with James Crane as presiding Elder.

On June 17, 1877, Herriman was for the third time organized into a ward, this time with James Crane as Bishop. Bishop Crane died July 6, 1886, and William C. Crump succeeded him as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1887 by Robert Danzie as Bishop, who in 1897 was succeeded by James S. Crane, who on June 1, 1906, was succeeded by Thomas Butterfield, who in 1916 was succeeded by Franklin T. Crane, who acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 345 members, including 83 children.
