Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Augusta

AUGUSTA, Des Moines Co., Iowa, is a little settlement situated on Skunk River, about ten miles southwest of Burlington, and sixteen miles in a straight line northeast of Nauvoo, Ill., was the home of quite a number of saints in 1840-1844. Among the first settlers of Augusta were Frederick Kesler (later Bishop of the 16th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah) and Levi Moffitt, who built a grist mill there in 1835, the first water-power flour mill ever built in the state of Iowa. At that time there were only a very few scattered settlers in that part of the country. The Indians roamed all over, but were quite friendly. In the fall of 1835 the townsite of Augusta was surveyed by Levi Moffitt and Fredrick Kesler without the use of surveying instruments, the north star being the only guide in laying off the streets running north and south and Mr. Kesler's carpenter's square was the only instrument used in laying off the cross streets. In 1839 Elder Lyman Wight, who had escaped from Missouri a short time previously, visited Augusta, held meetings there, made a number of converts and finally located his family there. Among the number baptized was Frederick Kesler. In 1840 several families of saints who had been expelled from Missouri settled at Augusta, and subsequently the number of inhabitants was considerably increased by the arrival of emigrants from several parts of the Union and Great Britain. The original town was on the north side of Skunk River and consisted in 1840 of two stores, a blacksmith shop, and a few private dwellings; but when the saints began to locate there, a new townsite was surveyed on the south side of the river in what is now Denmark Township, Lee Co., Iowa, where most of them built small houses. Notwithstanding persecutions the saints in Augusta continued to increase in number, and at a conference held there April 1, 1843, eighty-four (84) members of the Church were reported in good standing in the branch. The branch was continued until 1844, when the saints were advised to move to Nauvoo, which most of them did. Since the saints left Augusta, the place has been of no importance. (See "Historical Record", Vol. 8:943.)
