Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hillspring Ward

HILLSPRING WARD, Alberta Stake, Canada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the village of Hillspring and surrounding country, which village is situated on a flat on the left bank of the Belly River, 20 miles northwest of Cardston, 12 miles north northeast of Mountain View, and 55 miles, by nearest road, southwest of Lethbridge. The ward extends from Belly River on the east to the mountains on the west, south it extends to the Mounain View Ward and north to Glenwood. The farms belonging to the settlement lie partly on the flat along the Belly River and partly on the rolling prairies between that river and Waterton River. Some of the lands are irrigated from the United Irrigation District Canal, which taps the Belly River about seven miles south of Hillspring townsite at a well-constructed dam. Of the L. D. S. families residing in the ward, about one-third live on the townsite and the others in a scattered condition on their farms. The townsite is surveyed into ten-acre, eight-acre and five-acre blocks, the lots containing one acre each, except the business lots, which are half the size.

The first settlers in that district of country now included in the Hillspring Ward were Lincoln Garringer and family, and others. Some of these first settlers came from Cardston and Magrath, and most of them built on the townsite, which was surveyed early in 1910. The settlement of Hillspring was founded on land previously owned by the Church and contains a part of the former Cochrane Ranch, which had been purchased by the Church. The saints at Hillspring were organized as a ward June 12, 1910, with Franklin P. Fisher as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1925 by Franklin R. Smith, who died Nov. 7, 1928, and was succeeded by Heber L. Harker, who presided over the Hillspring Ward Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 424 members, including 112 children.

In 1926 the Stirling-Cardston branch of the Canadian Pacific Railroad was extended from Cardston, via Hillspring to Glenwood, thus making Hillspring a railroad town, to the great satisfaction and benefit of the inhabitants.
