Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hiram

HIRAM, a township in Portage Co., Ohio, about 35 miles southeast of Kirtland, was the home of the Johnson family and a number of other early members of the Church in 1831 and 1832. On the invitation of Father Johnson, Joseph Smith, the Prophet, removed with his family to Hiram Sept. 12, 1831, and there continued the revision of the Bible, Elder Sidney Rigdon assisting him as scribe. A few days after his arrival a conference of Elders was held at Hiram, at which Wm. W. Phelps was instructed to purchase a press and type at Cincinnati, Ohio, for the purpose of establishing a periodical (Evening and Morning Star) at Independence, Jackson County, Mo. While residing at Hiram, Joseph Smith received 13 of the revelations contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, among which is the revelation known as "The Vision". They are sections 65, 67, 68, 69, 71, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80 and 81 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The Prophet also held meetings on the Sabbath and in the evenings and baptized a number of people. Persecution soon began to rage against him and the new converts, which ended in an attempt to murder the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon on the night of March 24-25, 1832. Both Joseph and Sidney received brutal treatment and were both tarred and feathered by the infuriated mob. During the attack, a little child, Joseph Smith Murdock, was exposed to the night air, being sick with the measles, and died in consequence. That little baby boy is sometimes called the first martyr of the Church.

Hiram may consistently be termed the headquarters of the Church as long as Joseph, the Prophet, resided at the home of Father Johnson from Oct. 11, 1831, to April 2, 1832, when the prophet left Hiram to make a second visit to the state of Missouri. The old Johnson residence, a two-story frame building, with a basement, located about two miles southwest from the town of Hiram, is still standing in a good state of preservation, and a certain room on the second story of the building, which was occupied by the Prophet Joseph as a study, is still known as the Revelation Room, that being the room in which the Prophet received revelations. The property is now owned by James Henry Stevens, and the old homestead is about the same as it was when the Prophet Joseph Smith lived there with the Johnson family, except that a furnace has been placed in the basement to heat the house, and some additions were made to the original building about the year 1907. (For further details see "Historical Record," Vol. 5, pp. 11 to. 115.)
