Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Historian's Office

HISTORIAN'S OFFICE. When the Church was still in its infancy, no provision seems to have been made for a regular office for the Church Historians, who in consequence did their work at their private residences. But when the First Presidency was fully organized and the official headquarters of the Church established, the Church Historian appears to have shared the accommodations thus provided.

The first building known to have been occupied by the Church Historian was the so-called "Octagon," erected in Winter Quarters (later Florence, Nebraska) in 1846, and that building was used for historical purposes as well as for the general affairs of the Church until the headquarters of the Church were transferred to Salt Lake Valley. Then Willard Richards, who acted as second counselor in the First Presidency, kept the records in the office of the First Presidency until 1854, when George A. Smith, who succeeded Willard Richards as Church Historian, had an addition built to his private residence situated on the south side of South Temple St., on the ground now occupied by the Medical Arts Building. In due course of time, after the demise of George A. Smith, the whole building, formerly the home of Bro. Smith, was utilized for historical purposes and was thus continued until the erection in 1914-1917 of the splendid Church Offices, when the Historian's Office was removed to the 3rd floor of the new building, situated on South Temple St., immediately west of the historic Lion House. There the records of the Church are being gathered from all parts of the world and arranged systematically for reference.

Connected with the Historian's Office is a large library containing books published by the Church authorities, by members of the Church and by the auxiliary organizations of the Church which stress the activities of the youth of the Church. This library also includes sections of books devoted to written records of stakes and missions; to the "Journal History", a collection of the day by day history of the Church; to private journals; to patriarchal blessings; to Utah authors, non-Mormons; to friendly non-Mormon authors; to anti-Mormon writers and to the history of those factions who broke away from the Church. Besides these volumes there are many valuable books of reference and Church publications in foreign languages. There are also on file complete rosters of the original pioneers of Utah, of the other Utah pioneers of 1847, of the Mormon Battalion and of Zion's Camp, besides a large amount of valuable correspondence and other important documents.

Complete files have been preserved of the "Deseret News" and other local newspapers, of the "Millennial Star," "Contributor," "Era," "Woman's Exponent," "Young Woman's Journal," "Juvenile Instructor," "Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine," "Liahona" and many other Church publications including files of magazines and newspapers in foreign languages published by the Church in different parts of the world. It includes four foreign newspapers published in Salt Lake City, namely, "Beobachter" in German, "Bikuben" in Danish-Norwegian, "Utah-Nederlander" in Dutch and "Utah Posten" in Swedish.

The library is provided with modern steel book and filing cases and in the construction of the Church Office Building the section intended for the Historian's Office Library and the Genealogical Library were given special fire hazard protection.

At the southeast corner of the Historian's Office Library is a specially enclosed section containing the Andrew Jenson Library donated to the Church in 1930.
