Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hollywood Stake of Zion

HOLLYWOOD STAKE OF ZION, Los Angeles Co., California, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the north and west part of the city of Los Angeles and vicinity. The headquarters of the stake are in the Hollywood Ward, where the Hollywood Stake and Hollywood Ward have built a costly and monumental stake and ward house combined, with ample accommodations for both the stake and the ward. The Hollywood Stake contains (1930) ten organized bishop's wards and four independent branches which report directly to the stake presidency. The names of the wards follow: Alhambra, Boyle Heights, Garvanza, Glendale, Hollywood, Inglewood, Lankershim, Mar Vista, Santa Monica and Wilshire. The branches are El Segundo, Elysian Park, Pasadena and Redondo.

After the organization of the Los Angeles Stake of Zion, the Latter-day Saints in California continued to increase so rapidly that it became necessary to organize other stakes in California. Hence, at a regular quarterly conference of the Los Angeles Stake, held May 22, 1927, attended by Apostles David O. McKay and Stephen L Richards, the Los Angeles Stake was divided and the north and west parts of the same were organized into a new stake named Hollywood. The boundary line between the two stakes was established as follows: Commencing at the Pacific Ocean, south of the Redonda resort, and running thence in a northeasterly direction to 54th St. of Los Angeles, thence north along Vermont Avenue to 6th St., thence east along 6th St. to the Los Angeles River, thence southward along said river to Industrial Way, thence east along Industrial Way to Indiana St., thence north on Indiana St. to Alhambra Boulevard, thence straight east indefinitely. George W. McCune, who had presided over the Los Angeles Stake, was chosen and set apart as president of the new Hollywood Stake, with George F. Harding as first counselor. Arthur H. Sconberg was chosen as second counselor Sept. 30, 1927. The Hollywood Stake at the time of its organization consisted of the following wards, which had all previously belonged to the Los Angeles Stake: Wilshire Ward, containing the west half of the former Adams Ward; Alhambra, Belvedere, Boyle Heights, Garvanza, Glendale, Hollywood, Lankershim, Ocean Park and Pasadena. Soon afterwards Belvedere Ward was transferred to the Los Angeles Stake, in exchange for Redondo Branch and Inglewood Ward, which were made a part of the Hollywood Stake. In 1929 First Counselor George F. Harding was released, and Arthur H. Sconberg was promoted to first counselor and Lewis K. Sims chosen as second counselor. Brother McCune presided over the Hollywood Stake Dec. 31, 1930, with Arthur H. Sconberg as first and Lewis K. Sims as second counselor.

John S. McCune was the first stake clerk; he was succeeded in 1929 by John S. McCleeve, who in 1930 was succeeded by John S. McCune. He acted Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the membership of the stake was 5,871 souls, including 1,112 children.
