Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Honeyville Ward

HONEYVILLE WARD, Box Elder Stake, Box Elder Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district, or precinct, known as Honeyville, lying north of Brigham City. The ward extends north to Deweyville, east to the mountains, south to the Harper Ward and west to Bear River. The village of Honeyville is a station on the Oregon Short Line Railroad situated 1 1/2 mile east of Bear River, and about the same distance west of the base of the mountains. It is also four miles by road or 2 1/2 miles in a straight line northeast of Bear River City, ten miles northwest of Brigham City and 69 miles northwest of Salt Lake City. The village, as well as the surrounding farms, contain fine dwellings, and the farming land, within the limits of the ward, though quite limited, is fertile and watered by small mountain streams.

Honeyville, as a settlement, dates back to 1861, when a ferry across Bear River was established at a point about 1 1/2 mile northwest of the present site of Honeyville. Anson Call built a sawmill at Honeyville about 1861, north of the present mill site on Salt Creek, or Hot Springs. This mill finally passed into the hands of Abraham Hunsaker, who ran the mill quite successfully for a number of years. In an early day, when a name was wanted for the settlement, it was suggested that the place be named Hunsaker in honor of the original founder, Abraham Hunsaker, but as Brother Hunsaker himself objected to this, the name of Honeyville was adopted instead. The Honeyville settlement formed a part of the so-called Call's Fort district, but Abraham Hunsaker presided over the few saints in Honeyville from the beginning until Aug. 19, 1877, when the saints residing in and near Hunsaker's Mill were organized as a ward named Honeyville, with Abraham Hunsaker as Bishop. He was succeeded in that capacity in 1889 by Benjamin H. Tolman, who was succeeded in 1893 by Thomas Wheatley, jun., who in 1921 was succeeded by Leo Hunsaker, who in 1928 was succeeded by Abinadi Tolman, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. The Church membership of the Honeyville Ward on that date was 436, including 94 children. The total population of Honeyville Precinct was 494 in 1930.
