Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hurricane

HURRICANE is the largest town in southern Utah except St. George. It is situated on the south side of the Rio Virgen, at the foot of the well known Hurricane Hill. Of public buildings there are a modern brick school house and a Relief Society hall, in which meetings are held. The place has a flouring mill, three hotels, a number of stores and shops, a bank and a number of beautiful modern residences, mostly built of brick, lumber and cement. The town is particularly known for its fine orchards, and peaches, pears, cherries, grapes, plums, apricots, pomegranates, walnuts and almonds which are raised in abundance. The numerous shade trees, together with the fruit trees, give the town the appearance of a beautiful grove. The shade trees consist mostly of box elder, poplar, and umbrella trees. Wheat, barley, corn, sugarcane, and all kinds of vegetables are raised. Hurricane, throughout, is a sample semi-tropical town, and is a very attractive place for building homes. The gardens and farms are irrigated through a canal which taps the Rio Virgen about two miles above the settlement. The head of this canal is a cut or tunnel bored through the solid rock until it reaches the tableland below.

For many years the settlers of southern Utah struggled very hard indeed in their efforts to control the waters of the Rio Virgen, a most treacherous stream. Sometimes it overflowed its banks, washing away lands and improvements; at other times it was nearly lost in the sands; but finally, after great expense, the settlers, who were assisted financially by the Church, bored tunnels through the rocks and thus established a permanent head for their canal. It was such an enterprise that brought the beautiful town of Hurricane into existence. The Hurricane Canal Company was incorporated Sept. 1, 1893, and the work of construction commenced the following winter. The Church promptly lent the canal company $5,000, and thereby the tunnels and canal were made a success. The Hurricane townsite was surveyed in 1896, and in March of that year Thomas Morris Hinton and others built the first houses on the new townsite.

The first religious meeting was held in the house of Amos Workman at Hurricane June 3, 1906, and on Sept. 5, 1907, the saints at Hurricane were organized as a ward with Samuel Isom (formerly Bishop of Virgin City) as Bishop. Meetings were commenced in a social hall built during the winter of 1907-1908. Many comfortable private dwellings were also erected and a $30,000 school house built in 1917. The population soon increased to 800 people. A grist mill was built by the Hurricane Canal Company in 1915 and a telephone system installed in 1913. Bishop Samuel Isom died Feb. 2, 1923, and was succeeded by Ira H. Bradshaw, who presided until Aug. 26, 1928, when the Hurricane Ward was divided into the Hurricane North and the Hurricane South wards. On Dec. 31, 1930, the two Hurricane wards had a total membership of 1,227, including 300 children. The total population of the Hurricane Precinct was about 1,300 in 1930, of which 1,197 were residents of Hurricane town.
