Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Austrian Mission

AUSTRIAN MISSION. Apostle Orson Pratt and Wm. W. Riter, in April, 1864, proceeded to Vienna, the capital of Austria, for the purpose of opening a L. D. S. mission, but in consequence of religious intolerance they were unable to open the door for the proclamation of the restored gospel in that country. Later, however, the missionaries who labored in the Swiss and German Mission finally visited parts of Austria, made a few converts and organized several small branches of the Church.

Another attempt was made in 1883 and 1884 to open up a mission in Austria and Hungary, and at a conference held in Salt Lake City, Utah, in October, 1883, Elders Thomas Biesinger and Paul E. B. Hammer were set apart as missionaries to Austria. Leaving Salt Lake City Oct. 16, 1883, they arrived at Bern, Switzerland, Nov. 13, and reported for duty to the president of the Swiss and German Mission, under whose direction they were to labor. Elder Biesinger, being anxious to see his parents in Wurtemberg, Germany, left Elder Hammer to go to Austria alone and he, on Nov. 25, baptized his first convert at Lemberg. On Dec. 3, 1883, the two missionaries met in Vienna, and on Feb. 2, 1884, baptized two converts, namely, P. Cholewa, a Polish gentleman, and Josephine Jelenik, an Austrian lady. On account of persecution, it was thought best for the missionaries to separate, as in case one of them should be arrested, the other would be free to render him aid. So, leaving Elder Hammer in Vienna, Elder Biesinger went to Prague on Feb. 25, 1844, but a month later (March 30) he was arrested and imprisoned and, two weeks afterwards, sentenced to serve one month longer in a filthy jail and pay a fine of five guilders for preaching and distributing literature without a license (a privilege which had been denied to him). After his liberation from prison, Elder Biesinger baptized Anton Yost, a police official, who had served on his case. Elder James E. Jennings was sent from the Swiss and German Mission to assist Elder Biesinger in his missionary labors, but persecution being so severe, both Elders were obliged to leave the country soon afterwards.

In the meantime, Elder Hammer had gone to Hirchberg, Silesia, to labor, but was taken down with smallpox, and after an unexpected recovery returned to Bern, Switzerland, to recuperate.

In 1885, Elders Biesinger and Jennings made another attempt to perform missionary labor in Austria. They arrived at Budapest, Hungary, Feb. 18, 1885, but in April returned to Germany.

In the fall of 1900 and the spring of 1901, Elders Mischa Markow and Hyrum M. Lau labored in Tamesvar, Hungary, and, during a residence of about four months, baptized 31 persons and raised up a branch of the Church. Before being banished from the country by the police, these Elders ordained two of their converts (Frantz Kortie and Mathias Tedorf) to the office of Elder and appointed them to preside over the branch, which became a part of the German Mission and later a part of the German-Austrian Mission.
