Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Hyrum

HYRUM, Cache Co., Utah, a town on a branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad and the Utah-Idaho Central Railroad, is located in the south end of Cache Valley, about seven miles south of Logan, four miles east of Wellsville and 80 miles by nearest road northeast of Salt Lake City. Hyrum is the headquarters of the Hyrum Stake.

Hyrum was first settled in April, 1860, by Andrew Augustus and Ira Allen, Andrew Anderson, Alva, James and Moroni Benson, Alonzo and Calvin Bingham, Noah Brimhall, Jonas Halvorsen, John M. Hansen, Hans and Jens Monson, Andrew B., Hans E., George and Niels B. Nielsen, Christopher Olsen, David Osborn, Hugh and David Parkes, Adam Smith, Wm. and Thomas Williams and others, most of them with their families. A month later (May, 1860), Apostle Ezra T. Benson and Peter Maughan, presiding Bishop of Cache County, came to the location and organized the saints there into a ward named Hyrum, the name chosen for the townsite. That name was selected when the rounding of another settlement in the vicinity, to be known as the City of Joseph, was under contemplation. David Osborn, one of the first settlers, thought that Hyrum, the brother and close companion of the Prophet Joseph Smith in his martyrdom, should also be honored by having a town named for him. The City of Joseph, however, was never built. Calvin Bingham was appointed Bishop of Hyrum and Ira Allen was the first ward clerk. For some time the log cabins at Hyrum were built in fort style as a protection against Indians. A canal nine miles long was dug, bringing water from Little Bear River on to the location. While some of the brethren were building the canal, others were putting in crops and when, at one time, it seemed that the attempt to bring water upon the thirsty land would prove a failure, quoting the words of Ira Allen (the ward clerk) the settlers were "the sickest set of men he ever saw." But some of the settlers insisted that "it could be done" and finally the work was accomplished in time to save the crops. A log meeting house was erected inside the fort which also served as a school house, and in 1861 a post office was established with Bishop Calvin Bingham as postmaster.

Bishop Bingham, being called on another colonization mission, was succeeded as Bishop of the ward in 1864 by Ola N. Liljenquist. In 1874, when the United Order was introduced, the inhabitants of Hyrum entered into the proposition whole-heartedly, and Hyrum became for a time a "cooperative city." By cooperation the settlers were able to purchase a steam mill, make several good roads and invest largely in stock raising, dairying, etc. After a time, however, the people decided to discontinue the order, but lessons regarding the value of cooperation had been learned which were never afterwards forgotten. Bishop Liljenquist was succeeded in 1882 by Simpson M. Molen, who, being called to act as a counselor in the Cache Stake presidency, was succeeded in 1891 by John F. Wright, who presided over the ward until 1901, when the Hyrum Ward was divided into three wards, namely, the Hyrum 1st, the Hyrum 2nd, and the Hyrum 3rd wards. On Dec. 31, 1930, the three Hyrum Wards had a membership of 1766, including 417 children. The total population of the Hyrum Precinct in 1930 was 1,973, of whom 1,869 resided in the city. Hyrum Ward belonged to Cache Stake until 1901, when it became a part of the Hyrum Stake of Zion.
