Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Avon Ward

AVON WARD, Hyrum Stake, Cache Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints occupying the extreme south end of Cache Valley, Utah, including the old townsite of Paradise and also scattered settlers residing along the east and south forks of Paradise Creek (also called Muddy Creek or Little Bear River). The center of the ward is about three miles southeast of Paradise, seven miles southeast of Hyrum, 14 miles south of Logan and 72 miles northeast of Salt Lake City.

The site of Avon was the favorite rendezvous of the early trappers who used to cache their pelts and hides in its vicinity. The place was first settled in 1860 under the name of Paradise, but on account of Indian troubles, in 1868, the settlers moved three miles down the creek and established the settlement now known as Paradise. A few returned later to the old site and these, with others who joined them about 1880, established a new settlement which for a time was called Mineral Point or South Paradise. Meetings were held occasionally in private houses under the direction of the bishopric of the Paradise Ward, but a log meetinghouse was erected in 1886, and Henry W. Jackson was appointed to take the lead in ecclesiastical affairs in that part of the Paradise Ward. On July 5, 1891, South Paradise was separated from the parent ward and organized as the Avon Ward with Henry W. Jackson as Bishop. The name Avon was suggested by Mrs. Carrie Smith, wife of Bishop Orson Smith of Paradise, in remembrance of the River Avon upon which Stratford, the birthplace of the renowned Shakespeare, stands. Bishop Jackson was succeeded in 1895 by George William Davis, who was succeeded in 1904 by James J. Facer, who was succeeded in 1906 by Alma O. Jackson, who was succeeded in 1920 by George C. Nuhn, who was succeeded in 1930 by Alma O. Jackson, jun., who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the membership of Avon Ward was 100, including 21 children. The Avon Precinct in 1930 had a total population of 105. Avon belonged to the Cache Stake of Zion until 1901, when it became part of the Hyrum Stake.
