Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Idaho Falls

IDAHO FALLS, Idaho Falls Stake, Bonneville Co., Idaho, is one of the important incorporated cities of Idaho, situated on Snake River. It is the business center of a large part of Snake River Valley and is situated on the main line of the Oregon Short Line Railroad leading from Pocatello, Idaho, to Butte, Montana. About forty per cent of the inhabitants of Idaho Falls are Church members. It contains a number of manufacturing establishments, a fine court house, a beautiful L. D. S. tabernacle, a number of modern school houses and many fine private residences. It has paved streets, and is, throughout, a cosmopolitan town growing up from the humble village originally called Eagle Rock. Idaho Falls is the headquarters of the Idaho Falls Stake of Zion, and is divided into four bishop's wards, namely, the Idaho Falls 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th wards.

Eagle Rock was originally the name of a ferry located about eight miles north of the present Idaho Falls. The name was suggested by a rock in the river near that point frequently visited by eagles. In 1865-1866 the first wagon bridge was built across Snake River where the city of Idaho Falls now stands. In 1879 the Utah Northern Railroad was built through that part of the country, and in 1880 the railroad company built a round house and machine shops at Eagle Rock, which made the place at once an important railroad center.

Among the men employed by the railroad company in erecting buildings for the company at Eagle Rock were a number of Latter-day Saints, including James Thomas and others, who located there in 1882 with their families. Other saints followed and in October, 1882, Gideon Murphy was appointed presiding Elder by Pres. William B. Preston of the Cache Stake, and instructed to take charge of meetings. In 1883 Thomas E. Ricks, Bishop of the Bannock Ward, authorized John D. Evans to hold meetings with the saints at Eagle Rock, and on Jan. 10, 1886, a branch organization was effected with John D. Evans as presiding Elder. He was to act under the direction of the Lewisville Ward bishopric. Prior to this (in 1885) the saints at Eagle Rock had built a meeting house. The Eagle Rock Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward Nov. 18, 1886, with James Thomas as Bishop. Bishop Thomas presided until 1907, when he was succeeded by Charles S. Crabtree, who presided until 1919, when the Eagle Rock Ward, which in 1910 had changed its name to Idaho Falls, was divided into two wards, viz., the idaho Falls 1st and the Idaho Falls 2nd Ward. The total population of the five Idaho Falls precincts in 1930 was 12,322, of which 9,429 were residents of the city of Idaho Falls.
