Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Idaho Stake of Zion

IDAHO STAKE OF ZION consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in parts of Bannock and Caribou counties, and a small part of Bonneville County, Idaho, with headquarters at Bancroft, and includes the following organized wards and branches: Bancroft, Chesterfield, Conda, Grays Lake, Hatch, Ivins, Lund, Soda Springs and Toponce wards, and Kelley and Mount Sherman branches. All these organizations are in Bannock and Caribou counties with the exception of Grays Lake, which is in Bonneville County. Most of the inhabitants within the limits of Idaho Stake are L. D. S. farmer and stock-raisers. The majority of the people live in the upper Portneuf Valley, and some on, or near Bear River; hence some of the settlements are on the headwaters or tributaries of Snake River, and others on the opposite side of the Rim of the Basin, where the water finally flows through Bear River into the Great Salt Lake. In the upper Portneuf Valley there is no dividing ridge or mountain forming the Rim of the Basin and some of the streams which rise in the mountains east in that district could flow into Portneuf as well as into Bear River.

In the absence of a stake house in Bancroft, hired rooms are secured for the accommodations of the stake presidency and High Council.

The Idaho Stake was organized Nov. 20, 1916, when the Bannock Stake was divided and the north part of the same organized into a new stake of Zion called the Idaho Stake, while the settlements in Gentile Valley, or the south part of Bannock Stake, were retained in that stake. The new stake, when organized, contained the following wards: Bancroft, Chesterfield, Grays Lake, Hatch, Ivins, Kelly, Lund and Soda Springs, and the independent branch of Meadowville. Nelson J. Hogan was chosen as president of the new stake with Keplar Sessions as first and Robert L. Redford as second counselor. Nelson J. Hogan was released Nov. 12, 1925, together with his counselors, and Joseph Frederick Corbett, who had acted as Bishop of the Bannock Ward, was chosen as president of the Idaho Stake with Keplar Sessions as first and Alma A. Moser as second counselor. On May 18, 1930, Alma A. Moser was promoted to the position of first counselor and Alonzo J. Gilbert (formerly stake clerk) was sustained as second counselor to Pres. Corbett. This presidency acted Dec. 31, 1930, when the stake had a total membership of 2,054, including 336 children.

Following are the names of the stake clerks of Idaho Stake: Clarence O. Swenson, 1916-1918; Charles A. Higginson, 1918-1922; Willard Call, 1922-1926; Alonzo J. Gilbert, 1926-1930, and George H. Fisher, 1930.
