Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Independence Ward

INDEPENDENCE WARD, Fremont Stake, Madison Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a country district a short distance west of Burton Ward, or in a tract of country lying between Teton River on the north and Snake River on the south, and between Rexburg on the east and Henry's Fork on the west. Independence is eight miles southwest of Rexburg and ten miles north of Rigby.

That part of the Snake River Valley now included in the Independence Ward was at an early day the home of Bishop Andrew P. Anderson (Andreas Hansen), who owned a cabin originally erected by a half-caste Indian named Tex, after whom the so-called Texas Slough in the neighborhood was named. This cabin was still standing in recent years. Later the vicinity was occupied by a number of Morrisites and others who had seceded from the Church, and, for a time, the country had a somewhat unenviable reputation. But many of these people were children of Latter-day Saint parents and they and other more active members of the Church who had moved into the district desired that a Sunday school should be organized for the benefit of their children. This was done and shortly afterwards a branch organization was effected with Andrew P. Anderson (Andreas Hansen) as presiding Elder. The first meeting of this branch was held March 23, 1902, in the school house, known as the Independence school house. On April 13, 1902, the branch was organized as a ward with Andrew P. Anderson as Bishop. In 1903 a meeting house, a substantial brick structure, was erected, 1 1/2 mile north of the site of the old "Tex" cabin. Bishop Anderson died Sept. 1, 1908, and was succeeded as Bishop of the Independence Ward by Charles R. Thomassen, who served for 17 years and was succeeded in 1925 by Wilford C. Anderson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time the ward had a membership of 240, including 56 children.

The total population of Independence Precinct was 754 in 1930.
