Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Indianola Ward

INDIANOLA WARD, North Sanpete Stake, Sanpete Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in Thistle Valley, which is located in the northeast part of Sanpete County. Thistle Valley is somewhat circular in shape and the farms and gardens are principally watered from Thistle Creek, which, with its tributaries, rises in the surrounding mountains.

Thistle Valley proper was used for a number of years by the people of Sanpete County as a herd-ground. In 1860 a number of the Sanpete brethren hauled hay from Thistle Valley for Apostle Orson Hyde, who resided in Spring City, and as there was only very little hay in the vicinity of Fairview, the people of that settlement cut a quantity of hay in Thistle Valley and hauled it to their own town. In 1861 the Fairview people surveyed the meadow land in Thistle Valley and divided it among themselves. The country below Thistle Valley was settled in the spring of 1864 by Warren P. Brady and others, who built cabins in the so-called Lower Thistle Valley, or Thistle Canyon, below the present lndianola. Some of these brethren moved in with their families and commenced farming. Among the first settlers in Thistle Valley proper were John Given and family, who were so cruelly massacred by Indians May 26, 1865. The following year a company of territorial militia, consisting of men from Salt Lake County and other parts of Utah, who were stationed in Thistle Valley to protect the settlers of Sanpete County against Indians, came very near being massacred by the savages in the mountains east of Thistle Valley, but through the bravery of one of the boys help was obtained from Fairview, and the lives of the soldiers were saved. In 1871 Mormon Miner of Fairview entered Thistle Valley with a cooperative cattle herd owned by the people of Fairview and Mount Pleasant. Two families spent the winter of 1871-1872 in the valley. In the spring of 1872 an Indian farm was located in Thistle Valley about half a mile southeast of the present Indianola by the saints of Mt. Pleasant and Fairview. The brethren plowed and put in grain for the sole benefit of the Indians. In 1874 Hyrum Seely and about thirteen others from Mt. Pleasant and Fairview arrived in Thistle Valley for the purpose of making a permanent settlement there.

They filed on different quarter sections. Up to this time nothing but herding and ranching had been successful in that part of the country. Hyrum Seely and company built houses that year and raised a crop of wheat and oats. In 1875 some of the brethren brought their families into Thistle Valley, and in 1876 these families were organized as a branch of the Church with Jefferson Tidwell as presiding Elder. In 1877 John Spencer, of Payson, who had been an Indian interpreter for years, was sent by the Church authorities to Thistle Valley, where he found about 100 Indians living in a destitute condition, and by the assistance of the Church an Indian farm was located immediately east of where Indianola now stands. For many years after that the Indians in Thistle Valley constituted the principal part of the inhabitants, but finally the majority of these natives were moved to the Uintah Indian Reservation. John Spencer presided until Aug. 15, 1880, when the saints in Thistle Valley were organized as a ward with John Spencer as Bishop. Bishop Spencer, who died Aug. 20, 1891, was succeeded by Hyrum Seely, who acted as presiding Elder until 1892, when Peter Petersen succeeded him as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1902 by Hyrum Seeley, who in 1913 was succeeded by Warren Shepherd, who in 1920 was succeeded by William B. Seely, who in 1921 was succeeded by Richard Henry Spencer, who presided until the ward organization was discontinued in 1926.
