Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Iosepa Colony

IOSEPA COLONY consisted of Latter-day Saints from the Hawaiian Islands for whose benefit a settlement was founded in Skull Valley, Tooele County, Utah.

On August 28, 1889, a company of fifty Hawaiian saints, in charge of Elder Harvey H. Cluff, a former president of the Hawaiian Mission, arrived on the Quincy Ranch in Skull Valley, which had been purchased by the Church as a gathering place for Polynesian saints. A townsite was surveyed by Harvey H. Cluff, Wm. W. Cluff and Frederick A. Mitchell (all former missionaries to Hawaii), to which the name of Iosepa (Joseph) was given. Every adult male and every widow was given a grant of land in the settlement. In later years Aug. 28th was celebrated yearly as "Pioneer Day" in the settlement. On Sept. 1, 1889, a meeting was held in a bowery at which a branch of the Church and various quorums and auxiliary associations were organized. Soon afterwards the Iosepa Agricultural and Stock Company was organized with Harvey H. Cluff as president and Frederick A. Mitchell as secretary, to create employment for the community and dispose of their produce. A school was established and many of the young people from this school advanced to higher institutions of learning and made splendid progress. Some became stenographers, several led their classes, especially in oratory and debate.

Elder Harvey H. Cluff was succeeded in 1890 by Elder Wm. King, who had just returned from presiding over the Hawaiian Mission. But when Elder King died in 1892, Elder Cluff again resumed charge of the colony, which position he held until 1901, when he was succeeded by Thomas A. Waddoups, who presided over the colony until 1917, when, on account of the percentage of mortality among the Hawaiians, the settlement was broken up and the Hawaiians assisted to return to the islands. As many of the native saints had come to Utah in order to labor for their kindred dead in the temples, Pres. Joseph F. Smith, who had spent many years on the islands as a missionary and loved the people, promised that a temple should be erected for their benefit in their own land. On Nov. 27, 1919, the beautiful temple at Laie on the Island of Oahu was dedicated.
