Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Irish Mission

IRISH MISSION. The first Latter-day Saint Elders who labored in the British Isles did not extend their missionary labors to Ireland at once. Hence, there is no record of any Elders of the Church visiting Ireland during the years 1837, 1838 and 1839. More Elders, including seven of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, came to England in 1840, accompanied by several other missionary Elders. One of these missionaries, Reuben Hedlock, made a short visit to Ireland in May, 1840, and spent two or three days in Belfast, but having been called to labor in Scotland, he proceeded to his appointed field of labor.

On July 27, 1840, Apostle John Taylor and two local missionaries, Elder James McGuffin and a priest named Wm. Black (or Blake), left Liverpool England, for Ireland. They landed at Warren Point in County Down and thence went to Newry, where some of Elder McGuffin's friends resided. Here Elder Taylor had the privilege of speaking in the Session House. From Newry these brethren went to a part of the country called the "Four Towns of Ballymacraech," where they baptized a farmer named Taite as the first fruits of preaching the gospel in Ireland. In the town of Lisburn nearby, Elder Taylor preached several times in the market place, but having other Church business to attend to in Scotland, he left Ireland soon afterwards.

Later in 1840 Elder Theodore Curtis, a newly arrived American missionary, crossed the Irish Channel and performed successful labors in Hillsborough, County Down, Ireland, where he raised up a branch of the Church with 20 members before the end of the year 1840.

In 1841 Elder David Wilkie labored in Crawfordsburn, County Down, where a branch was organized consisting of 22 members, and at a conference held in Manchester, England, May 15, 1842, Elder Wilkie reported that there was a total membership of 71 in the two branches Hillsborough and Crawfordsburn. Considerable difficulty was experienced by the missionaries in Ireland on account of the great poverty which prevailed. Most of the farmers occupied their land and depended for their livelihood upon the good will of their landlords, who, being mostly Catholics, disapproved of the introduction of a new religion into their midst, and intimidated their tenants by withholding coal and other free distributions and threatened loss of employment and eviction from their homes and farms if they disobeyed the local Catholic priests by attending meetings of the Latter-day Saints.

In 1847 the mission in Ireland consisted of four branches, namely, Belfast, Hyde Park, Crawfordsburn and Hillsborough, but the total membership of the Church was only 40 souls.

In 1848 the Belfast Conference was organized consisting of the above named branches and also those at Kilachy and Lisburn, all in the vicinity of Belfast. This conference had a membership of 152 in 1856. A branch of the Church having been organized in Dublin in 1850, this branch, and the Latter-day Saints residing in a scattered condition in its vicinity, were organized as the Dublin Conference, which had a membership of 58 in 1856.

In 1867 these two conferences (Belfast and Dublin) were reported for the last time, and shortly afterwards it was reported that the Church in Ireland consisted of about 100 members, ranging from Londonderry on the north to Cork in the south.

After the discontinuance of the Belfast and Dublin conferences, the saints in Ireland were under the immediate jurisdiction of the presidency of the British Mission, and leading Elders and missionaries occasionally crossed the Irish Sea from Liverpool to visit the saints in Ireland.

In 1884 Ireland again became a missionary field known as the Irish Mission or Irish Conference of the British Mission. A flourishing branch was raised up at Belfast and another at Dublin, and the Irish Conference in 1915 numbered 328 souls. In 1924 the Irish Conference was divided into two conferences, namely, the. Ulster and the Free State conferences, following the new political divisions of the country. There were two branches of the Church in Ulster in 1930, namely Belfast and Londonderry, and one (Dublin) in the Free State.
