Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Baker Ward

BAKER WARD, Union Stake, Baker Co., Oregon, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the city of Baker and vicinity. The Baker Ward consisted in the beginning to a considerable extent of a floating population, but is at present more permanent. Many of the brethren residing in South Baker are employed by the Oregon Lumber Company, whose mills are located at South Baker, and others in various industrial enterprises, and the town around it has grown into what is locally known as the Mormon town of Baker City (or South Baker). Besides the Latter-day Saints residing in Baker City and immediate vicinity some 15 families of saints who reside at Pondosa, a lumber camp about 22 miles northwest of Baker City, belong to the Baker Ward. Baker City is an important town on the Oregon Short Line Railroad, 52 miles southeast of La Grande, the stake headquarters, and 1,554 miles by rail northwest of Salt Lake City, and 338 miles southeast of Portland, Oregon.

During the years 1890, 1891 and 1892, a number of Latter-day Saints settled in Baker City, Oregon, for the purpose of manufacturing lumber, David Eccles of Ogden, Utah, being the principal owner of the mill which was built during the years mentioned. For some time there was no branch organization in the place, but as the saints began to see the necessity of religious training, especially in the interest of their children, they were organized by Apostle Franklin D. Richards into a branch of the Church, July 23, 1893, with John Stoddard as president. Apostle Richards on that occasion spoke prophetically as follows: "This organization (referring to the Baker Branch) is but the nucleus of the great work to be done in these northwestern states. Missionaries will be sent here and a mission established. There will be towns and cities inhabited by our people in these valleys. There will be a stake of Zion organized in Oregon and a tabernacle built, and I would not be surprised if a temple should be erected." Turning to David Eccles and Charles W. Nibley, he said: "You brethren will not only be engaged in the manufacture of lumber, but will launch out into other lines of industry, which will give employment to our people." In 1895 John Stoddard was succeeded as presiding Elder at Baker by Harry E. Baker, and soon afterwards the saints at Baker purchased a building site and erected a hall for meetings and social purposes at a cost of about $1000; both Mormons and non-Mormons subscribed liberally to its construction.

The Baker Branch of the Church belonged at the beginning to the Oneida Stake of Zion, but was transferred to the Northwestern States Mission in 1899; it remained as such until June 9, 1901, when the saints in eastern Oregon were organized as the Union Stake of Zion, and the Baker Branch was made a regular bishop's ward, with William K. Davis as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1903 by William J. Wale, who in 1919 was succeeded by William A. Roundy, who in 1921 was succeeded by James W. Eardley, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Baker Ward had 610 members, including 119 children. The total population of Baker City was 7,858 in 1930, of which 721 resided in South Baker.
