Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Jackson County

JACKSON COUNTY, Missouri, is located in north latitude 39 degrees north and longitude 94 west of Greenwich, and extends east and west 27 miles and north and south 23 miles. It is bounded on the north by the Missouri River, on the east by Lafayette and Johnson counties, south by Cass County, and west by the Kansas State line. Jackson County presents some physical features found in no other county in Missouri; there are three elevations or ridges passing through it from the south, bearing northward 30 degrees east. The water drained from these ridges feeds streams on the east and west side; those upon the east side of the western ridge become tributaries of the Big Blue which discharges its water into the Missouri and those upon the western slope empty into the Kansas River. The western ridge terminates at Kansas City at an elevation of 292 feet above high water mark.

These elevations, with their perfect drainage, present an exceedingly pure atmosphere throughout the entire county, thus precluding the possibility of malaria to exist to any great extent. Hence it is one of the most desirable places of Missouri from a sanitary standpoint. Jackson County is quite a heavy timbered country affording a luxuriant growth of hickory, some black walnut, a variety of oaks, plenty of elm, cherry, honey-locust, mulberry, basswood and boxelder. There are huge sycamores and cottonwoods in the river bottom, also hard and soft maple. The country is well supplied with springs of water gushing out from every hillside. The population of Jackson County was 7,612 in 1840, including 1,361 slaves, 14,000 in 1850, 22,913 in 1860, 82,325 in 1880, 283,522 in 1910, 367,846 in 1920, and 470,454 in 1930.

Independence is the county seat of Jackson County.

Soon after the Church was organized, persecution and opposition made life unpleasant for many of the young converts to the restored gospel, and finally the Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, revealed that a place of gathering would be selected for the saints who embraced the gospel in different parts of the country. In June, 1831, Joseph Smith and about 30 other Elders were called by revelation to travel westward, two and two, and preach the gospel on the way, which they did; and when the Prophet and some of his brethren arrived in Jackson County in July, following, the Lord revealed to the Prophet that Jackson County was the place to which the saints should gather and build a city, "even the new Jerusalem." As a commencement to this gathering, the land was dedicated, a temple site selected, and other preparations made to build a settlement or settlements in and around Independence in August, 1831, the first real location being on the Big Blue, a short distance southwest of Independence. As soon as this was done, the saints flocked in from different parts of the country, bought lands from the U. S. Government at $1.25 per acre, established a store, and a printing office in Independence, built primitive school houses and introduced eastern civilization in a part of the country, which was thinly inhabited by farmers operating by slave labor. At first everything was promising for the saints in Jackson County, but early in 1833 signs of hostilities began to show themselves on the part of mobbers, who finally fell upon the saints July 20, 1833, at Independence and destroyed the saints printing office, and looted the store of Gilbert & Whitney. Several minor skirmishes followed in which the saints tried to defend themselves, but after suffering much through persecutions and two of them having been tarred and feathered and others severely beaten by the mob, the saints were driven at the point of the bayonet across the Missouri River into Clay County, Missouri, in November, 1833.

For many years after that the activities of the saints were directed towards being returned to their lands in Jackson County by legal authority, but in this they failed, and Jackson County later became an important place of rendezvous for a part of the mob who drove the saints out of Missouri. The missionaries, however, frequently visited Jackson County and former owners of property also appeared on the scene looking after their land-holdings, but these finally passed out of the hands of the saints, including the 63 acres of land which had been purchased by the Church, and on which it was the intention to build a temple and a city.

About 1868 the so-called Hedrickites succeeded in buying the temple lot, of which they are still the custodians. The Reorganized Church established their headquarters in Independence. Still later some business men from Utah established themselves in Jackson County, which gave employment to a number of brethren, which again led to the organization of a branch of the Church at Independence and finally to the purchase of considerable real estate and the establishment of the headquarters of the Central States Mission, and the rounding of a printing office, from which "Liahona the Elders' Journal" is still being published.

At some future day it is expected that some of the Latter-day Saints will return to Jackson County, build a city there and make that locality the headquarters of the Church. (For further particulars see "Historical Record," Vol. 7, pages 625-648. "Missouri Persecutions," by B. H. Roberts. "Essentials in Church History," by Joseph Fielding Smith, and "Comprehensive History of the Church," by B. H. Roberts.)
