Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Johnson Ward

JOHNSON WARD, Kanab Stake, Kane Co., Utah, consisted of a few families of Latter-day Saints residing at a place known as Johnson, including also a few families living on the Paria Creek. The village of Johnson is situated in a narrow valley bounded on both sides by sand bluffs. A short distance below the settlement the valley opens out into the broad desert which is bordered on the south by the Buckskin Mountains. The village of Johnson is 14 miles northeast of Kanab, and 66 miles by nearest road northwest of Lee's Ferry on the Colorado River.

Johnson was first settled in the spring of 1871 by four brothers, viz., Joel H., Joseph E., Benjamin F., and William D. Johnson, with their respective families, and others. Some of these came from Saint George and others from Spring Lake Villa, Utah Co., Utah. On account of Indian troubles the settlement was temporarily abandoned during the winter of 1871-1872. Sixtus E. Johnson, sen., presided over the Johnson settlement from the time it was first founded until Aug. 7, 1877, when the branch was organized as a ward with Sixtus E. Johnson as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1879 by William D. Johnson as presiding Elder, who in 1890 was succeeded by German Buchanan, who in 1891 was succeeded by John William Glazier, who on Sept. 1, 1894, was made a regular Bishop. He presided until March 9, 1901. On June 8, 1901, the few saints who remained in the Johnson settlement were attached to the Kanab Ward, where they still belonged in 1930. All that now remains of the old Johnson settlement are a few ranchers scattered on the desert adjacent to the old townsite. There were only 36 people in the Johnson Precinct in 1930.

JOHNSTON'S ARMY was an appellation given to the so-called Buchanan Expedition which was sent to Utah in 1857 by Pres. James Buchanan to punish the Mormons who were falsely accused of being disloyal to the U. S. Government and in open rebellion to the United States. On investigation it was found that the sending of the army was based upon false reports and the difficulties were settled, but not until the saints had vacated their northern settlements, traveling south, with the determination to destroy all their improvements in the valleys if the army, on their arrival, should prove hostile. Peace was established in 1858 and the saints soon afterwards returned to their homes. (See Essentials in Church History by Joseph Fielding Smith, Comprehensive History of the Church by B. H. Roberts, and Histories of Utah by Edward W. Tullidge and Orson F. Whitney.)
