Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Joseph City Ward

JOSEPH CITY WARD, Snowflake Stake, Navajo Co., Arizona, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town known as Joseph City, beautifully located on the brow of a hill overlooking the Little Colorado River, 12 miles west of Holbrook, 40 miles northwest of Snowflake, the headquarters of the Snowflake Stake, and about 75 miles northwest of St. Johns, the headquarters of the St. Johns Stake of Zion.

Early in 1876 about 200 families were called from Utah by the Church authorities to locate new settlements in Arizona, and to act as missionaries to the Indians; they were advised to live in the United Order, and were divided into four companies in charge of George Lake, Lot Smith, Wm. C. Allen and Jesse Ballinger respectively. Wm. C. Allen located on the present site of Joseph City, and the first plowing was commenced there March 25, 1876. The following day a meeting was held in the camp (known as Allen's Camp), this being the first L. D. S. meeting held in the Little Colorado River Valley. The settlers commenced to make a ditch to carry water to the proposed townsite and built a dam, John Bushman cutting the first logs for its construction. They then built a stockade and organized themselves as a branch of the United Order, sharing all their possessions and working under a common leadership. The other three camps were located at no great distance apart and communication was kept up between the settlements. St. Joseph, however, is the only one of the four which has had a continued existence. Until they were properly established occasional trips to the settlements in southern Utah for provisions and other supplies were made, but they soon became self supporting.

On Jan. 27, 1878, the Little Colorado Stake of Zion was organized with Lot Smith as president, and at that time John Bushman was appointed to take charge of the saints at Allen's Camp, Bro. Allen being absent at the time. In August, 1878, Samuel G. Ladd of St. Joseph (Allen's Camp) reported that they expected to harvest 1,200 bushels of wheat, that their 1,000 fruit trees and grape vines were doing well; that they milked daily 100 cows, had a flock of 500 sheep and were sending a load of wool to Utah. The United Order was working harmoniously. It should also be mentioned that the people of the settlement made a specialty of raising broom corn and furnished all the country around with brooms.

In 1878, on the occasion of a visit by Apostle Erastus Snow, Joseph H. Richards was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over the St. Joseph Ward. In 1880 grading was commenced for a railroad through the Little Colorado country, John W. Young, a son of Pres. Brigham Young, taking a contract for grading 60 miles, in which labor he gave employment to many of the brethren in the Mormon settlements. In 1883 the United Order was dissolved with an amicable arrangement.

The Little Colorado Stake was divided in 1887 and later St. Joseph became part of the Snowflake Stake. Bishop Richards, who was called into the Snowflake Stake presidency, was succeeded as Bishop of St. Joseph by John Bushman, who was succeeded in 1916 by John L. Westover, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Joseph City Ward had 391 souls, including 99 children.

In 1916 the name of St. Joseph was changed to Joseph City, in order to avoid confusion with St. Joseph, Missouri, which, like St. Joseph in Arizona, was on the Santa Fe Railway system.
