Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Juab Ward

JUAB WARD, Juab Stake, Juab Co., Utah, consisted of Latter-day Saints residing in the Juab Valley, 15 miles southwest of Nephi. The little hamlet of Juab is situated on Chicken Creek, a stream which rises in the mountains east of Juab Valley and is now used for irrigation purposes by the people of Levan. Chicken Creek, which was the early name for Juab, is mentioned by George A. Smith's pioneer company which traveled through Juab Valley late in 1850, bound for Little Salt Lake Valley, where they founded Parowan. Parley P. Pratt's exploring company mentions Chicken Creek in 1851. A stock ranch, owned by some of the brethren of Nephi, was established on Chicken Creek at an early date, but the more permanent settlement of Chicken Creek (afterwards called Juab) dates back no further than 1860, and in 1862 the saints there were organized as a branch of the Church with James Wilson as presiding Elder. In 1866 the settlement was temporarily abandoned because of Indian troubles, but the people who had sought protection at Nephi returned to their holdings on Chicken Creek later the same year. A reorganization of the branch was effected Feb. 11, 1867, named the Chicken Creek Branch, with Abraham Palmer as presiding Teacher. In 1868 Levan was founded on the east side of the valley, near the place where Chicken Creek enters Juab Valley from the mountains, and most of the people from the old Chicken Creek settlement changed their place of residence to Levan, leaving only a few people in the old place. When the Utah Southern Railroad was built through Juab County in 1879, the site of old Chicken Creek was made the location of a small railroad town which was named Juab and was for a number of years the terminal of the Utah Southern Railroad until that road was extended further south. A branch of the Church called Juab was organized May 27, 1883, with James Wilson as presiding Elder. He presided until Jan. 23, 1886, when the Juab Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward with Elmer Taylor as Bishop. Bishop Taylor was succeeded as Bishop in 1895 by Robert C. Stephensen, who presided until May 27, 1906, when the ward was disorganized.
