Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Juarez (or Colonia Juarez)

JUAREZ (or COLONIA JUAREZ), Juarez Stake, Chihuahua, Mexico, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing on the Rio Piadres Verdes (Green Rocks River) in the state of Chihuahua, ten miles southwest of the Mexican town of Casas Grandes, 16 miles southwest of Dublan, 150 miles west of El Paso, Texas, and 120 miles west northwest of Galego, the nearest accessible railway station on the Mexican Northwestern Railway. Colonia Juarez is the headquarters of the Juarez Stake of Zion. The town is located in a narrow valley, about three-fourths of a mile wide on an average, and bordered by high bluffs varying in height from 100 to 200 feet. The town is laid out in regular square blocks, the streets crossing each other at right angles, but instead of following the cardinal points of the compass the streets run parallel with the bluffs and the river from northeast to southwest. Juarez has a number of fine brick buildings, some of which were built with Utah capital, and the town contains some of the finest homes in the state of Chihuahua. Beautiful orchards and gardens are the pride of the town, and the best fruits raised in northern Mexico are grown in Colonia Juarez. The opportunities for farming, however, are limited owning to the scarcity of water for irrigation purposes. While apples are the principal fruit grown, grapes, blackberries and strawberries are also raised successfully.

When the first camp of Latter-day Saints on the bank of the Casas Grandes north of La Ascension broke up in April, 1885, a company of saints in charge of Isaac Turley settled near the present site of Colonia Juarez. This separation was considered necessary on account of the objection of the Mexicans to large companies of Americans settling in any particular locality. The colonists at first rented land from Mexicans and commenced plowing and planting. Soon after their arrival Wallace Roundy was appointed by Pres. Jesse N. Smith to act as presiding Elder; 20,000 hectares (about 8,000 acres) of land were purchased by the colonization company for the benefit of the settlers. A townsite was surveyed in 1886, about two miles above the original location, the first site not being for sale. The new townsite was dedicated Jan. 1, 1887, and named Juarez, after the famous Mexican patriot and general. A ward organization was effected June 5, 1887, by Apostle Erastus Snow, with George W. Sevey as Bishop. Bro. Sevey presided until 1898 when he was succeeded by Joseph C. Bentley, who presided until the exodus of 1912, and as Juarez never was entirely vacated by the saints during the general move, Bishop Bentley had jurisdiction over the Juarez Ward without interruption, except that most of the members of the ward moved away, but returned soon afterwards, and so the ward was continued with Joseph C. Bentley as Bishop. When in 1895 Bishop Bentley was chosen president of the Juarez Stake, he was succeeded as Bishop in Juarez by John Jacob Walser, who in 1922 was succeeded by Walter Ernest Young, who still presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the membership of the ward was 355, including 58 children.
