Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Juarez Stake of Zion

JUAREZ STAKE OF ZION consists (1930) of the Latter-day Saints residing in the state of Chihuahua, Mexico, and is organized into five bishop's wards, namely, Colonia Chuichupa, Colonia Dublan, Colonia Garcia, Colonia Juarez and Colonia Pacheco; also a Mexican branch, consisting of Mexican saints residing within the limits of the Dublan Ward. Colonia Oxaca and Colonia Morelos in the state of Sonora, and Colonia Diaz in the state of Chihuahua are defunct L. D. S. settlements. There was also a branch of the Church in Cave Valley.

The headquarters of the Juarez Stake are at Colonia Juarez, which is situated at the mouth of a canyon through which the Piadres Verdes (Green Rocks) River enters the Casas Grandes Valley from the west. At Juarez there is a fine academy building, which is used for stake conferences, and there is a stake office building in which there are accommodations for the stake presidency and High Council.

When Alexander F. Macdonald was appointed to preside over the Maricopa Stake of Zion in Arizona in 1882, he was instructed to look out for opportunities and facilities of locating settlements along the Mexican border, thus following up an old idea of Pres. Brigham Young in regard to locating settlements of saints in Mexico.

In 1884, it being imperative to locate places of refuge for brethren liable to prosecution under the Edmunds-Tucker law, Pres. John Taylor urged upon the presidents of the Eastern Arizona, Little Colorado, St. Joseph and Maricopa stakes to take immediate action in this regard.

Early in 1885 Apostle Moses Thatcher arrived at St. David, Arizona, to assist in the colonization, and several small companies of saints crossed the border and located near Corralitos, a Mexican village, about 20 miles north of Dublan and 40 miles south of Colonia Diaz. Among these early settlers was Jesse N. Smith, who, together with many others, mainly from the Arizona settlements, founded Colonia Diaz on the Casas Grandes River, about 60 miles south of Deming, New Mexico. Soon afterwards Colonia Dublan, Colonia Juarez, and Colonia Pacheco were founded by the saints and still later Oxaca in the state of Sonora. These settlements or L. D. S. colonies existed for a number of years as the Mexican Mission, presided over by Apostle George Teasdale, with Alexander F. Macdonald and Henry Eyring as counselors. But on Oct. 9, 1895, Elder Anthony W. Ivins of St. George, Utah, was called and set apart to preside in Mexico, where the settlements already founded were organized as the Juarez Stake of Zion. Soon afterwards Henry Eyring was chosen as first and Helaman Pratt as second counselor to Pres. Ivins. In 1897 two branches of the Church were organized, namely, Chuichupa and Garcia, in the mountain district.

First Counselor Henry Eyring died Feb. 10, 1902, after which Helaman Pratt became first counselor and Guy C. Wilson second counselor to Pres. Ivins. In 1908 Pres. Ivins was chosen as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, and he was succeeded in the presidency of the Juarez Stake by Junius Romney, who acted with Hyrum S. Harris as first and Charles E. McClellan as second counselor. This presidency stood intact until 1912, when the L. D. S. settlements in Mexico were broken up on account of the revolution which was taking place in the republic. Thus all the Church organizations in Mexico ceased to exist until 1915, when Joseph C. Bentley was placed in charge of the few saints who had remained in Mexico and those who had recently returned to their former homes after the political troubles were partly ended. In 1916 John T. Whetton was chosen as first and Arwell L. Pierce as second counselor to Pres. Bentley. In 1919 Albert A. Wagner succeeded Arwell L. Pierce as second counselor. In 1929 Pres. Joseph C. Bentley was released together with his counselors (Whetton and Wagner) and Ralph B. Keeler was chosen as president of the Juarez Stake with Claudius Bowman as first and Moroni A. Abegg as second counselor. This presidency acted Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the Juarez Stake had a total membership of 1,263, including 353 children. The Priesthood included 2 Patriarchs (John Jacob Walser, sen., and Joseph C. Bentley), 68 High Priests, 30 Seventies, 75 Elders, 63 Priests, 55 Teachers and 80 Deacons.

Joseph C. Bentley was the first clerk of the Juarez Stake. He was succeeded in 1910 by Alonzo L. Taylor, who acted until the exodus in 1912. Since the reorganization of the stake in 1916 the following brethren have acted as stake clerks: Joseph C. Martineau, 1915-1918; Harold H. Bentley, 1918-1920; Theodore Martineau, 1920-1924; Ivins Bentley, 1924-1926; Edward F. Turley, 1926-1929, and Joseph C. Bentley, 1929-1930.
