Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

"Julia Ann"

"JULIA ANN", a bargue or sailing vessel on which a company of saints had secured passage, was wrecked in the Pacific Ocean in 1855. Out of the great number of companies of Latter-day Saints which had crossed the oceans from Europe, Asia, Australia and the islands of the sea, there are few instances on record where loss of life has been caused by shipwreck by these companies. The following is a short account of that solitary shipwreck:

The American barque "Julia Ann," Capt. B. F. Pond, bound for San Francisco, California, with 56 souls on board, sailed from Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, Sept. 7, 1855, bound for San Francisco, California. Twenty-eight of that number were Latter-day Saints on their way to Utah, including Elders James Graham and John S. Eldredge, two American missionaries returning home.

Elder John Penfold, sen., had been appointed by President Augustus Farnham to take charge of the company. On the voyage rather rough weather was encountered for a few days; otherwise the voyage was successful until Oct. 3, 1855, when, about 9 o'clock p.m., the vessel struck on the reefs off the Scilly Islands, which is situated in the Pacific Ocean about 16 degrees south latitude, 159 degrees west longitude. Capt. Pond, expecting to pass between Mopea and the Scilly Islands, had set the watch in the foretop. The vessel was making headway at 11 1/2 knots per hour when, with a tremendous crash, it dashed on to a coral reef. She immediately swung around with her broadside to the reef and the sea made a complete break over her at every swell. Capt. Pond ordered all the passengers into the after cabin. A scene of indescribable confusion followed as the steerage passengers rushed into the cabin and several mothers were seen holding their undressed children in their arms as they had snatched them from their slumbers. By the aid of the spanker boom and the expert swimming of one of the sailors a rope was carried ashore and fastened to the reef by means of which many succeeded in making their escape in comparative safety from the vessel. Five, however, were drowned, namely, Sisters Humphrey and Harris and three children. The noble and heroic disposition of Captain Pond was exhibited throughout the whole sad affair. While the crew was engaged in getting the passengers ashore, Mr. Owens, the second mate, was going to carry a bag containing $8,000 ashore. The captain ordered him to leave the money and carry a little girl ashore instead. He did so; the child was saved, but the money was lost. The surviving passengers remained on the uninhabited island seven weeks, living mainly on turtles and fish. In the meantime the ship's carpenter had repaired the quarter boat so that it might possibly live to perform a voyage to some inhabited land. This boat, after much difficulty, was launched over the reef, and Capt. Pond and nine other men embarked. The provisions were a little salt pork, some jerked turtle and two casks of water. After four days hard pulling through squalls and calms, Capt. Pond and his men succeeded in reaching Borabora, one of the Society Islands, a distance of about 200 miles. From there three men went to the island of Mopita and petitioned King Tatoa for relief. They were received by the natives with kindness and received two small schooners with which to return to rescue the shipwrecked passengers. In these they returned to the Scilly Islands. In the mean time, Capt. Pond had chartered the "Emma Packer" at Huahine and had sailed for the Scilly Isles and reached there twelve hours before the other man returned with the schooners. The "Emma Packer" took the shipwrecked passengers from the island Dec. 3, 1855, and brought them to Huahine, one of the Society Islands, thence to Tahiti, where they were most kindly treated by the inhabitants. From Tahiti Elders Graham and Eldredge returned with the schooner to Huahine, where they remained a month and then sailed for Honolulu, Hawaii. After the departure of the two Elders and two others, the following saints were left at Tahiti: John Penfold (the president of the company) and his wife, two sons and three orphan children whose parents were lost, Bro. Anderson, wife and seven children, and Bro. Logie, wife and one child. Bros. Penfold and Logie, with their families, embarked for California a short time afterward, and Bro. Anderson and his family, the last members of the shipwrecked company, embarked and sailed from Tahiti on the "G. W. Kendell" on May 5, 1865, arriving at San Francisco, California, June 27. (See Historical Record, Vol. 6, p. 161.)
