Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Junction Ward

JUNCTION WARD, Garfield Stake, Piute Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Junction, which is situated on City Creek, 16 miles south of Marysvale, the nearest railroad station and the terminus of the Marysvale branch of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad. Junction is seven miles northeast of Circleville, 35 miles northeast of Panguitch and about 25 miles, in an air line, due east of Beaver. The village of Junction is also located about one mile east of the foot hills of the Mount Baldy Range, and about one and a haft mile west of the confluence of the east and south forks of the Sevier River. The junction of these two streams suggested the name of the place. The ward owns a fine meeting house. Within the limits of the ward there are a number of non-Mormons. The valley in which Junction and Kingston are located is about eight miles long extending, as it does, from the top of the bench which separates it from Marysvale to the summit of a ridge which separates it from Circle Valley. The valley in which Marysvale is located is really a continuation of the same valley northward in which Junction is located and Circle Valley proper is also a continuation of the same valley, running southward. All kinds of grain and hardy vegetables are raised successfully, and hardy fruit-bearing trees constitute the orchards of the locality.

After the close of the Black Hawk Indian War the valleys on the upper Sevier River remained unoccupied by white people for several years, but in the early 70's a number of non-Mormons came in and located several ranches on different points along the Sevier River and its tributaries. Soon after Latter-day Saint settlers also began to arrive who immediately commenced farming. In 1879 about a dozen such families had located in and near where the town of Junction now stands. At a meeting held Nov. 8, 1880, in the City Creek school house (City Creek being the original name of the present Junction), the saints in that locality were organized as a branch of the Church with John Morrill as presiding Elder. In 1883 public meetings were commenced both at West Junction and at East Junction. Finally it was agreed that the settlers on the east side of the river who had moved down from old Kingston to Circle Valley should unite with the Kingston Branch, and it became known as the East Junction Branch.

On March 29, 1887, the Kingston Ward was dissolved and two new wards, namely, Circleville and West Junction, were created instead. Rufus A. Allen was chosen as Bishop of the West Junction Ward. He presided until Jan. 5, 1895, when the bishopric of the West Junction Ward was disorganized, and two wards, namely, Junction and Kingston, were created; that part of the old ward hitherto known as the West Junction Ward was organized as a separate ward called Junction. On Jan. 5, 1895, Rufus A. Allen was sustained as Bishop of the Kingston Ward which for some years had been known as the East Junction Branch (see Kingston Ward), and John Morrill was sustained as Bishop of the junction Ward. Bishop Morrill presided until 1914, when he was succeeded by John H. Stoney, who was succeeded in 1915 by Joseph Ipson, who, being called to act as a counselor in the stake presidency, was succeeded in 1924 by Ira Milton Bay, who in 1930 was succeeded by Oliver G. Anderson, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the membership of the Junction Ward was 358, including 78 children. The total population of Junction Precinct in 1930 was 389 souls, of whom 352 resided in the town of Junction. About three-fourths of the population are Latter-day Saints.
