Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kanesville Ward

KANESVILLE WARD, Weber Stake, Weber Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a tract of country lying northwest of the so-called Sand Ridge, in the southwest part of Weber County, Utah; the center of the ward is about six miles southwest of the center of Ogden. Of late years grapes have been raised quite successfully in Kanesville; this fruit matures early there and is of fine quality and flavor.

The first settlers in that section of country now embraced in Kanesville Ward were Orrin Hedlock, John Atkin and Calvin C. Wilson, who located there about 1868. Other settlers came in 1870 among whom was Wilson Poulter. A small crop of grain and vegetables was raised in 1872. In 1874 Peter B. and Hans J. Petersen came and others followed so that there were soon about 25 families in the settlement. They belonged to the Hooper Ward and John T. Jones and Hans J. Peterson were appointed resident teachers of the district (which was known as Northeast Hooper) and they held meetings from time to time in private houses. On April 27, 1886, this district was separated from the Hooper Ward and organized as the Kanesville Ward, thus named in honor of Thomas L. Kane, a statesman and life-long friend of the Latter-day Saints, in whose honor also Kanesville, Council Bluffs, Iowa, and Kane County, Utah, had previously been named. Peter B. Petersen was chosen as Bishop of the new ward.

In 1882 the people of the district petitioned the Weber. County Court for a school district, and by popular subscription erected a frame school house in which day school was commenced in January, 1884, with Miss Georgina Geertsen as instructor. This building also served as a meeting house until a frame chapel was erected in 1892. In 1910 a substantial brick chapel was built at Kanesville at a cost of $8,000, which is still (1930) in use by the ward.

The limits of the ward were somewhat diminished in 1899 when the south part (or what was known as the Roy School District) was organized as the Roy Ward with Thomas Hollands as Bishop.

Peter B. Petersen, the first Bishop of Kanesville Ward, after serving in that capacity for 22 years, was released and was succeeded in 1908 by George Green, who was succeeded in 1923 by Edward S. Green, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 195 members, including 39 children; all the usual auxiliary organizations were in good running order.
