Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kanosh Ward

KANOSH WARD, Millard Stake, Millard Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Kanosh, situated about three miles below the mouth of Corn Creek Canyon in the southeast corner of the main Pauvant Valley. Kanosh (named in honor of an old Indian chief of that name who became a member of the Church) is 14 miles southwest of Fillmore, the stake headquarters, and 161 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. Fruit is grown extensively in the region. Nearly all the people in the district are members of the Church.

Corn Creek was well known to the early pioneers of Utah, it being the last watering place in Pauvant Valley for travelers going south. Here was the chief camping place of a band of Pauvant Indians under Chief Kanosh, who manifested friendship for the Mormons from the beginning, and was thankful for their instructions in regard to raising crops, as he had, previous to the arrival of the first L. D. S. settlers, operated a small farm in the locality. In 1859 Peter Robison, Peter Boyce and Horace Owens located on the site of Petersburg (now included in the Kanosh Ward). Horace Owens and Byron Warner, both of Fillmore, also settled on Corn Creek that year. Others followed, and in 1861 Apostle George A. Smith visited the settlement and organized a branch of the Church there with Peter Robison as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1869 by Culbert King. In 1867 most of the people moved further up the creek, where a townsite was surveyed and named Kanosh, the previous site having been known as Petersburg, thus named in honor of Peter Robison, the first settler of the place.

At the organization of the Millard Stake in 1877, the Kanosh Ward was organized with Culbert King as Bishop. In 1878 he was succeeded by Abraham A. Kimball, who died Sept. 24, 1889, and was succeeded by Jesse Hopkinson, who died Nov. 3, 1897, and was succeeded by Christian F. Christensen, who was succeeded in 1901 by Abram Alonzo Kimball, jun., who was succeeded in 1922 by Ammon T. Rappeleye, who was succeeded in 1925 by Preal George, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, at which time the ward had a membership of 565, including 73 children. The total population of the Kanosh Precinct in 1930 was 674.
