Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Karachi

KARACHI, in India, is the capital of the province of Sind, situated about 600 miles northwest of Bombay, on the Arabian Sea. It is one of the five principal seaports of India and has about 120,009 inhabitants.

When Nathaniel V. Jones and his company of Elders from Zion arrived in India in May, 1853, Elders A. Milton Musser and Truman Leonard were appointed to labor in the province of Sind. Brother Musser made his headquarters at Karachi, while Elder Leonard labored in Hydrobad, the old capital of Sind. Bro. Musser, who has the distinction of having traveled around the world without purse and script, erected a small meeting house at Karachi and delivered a number of lectures. It is not recorded, however, that he baptized any converts or organized a branch there, as he met with considerable opposition from both civil and military officers. Elder Leonard distributed literature in Hydrobad, and one of the books or pamphlets fell into the hands of Robert Marshall, then a young man, who showed friendship to Elder Leonard. Among the literature received by Mr. Marshall was the "Pearl of Great Price," which contained the so-called revelation on war given to Joseph Smith in 1832, and published in Liverpool by Franklin D. Richards in 1851. Mr. Marshall paid but little attention to Mormonism until the Civil War broke out in America between the North and the South in 1861. In this he saw the fulfillment of the prophecy mentioned and became a convert to Mormonism. The books he now valued almost above anything else were constantly read by him, including the sermons contained in the "Journal of Discources." His sons and daughters were also converted and the family engaged in regular family prayers. They remained as a household of unbaptized Mormons for many years. Nearly half a century passed after Elders Musser and Leonard had sowed the seeds of the gospel at Sind. Mr. Marshall lived to be three score and ten years. He had lost the sight of his eyes and longed for baptism before passing to the Great Beyond. His son subsequently addressed a letter to Pres. Francis M. Lyman of the European Mission in 1903, and was informed that there was an Elder of the Church-John H. Cooper-in India. The sequel was that Elder Cooper, who was located in Calcutta, about 1800 miles from Karachi, just preparing to sail for Zion, was invited to "come over to Macedonia and help us." Elder Cooper arrived in Karachi June 26, 1903, and soon afterwards baptized 13 persons (8 males and 5 females), all adults, six of whom he ordained Elders and organized the Karachi Branch Sept. 24, 1903. Of these 13 persons, six belonged to Mr. Marshall's household, so that the branch was virtually the growth of the seed sown half a century previously. Thus in the establishment of the Karachi Branch was once again the experience repeated of "Paul sowing, Apollos watering and God giving the increase." Elder Cooper left for Zion, via Bombay and Liverpool, Sept. 24, 1903. After that the members of the branch waited anxiously for years for other L. D. S. missionaries to visit India, but this hope does not seem to have been realized. Yet the local members were not entirely inactive. Some of the members being more or less educated, the branch collected a good library of Church works and distributed tracts and leaflets among their neighbors. They also caused copies of the Book of Mormon to be sold in the book stores. According to the statement of Henry J. Lilley, a member of the Karachi Branch, written in 1909, the members at that time were scattered far and wide throughout India, some of them had "fallen away," one had died, and there only remained at that time Pres. Robert Marshall and one son, together with Henry J. Lilley and wife, who were the only members of the branch left at Karachi. (See "Improvement Era," Vol. 12, pp. 423-434.)
