Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kaysville Ward

KAYSVILLE WARD, North Davis Stake, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Kaysville, Davis Co., Utah, and vicinity. The center of the ward is about 21 miles north of the Temple Block in Salt Lake City and 16 miles south of the center of Ogden. The ward extends eastward to the mountains and westward to the Great Salt Lake. Within the limits of the ward grain, fruits and garden produce are raised successfully for exportation.

Samuel O. Holmes, in the spring of 1849, located on what is still known as Holmes Creek, about 1 1/2 mile west southwest of Kaysville. The following spring (1850) Wm. Kay, Edward Phillips and John H. Green settled on what later became known as Kay's Creek, at a point about 2 1/4 miles northwest of the present center of Kaysville. They both raised good crops of grain and built log cabins there that season. During the same year John Weinell, Henry Woolley, James Bennett, Wm. B. Smith, Joseph Egbert, Wm. L. Payne, Benjamin Hawkins and James Bevan, and perhaps others, came into the district and more followed, many of them with their families. In 1851 Pres. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball visited the little settlement and appointed Wm. Kay to preside as Bishop over the saints in the district. Soon afterwards a log school house was erected which was used for school and all public purposes for several years. In 1856, when a call was made for teams and wagons to go to the assistance of the belated handcart companies, every horse team in Kaysville was placed at the disposal of the bishopric of the ward for that purpose. After the "move south" in 1858, on account of the approach of Johnston's Army, many of the Kaysville saints scattered into different parts of Utah County. Upon returning to their homes in Kaysville in July following they found that quite a crop of grain had matured during their absence, which gave great satisfaction. An attempt was made about this time to change the name of the settlement to "Freedom" but by advice of Pres. Brigham Young, the old name was retained. When the Deseret Telegraph Line was built through Davis County in 1866, Kaysville made a contribution of poles for about six miles of the line.

Kaysville was the first incorporated city in Davis County, being granted a charter by the Territorial Legislature of Utah in February, 1868.

A Relief Society was organized in Kaysville in 1868, which has had a continued existence ever since.

It is claimed that lucern was introduced into the territory of Utah by Christopher Layton of Kaysville. As a member of the famous Mormon Battalion he had seen it grow in California in 1847, and is said to have procured samples of the seed which he planted. In course of time the farmers of Kaysville, who had formerly purchased hay, produced lucern in abundance and shipped the seed to distant points at remunerative prices.

In 1863 an adobe meeting house was finished and dedicated in Kaysville which served the saints until 1914, when an imposing edifice, known as the Kaysville Tabernacle, was erected at a cost of $52,000. The old building was then remodeled to serve as an amusement hall. Kaysville belonged to the Davis Stake of Zion until 1915, when that stake was divided and organized as the North Davis and the South Davis stakes respectively; Kaysville then became part of the North Davis Stake.

Bishop Wm. Kay was succeeded in 1856 by Allen Taylor, who was succeeded in 1862 by Christopher Layton, who, being called to act in the presidency of Davis Stake, was succeeded in 1877 by Peter Barton, who was succeeded in 1907 by Henry H. Blood, who, being called to preside over the newly organized North Davis Stake, was succeeded in 1915 by Frank Hyde, who presided over the ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 1,499 members, including 231 children. The total population of the Kaysville Precinct was 1,544 in 1930; of these 992 resided in the town of Kaysville.
