Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kelsey

KELSEY, Texas. Realizing the benefit to be derived by members of the Church in locating together in compact bodies, Elder James G. Duffin, president of the Southwestern States Mission, brought the attention of the presidency of the Church to the importance of colonizing the members of the Church in the mission, instead of encouraging them to emigrate to the settlements of the saints in the West. The plan was approved by the First Presidency and this branch of practical mission activities was commenced during the latter part of 1901. From this time until the release of Pres. Duffin from the presidency of the mission in November, 1906, this work of colonization continued to grow. Branches of the Church were organized in Kansas, Missouri and Texas and other states and a number of comfortable houses of worship were erected, and this without cost to the Church. Thus two church buildings were erected in the state of Kansas, two in Indian Territory, three in Texas, two in Louisiana and two in Arkansas. Seven of these buildings were constructed after the year 1901. Real estate for the use of the Church had been secured in Kansas, Missouri and Texas, but the most important colony established was at Kelsey, Upshur Co., Texas. During the fall of 1901 nine families of saints located six miles west of Gilmer, the county seat of Upshur County, as a beginning of the colony. In November, 1902, when Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff visited the mission, a townsite was selected and laid off by Elders Woodruff and Duffin, on land belonging to James Edgar, a member of the Church. Through an arrangement made with Bro. Edgar, the colonists were allowed to purchase city lots for $30 each. All streets in this new townsite run north and south and east and west, intercepting at right angles. Two main streets, six rods in width, run through the center of the town, one running east and west and the other north and south. All other streets are four rods wide. An alley two rods wide runs through each block, and each block contains five acres, divided into four lots of 1 1/4 acre each. This gives each family a corner lot for building purposes, and all outbuildings can be located on the inside of the lot with an outlet through the alley. By this arrangement all outbuildings are taken off the main streets. A post office was established in 1902 and given the name of Kelsey.

As soon as the colony was established, a building was erected for school and Church purposes. The principal of the school was furnished by the mission, free of charge, to the colonists, but the assistant teacher was paid by the colonists. When Pres. Duffin was released in November, 1906, the membership of the colony had increased to about 70 families, or 400 souls, and a very nice building had been erected by the Relief Society for the use of its members. A tract of five acres, covered with a fine growth of native timber, had been secured for a park at the Kelsey colony adjoining the town.
