Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kimball Ward, Shelly Stake

KIMBALL WARD, Shelley Stake, Bingham Co., Idaho, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Snake River Valley which lies south of Basalt Ward. Snake River forms its western boundary, and the ward extends north and south about four miles, and west about five miles, Sand Creek being its eastern boundary. The saints residing in this locality are farmers, who live in a scattered condition upon their respective farms. The center of the ward, where the meeting house, a frame building, stands immediately east of the Oregon Short Line Railroad track, is about a mile from Snake River, four miles southwest of Basalt, nine miles southwest of Shelley, the stake headquarters, and about eight miles northwest of Blackfoot.

Prior to the building of the Oregon Short Line Railroad through the Snake River Valley, there was a stage station on Snake River about a mile west of the present Kimball meeting house. Jens Nielsen from Ovid, Bear Lake Co., Idaho, was among the first L. D. S. settlers in that part of the Snake River Valley, which is now included in Kimball Ward. He settled there in 1892. Other families of saints arrived afterwards, who at first belonged to the Basalt Ward. When the railroad was built through the country, a small station on the line was named Howard and the saints in the neighborhood were organized in 1902 as the Howard Branch, which consisted of saints who in part had belonged to the Blackfoot Ward and partly to the Basalt Ward of the Bingham Stake. John L. Wheeler was chosen as presiding Elder. A school house was built in 1904, when 72 families resided in that district of country, half of whom were Latter-day Saints. The Howard Branch was organized as a ward Jan. 19, 1905, named Kimball, in honor of Elias Kimball, the first president of the Blackfoot Stake, with Moroni Mecham as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1909 by Christopher A. Merkley, who in 1910 was succeeded by William B. Taylor, who in 1930 was succeeded by John C. Stutznegger, who presided Dec. 31, 1930, on which date the ward had 136 members, including 34 children. The total population of the Kimball Precinct was 197 in 1930.
