Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kimberly Ward

KIMBERLY WARD, Twin Falls Stake, Twin Falls Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Kimberly and vicinity. This town is situated on the Minidoka-Buhl branch of the Oregon Short Line Railroad, three miles south of Snake River, six miles east of Twin Falls and 32 miles west of Burley. It is the center of a fine irrigation district under the Twin Falls Irrigation Project, and has an excellent site for a beet sugar factory, flouring mill, etc., it being within five miles of the great Shoshone Falls, and within five miles of Twin Falls. Most of the saints belonging to the Kimberly Ward are farmers and live in a scattered condition on their respective farms surrounding the town of Kimberly. Some of the brethren are employees of the railroad company. The saints own a neat little meeting house, a frame building, with an auditorium seating 200 people. The farmers of Kimberly make the raising of potatoes a specialty.

When the lands under the Minidoka Reclamation Project were first brought into the market, a number of Latter-day Saints, seeking homes, were among the first settlers in that part of the country. As they increased in number, a townsite was surveyed in 1905 and the town lots placed on the market for sale Aug. 8, 1905. The first L. D. S. meetings were held in the private residence of Albert Franklin McEwan, but soon afterwards a meeting house was built.

On May 28, 1905, the saints in the Kimberly district were organized as a branch of the Marion Ward by the Cassia Stake presidency, with Magnus P. Swann as presiding Elder. He was succeeded in 1908 by Etson B. Wilkins, who presided until May 10, 1909, when the Kimberly Branch was organized as a regular bishop's ward with Etson B. Wilkins as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1915 by Joseph H. Sudweeks, who in 1921 was succeeded by Roy Wood, who in 1926 was succeeded by Niels A. Olsen, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Kimberly Ward had 275 members, including 59 children. The total population of Kimberly Precinct was 1,948 in 1930; of these 648 resided in the town of Kimberly.
