Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kingston Ward

KINGSTON WARD, Garfield Stake, Piute Co., Utah, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the town of Kingston and surrounding upland. Kingston is situated on the left bank, or south side, of the east fork of the Sevier River, three miles southeast of Junction, the county seat of Piute County, and seven miles northeast of Circleville. The south fork of the Sevier River forms the boundary line between the two wards, Kingston and Junction. Nearly threefourths of the people in the Kingston Ward live in the village and the rest are scattered on ranches extending up and down the east fork of the Sevier River for several miles. The meeting house, a fine brick building, occupies a central position in the village and nearby is a Relief Society hall, a small brick building.

In the fall of 1876 Thomas R. King of Fillmore, Millard Co., Utah, commenced to move his large family into Circle Valley, together with a number of his sons and their families, with a view of establishing themselves in a family United Order; a few of them moved over at once, while the remainder of the family did not arrive until 1877. They founded a settlement on the east side of the Sevier River, about two miles from the site of the original Circleville, built by the pioneers of Circle Valley in 1864. When the King families came into the valley there were a few non-Mormon settlers in that and the adjoining Junction Valley, besides several families of saints who had located at different points on the Sevier River and its branches and had commenced farming and ranching. The saints who had located in the new settlement, called Kingston, were organized as a branch of the Church by Stake Pres. Albert K. Thurber, May 6, 1877. Wm. King was chosen as the Bishop of the settlement; he was subsequently ordained to that position when the Kingston Ward was more fully organized Aug. 5, 1877. The United Order, which had been started in the spring of 1877 with Thomas R. King as president, contained some thirty families of saints when first organized, and farming and stock-raising were carried on quite successfully after that for about six years. During the time the brethren belonged to the Order they built a grist mill, a woollen factory and a tannery at the mouth of East Fork Canyon, half a mile east of the present site of Kingston. They also built a saw mill on City Creek, about six miles above the present junction, up in City Creek Canyon. The place was called Kingston from the beginning in honor of Thomas R. King. After the town of Kingston was surveyed the houses were built in fort style with the dining hall in the central building. Most of the houses were built around a ten-acre block. The activities of the United Order proved quite successful and farming was carried on somewhat extensively. Also large flocks and herds were taken care of in the Order, part of the cattle and horses being herded up the East Fork of the Sevier River and on Otter Creek. The large dining hall in which the people ate together for a couple of years or more was 70 feet long. Gradually, however, some of the people became dissatisfied and withdrew from the Order. Prior to the year 1877, as stated, there were only a few people in Circle Valley, most of these being outsiders or half-hearted Mormons. Thomas R. King died Feb. 3, 1879, at Kingston.

In 1883, by the advice of visiting Apostles, the United Order was discontinued, after which most of the people who had belonged to the Order moved away from Circle Valley and scattered to different parts of the country.

In dissolving the Order, the factory, tannery and mill at the mouth of East Fork Canyon became the property of the King family; hence William and Thomas E. King moved down to that place and took charge of these industries. They transferred the name of the old settlement to the new place, and for a number of years the settlement on the east side of the Sevier River, near the mouth of East Fork Canyon, was called alternately Kingston and East Junction. But the name Kingston finally prevailed, until the Junction Ward was organized in 1887 with Rufus A. Allen as Bishop.

When old Kingston was broken up, Isaac Riddle built a grist mill at East Junction, and a log school house was erected there as early as 1880. East Junction was finally absorbed in Kingston. On Jan. 6, 1895, Rufus A. Allen, formerly Bishop of the Junction Ward, was chosen as Bishop of the new Kingston Ward, then organized. This was the beginning of the present Kingston Ward. Bishop Allen was succeeded in 1917 by Marion Devalson Allen, who presided as Bishop Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the membership of the Kingston Ward was 129, including 19 children. The total population of the Kingston Precinct was 240 in 1930.
