Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kirtland

KIRTLAND, Ohio, has been connected with Church history since the autumn of 1830, when Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, Peter Whitmer, jun. and Richard Ziba Peterson arrived at Kirtland from the East and as missionaries commenced at once a successful missionary labor. Among their converts were Sidney Rigdon and others who subsequently became prominent in the Church. Early in 1831 Joseph Smith the Prophet and his family arrived in Kirtland and made his temporary home in the house of Newel K. Whitney, afterwards a presiding Bishop of the Church. The branch organized in Kirtland by the four missionaries mentioned soon grew in number by the arrival of saints from the state of New York and other places and steps were taken to build a town which was named Kirtland in the immediate vicinity where the Kirtland Mills had previously been erected. With the exception of a short period when the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon resided at Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio, Kirtland was the headquarters of the Church from January, 1831, to the spring of 1838. In the latter year Joseph Smith the Prophet moved to Missouri. A temple was commenced in Kirtland in 1833, and finished in 1836. (See Kirtland Temple.) Kirtland has a long and interesting history. Here the School of the Prophets was first started and the Elders received many blessings.

Hundreds of Elders were sent out from Kirtland to preach the gospel in the United States, Canada and Great Britain and the town at the time of its greatest prosperity (1833-1838) had about 2,000 inhabitants. After the dedication of the Kirtland Temple a great apostasy took place in Kirtland, during which several of the Twelve Apostles and others who had been active and prominent in the Church rebelled against the Prophet Joseph Smith, who, in consequence, was obliged to leave Kirtland and go to Missouri, where the headquarters of the Church were then located. Brigham Young and others of the faithful Elders of the Church were likewise compelled to flee from their enemies in Kirtland.

Those of the saints who remained in Kirtland were subsequently reorganized into a stake of Zion under the presidency of Almon W. Babbitt, but after most of the saints had left the states and located in the Rocky Mountains, Kirtland was deserted by nearly all the faithful members of the Church and since that time there has been no organization in Kirtland representing the true Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The temple was left without any legitimate owner and was fast going into ruins, when the Reorganized Church (or so-called Josephites) obtained possession of the building by legal process, and they are still the custodians of the building which, however, naturally belongs to the Latter-day Saints who have their headquarters in Utah. (For a more complete history of Kirtland see "Historical Record", Vol. 5, pp. 62-71 and Church histories in general.)

According to the U. S. census there were 1,598 inhabitants in Kirtland in 1850; 1,029 in 1870; 984 in 1880; 1,134 in 1900, and 1,602 in 1930.
