Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Kirtland Camp

KIRTLAND CAMP. After the glorious manifestation in Kirtland in 1836 followed a great apostasy which affected every quorum in the Church, and which became so general and bitter in 1837 that the lives and property of those who remained faithful were exposed to the greatest danger. Consequently many of the leading men, including Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon and Brigham Young, found it necessary to leave Kirtland quietly and journey to Missouri, where the saints at that time were building up Far West and other settlements which had been designated as gathering places for the saints. After the departure of the Prophet, the desire to migrate to Missouri became general among those who had kept the faith in Kirtland, and on the 6th of March, 1838, the Seventies assembled in the temple for the purpose of devising means of removing their quorum thither according to a revelation which had been given on the subject. At that time there were only two quorums of Seventy in the Church, numbering about 150 men. On March 10, 1838, it was made manifest by vision and prophecy that the Seventies should go to Missouri in a camp, pitching their tents by the way. On the 13th they with others, adopted a constitution and laws to govern them on their journey, which was signed by 175 of the brethren. The privilege was given to anyone to go even if they did not belong to the Seventies, provided they would abide by the constitution. Elders James Foster, Zeta Pulsipher, Joseph Young, Henry Harriman, Josiah Butterfield, Benjamin Wilber and Elias Smith were appointed to act as commissioners to lead the camp, which was divided into companies of tens with a captain over each. Elias Smith was chosen clerk and historian and Jonathan H. Hale treasurer. On Thursday, July 5th, the company met about a quarter of a mile south of the temple and pitched their tents in the form of a hollow square. On Saturday, July 6, 1838, at noon, the brethren struck their tents and began to move toward the south, and in thirty minutes the entire camp was in motion. It consisted of 515 souls, namely, 249 males and 266 females. They had 27 tents, 59 wagons, 97 horses, 22 oxen, 69 cows and one bull. Jonathan Dunham acted as engineer. Continuing the journey the camp traveled via Aurora (Portage Co.), Talmadge, Akorn, Chippawa (Wayne Co.), Mohecan (Ashland Co.), Mifflin, Springfield, Mansfield (Richland Co.), Grand Prairie, Burlington, Dayton, Montgomery and Eton, all in Ohio; Richmond, Centerville, Jacksonburg, Germantown, Cambridge, Dublin, Lewisville, Ogden, Graysville, Knightstown, Charlottsville, Portland, Jackson, Greenfield, Indianapolis, Bridgeport, Plainfield, Guilport, Belleville, Stylesville, Mount Vernon, Mount Meridian, Putnamsville, Manhattan, Pleasant Garden, and Terre Haute, all in Indiana; Pilot Grove, Independence, Springfield, Jacksonville, Brussels (Phillips Ferry), in Illinois, and across Illinois and the Mississippi River into Louisiana, Pike Co., Mo. Thence they traveled via Paris, Huntsville (Randolph Co.), Keytesville (Chariton Co.), and Chilicothes to Far West, where they arrived Oct. 2, 1838. Here they encamped on the public square directly south and close by the excavation of the Lord's House, and here friends greeted friends in the name of the Lord. Isaac Morley, Patriarch in Far West, furnished food for the camp. The next day (Oct. 3rd) the camp continued its journey to Ambrosia Creek, and the next day (Oct. 4th) arrived in Adam-ondi-Ahman, Daviess Co., Missouri, their destination. They at once pitched their tents about sunset when one of the brethren living in the place proclaimed with a loud voice: "Brethren, your long and tedious journey is now ended. You are on the public square of Adam-ondi-Ahman, where Adam blessed his posterity when they rose up and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel, and he being filled with the Holy Ghost predicted what should befall his posterity to the latest generation." The Kirtland Camp arrived when persecution was raging against the saints in Missouri, and a month later the saints at Adam-ondi-Ahman and other places were forced to leave the vicinity and seek refuge in Far West. ("Historical Record," Vol. 7, pp. 593 to 603.)
