Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Knightsville Ward

KNIGHTSVILLE WARD, Tintic Stake, Utah Co., Utah, consisted of the Latter-day Saints residing in a once flourishing mining camp situated on the summit of the mountains which separate Tintic Valley from Utah Valley, about a mile east of Eureka and some 15 miles west of Goshen. There was nothing left in Knightsville in 1930 except the ruins of some of the old buildings.

Jesse Knight, of Provo, after prospecting for many years in the mountains surrounding Tintic Valley, was led by instinctive inspiration to hunt for precious metals at the very place where he later found them. After commencing to develop the mine, he employed quite a number of the brethren to work his claims. They soon commenced to hold meetings, and built a meeting and school house in 1897. Bro. Knight dug a village well for the accommodation of the laborers employed by him and also for mining purposes. From this well, which was operated by a steam pump, Bro. Knight permitted all who so desired to take water free of charge. John P. Boyle and family who hailed from Payson, Utah, were the first people who moved on to the Knightsville townsite. At a special meeting held Oct. 3, 1897, the saints, who were employed by Jesse Knight in and about the "Uncle Sam" and the "Humbug" mines, were organized into a branch of the Church named the Knightsville Branch, in honor of Jesse Knight, with William A. McCullough as president. At this time the branch belonged to the Utah Stake, but when the Nebo Stake of Zion was organized Jan. 13, 1901, it became a part of that stake, and the branch was organized as the Knightsville Ward with John Roundy as Bishop. He was succeeded n 1909 by Perry B. Fuller, who in 1915 was succeeded by George H. Taylor, who in 1917 was succeeded by Joseph A. Gagon, who presided until Aug. 18, 1924, when the Knightsville Ward was disorganized, most of the members having moved away. Those who remained became a part of the Eureka Ward. When the Tintic Stake was organized April 22, 1917, Knightsville became a part of that stake.
