Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lake Point Ward

LAKE POINT WARD, Tooele Stake, Tooele Co., Utah, consists of Latter-day Saints residing in the extreme northeast part of Tooele Valley, bordering on the Great Salt Lake on the north, the Oquirrh Mountains on the east, Batesville (Erda) Ward on the south, and Grantsville on the west. The inhabitants are nearly all farmers most of whom reside in the village of Lake Point (originally called E T City) and vicinity, which contains a limited amount of good farming land. The ward has a modern meeting house (a rock building), a good school house and some comfortable private residences. It is a scattered settlement of farmers. The Richville Flouring Mill and the Utah Woolpulling Company's plant are within the limits of the ward, three miles southwest of Lake Point center.

E T City (now Lake Point) was first settled in the spring of 1854 by Peter Maughan and others, who located about a mile southwest of where the present Lake Point meeting house stands. But finding the water there brackish, Brother Maughan went northeast and commenced farming, raising a crop the first year. In 1855 a number of other settlers located in the same locality and thus a little village, or sort of string town, came into existence under the name of E T City, so named in honor of Apostle Ezra T. Benson. In 1858 the little settlement was vacated for a short time when the people participated in the general "Move" south. After the departure of Peter Maughan for Cache Valley in 1856, George W. Bryan became presiding Elder at E T City. He was succeeded in 1872 by William F. Moss, who presided in that capacity until June 24, 1877, when the Tooele Stake of Zion was organized, and the saints at E T City were organized as a regular bishop's ward with William F. Moss as Bishop. He was succeeded in 1901 by Emil Feller, who in 1907 was succeeded by Samuel Paget, who in 1909 was succeeded by James Maxwell Yates, who on Jan. 5, 1930, was succeeded by William George Yates, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Lake Point Ward had 235 members, including 54 children. The total population of the Lake Point Precinct was 299 in 1930. In August, 1923, the name of E T City Ward was changed to Lake Point.
