Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Lake View Ward, Sharon Stake

LAKE VIEW WARD, Sharon Stake, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in a farming district lying west of Provo, Utah Co., Utah, including a strip of country extending north and south about four miles, and east and west about two miles. Northward the ward extends to the Vineyard Ward, east to the Timpanogos and Grand View wards, south to the Provo River, and west to the Utah Lake. The Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad and the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad pass through the ward from northwest to southeast and the Salt Lake and Utah Railroad from north to south. Nearly all the inhabitants are Latter-day Saints and live in a scattered condition on their respective farms. L. D. S. meetings are held in a fine brick meeting house located about 3 1/2 miles northwest of the Provo Tabernacle and eight miles south of Pleasant Grove. The name Lake View was undoubtedly suggested by the fact that a most excellent view is had from the higher lands in the ward over the Utah Lake and a large portion of the beautiful Utah Valley.

The first settler in that part of Utah Valley now included in the Lake View Ward was Peter Madsen, a fisherman, and a native of Denmark, who settled at the mouth of Provo River in the summer of 1855, and established himself as a fisherman. During the grasshopper period in 1855-1856, when the grasshoppers destroyed the crops, Brother Madsen fed hundreds of people who visited him, besides sending scores of barrels of fish to the neighboring settlements to be distributed among the poor. During the time of the "Move" in 1858, hundreds of people encamped on or near the banks of the Provo River northward, pitching their tents and camping on the sand ridges. There are traces of their dug-outs to this day. In due course of time other settlers located in that part of the country and a school district was created in 1876. When the Utah Stake of Zion was reorganized in June, 1877, the saints who had settled in that part of Utah Valley now included in the Lake View Ward were organized as the Provo 5th Ward (later changed to Lake View Ward) with Peter Madsen as Bishop. He was succeeded in that capacity in 1892 by John Johnson, who in 1915 was succeeded by William W. Taylor, who in 1928 was succeeded by Spencer Madsen, who acted as Bishop of the Lake View Ward Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the ward had 372 members, including 88 children. Lakeview Precinct had 376 inhabitants in 1890 and 465 in 1930.
