Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Basalt Ward

BASALT WARD, Shelley Stake, Bingham Co., Idaho, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in that part of Snake River Valley which lies between Blackfoot on the south, Goshen, on the east and Shelley on the north. The ward extends north and south about eighteen miles, and east and west about ten miles, taking in a scope of country lying on the east side of Snake River. Nearly all the people live in a scattered condition on their respective farms, though a townsite has been surveyed. Nearly all the lands and gardens are irrigated from the Cedar Point Canal and the Snake River Valley Canal. These two canals head at the same point on Snake River, about three miles below Idaho Falls, but separate three and one-half miles below the head. They are owned and operated by the same company.

Among the first Latter-day Saints who settled in the neighborhood of Basalt Railroad Station on the Oregon Short Line Railroad was Andrew O. Ingleström, who entered land in June, 1885. Other settlers soon followed, among whom were a number of non-Mormons. A canal was constructed for irrigation purposes tapping Snake River 3 1/2 miles below Idaho Falls, and 11 miles above the Basalt townsite. The locality was originally called Cedar Point settlement and was organized Oct. 18, 1885, as a branch of the Lewisville Ward, with Andrew O. Ingleström as presiding Elder. When the Eagle Rock Ward was organized in November, 1886, the branch was attached to that ward, where it remained until Aug. 19, 1888, when the Cedar Point Branch was organized as a bishop's ward, called Basalt, with Andrew O. Ingleström as Bishop (as a part of the Bannock Stake). On the same date two other new wards were organized in the Bannock Stake, namely, the Taylor Ward and the Willow Creek Ward. At the time of its organization the Basalt Ward contained all that strip of country lying south of Eagle Rock (Idaho Falls) and extending southward as far as there were any Latter-day Saints in the Snake River Valley. Thus Basalt Ward became the parent ward of a number of other ward organizations. Bishop Ingleström presided until 1904, when he was succeeded by William M. Dye, who in 1924 was succeeded by Philip J. Paskett, who in 1928 was succeeded by Rulon M. Jensen, who on May 4, 1930, was succeeded by Francis E. Kelsey, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Basalt Ward had 440 members, including 86 children. The total population of the Basalt Precinct was 1,215 in 1930, of which 259 resided in Basalt, and 236 in Firth.
