Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1941)

Las Vegas Ward

LAS VEGAS WARD, Moapa Stake, Clark Co., Nevada, consists of the Latter-day Saints residing in the railroad town of Las Vegas on the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad, 66 miles southwest of Overton, the headquarters of the Moapa Stake, 450 miles southwest of Salt Lake City and 301 miles northeast of Los Angeles, California. Las Vegas is a Spanish name meaning "The Meadows". Some of the brethren at Las Vegas are employed by the railroad company, while others are engaged in business, farming, and stock-raising. The saints in 1930 owned a small meeting house in Las Vegas which was not at that time large enough to accommodate the membership of the ward.

Las Vegas Springs was an important camping place on the so-called Spanish Trail before the advent of Latter-day Saints into the Rocky Mountain country. Capt. Jefferson Hunt, of Mormon Battalion fame, and a few companions, were the first Latter-day Saints to travel over that trail from Salt Lake City to California in 1847. Much traveling over said trail by Latter-day Saints was continued for many years, until the building of the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. Many caravans and teams of all kinds, freighting between southern California and what in early days was termed "The Lake," meaning Salt Lake City, took place.

In 1855 a L. D. S. colony was founded at Las Vegas, under the advice of Pres. Brigham Young, which colony prospered and was a most important outpost of L. D. S. settlements until the Johnston Army troubles in 1858 caused the saints to vacate the place. (See Mss. history of Las Vegas Mission.) Ruins of buildings erected by the saints during the time of the Mormon occupancy can still be seen in Las Vegas. When the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad (originally called the San Pedro Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad) was built through the desert in 1900-1905, Las Vegas became an important railroad town and the end of a division. Among the railroad employees were a number of Latter-day Saints (some with families) including Charles P. Ronnow, formerly a resident of Panaca, Nevada. As the town grew, the L. D. S. population also increased in number and a L. D. S. branch organization was effected in 1915 as a part of the Bunkerville Ward. This continued until April 30, 1922, when the saints at Las Vegas were organized into an independent branch with Ira J. Earl as presiding Elder. On June 1, 1924, the Las Vegas Branch was organized into a regular bishop's ward, with Ira J. Earl as Bishop. He was succeeded by Bryan L. Bunker in 1929, who presided Dec. 31, 1930. On that date the Las Vegas Ward had a membership of 410, including 101 children. The total population of Las Vegas Precinct was 5,922 in 1930, of which 5,165 were residents of Las Vegas City.
