Creation of the Earth.

Two Creations.—There were two creations—the first spiritual, the second temporal. This truth is taught inferentially in the first and second chapters of Genesis, King James's Translation; but more plainly and pointedly in the Book of Moses, a reproduction of the Book of Genesis, revised and amplified by the spirit of revelation in Joseph the Seer. Here is the modern rendering of the passages bearing directly upon this point:

As Related in the Book of Moses.—"And now, behold, I say unto you, that these are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth.

"And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air;

"But I, the Lord God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

"And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word." (Moses 3:4-7.)

Adam's Incarnation.—In the Book of Abraham the incarnation of Adam is thus described:

"And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit) and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul" (Abr. 5:7).

Plurality of Worlds.—Regarding this earth and other creations, the Lord said to Moses:

"And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.

"And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many.

"But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them."

* * * * * * * * * * *

"And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: The heavens they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

"And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof, even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works; neither to my words.

"For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."—Moses 1:33-39.

Purposes of Earth Life.—God's purpose, primarily, in placing man upon the earth, is to give him a body, a mortal tabernacle, which is rendered immortal through death and the resurrection. The spirit and the body constitute the soul. It is the soul that is redeemed from the grave (D&C 88:15,16). It is the soul that goes on to perfection. Man is here also for experience, that he may advance from stage to stage of growth and development, approximating nearer and nearer to the divine ideal voiced by the Savior: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."—Matthew 5:48.

Man on Probation.—There is still another purpose in man's mortal existence, and it is referred to in the Book of Abraham, where the Creator, after announcing to "those who were with him" the proposed making of an earth "whereon these may dwell," says: "And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command." Thus we are shown that man while here is on probation, that he may demonstrate his worthiness to inherit the great things held in reserve for the righteous.
