Divine Authority, Continued.

A Twofold Power.—In an article on Priesthood, prepared by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and read at a conference of the Church in Nauvoo, Illinois, October, 1840, the following sentences occur:

"There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the scripture, viz., the Melchizedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom of God, in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven."—("History of the Church," Vol. IV, p. 207.)

Spiritual and Temporal.—Why there are two priesthoods, or, more properly speaking, two grand divisions of the Priesthood, is because the Church of Christ has to do with temporal as well as with spiritual things. All things, however, are spiritual unto God. The laws and commandments that emanate from him are of that character. He gives no temporal commandment. All his laws are spiritual. As eternity includes time, so the spiritual includes the temporal.

A Divided Jurisdiction.—The Melchizedek Priesthood has general authority and jurisdiction over all things, spiritual and temporal: while the Aaronic or lesser Priesthood, which is an appendage to the higher power, has a limited jurisdiction, its special calling being to administer in temporal things.

"The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things.

"The second priesthood is called the priesthood of Aaron, because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations.

"Why it is called the lesser priesthood, is because it is an appendage to the greater or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering outward ordinances.

"The power and authority of the Higher or Melchizedek Priest hood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church. * * *

"The power and authority of the Lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel—the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, agreeable to the covenants and commandments."—(D. and C. 107:8, 13, 14, 18-20.)

The Government of God.—The Government of God, with its two great wings of authority, corresponds to the duality of the soul: and the saving of souls, here and hereafter, is the grand purpose for which this government, the Church of Christ, was organized. The necessity for a church,—which some people question, just as some question the necessity for a civil government, or a government of any sort,—ought to be apparent at a glance. It is as plain as that twice two make four. Two men, united, are more capable than one man, the powers possessed by them being equal. Individuals, working separately, however good their intentions, can never accomplish as much as a community of men and women, imbued with a common purpose, and pushing forward the same enterprise. The difference between a single shot and a whole volley, between one rifleman and a regiment, may serve as a sufficient illustration.

The Priesthood and the Soul.—As the spirit and the body constitute the soul, so the Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthoods constitute the government of the Church. As through the medium of the mortal body, with its various members and organs, the tangible things of this life are grasped and utilized, while things pertaining to a higher state of existence are perceived, comprehended, and made practical, by means of the spiritual faculties; so, by this twain of powers, differing in their prerogatives, yet allied, interwoven, and harmonious in their mutual workings, is carried on, in this world and in all worlds, the great cause of truth and righteousness, for the salvation and never-ending progress of God's children.

Furthermore, to continue the analogy, it is the spirit, or higher part of man, that controls, directs, and supplies the motive power for the body, being the vital mainspring of that wondrous piece of machinery, whose functions are forwarded by the animation resulting from union and normal operation. Even so is it the Melchizedek Priesthood, holding the right of presidency, which controls, influences, and directs the entire body of the Church, delegating, however, a portion of its authority to the Lesser Priesthood, that it likewise may possess and wield its legitimate powers, and execute fully the purposes for which it was designed.

The Channel of Revelation.—Speaking of the eternity of the Priesthood, the Prophet Joseph says:

"Its institution was prior to the foundation of this earth, or the morning stars sang together, or the Sons of God shouted for joy,' and is the highest and holiest Priesthood, and is after the order of the Son of God, and all other priesthoods are only parts, ramifications, powers and blessings belonging to the same, and are held, controlled, and directed by it. It is the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing his glory at the beginning of the creation of this earth, and through which he has continued to reveal himself to the children of men to the present time, and through which he will make known his purposes to the end of time."—("History of the Church," Vol. IV, p. 207.)

Adam's Position.—In another place, the Prophet thus continues:

"The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the creation, before the world was formed [that is, in the spiritual creation, before the temporal world was formed]. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the scriptures."—("History of the Church," Vol. III, pp. 385, 386.)

Noah Next to Adam.—"Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven."—(Ibid, p. 386.)

An Everlasting Principle.—"The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority.

* * * * * * * * * * *

Succession and Descent.—"The Savior, Moses, and Elias gave the keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before Him. * * * How have we come at the Priesthood in the last days? It came down, down, in regular succession. Peter, James and John had it given to them, and they gave it to others. Christ is the Great High Priest: Adam next."—(Ibid, 386-388.)

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.—Peter, James and John—not as mortal men, but as ministering angels, sent from heaven for the purpose—gave the Melchizedek Priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery; and prior to the coming of that Priesthood, they received the Aaronic Priesthood from John the Baptist, also acting as an angel. The exact date of the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood is not given in the Church records, but the event must have taken place between May 15, 1829, when the Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon Joseph and Oliver, and April 6, 1830, the date of the Church's organization, when they were sustained, respectively, as the First and Second Elders thereof.

Spirits Foreordained.—In view of the fact that these ordinations were subsequent to the Prophet's vision, in the spring of 1820, when the Father and the Son appeared to him, some have found it difficult to interpret the divine declaration, that no man without the Melchizedek Priesthood "can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." (D&C 84:19-22.) But the problem is easy of solution, in the light of the Prophet's teachings. Did he not give the key to it when he said that certain men, called to minister to the inhabitants of this world, were ordained to that very purpose before the world was? (Compendium, p. 285.) I have already cited the examples of Abraham and Jeremiah, who were "chosen" and "ordained" before they were born. That Joseph Smith was likewise preordained, seems to me a necessary inference, in view of the facts presented. For if no man without the Melchizedek Priesthood can see the face of God the Father and live, and Joseph Smith, nine years before he received either of the Priesthoods from those heavenly messengers, looked upon the faces of both the Father and the Son and survived, it indicates, in accordance with his own statement and the examples given, that certain spirits are ordained to certain callings before they tabernacle in the flesh, and that he himself held the Melchizedek Priesthood when he saw the face of God at the opening of the last gospel dispensation.

An ordination in the flesh, after an ordination in the spirit, seems perfectly consistent; for the body was not present when the spirit was ordained, and it is the soul, spirit and body, that God is dealing with and acting through, in this stage of existence. That supplemental ordinations are sometimes in order, is evident from the fact that Joseph and Oliver ordained each other, after they had been ordained by the angel, or angels; and that, too, by divine commandment.—("Pearl of Great Price,"—"Writings of Joseph Smith," 2:71.)

Natural and Spiritual Eyes.—There is another interpretation, which holds that the necessity for the Melchizedek Priesthood, in the case of those who look upon the countenance of Deity, applies only to such as behold him with the natural eye, and that it has no reference to those who see God by means of the spiritual vision. Joseph's experience, when he beheld the Father and the Son, was probably a parallel to that of Moses, when he saw God face to face, and testified as follows:

"Mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes; for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me, and I beheld his face; for I was transfigured before him."—(Moses 1:11.)

That this was the way in which Joseph saw God, is virtually affirmed in the following passage:

"We, Joseph Smith, Jr., and Sidney Rigdon, being in the Spirit, * * * by the power of the Spirit our eyes were opened, and our understandings were enlightened, so as to see and understand the things of God * * * whom we saw and with whom we conversed in the heavenly vision."—(D. and C. 76:11, 12, 14.)

In other words, Joseph and Sidney saw God (Jesus Christ) with their spiritual eyes (the eyes of their spirits), reinforced by the all-revealing Spirit of God.

Qualifications for the Priesthood.—The qualifications required in those whom the Lord ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood are thus outlined in the Book of Mormon:

"My brethren," [it is the Prophet Alma who is speaking]. "I would that ye should remember that the Lord God ordained priests, after his holy order, which was after the order of his Son, to teach these things unto the people.

"And those priests were ordained after the order of his Son, in a manner that thereby the people might know in what manner to look forward to his Son for redemption.

"And this is the manner after which they were ordained: being called and prepared from the foundation of the world, according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works: in the first place being left to choose good or evil: therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceeding great faith, are called with a holy calling, * * * while others would reject the Spirit of God on account of the hardness of their hearts and blindness of their minds, while, if it had not been for this, they might had as great privilege as their brethren.

* * * * * * * * * * *

"Now they were ordained after this manner: Being called with a holy calling, and ordained with a holy ordinance, and taking upon them the High Priesthood of the holy order, which calling and ordinance and High Priesthood is without beginning or end:

"Thus they become High Priests for ever, after the order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father. * * * *

"Now as I said concerning the holy order of this High Priesthood: there were many who were ordained and became High Priests of God: and it was on account of their exceeding faith and repentance, and their righteousness before God."—(Alma 13:1-10.)
