The Living Christ: The Testimony of the Apostles

As we commemorate Jesus Christ's birth two millennia ago, we offer testimony of His matchless life and the infinite virtue of His atoning sacrifice. None has had greater influence on all who have lived and will live upon earth.

He was the Great Jehovah of the Old Testament and the Messiah of the New. Under His Father's direction, He created the earth. Though sinless, He was baptized to fulfill all righteousness. He went about doing good, yet was despised for it. His gospel was a message of peace and goodwill. He entreated all to follow His example. He walked Palestinian roads, healing the sick, causing the blind to see, and raising the dead. He taught eternal truths, the reality of our premortal existence, life's purpose on earth, and potential for God's sons and daughters in the life to come.

He instituted the sacrament as a reminder of His atoning sacrifice. He was arrested and condemned on spurious charges, convicted to satisfy a mob, and sentenced to die on Calvary's cross. He gave His life to atone for all mankind's sins. His was a great vicarious gift for all who would ever live upon earth.

His life, central to all human history, neither began in Bethlehem nor concluded on Calvary. He was the Firstborn of the Father, the Only Begotten Son in the flesh, the world's Redeemer.

He rose from the grave to become the firstfruits of those who slept. As Risen Lord, He visited those He had loved in life. He also ministered among His other sheep in ancient America. In the modern world, He and His Father appeared to boy Joseph Smith, ushering in the long-promised dispensation of the fulness of times.

Joseph Smith wrote of the Living Christ: "His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father."

Joseph also declared: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God."

His priesthood and Church have been restored upon the earth—"built upon the foundation of apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone."

He will someday return to earth. His glory shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. He will rule as King of Kings and reign as Lord of Lords, and every knee shall bend and every tongue shall speak in worship before Him. Each will stand to be judged according to our works and the desires of our hearts.

We bear testimony, as His duly ordained Apostles—that Jesus is the Living Christ, the immortal Son of God. He is the great King Immanuel, who stands today on the right hand of His Father. He is the light, the life, and the hope of the world. His way leads to happiness in this life and eternal life in the world to come. God be thanked for the matchless gift of His divine Son.

Signed by the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. January 1, 2000.
