Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

Preface

One who understands the moral power of the individuals surrounding Joseph Smith will never see him in quite the same way again. Asael Smith wrote to his children in the hope that his good qualities would "revive and live in you," a process at work to some extent in every family. Since Joseph Smith's grandparents largely created the influences of his youth, the formation of the boy is perceived through his family background. Research transforms empty names into vital people, and isolated facts into gripping biographies. Asael Smith and Solomon Mack were part of the dynamic era that founded a great nation, but their moral fiber contributed to the later founding of an important church. Although their venturesome lives are fascinating by themselves, they also bear upon a most significant issue.

Since Joseph Smith claimed modern direct revelation, his reliability is the central historical question. No approach throws more light on his early life than close study of his environment. Careful biography of the Prophet begins with an accurate understanding of the operating convictions of his home, and these stemmed from his grandparents. Sweeping statements about the general religious attitude in early nineteenth-century America will not do—even studying early New England or Vermont is not enough. No one really knows Joseph Smith's background until he knows which influences of that time and region were operative in his family. So nothing less than detailed portraits of his immediate ancestors can furnish answers. And these must throw intense light on their personalities. That is why the writings of each grandfather are published here with their life stories. Nothing reveals personality as effectively as self-expression.

Joseph Smith's common image is badly distorted, since reputable publishers continue to print astonishing misinformation from pseudo-experts on Mormonism and its founder. But serious researchers distrust Joseph Smith's biographies of current national reputation. This founder of a modern revealed religion may always be controversial, but that is no excuse for canonizing imaginative literature as history. In this situation, everyone has to take firsthand evidence and judge for himself—a practical solution, for no religion surpasses Mormonism in the preservation of the authentic documents of its early years. In fact, the last decade marks a new age in classification and duplication of library materials, to say nothing of the availability of papers in private hands. This means that historical material on Joseph Smith has at least doubled in recent years, making possible a fairly objective agreement on the main sources for each period of his life. This book begins a series on the Mormon Prophet, narrating a leading phase of his life from all reliable records and including the essential documents on which interpretation must be based. Evidence about Mormonism will speak for itself.
