Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

Acknowledgments

Thanks must be expressed to those that have cooperated in making these materials available: to Brigham Young University for time and research grants; to Brigham Young University librarians, including Adele Manwaring for her efficiency in procuring missing publications through interlibrary loans; to LDS Church President Joseph Fielding Smith and Church Historian Howard W. Hunter for permission to publish many sources, including the facsimile of Asael Smith's family address; to Assistant Church Historian Earl E. Olson and his staff—particularly archivist Dean Jessee for endless patience with requests and inquiries; to the LDS Genealogical Society staff for their helpfulness in utilizing their magnificent source collection—and to Robert J. Tarte, Boston Branch librarian; to friends who have been generous in consultation, particularly Professors Richard L. Bushman of Boston University, Milton V. Backman, Jr., and Russell Rich of Brigham Young University, and Donald Q. Cannon of the University of Maine, Portland; to Archibald Hanna and Yale University for library assistance and permission to publish George A. Smith's correspondence; to Mrs. Charles Potter and Essex Institute for assistance and permission to publish Asael Smith's 1796 letter in facsimile; to Mrs. Kristin Bowman and Misses Sandra Compton and Pamela Flynn, my secretaries, who checked research leads, filed, and typed; to Robert Yukes and Miss Nancy Richards, who each took personal time to locate and gather materials from Massachusetts archives; to David H. Horne, president of the Asael Smith Descendants, for his courteous support and willingness to share Asael Smith's Bible, in his possession. Finally, production details open new problems to writers. William James Mortimer, manager of Deseret Book Company, has cordially solved difficult problems, and editor (and personal friend) Gary Gillespie has gone many extra miles in making the printing as perfect as possible. All who have helped produce a book of serious research can never be named—some additional recognitions are found in the notes.
