Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

Source Note

Behind Joseph Smith's vigorous grandparents are equally interesting sources from which their lives were reconstructed. Thus Notes on Text (p. 161) are the foundation of this study. For that reason they have been set in easily readable type. Facts and relationships appear there that could not readily fit into the biographical narratives.

The footprints of the Smiths and Macks are in public records in a dozen major localities in New England, but their personalities live in their writings. Their manuscripts are preferred sources, necessitating some general observations on their treatment here. Most of the unpublished Smith and Mack documents are carefully preserved in the archives of the Church Historian's Office in Salt Lake City. Important manuscripts elsewhere have their location identified.

These documents have been reproduced here by scholarly methods, but for an audience not restricted to scholars. A researcher with a manuscript and a reader of a book do not have identical goals. Therefore, spelling errors are not published, modernized spelling is used in certain regular cases, and punctuation and capitalization have been frequently adjusted in quotations. Slavish literalism in this regard may be an abdication of the historian's main duty—to aid his documents to communicate with his reader. Despite some negative comment, Solomon Mack does not spell badly. Like much writing from his time, his prose needs slight editing for good readability. If this makes Asael or John Smith spell a bit better than they really did, perhaps the distortion is insignificant. Asael was an experienced town clerk and wrote better than average for his day. However, care has been taken to reproduce exact wording of all documents quoted. Additions or substitutions appear in brackets, and words subtracted are replaced by the standard ellipsis sign. Solomon Mack's Narrative (chapter 3) preserves original paging in brackets so that citations may easily be identified.

The writings of Asael Smith and Solomon Mack are reprinted in this book, with many unpublished comments from Lucy Mack Smith on the early history of both families. Serious writers revise their first drafts, and both Solomon Mack and his daughter Lucy did the same. The published versions sluffed off many interesting details as trivial; yet such matters are vital to biographers. But Lucy's first draft of her family story is almost completely preserved, mostly in her own handwriting. This is a tremendous fact, and adds to what has been known about Martha Coray, the secretary for Lucy Mack Smith (discussed in my "Circumstantial Confirmation of the First Vision through Reminiscences," Brigham Young University Studies, vol. 9 [1969], pp. 386-88). Lucy's first version proves that editors Martha and Howard Coray preserved her record faithfully, for their finished product incorporates her handwritten recollections with very few basic modifications. On the other hand, Lucy Smith clearly intended to supplement her first draft, for her manuscript has numerous additions in her hand and a few in the reviser's hand. A few parts of the published Lucy Smith record are not found in her own manuscript; however, she was responsible for these additions, for she gave Orson Pratt written permission to publish "all those manuscripts you have, once belonging to me" (Letter of Feb. 4, 1854, Nauvoo, Ill., cit. Kate B. Carter [ed.], Our Pioneer Heritage, vol. 3 [Salt Lake City, 1960], p. 125). Thus Orson Pratt's publication in 1853 was Lucy's revised work, and one must designate her handwritten narrative as a "preliminary manuscript," the name it carries in footnote citations herein.

Later editions of Lucy Mack Smith have made some textual modifications, so this study has utilized her initial printing of 1853. Consequently, page numbers herein correspond to Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, the 1853 edition, conveniently reprinted by Arno Press and the New York Times in 1969. Undoubtedly the most popular version is that edited by Preston Nibley as the History of Joseph Smith by His Mother. Page numbers of this can generally be found by the context of a given quotation. Orson Pratt's full title of Lucy Smith's history included biography of both Joseph Smith "and his progenitors for many generations." That is precisely what Lucy's introduction to her preliminary manuscript contemplated. She reflected upon her unique knowledge:

"none on earth do know as fully as myself, the entire history of those of whom I speak and all those intimately connected with them." Furthermore, Joseph Smith's mother saw him in the context of a religious inheritance, for she wished to trace not only the lives of the Prophet and his parents, "but likewise to give a sketch of their progenitors and the dealing of God with them also."

Why is it this babbler gains so many followers and retains them? Because I possess the principle of love. All I can offer the world [is] a good heart and a good hand.

Mormons can testify whether I am willing to lay down my life for a Mormon. If it has been demonstrated that I have been willing to die for a Mormon, I am bold to declare before heaven that I am just as ready to die for a Presbyterian, a Baptist, or any other denomination.

It is a love of liberty which inspires my soul. Civil and religious liberty was diffused into my soul by my grandfathers while they dandled me on their knees. And shall I want friends? No.

JOSEPH SMITH, JR.

Journal kept by Willard Richards

July 9, 1843
