Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

CHAPTER 1

Prologue

Character assassination predates history, but responsible historians attempt to set the record straight. Joseph Smith published his life story to counteract false reports, to present "the facts as they have transpired in relation both to myself and the Church." [^1] He had invited controversy by claiming that God called him as a prophet to criticize and correct a withered Christianity. His first visions came in his youth; hence the importance of understanding his family environment. An objective and intimate picture is possible of the influences upon young Joseph Smith. More is known than ever before of the parents and grandparents that fashioned the ideals of his home. Later in life Joseph Smith spoke of "love of liberty" (certainly one of his dominant characteristics) that was "diffused into my soul by my grandfathers while they dandled me on their knees." [^2] In their homes were molded the personalities of Joseph Smith, Sr., and his wife, Lucy Mack Smith, parents and creators of the Prophet's immediate environment.

The books debunking Joseph Smith typically begin by downgrading his immediate ancestors. We read that his "was a crude and credulous line." Even the biography still mislabeled as definitive echoes this opinion in more sophisticated prose. Joseph Smith's father's father was "avowedly Christian but basically irreligious"; the mother's father finally came to "senile mysticism." These judgments are enormous exaggerations, with intended implications for Joseph Smith's life. But his grandparents deserve to stand on their own merits. Their lives are here studied in detail from their own writings, enriched by early family histories, letters, and recollections, supplemented by town and church minutes, and checked against deeds, wills, censuses, and assessment lists. A story of responsibility and moral heroism emerges that matches the personal philosophy that both grandfathers candidly expressed. If they did not achieve national fame, they at least represented the solid virtues that founded their nation. Their moral excellence was Joseph Smith's heritage.

The books sympathetic to Joseph Smith typically call the roll of illustrious forbears, perhaps with an unstated premise that outstanding ancestors have outstanding descendants. Yet physiological inheritance is neither evaluated nor dealt with here. However, the main environmental forces about the Mormon Prophet can be clearly identified. Value structures are formed by conscious and unconscious reaction to personalities clustered around the impressionable individual. Joseph Smith's warm love for his parents and their positive affection for their parents are historical realities. Joseph Smith was deeply influenced by his older brothers and even more by his parents. Through them the ideals of his grandparents were effectively transmitted to the young man who claimed visions. Any other view badly underestimates the powers of obedience and imitation that characterize his family.

The riddle of Joseph Smith exists partly because malicious detractors slandered the rising Prophet. It could hardly be otherwise in a static, rural society that aggressively resisted change. In Joseph Smith's own words, the moment his revelations were known, "rumor with her thousand tongues was all the time employed in circulating tales about my father's family, and about myself." Such distortion demands knowledge of what went on within his family. Outside sources cannot really solve this problem, for those with the inside story are insiders. In other words, statements of spiteful neighbors are beside the point when the Smith family itself is available for study. Far too many biographers have believed accusations without really investigating their basis. That cannot be done without entering the Smith household and understanding its motives and manners. Joseph Smith was still a young man, heavily under his family's influence, when he announced his early visions. If the grandparents are only part of the picture, they are nevertheless a very significant part. Their profiles outline the characteristics that came to Joseph Smith through his parents. The convictions and attitudes of these grandparents go far in portraying the true personality of their grandson.
