Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

CHAPTER 2

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCLives of Solomon and Lydia Gates Mack

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCJoseph Smith's mother drew incisive historical portraits of her family, but she let her father speak for himself. "My parents had a large property and lived in good style," Solomon Mack wrote of his youth. [^1] Local records tend to confirm this picture, for Ebenezer Mack engaged in numerous land transactions. Although a middle son, his father named him executor and willed him the family farm, with the duty to care for his mother. [^2] Lucy Mack Smith portrayed Ebenezer and Hannah Mack as directing a "happy and flourishing family" and displaying "habits of strict morality." [^3] Hannah probably taught school later, "instructing the youth for about thirty years." A woman of religious dedication, she "experienced the power of God from an early age, with all the good morals of life," and she died with great faith, "rejoicing and wishing her last moments to come." [^4]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCBut financial tragedy disorganized this family, and Solomon was "bound out" as a child to a farmer in his neighborhood of Lyme, Connecticut. [^5] Forced early to self-reliance, Solomon later realized how deprived his youth had been. The taskmaster exploited the indentured boy instead of educating him:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCI was treated by my master as his property and not as his fellow mortal. He taught me to work, and was very careful that I should have little or no rest. From labor he never taught me to read or spoke to me at all on the subject of religion. [^6]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCThe rest of Solomon's life was a quest for what his youth lacked. With uncommon enterprise he sought financial success, but through life's reverses was haunted by his family's religious conviction. In the end he gained his most valued possession, a satisfying relationship with God.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCOne bibliographer surveys Solomon Mack's life as the "career of an unlettered New Englander with his many unfortunate ups and downs." [^7] A biographer with empathy will rather stress the heroism of one determined not to give up in the face of overwhelming hardships. There is a constant tone of responsible morality in Solomon's writings. Though "frequently abused," he steadily served his time until of age. In later life he still resented his early unfair treatment, but nevertheless declined the retaliation of naming his master. Solomon gave him credit for being "very kind to me," providing help and comfort in a critical sickness, though surmising his possible motive as preserving an able worker's life. [^8]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCOn attaining his freedom, Solomon Mack enlisted for the campaigns of the French and Indian War in the Lake George-Lake Champlain sector. Exposing his life to bullets and fevers, he displayed marked bravery under danger and concern for those about him. "In the year 1755," Solomon reports of his early twenties, "I enlisted under Captain Harris and went to Fort Edward"—and the enlistment rolls verify every fact named. [^9] Two years later he "mustered two teams in the King's service," freighting supplies to the front at Fort Edward. [^10] Because his oxen were lost, he took a companion to search their previous route through dangerous forest. Suddenly Solomon Mack confronted four hostile Indians some 150 yards ahead, armed with knives, tomahawks, and guns. With just nerve plus a single reinforcement 100 yards behind, Solomon "saw no other way to save myself only to deceive them by stratagem":

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCI exclaimed like this: "Rush on! Rush on! Brave boys, we'll have the devils! We'll have the devils!" I had no other weapon only a staff. But I ran towards them, and the other man appearing in sight, gave them a terrible fright, and I saw them no more. But I am bound to say the grass did not grow under my feet. [^11]

In this case, history repeated itself, as this bold strategy was later used by his prophet-grandson. The operating tradition of this family was to squarely face its problems. When Joseph Smith first received the ancient plates, neighborhood gangs formed to steal them. Lucy Mack Smith relates her son's intuitive apprehension before one such attempt, prompting him to secure the record under the hearthstones:

This was done as speedily as possible, but the hearth was scarcely relaid when a large company of men well-armed came rushing up to the house. Joseph threw open the doors, and taking a hint from the stratagem of his grandfather Mack, halooed as if he had a legion at hand, in the meanwhile giving the word of command with great emphasis; while all the male portion of the family, from the father down to little Carlos, ran out of the house with such fury on the mob that it struck them with terror and dismay. And they fled before the little Spartan band into the woods, where they dispersed themselves to their several homes. [^12]

Solomon Mack's daring was unselfish. During French and Indian War service he marched with thousands in the bloody and useless frontal assault on Fort Ticonderoga. Here he did not hang back, but "marched to the breastworks," [^13] where hundreds were killed attempting to storm a fortified wall of logs stacked eight feet high. [^14] The waves of assaulting troops were met with a deadly, "damnable fire." [^15] Historians can make war statistical—for Solomon it was personal: "I escaped very narrowly by a musket ball passing under my chin, perhaps within half an inch of my neck." [^16] He shared the reluctant retreat of the English-American forces, impatient at incompetent leadership. Tactics now became defensive, and Solomon was sent on massive patrol with the forces of Rogers and Putnam to cut off French-Indian parties that had ambushed a supply train. But this Colonial force itself was ambushed, and Solomon Mack faced the ultimate test, which he impressively passed. His unit led a long formation strung out the better part of a mile in single file. First was his commanding officer, Major Israel Putnam, who was captured in the first attack, though he miraculously survived savage treatment. Solomon Mack's own story is a glittering bit of this mosaic: "The enemy rose like a cloud and fired a volley upon us. . . . [T]he tomahawks and bullets [were] flying around my ears like hailstones." [^17] A ranger also remembered the "severe fire," accompanied by "the hideous war-whoop of the Indians, and we found ourselves nearly surrounded." [^18] Safety lay in immediate retreat and regrouping. Running at full force, Solomon cleared a huge obstacle:

And as I ran I looked [a] little one side, where I saw a man wounded (the Indians close to him), who immediately with my help got into the circle. [^19]

Solomon Mack successfully gambled his own life for that of another. His unit repulsed the attack, then gradually drove their opponents from the field. Major Rogers praised the actions of Mack's Connecticut volunteers. Although "considerably disordered" by the first assault, they "afterwards rallied and did good service"; all fought with a "vigor and resolution" that broke the surprise attack of incomparable native warriors. [^20] Solomon Mack impressively shared this achievement in bravery. [^21]

The energy of Solomon Mack was exceptional. Before later military service in the Revolution, he was a merchant, land developer, shipmaster, mill operator, and farmer. Though a fateful series of reverses canceled profits, his initiative poured out. Even Solomon's wedding is part of this picture, for he married well in 1759, "shortly after becoming acquainted" with Lydia Gates, daughter of a prominent Connecticut deacon. Solomon next sold goods to the army at Crown Point, on Lake Champlain, for some two years, but his lack of education prevented good accounting, with the loss of "what I had accumulated by hard industry for several years." [^22] Army service had earned "a handsome sum of silver and gold," which he invested in 1,600 acres of wilderness in northern New York, only to lose it after badly gashing his leg, which prevented performing contractual obligations to clear homestead lots and build cabins. [^23] This period saw the sea venture of carrying cargo from a New England port to New York City—but high profits were destroyed on return by shipwreck off Long Island. [^24]

Deeds in several localities indicate Solomon's farming at this time. "I went to Lyme and purchased a farm," Solomon says of his first soldier's earnings. This was after "the biggest part of the summer" of 1756, and land records precisely support his narrative. [^25] Eight acres were added after the campaign of 1758, with more expansion in 1759 (the year of his marriage), and further acreages in 1761. But "Solomon Mack of Lyme" (as he is named on Connecticut deeds) closed out these holdings between 1762 and 1766, disposing of 127 acres with houses and farm buildings. [^26] In the meantime he joined several relatives to pioneer new land in southern New Hampshire. He moved some 130 miles north to Marlow in 1761 and remained over ten years. This was a primitive life: "When we moved there it was no other than a desolate and dreary wilderness. Only four families resided within forty miles." [^27] Solomon's title to 100 acres matured in 1767, and that year he was elected game warden, the office of "deer reeve." [^28] His deed for an additional seventy-six acres in 1770 mentioned "said Mack's old house," indicating improvements and construction of a better dwelling. [^29] His toil is symbolized by the 1773 conveyance by "Solomon Mack of Marlow" of fifty acres "where the labor is done," no doubt the previous clearing of heavy forest. [^30] Solomon next moved to nearby Gilsum, New Hampshire, where the deeds name "a sawmill and grist mill" owned by Elisha Mack. Responsible family tradition associated Elisha "with his brother Solomon" in building "the first mills and the first bridge" in Gilsum. Solomon's mention of the sawmill (and his encounter with its waterwheel) confirms this vocation there. [^31]

Site of Elisha and Solomon Mack's mills, Gilsum, New Hampshire

Solomon, Jr., and the mother of the Prophet were born at Gilsum in 1773 and 1775. Lucy was a child of the Revolution, for the battles of Lexington and Concord had been fought that spring. She was the last of eight children, but her father contributed energetically to the establishment of his country. Early war years saw a critical lack of gunpowder in the Colonies. Washington wrote of the "gloomy prospect" of shortage in 1775: "our want of powder is inconceivable." When state legislatures encouraged local production of the nitrate saltpeter and development of powder mills, Solomon was at the center of activity. He traveled to his brother-in-law's in his native Connecticut to learn how to manufacture saltpeter; then he visited Springfield and Longmeadow, in western Massachusetts, to build this technology there. He was then "sent for from town to town" at wages of "one dollar per day." [^32] But war-related contributions were not enough for Solomon, who next was in active military affairs:

I then enlisted into the American army. I soon mustered two teams and carried baggage to Skenesborough. I afterwards enlisted into a company of artillery for a short campaign. [^33]

This did not end his Revolutionary service, but a severe accident about 1777 demands comment. Recuperating from sickness, Solomon visited his son, who was felling trees:

[A] tree fell on me and crushed me almost all to pieces—beat the breath out of my body. My son took me up for dead. I, however, soon recovered, but have not to this day recovered the use of my limbs, which was 34 years ago. [^34]

Further agonies were in store. "Soon recovered" translates to two months immovable on his back, followed by bedridden immobility for another two months. "Able to walk by the help of crutches," Solomon "hobbled down" to show an employee how to fix broken machinery of a sawmill. But the unfortunate invalid "fell on the waterwheel, and bruised me most horribly. I was indeed helpless and in dreadful pain, confined month after month." Nor was this the end:

I regained my strength so I could walk a little and ride sideways. Soon after this I was wounded by a limb falling from a tree upon my head, which again nearly deprived me of life. I was carried in wholly unable to help myself. [^35]

Solomon had one purpose in mentioning these catastrophes, but they are reviewed now for another reason. After describing these three accidents, Solomon first refers to a possible convulsion: "I afterwards was taken with a fit." He obviously identified a cause and effect relationship between the brutal shocks to his system and nervous disorders that appeared "afterwards." Traveling alone in hill country when "the face of the land was covered with ice," Solomon "was senseless from one until five p.m." On regaining consciousness, "I had my axe still under my arm; I was all covered with blood and much cut and bruised." There were also "some fits" among his later disorders. [^36] This much has supported an unprovable accusation against the disabled man. He was supposedly afflicted with hereditary epilepsy, which too neatly explains his grandson's visions as epileptic seizures, with flashing lights and lapses into unconsciousness. [^37] But the case of neither grandfather nor grandson fits such speculation. Of Joseph Smith's significant visions, the majority involved others who viewed them simultaneously; nor did the Prophet generally experience loss of consciousness, and never injuries from a convulsion. Moreover, each experience is recorded in detail as furnishing a coherent message, not a confused set of nervous impulses. As for Solomon Mack, any seizures appeared only after severe injuries and probably arose from neural damage. These facts do not support hereditary disorders. Diagnosis may be difficult enough with the living patient before the doctor. Both scientific and historical probabilities are violated by an arbitrary interpretation of Solomon Mack's physical symptoms and by bending the constitution of Joseph Smith to fit a theory. [^38] This is a clever but inaccurate explanation of one who assumes that dreams and visions are automatic signs of abnormality. [^39]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCInjured or not, gritty Solomon refused to abandon an active life. At the close of the Revolution, he served on a privateer with two teenage sons, and the middle-aged man retained the cool courage of his youth. "We ship't aboard a privateer of 114 tons, commanded by Captain Havens," with a complement of about eighty men. Solomon tells of two engagements in the waters off Connecticut and Long Island. In the first, "five British privateers" drove his vessel "in upon Horseneck." There his crew mounted guns on shore, but their ship sustained heavy damage, its rigging cut away. After repairs they cast anchor offshore, and Solomon stood watch alone as others rested. "And very soon I espied two row-gallies, two sloops, two schooners; I rallied all hands on deck." With life again at stake, the American privateer made shore, and the crew barely had time to mount two guns on stern and two on a point of land. A furious cannonade began, followed by closer fighting. "One of the row-gallies went round the point of land to hem us in . . . but with our small arms we killed forty of the enemy." Such losses ended the attack: "they thought proper to leave us, pleased enough at the fight." Solomon remembered this combat "in the month of March," and on March 25, 1779, their exploits made news in the home port of New London:

A few days since, Capt. Havens, in the sloop Beaver, and Capt. Dennis, in a schooner, captured a schooner near Huntington, which they sent into Horseneck. The two privateers were soon after attacked by two row-gallies, who drove the Beaver on shore near Horseneck. But she was defended by her people till assisted by some Continental troops, who drove the gallies off. The Beaver had 3 or 4 of her people killed and several wounded. [^40]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCWar hazards were followed by risks in seafaring. Solomon Mack had developed certain assets, for a letter came from Liverpool (a Nova Scotia port) "stating that a heavy debt that had been due me for a long time was collected and ready for me." [^41] The father requested his oldest son to accompany him, which Jason did with extreme reluctance, for he was deeply in love and about to be married. The beginning of a touching tragedy, the journey of father and son was probably planned as a venture to invest in a ship and bring back trading profits to loved ones. But a rival suitor intercepted Jason's letters and after two years forged substitutes reporting Jason dead. His fiancee waited almost two years longer before unwittingly marrying the forger—only to collapse in frustration when her beloved shortly appeared. Jason went to sea again, to the sorrow of his parents. One can imagine the emotions of the wronged Macks—the mother who had so long believed the false notification, and the father who had urged his son to leave. Yet Solomon Mack writes of the event without a grudge, though aching in loneliness for news of his son:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCBut if this happens to meet the eye of the man who has brought this heavy affliction upon my boy and us his parents, I hope it may stimulate him to penitence and better deeds hereafter. [^42]

The full story of four years at sea would have made a large book. Solomon began with fishing voyages off Nova Scotia, and his Narrative abbreviates "a terrible hurricane as ever I saw in my life"; masts were swept away, and all hands abandoned ship except "myself and my son."

Solomon and Jason improvised rigging and worked the battered hull into port. After the owner repaired his schooner, Solomon bought it in a cash purchase. But the sea stalked his success. After escaping shipwreck by running before a December gale, he wintered at "Hawton" (evidently Horton, on the north coast of Nova Scotia), carrying passengers to Connecticut and returning "in the spring." [^43] Next he "took in a freight of dry goods" at Halifax, bound westward around Nova Scotia for Horton: "On our passage we struck on a reef and employed other small vessels to take her loading and carry it to Liverpool harbor and secure it." A contemporary report of the Macks' grounded vessel appears in the diary of Simeon Perkins, prominent shipowner from Liverpool, who was temporarily in Halifax on business:

Wednesday, May 30th [1787]—Mr. Callahan, Spittenfield, and Dogget all arrive from Liverpool, and report that Jason Mack has stranded his vessel at Port Medway and lost a considerable quantity of goods, after they were saved out of the vessel. Mr. John Wm. Schwartz calls on me and desires me to take care of the goods, etc. [^44]

The Macks floated their ship, but were "obliged to sell her to defray the expenses" of removing and securing the cargo. Not conceding defeat, Solomon labored until he "obtained the same vessel by honest industry." Master of a two-masted schooner of about forty tons capacity, he commanded a small crew and began "coasting," trading between ports in the Maritime Provinces and perhaps New England. [^45] Determined not to return without profits, the seafarer stayed away until sickness drove him home empty-handed.

But the venturesome Solomon was richer in intangibles. If deprived of book learning, the Prophet's grandfather was no isolated farmer. He was already skilled in several vocations and well traveled for his time on land. In the years spanning the Revolution, he shipped into major ports from New York to Halifax. He now turned his back on the Atlantic with expanded horizons. The material world had been tested and found wanting. Solomon had toiled in youth and prime, only to have every surplus vanish, leaving no prospect of retirement: "but after all this earth, hard labor, and perplexity of mind, I had won nothing, and the best of my days were past." Such lessons were painful. "Late in the fall" Solomon put into Salem and lay sick for weeks; he "recovered and returned to my family after an absence of four years." [^46]

Solomon rejoined his family in western Massachusetts. Early Revolutionary years had been spent in Gilsum, New Hampshire, where youngest child Lucy was born in 1775 and the mill accident probably took place in 1777. Next the Macks had moved some forty miles south to Montague, Massachusetts. Sons Jason and Stephen enlisted in that area in 1779, and daughter Lovisa married Joseph Tuttle there in 1780. [^47] Reliable tradition from the Tuttles reveals some pride in their relationship to the Macks. Lovisa died without children, and Joseph remarried, passing on to his eldest son the following impressions:

My father was twice married. His first wife was Lovice Mack, a daughter of old Capt. Mack, of Sunderland, Mass. Her father was an old sea captain and was well known in that vicinity. [^48]

Solomon's four years at sea had been about 1784 to 1788. [^49] He comments on the loss of "hundreds of dollars of my property" while away, and unjust creditors turned his family "out of doors" in his absence. Paul-like, Solomon Mack could be dejected and heroically persevere. He returned impoverished from the sea to an impoverished family; Solomon "now thought all was gone, and I did not care whether I lived or died." That was not wholly true, judged by the next thought: "but however, I went to work and shifted from plan to plan till at length I moved to Tunbridge in Vermont." A decade of labor is summarized in this sentence, and one "plan" was heavy construction. With access to Solomon's grandson, a competent local historian wrote:

Samuel Mack was a very ingenious mechanic, and with his brothers, Solomon and Elisha, was noted as a bridge and dam builder. He was the first man to build dams across the Connecticut River, and was employed by an English company to build one at Bellows Falls, where he was assisted by his brother Solomon, and his son Solomon, Jr. [^50]

That location is doubtful, but immediate descendants evidently associated the Mack brothers on Connecticut River projects. The likely time would be the mutual years of Solomon and Elisha at Montague, Massachusetts, where both appear in the 1790 census. Elisha Mack's engineering exploits were legend in Montague and Greenfield, where he owned a sawmill. In 1792 the Massachusetts legislature authorized building and operating a toll bridge over the Connecticut River between Montague and Greenfield; Elisha Mack was one of the proprietors. The same session incorporated a group for developing locks and canals on the river, and Elisha had a leading role at Turners Falls:

The construction of the dam at Montague was first attempted some two miles below the falls, at Smead's Island, by Capt. Elisha Mack of Montague, who operated either as engineer for the corporation, or a contractor for its work. After a season of unsuccessful effort, the point was abandoned, chiefly on account of the depth of the water. In 1793, Capt. Mack succeeded in constructing a dam at Turners Falls. It stood one year on trial, as it was doubted whether it would be able to withstand the spring freshets, but it sustained the test. [^51]

The Connecticut River at Sunderland, Massachusetts

If Elisha and Solomon continued a working association that began with the grist and sawmill at Gilsum, New Hampshire, Solomon found returning there more congenial to his physical condition. From 1793 to 1797 Solomon Mack is found on the tax lists at Gilsum, where he was probably farming, if not working again at the mills. [^52] Daughter Lucy dated Solomon's return about 1792, and he traveled from there back to Massachusetts to see Lovisa in her dramatic last illness about 1794. [^53] That was a year of personal tragedy, for he buried his two oldest daughters at Gilsum, though he could take comfort in the prosperous circumstances of his next daughter, Lydia, married in 1786 in that town to prominent Samuel Bill. Youngest daughter Lucy lived with her parents at Gilsum prior to her marriage in early 1796 and visited them there afterward. [^54] About 1799 Solomon followed Lucy and his very successful son Stephen to Tunbridge, Vermont, where the father appears on the 1800 census. The story of this move is preserved in Solomon's recollection of "my passage" to Tunbridge.

Too self-reliant for his safety, the spirited cripple insisted on driving cattle. Apparently on foot, he "fell and broke my wrist." If physical existence was painful, a lifetime of valor brought some security, for "by that time I had gained some property." [^55] But more important to him was the spirituality of his ripe years, and he wrote to share this personal wealth.

While living in Vermont, Solomon Mack wrote his autobiography, with its motivation revealed in the subtitle: "An account of the many severe accidents he met with during a long series of years, together with the extraordinary manner in which he was converted to the Christian faith." Not aimlessly listing misfortunes, Solomon discerned that financial and physical setbacks had led him to higher things. In retrospect he saw himself as thoughtless of God, his protector in danger. Up to the reverses of middle-age, Solomon was unaware of his potential spirituality: "But strange to relate, and unaccountable as it may appear to a thinking mind, I never once thought on the God of my salvation or looked up to him for blessing or protection." Yet Solomon had been a highly moral man, strictly honest in his affairs and generous to a fault with his means. Even in late Vermont years, he paid "every farthing" when he "became bail for a number of people." [^56] But his futile quest for material security had long forced him to question his values. After seafaring years away from home, he resolved to make amends: "I determined to follow phantoms no longer, but devote the rest of my life to the service of God and my family." [^57] Only gradually, however, did he understand:

I had never read the Bible, nor had I any knowledge of it; could only recollect some taught parts such as I had heard and laid up for the purpose of ridiculing religious institutions and characters. [^58]

Nevertheless Solomon Mack knew one of the great invitations of the Lord: "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." [^59] Almost eighty, Solomon lay confined with rheumatism for a winter and reflected on his religious ignorance. Reference to "so many warnings of my companion" indicates that his wife had long sought to share what Solomon could only find himself. In this winter of 1810-11 he "began to search the Bible" and seriously question his wife, "my only instructor." He tested the promise "ask, and it shall be given you," and found his intense pain relieved through prayer. More important, his dedicated search in that winter brought peace of soul. There were some manifestations—fully awake, he twice saw a light "as bright as fire," and another time he heard a voice call his name. [^60] The great miracle, however, was the transporting joy of his conversion:

[E]verything appeared new and beautiful. Oh how I loved my neighbors. How I loved my enemies—I could pray for them. Everything appeared delightful. The love of Christ is beautiful. [^61]

His profound joy is measured in the spontaneous poetry that expressed faith and trust in the Savior. He includes fourteen pages of his devotional hymns at the end of his pamphlet; if not displaying great literary ability, they burn with conviction. They express love of God, family, and fellowmen. The former sailor looks to his final harbor to "see my redeemer there"; the former soldier knows he is beyond the "warlike weapons" of evil. Immortality is a certainty, and his life a lesson:

My friends, when you read this journal, remember your unfortunate friend Solomon Mack, who worried and toiled until an old age to try to lay up treasures in this world, but the Lord would not suffer me to have it. But now I trust I have treasures laid up that no man can take away—but by the goodness of God through the blood of a bleeding Savior. [^62]

These words were written about 1811, and he had an active program for the closing nine years of life: "The remainder of my days, I mean to spend in my Father's service, though a poor cripple; cannot get on or off my horse without help." [^63] All evidence from Solomon Mack's closing years shows that he carried out his intention to serve God full time after conversion. There were successful sons at Tunbridge, Vermont, but in 1804 he had moved from there, giving about $350 as payment on his 100-acre farm at Sharon, adjoining the town line of Royalton. [^64] Soon this was rented to his son-in-law Joseph Smith, Sr., and was the Prophet's birthplace in 1805. [^65] Before 1808 Joseph Smith's family had vacated this Sharon farm, and Solomon had moved back. [^66] Not only did neighbors say so, but Solomon signed a deed on March 21, 1807, naming this land as "the farm that I now live on." [^67] Solomon and wife were still living alone at Sharon when enumerated in the 1810 census. [^68] In fact, on March 6, 1811, the town records there have this entry: "voted to exempt Mr. Solomon Mack from all taxes," probably because of the enervating sickness described by his Narrative as lasting until "the spring" of that year. By May 11, 1811, he was no longer bedridden—on that date Solomon Mack "of Sharon" sold his remaining interest in his farm for $500. [^69]

This sale marked a new era in his life. Some proceeds must have defrayed the cost of printing his autobiography and testimony of conversion, published soon after he disposed of his land. This pamphlet was printed "at the expense of the author" at Windsor, some thirty-five miles away. Since it mentions riding his horse through neighboring towns, Solomon probably made the seventy-mile round-trip to the printer on horseback, arranging for publication and later picking up the finished booklets. Memories of him persisted at Sharon and Royalton. A prominent neighbor was complimentary: "the elder Dewey often spoke of Solomon Mack, whom he knew, as being of a fine family." [^70] One later ridiculed him as "an infirm man, who used to ride about the country on horseback, using . . . a 'side saddle.'" [^71] Another could be more specific: "I well recollect Mr. Mack, . . . and his business on horseback was selling an autobiography of himself," a missionary activity judged by Solomon's convictions. [^72]

About 1818 Solomon's wife died, perhaps precipitating a final move, for his concluding years were spent with his namesake-son, Solomon Mack, Jr. [^73] So he finally returned to Gilsum, New Hampshire, where the 1819 assessor's list names no other taxable property but his horse. [^74] But he is not listed in 1820, and his tombstone at Gilsum identifies that year as his last: "SOLOMON MACK, 1st. Died Aug. 23, 1820, AE. 84 ys." [^75] His true age was nearly eighty-eight, but spirited Solomon had no concept of disability. He had written of his concern for the young:

Parents, a little caution how to train up your children in the sight of the Lord. Never bid them to do anything that is out of their power, nor promise them only what you mean to fulfil. Set good examples in word, deed, and action. [^76]

If the shadow of his youthful mistreatment falls over these words, his aged body housed a soul determined to give better than he received. That is the final mark of his long life:

He . . . is remembered as riding about town on a side-saddle. . . . [H]e experienced a very remarkable religious conversion, and became very zealous, often visiting the schools and talking to the young on the subject of religion. [^77]

Such religious conviction was inevitably shared with his grandchildren. Especially intimate with his son-in-law Joseph Smith, Sr., and daughter Lucy Mack Smith, Solomon Mack spent time with their children. Joseph Smith, Jr., was an observant ten-year-old when his parents moved to New York. [^78]

History only incidentally records home life; yet there are solid insights into the personalities of Joseph Smith's grandmothers. They deserve final emphasis, since Joseph Smith felt the impact of their immovable faith. One does not read much of Lucy Mack Smith without sensing the powerful relationship of the Prophet with his mother, and no one influenced Lucy more than her own mother. Lydia Gates was the oldest child of Daniel Gates of East Haddam, Connecticut, the neighborhood of Solomon Mack's early Connecticut life. By tradition a tanner, Daniel Gates is called "a man of wealth," and his estate contained a substantial farm. His home provided a Christian environment, for his children were baptized shortly after birth, and Daniel is prominent in church records as a deacon. His daughter Lydia completely accepted his religious convictions formalized in his will:

I would . . . commit my soul into the hands of God, who gave it, hoping and believing that I shall obtain remission of all my sins through the alone merits of Jesus Christ, my only Savior, and that for his sake I shall be admitted into life eternal. [^79]

Baptized as an infant, Lydia Gates made her own profession of faith as an adult and was enrolled in the Congregational Church. [^80] Her religious life is vividly portrayed in the writings of husband and daughter. Lucy Mack Smith recalled a touching scene during her mother's critical illness about 1784. Despairing of life, Lydia gathered her family at her bedside to emphasize what she valued most. She encouraged her children "always to remember the instructions which she had given them—to fear God and walk uprightly before him." But she recovered to share three more decades of intimate companionship with Joseph Smith's mother. Lydia Gates Mack also deeply affected Solomon, who "had abused the Sabbath and had not taken warning from my wife." [^81]

Before marriage Lydia Gates was "an amiable and accomplished young woman, a school teacher." Only afterward did Solomon appreciate the full influence of his wife. Not only did she exhibit "the polish of education, but she also possessed that inestimable jewel which in a wife and mother of a family is truly a pearl of great price, namely, a pious and devotional character." [^82] Lydia's husband remembered vividly her moral leadership of the first decade of marriage, when the parents stood virtually alone against the wilderness at Marlow, New Hampshire. Lydia Mack endured inconvenience with "excellent disposition," but she also had ambition and capacity to educate her own:

[A]s our children were deprived of schools, she assumed the charge of their education, and performed the duties of an instructress as none save a mother is capable of Precepts accompanied with examples such as hers were calculated to make impressions on the minds of the young never to be forgotten.

She, besides instructing them in the various branches of an ordinary education, was in the habit of calling them together both morning and evening and teaching them to pray, meanwhile urging upon them the necessity of love towards each other as well as devotional feelings towards him who made them. In this manner my first children became confirmed in habits of piety, gentleness, and reflection, which afforded great assistance in guiding those who came after them into the same happy channel.

Solomon perceived a significant fact about raising his family in the New Hampshire isolation of four families in forty miles. Since civilization's benefits were absent, so were its disadvantages. Home environment there had no rivals, so "their mother's precepts and example . . . had a more lasting influence upon their future character." With seasoned disdain of mere show, Solomon added that "all the flowery eloquence of the pulpit" could not have been as effective as his wife's influence, which included prayers that "came up daily before that all-seeing eye that rests upon all his works." [^83]

Six children were trained by Lydia Mack in wilderness conditions at Marlow, New Hampshire; two more came after the Macks moved to nearby Gilsum. All eight are impressive evidence of the parents' leadership and example—youngest Lucy Mack Smith's opening chapters portray faith and generous concern as common traits of her brothers and sisters. Eldest Jason was a dynamic lay preacher who believed in miraculous healing, but also a practical leader of a successful cooperative settlement. [^84] The eldest daughters possessed a sensitive devotion to each other and a faith that scorned death—chapter 4 reports their religious heroism under lengthy terminal sickness. [^85] Remarkably like his father, Stephen Mack had spectacular farming and business success at Tunbridge, Vermont, and then became a major developer of early Detroit and Pontiac. At his death the Detroit Gazette emphasized his twenty-year Michigan residence; he was "distinguished from the mass of his fellow-citizens for his enterprise and the great utility of his views." [^86] He was a pewholder in Tunbridge, Vermont, where his family generosity is measured by the $1,000 wedding gift to Lucy Smith from him and his business partner. Another venturesome temperament was Daniel, and glimpses of his life remain—Lucy Mack Smith relates his rescue of three men from drowning in explaining his "very daring and philanthropic spirit." The same phrase describes Lucy herself, who fervently sought God and stood courageously by her convictions before and after accepting the revelations of her son Joseph Smith, Jr. The remaining two Mack children settled in Gilsum, New Hampshire. They were affluent in this community, but they remembered God and fellowmen. Solomon Mack, Jr., was a successful farmer and community leader, holding positions in town government and militia. When he was seventy, Hyrum Smith visited him and reported:

"Uncle Solomon seemed to be lively and cheerful, and quite thoughtful about his future state." [^87] Lydia Mack's marriage to prosperous Samuel Bill has been noted; Lucy Smith insists that "she dealt out her substance to the needy with a liberal hand to the end of her days." Lydia Mack Bill's gravestone symbolizes the Christian commitment that her mother Lydia effectively bequeathed:

Now she's gone to realms above, Where saints and angels meet; To realize her Savior's love And worship at his feet. [^88]

The Mack sons and daughters are realities reflecting the intense conviction of Lydia Gates Mack. Joseph Smith, Jr., also came under his grandmother's influence, for he remembered her presence as the Smiths began their journey to New York. [^89] The Prophet's mother also mentions that "my aged mother . . . had lived with us some time." [^90] But accompanying the emigrants a short distance, Lydia Gates Mack was injured by an overturning wagon. [^91] She accurately sensed that she would not live much longer and wept at parting. Her daughter's thoughts at that moment epitomize a heritage:

"I was here to take leave of that pious and affectionate parent to whom I was indebted for all the religious instructions as well as most of the educational privileges which I had ever received." In turn, the aged mother's first concern was reiterating her faith, so resolutely preserved for further generations:

I must soon exchange the things of earth for another state of existence, where I hope to enjoy the society of the blessed. And now, as my last admonition, I beseech you to continue faithful in the exercise of every religious duty to the end of your days, that I may have the pleasure of embracing you in another fairer world above. [^92]
