Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

CHAPTER 3

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCWritings of Solomon Mack

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCSolomon Mack's known writings come from his autobiography, written late, probably the spring of 1811 (see n. 3). Lucy Smith appears to use a fuller manuscript of her father, since she quotes unpublished episodes from her father in the first person (see n. 29 and n. 44). One suspects that Solomon kept a rather extensive journal, from which his Narrative was extracted, but it is the autobiography proper that is fully reprinted here. This includes some two dozen pages of the original edition plus two pages of "errata" appended by the author. Paging of the original is preserved, indicated in brackets at the top of each page of the Narrative. Solomon Mack added nineteen pages of verse to his autobiography, devotional poetry expressing faith and gratitude for his conversion, and selections from this material follow his life story.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCThe remaining small portion of Solomon's pamphlet is reserved for reprinting in the following chapter. This is his two-page narrative of daughter Lovisa's sickness and death, and it is separately printed for comparison with Lucy Mack Smith's similar account. Thus all of Solomon Mack's printed prose appears here. The close of the addition on Lovisa restates the conclusion of the autobiography proper, and was intended as the final injunction of the pamphlet:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCMy friends, when you read this journal, remember your unfortunate friend Solomon Mack, who worried and toiled until an old age to try to lay up treasures in this world, but the Lord would not suffer me to have it. But now I trust I have treasures laid up that no man can take away—but by the goodness of God through the blood of a bleeding Savior.

Although I am a poor cripple, unable to walk much or even to mount or dismount my horse, I hope to serve my God, by his assistance to divine acceptance, that I may at last leap for joy to see his face and hold him fast in my embrace.

Reprinting a work published over 150 years ago makes rivals of accuracy and readability. Because early type faces can be confusing, photographic reproduction is impractical. Spelling errors are corrected, but forms correct in Solomon's day are largely untouched—yet certain patterns have been regularized where the first printing was not wholly consistent with itself. Abbreviations have generally been written out, and geographical names spelled according to accepted usage. There is no question of ambiguity, except where "St. John's" has been changed to "St. John," the latter New Brunswick location more in accord with Solomon's narrative than the Newfoundland city. "Hawton" is changed to "Horton" with little possibility of error (n. 45). Personal names have occasionally been regularized, but one suspects that the typesetter did not always read Mack's manuscript correctly. Fellow-soldier "Bowley" (p. [8]) is actually Rowley (n. 23); the Mohawk chief Hendrick appears as "Kenrick" (p. [47]); and the census records of Surry, New Hampshire, show that Samuel McCordy lived there instead of the "Samuel M. Cordy" of the pamphlet (p. [17]), corresponding with John McCurdy, the brother and estate administrator also mentioned (pp. [16-17] and n. 51). This notation is made for these men, however, instead of the rather clumsy repeated bracketing of the names. Little has been modified in editing by the rules just mentioned, and anything added is indicated in brackets, the standard sign for editorial modification. The only extensive changes are in capitalization and punctuation, where editorial duty dictates readable copy. Original punctuation and capitalization have been changed cautiously, seeking clarity by breaking down sentences into more readable units.

[3]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCI, SOLOMON MACK, was born in Connecticut, in the town of Lyme near the mouth of Connecticut River, September 26, 1735, my parents, Ebenezer and Hannah Mack. Ebenezer Mack departed this life in 1777. He went to the door to fetch in a back-log and returned after a fore-stick and instantly dropped down dead on the floor. You may see by this our lives are dependent on a supreme and independent God. Hannah Mack departed this life in 1796 with a long fit of sickness; she experienced the power of God from an early age, with all the good morals of life, and instructing the youth for about thirty years. She died rejoicing and wishing her last moments to come. Rejoicing she went home to meet her Father in the realms of eternal bliss.

My parents had a large property and lived in good style. From various misfortunes, and the more complicated evils attendant on the depravity of the sons of men, my parents became poor. And when I was four years old the family, then consisting of five children, were obliged to disperse and throw themselves upon the mercy of an unfeeling and evil world. I was bound out to a farmer in the neighborhood. As is too commonly the case, I was rather considered as a slave than a member of the family. And instead of allowing me the privilege of common hospitality and a claim

[4]

to that kind protection due to the helpless and indigent children, I was treated by my master as his property and not as his fellow mortal. He taught me to work and was very careful that I should have little or no rest. From labor he never taught me to read or spoke to me at all on the subject of religion. His whole attention was taken up on the pursuits of the good things of this world; wealth was his supreme object. I am afraid gold was his God, or rather he never conversed on any other subject. And I must say he lived without God in the world, and to all appearance God was not in his thoughts.

I lived with this man (whose name, for many reasons, I did not think proper to mention) until I was 21 years of age lacking 2 months, when a difficulty took place between me and my master, which terminated in our separation at that time. I, however, at his request returned and fulfilled the indenture; which in consequence of being frequently abused, I had found my indentures in my master's custody, and I burnt them. My mistress was afraid of my commencing a suit against them, she took me aside and told me I was such a fool we could not learn you. I was totally ignorant of divine revelation or anything appertaining to the Christian religion. I was never taught even the principles of common morality and felt no obligation with regard to society and was born

[5]

as others, like the wild ass's colt. I met with many sore accidents during the years of my minority.

I had a terrible fever sore on my leg which had well nigh proved fatal to my life, which it seems was occasioned by a scald that terminated in a severe fit of sickness. In these trials my master was very kind to me. He procured the best physicians and surgeons and provided everything necessary for my comfort, all which as I suppose that he might again reap the benefit of my labor. For although it was thought for a time that I could not live, yet my master never spoke to me of death, judgment or eternity; nor did he ever to my recollection discover that he himself had any idea that he was made to die, or that he had here no continuing city, or ever thought of seeking one to come.

Soon after I left my master, I enlisted in the service of my country under the command of Captain Henry and was annexed to a regiment commanded by Colonel Whiting. I marched from Connecticut to Fort Edward; there was a severe battle fought at the Halfway Brook in the year 1755.

I had been out a long scout, and I caught a bad cold and was taken sick and remained so all the rest of the winter. And in the spring, 1756, I was carried to Albany in a wagon, where I saw five men hung at one time. I remained sick the biggest part of the summer. I went

[Compare this page with final ERRATA.]

[6]

to Lyme and purchased a farm. In the year 1757 I mustered two teams in the King's service for one season. I then went to Stillwater with the general's baggage. One morning I went out to yoke up as usual and found there was three of my oxen missing; the officer was so angry that he drew his sword to run me through but immediately exclaimed, get thee out three of any you can find, which I accordingly did. Then I went on with the baggage and arrived at Fort Edward; then I returned back after my oxen. When I got about halfway I espied at about thirty rods distance, four Indians coming out of the woods with their tomahawks, scalping-knives and guns. I was alone, but about twenty rods behind me there was a man by the name of Webster. I saw no other way to save myself only to deceive them by stratagem. I exclaimed like this: Rush on! Rush on! Brave boys, we'll have the devils! We'll have the devils! I had no other weapon only a staff. But I ran towards them, and the other man appearing in sight, gave them a terrible fright, and I saw them no more. But I am bound to say the grass did not grow under my feet.

I hastened to Stillwater and found my oxen; the same night I returned back through the woods alone, which was about seven miles. The next morning I was ready to go on my journey again. From thence I went to Lake

[7]

George. I followed teaming the remainder of the season, but by accident I was taken with the smallpox at Albany. I entrusted a man to convey my teams to Litchfield and gave him 15 dollars for his services. But instead of doing as he agreed, he went twenty miles and sold one team, then went a short distance and left the other. But after I regained my health I went and bought them again and returned to Lyme.

Soon after I enlisted under Major Spencer in 1758, and went over the lakes. There was a severe battle fought; Lord Howe was killed. His bowels were taken out and were buried; his body was embalmed and carried to England.

The next day we marched to the breastworks and were obliged to retreat with the loss of five hundred killed and as many more wounded. But I escaped very narrowly by a musket ball passing under my chin, perhaps within half an inch of my neck. In this rencontre I had no reflection, only that I thought I had by my good luck escaped a narrow shot. The army returned back to Lake George. A large scouting party of the enemy came round by Skenesborough, at the Halfway Brook, and cut off a large number of our men and teams. One thousand of our men set out to go to Skenesborough after the enemy; five hundred of them were sent back. And just as we got to South Bay the enemy got out of our reach.

[8]

The enemy went to Ticonderoga and got recruited; they then came after us. We scouted by Wood Creek. On the 13th day we got to Fort Ann. The sentry came and told me that the enemy was all around us. Major Putnam led out the party. Major Rogers bro't up the rear, marched in an Indian path three-quarters of a mile. The Indians lay in a half-moon. Major Putnam went through their ranks; they fired upon us. Major Putnam was taken and tied to a tree, and an Indian would have killed him had it not been for a French lieutenant who rescued his life. The enemy rose like a cloud and fired a volley upon us, and my being in the front brought me into the rear. I turned little to the right, the tomahawks and bullets flying around my ears like hailstones. And as I was running, I saw a great windfall little forward which seemed impossible for me or any other man to mount, but over I went. And as I ran I looked little one side, where I saw a man wounded (the Indians close to him), who immediately with my help got into the circle. Gershom [R]owley had nine bullets shot thro' his clothes and remained unhurt. Ensign Worcester had nine wounds, scalped and tomahawked, who lived and got well.

The battle commenced in the morning and continued until three o'clock, when they left us. We gathered our dead and wounded up in a ring; there was half of our men killed and

[9]

wounded and taken. We sent to Fort Edward for relief to help carry our wounded, it being 80 in number; we made biers to carry them, many of whom died on the passage, the distance being 14 miles.

I was almost beat out, but I went to Albany after stores and returned to the army. From thence I went home, it being in the fall, and tarried through the winter.

In the spring, 1754, I set out on another campaign. I went to Crown Point, and there I set up a sutler's shop, which I kept two years by means of a clerk I employed for that purpose, not knowing myself how to write or read to any amount what others had written or printed. I lost my clerk, and not being able properly to adjust accounts, lost what I had accumulated by hard industry for several years, all for the want of youthful education.

After leaving the army I accumulated by industry a handsome sum of silver and gold. With it I purchased in the town of Granville sixteen hundred acres of land and paid for it on delivery of the deed—but besides I was to clear a small piece of land on each right and build a log house. But previous to this I married in the year 1761.

I then proceeded into the back country to clear me a farm. Soon after I began to work in the woods, but unfortunately cut my leg and lay under the doctor's care the whole season,

[Compare this page with final ERRATA.]

[10]

which cost me a large sum and well nigh took my life. I underwent everything but death, but thought nothing of the hand that inflicted the chastisement. My family arrived, and we were in the wilderness and could do no business. Previous to this, however, I freighted a vessel and went to New York, where I sold my cargo extremely high, and returning was overtaken by a gale of wind. My vessel was much damaged, but we made shift and got to Long Island, and there we left the vessel.

I arrived at home sometime in the winter, poor enough; the vessel did not arrive till the next spring. Afterwards I broke my wrist, with which I had a great deal of pain and expense. For a long time I was unable to do any labor. Though I still sought to make myself great and happy in the way I was educated, the Lord would not suffer me to prosper. l was not yet discouraged. Soon after I went to Moodus and learnt of my brother-in-law how to make saltpeter. Though being a cripple, I went to Old Springfield and Longmeadow to show them the art of making saltpeter. I was sent for from town to town; my wages was one dollar per day. This was in our Revolutionary War. I then enlisted into the American army. I soon mustered two teams and carried baggage to Skenesborough. I afterwards enlisted into a company of artillery for a short campaign, but on my return home

[11]

I was taken sick. As soon as I recovered I went to see my son. He was cutting trees, when unfortunately a tree fell on me and crushed me almost all to pieces—beat the breath out of my body. My son took me up for dead. I, however, soon recovered, but have not to this day recovered the use of my limbs, which was 34 years ago. I lay sixty days on my back and never moved or turned to one side or the other. The skin was worn off my back from one end to the other. I was then taken by six men in a sheet and moved from time to time for sixty or seventy days more, when I was able to walk by the help of crutches. I had a man to work in a saw-mill; it got out of order. I hobbled down to show him how to mend it, and by accident I fell on the waterwheel and bruised me most horribly. I was indeed helpless and in dreadful pain, confined month after month, unable to help myself. But at last I was restored to health, but being destitute of property and without my natural strength to get my bread, with a young and dependent family whose daily wants were increasing and none to administer relief. But strange to relate and unaccountable as it may appear to a thinking mind, I never once thought on the God of my salvation or looked up to him for blessing or protection; I was stupid and thoughtless.

Owing to my misfortune I could not attend to my contract at Granville, so I lost all

[12]

my land; however, I regained my strength so I could walk a little and ride sideways. Soon after this I was wounded by a limb falling from a tree upon my head, which again nearly deprived me of life. I was carried in wholly unable to help myself. I, however, recovered again; I can say like this: the time of my departure was not yet come, and there was yet more trouble for me to pass through.

I afterwards was taken with a fit, when traveling with an axe under my arm on Winchester hills; the face of the land was covered with ice. I was senseless from one until five p.m. When I came to myself I had my axe still under my arm; I was all covered with blood and much cut and bruised. When I came to my senses I could not tell where I had been nor where I was going. But by good luck I went right and arrived at the first house—was under the doctor's care all the winter. In the next place I fell[ed] seven large trees against another, and very imprudently went to cut away the prop—when suddenly the whole fell together, and I in the midst of them. This time I remained unhurt but thought nothing of the power that protected me, blind as ever.

Soon after I and my two sons went out a-privateering. We ship't aboard a privateer of 114 tons, commanded by Captain Havens; there was about eighty men on board. We

[13]

were chased by five British privateers; they drove us in upon Horseneck, where we got some of our guns on shore; we brought them to bear upon the enemy. We exchanged a great many shots; they shattered our vessel and cut away our rigging. The next day our officers went up into town, and five repaired our vessel; then hauled off from the wharf; then cast anchor. Every man on board went to their rest except myself, in the month of March. And very soon I espied two row-gallies, two sloops, two schooners; I rallied all hands on deck. They quick obeyed, and we weighed anchor—then hauled by the side of the wharf but had only time to get two cannon out on the point of land and two on the stern of the vessel. This engagement began in the morning. The enemy gave us a broadside, and where the bullets struck, it had the appearance of a furrow made by a plough. Staddles in gun shot was all cut asunder. One of the row-gallies went round the point of land to hem us in, and they had near ran aground, but with our small arms we killed forty of the enemy. We sent our cabin boys up to a house near the shore with a wounded man. Just as the boys entered the door there came an eighteen pounder into the house, and the woman was frying cakes over the fire. Says the woman to the boys, take the cakes, and I will go down cellar. By our killing so many of the enemy they thought proper to

[14]

leave us, pleased enough at the fight. For if we had been taken, what would our punishment have been. But I thought nothing of futurity, which if I had considered a moment and viewed a watery grave already made, it appears as if I must have shuddered at the thought. My God must have given me some warnings of my danger, but if he did, his calls I would not hearken to. The devil had great hold on me, and I served him well. But the Lord was with me—yes, he has supported me to this day through trials and fatigues. But now I feel to sing praises with the celestial bands above. How thankful, my friends, I am to join with Christian friends now in my old age, but I must leave this subject.

Next we hoisted sail and made for New London. After the war we freighted a vessel and went to Liverpool and sold our loading and ship't aboard Captain Foster's and went [on] a fishing voyage. And so I went two voyage[s], and the third voyage I was in the cabin when I heard a rout on deck. I sprang up as quick as possible, and there being a terrible hurricane as ever I saw in my life. Both masts was carried overboard, and if they had not we must all have found watery graves—we ought to have been thankful and bless the Lord for it. Our captain and all hands appeared to be greatly surprised, but we was all spared through the tempest. We ought to be thankful to our God for a few moments

[15]

for repentance, but we thought nothing of these things.

The hands all left her but myself and my son. We stuck fast by the hull, and that night we caught 25 large fish; but by jury masts we worked her into Liverpool. We went on board another vessel and sailed for Halifax. Meanwhile Captain Foster repaired his schooner and proceeded to Halifax, and there he found me. I bought his vessel, and by good fortune I was able to pay the whole purchase except eight pounds. I then took a freight and went to St. [John], and on our return to Halifax we were overtaken by a gale of wind and well nigh lost all hands, vessel and cargo. We, however, made for Mount Desert and obtained it. I was very uneasy about my property but thought of nothing else. We repaired our vessel and returned to Halifax; this was the first of January. Such a day I never saw before nor since—nothing but confusion. Almost every sailor was intoxicated, myself amongst the rest. After I came to myself I reflected a little on such conduct, resolving to amend from such practices. But soon I forgot amidst the bustle of the world.

The next day I sailed up the bay of Fundy and wintered at [Horton]. There I made an agreement to take thirty passengers on board (at eight dollars per head) and carried them to New London and brought them back again in

[16]

the spring. So I returned to Halifax and took in a freight of dry goods, and again sailed for [Horton]. On our passage we struck on a reef and employed other small vessels to take her loading and carry it to Liverpool harbor and secure it; and then I informed the sundry owners of the circumstance. But I soon got my vessel off again, but it cost me one dollar an hour for each man. The cost being so much, I was obliged to sell her to defray the expenses. Again I was left destitute of property.

I had by this time recovered my health, and was not willing to return empty. I immediately went to work and again obtained the same vessel by honest industry. My next business was to follow coasting, but late in the fall I landed at Salem and was taken very sick. I lay there some weeks, when I recovered and returned to my family after an absence of four years, in which time I had not heard from them. I had very little property, and my family had been turned out of doors on account of placing confidence in those that I took to be my friends. But by unjust dealing they took hundreds of dollars of my property. When I went from home I owed John Cordy at Lyme one hundred dollars; Nathaniel Peck of Lyme owed me one hundred dollars. He gave me a note; I gave that note to John Cordy to pay that debt. Nathaniel Peck went to sea and died. John Cordy administer[ed] upon Nathaniel Peck's estate.

[17]

Mr. Cordy got just d.26,66 of his debt. Mr. Cordy came up here and asked me if I would let his brother Samuel take the note; I gave him leave. I then drove two yoke of oxen to Samuel M. Cordy, Surry. Those oxen with the d.26,66 paid the debt. John Cordy at Lyme did not know it, and on his deathbed he willed me half of the said debt (his widow and son signed the will). Likewise, when I was at sea Samuel M. Cordy got all the writings and turned my family out of doors.

This I can prove by Abisha Tubbs, Esq. Kind reader, look at the nature of mankind, what they will do for silver and gold. But after all this earth, hard labor and perplexity of mind, I had won nothing—and the best of my days were past and gone and had to begin entirely anew. I now thought all was gone, and I did not care whether I lived or died. But however, I went to work and shifted from plan to plan till at length I moved to Tunbridge, in Vermont. On my passage I undertook driving cattle, but by accident I fell and broke my wrist. I walked eight miles before I could get it set. By that time I had gained some property, altho I was all this time a cripple and afflicted with broken bones and sore sicknesses and some fits. To add to all the rest, I became bail for a number of people, and all that I was bondman for, and took all I had. I had to pay

[18]

every farthing, and it reduced me to poverty again, in advanced age without the means of hiring or anyone to relieve our wants. Who is able or willing to bear our burden?

A few particulars which were forgotten. As I was passing through Woodstock, a number of troopers rode by in haste, struck my side, my horse run, and I immediately fell backwards and almost was killed; and I did not recover for a number of months. At another time I fell and broke my shoulder. At another time at [Horton], I was riding in the road; a boy in making his obeisance, started my horse, and I fell to the ground and was much bruised. At another time at Royalton my horse fell, and through the mercy of God my life was spared and not much hurt. At another time I fell in a fit at Tunbridge, and was supported for the benefit of my soul and others. In the fall of the year 1810, in the 76th year of my age, I was taken with the rheumatism, and confined me all winter in the most extreme pain for most of the time. I under affliction and dispensation of providence, at length began to consider my ways and found myself destitute of knowledge to extol me to enquire. I thought on the best that is recorded in the 11th chapter of Matthew, and 28th to the 30th verses came to my mind. I asked my wife whether those words were in the Bible or not. She told me they were. That gave me a shock, and very uneasy I was, not

[19]

knowing where they were. I began to search the Bible. But often before this I had trials, but I would not hearken. I had practically said unto God, depart from me—I desire not the knowledge of thy ways. I had all my days set at naught his councils and words. I often slighted till an advanced age, but now I experienced personal deliverance. Yet I had all these number of years been totally blind to the things that belonged to my peace. I had fears and put up prayers before God in this situation. I had incurred (as I thought) the denunciation: I will pour out my fury upon the heathen and upon the families that call not on my name.

My mind was imagining, but agitated I imagined many things. It seemed to me that I saw a bright light in a dark night when contemplating on my bed, which I could not account for—but I thought I heard a voice calling to me again. I thought I saw another light of the same kind, all which I considered as ominous of my own dissolution. I was in distress, that sleep departed from my eyes; and I literally watered my pillow with tears, that I prayed eagerly that God would have mercy on me, that he would relieve me and open the eyes of my understanding and enable me to call on him as I ought. It brought passages of scripture to my mind, those particular. Christ's lamentations over Jerusalem struck me very forcibly to think that often the Lord had

[20]

called, and I was stubborn and would not; therefore I [was] left desolate. The whole force of the scripture seemed to be out against me as far as I could learn. My wife was my only instructor. I had never read the Bible, nor had I any knowledge of it; could only recollect some taught parts such as I had heard and laid up for the purpose of ridiculing religious institutions and characters. I, however, had my intention. I believe these things have turned to my advantage, but I hope and trust I found mercy. I do believe that God did appear for me and took me out of the horrible pit and mirey clay, and set my feet on the rock of Christ Jesus. Blessed be the name of Jehovah, that I have reason to hope that I have found him of whom the prophets did write, and that he has told me all things that ever I did, has enabled me to cast my burthen on the Lord and to believe that he will sustain me, to whom be glory for ever and ever.

A few words upon the universal principle—I have experienced it through the early part of my life, but I say it was like building on sand. A certain learned man built seven years upon it, but upon his death bed he damned the principle and made this reply, "I shall be damned to all eternity for this principle." He went out of the world smiting his fists almost in despair, and I having no learning, thinking of him

[21]

who made me believe it would deceive me. I have tried and reached much after property and several times obtained it, but by misfortunes time after time I lost it. I at length got wholly discouraged of trying to lay up on earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and thieves break through and steal, which put me to thinking something of death and eternity till I thought myself almost a Christian and was so religious that I once went to talk with a sick man on his death bed. But if the Lord had taken me away with such false hopes, I should have been miserable to all eternity. This is Universalists that I am speaking of. This will not answer, deceived man and woman. Last fall I was again almost a Christian, but I found it would not answer to depend on such foundation. Those verses still run in my mind, Matthew, the 11th chapter and 28th, 29th verses:

Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

I was so stupid that I did not know whether these words were in the Bible or not; I asked my wife, and she told me they were and where they were. I then discovered how ignorant and stupid I had been even to a great age. And I saw what offers of mercy I had, but I slighted

[22]

them. It brought to my mind Christ's sayings in St. Matthew, 23d chapter and 37th verse: O Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together even as the hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Reader, you may think I was in great distress. I could not sleep and took to reading. I was distressed to think how I had abused the Sabbath and had not taken warning from my wife. About midnight I saw a light about a foot from my face as bright as fire; the doors were all shut and no one stirring in the house. I thought by this that I had but a few moments to live, and oh what distress I was in. I prayed that the Lord would have mercy on my soul and deliver me from this horrible pit of sin. I thought myself that I had been such a vile wretch that the Lord would not have mercy on me, and I thought as I had slighted so many warnings from my companion and so abused the Sabbath; but I perceived my body and soul was in danger; oh reader, you may think I was in distress.

Another night soon after, I saw another light as bright as the first, at a small distance from my face, and I thought I had but a few moments to live. And not sleeping nights and reading, all day I was in misery; well you may think I was in distress, soul and body. At another time in the dead of the night I was called

[23]

by my Christian name; I arise up to answer to my name. The doors all being shut and the house still, I thought the Lord called, and I had but a moment to live. Oh what a vile wretch I had been. I prayed to the Lord to have mercy on my soul. I called upon the Lord the greatest part of the winter, and towards spring it was reviving and light shined into my soul. I have often thought that the lights which I saw were to show me what a situation I was in. I had slighted his calls and invitations and warnings from my companion, and what a sandy foundation I was on. The calls, I believe, were for me to return to the Lord, who would have mercy on me.

All the winter I was laid up with the rheumatism, so that my wife was obliged to help me to bed and up again, but in the spring the Lord appeared to be with me. But for my own satisfaction, I thought like this, as I was sitting one evening by the fire. I prayed to the Lord, if he was with me, that I might know it by this token—that my pains might all be eased for that night. And blessed be the Lord, I was entirely free from pain that night. And I rejoiced in the God of my salvation—and found Christ's promises verified that what things soever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive—and found that Christ would fulfil all his promises, and not one jot or tittle would fail. And the Lord so shined light into my soul that every

[24]

thing appeared new and beautiful. Oh how I loved my neighbors. How I loved my enemies—I could pray for them. Everything appeared delightful. The love of Christ is beautiful. There is more satisfaction to be taken in the enjoyment of Christ one day, than in half a century serving our master, the devil. You that have children under your care that have no parents, when you put anything upon them to do, consider them as your own, that when death overtakes you, you need not fear their apparitions appearing in your sight for tyranny and misusage of the fatherless and motherless. Time will come when we shall all be called for, sooner or later, when money cannot buy our breath one moment. Parents, a little caution how to train up your children in the sight of the Lord. Never bid them to do anything that is out of their power, nor promise them only what you mean to fulfil. Set good examples in word, deed, and action. We aged parents have a Father to go to and to guide us if we will but obey and hearken to his calls. How often we hear, but do not obey him. But why? Because we will say there is time enough yet, and I have something more to attend to of my worldly business. But how am I bringing up my children, in the fear of the Lord? I answer no, but in all manner of evils, Sabbath breaking, lying, swearing, etc., giving them no counsels from the command of

[25]

our God. Bless the rising generation with his outpouring from corner to corner. I invite you to hearken to the calls that often presses into your minds, and put it not away for another day. I give you a weak advice; I am almost brought to the ground with sore accidents, and greatly advanced in years. I always lived in sin, an enemy to God till in my seventy-sixth year. Then I began to hearken to these calls—made alive through the blessedness of Christ—reconciled to God. Oh my friends, what views I had—the love I had to God and my fellow mortals, I cannot express.

The remainder of my days, I mean to spend in my Father's service, though a poor cripple; cannot get on or off my horse without help. I have a love to all: rich and poor, kings and nobles, black and white. Come all to Jesus, my friends, come to Jesus, and he will in no wise cast you off. Oh, come, come; how sweet is the love to Jesus—how beautiful is the love of God. This invitation is from my heart to hear of your repenting and turning to my God. Take no pattern from me, for I would not hearken till I arrived to advanced age—swared from time to time; now I have a love for your souls. Now listen to me, though like a child, but shun that path that I used to walk in—this is the prayer of SOLOMON MACK.

[47, 48]

ERRATA

In the year 1755, I enlisted under Captain Harris and went to Fort Edward. There was a large army come from South Bay (now called Skenesborough) upon a scouting party of our men at Halfway Brook. There was a scouting party of the enemy attacked our men, and [Hendrick's] horse was shot under him, and he was killed. When they heard the guns, General Lyman and Colonel Johnson had not a log put up. The enemy fought seven miles and killed them all the way. When they got there the breast work was finished. This battle lasted all day; many were killed on both sides. The remainder of the enemy went back to Halfway Brook (being seven miles) and refreshed themselves upon their spoil. Then a party of New Hampshire troops come upon them and killed a great number of them. I was married in the year 1759, instead of 21—same page, instead of 1754, 1759. Then I went to Crown Point and kept a sutler's shop 27 years. In the year 1757 a large army came from Quebec and took Fort William Henry. The French guarded the prisoners fourteen miles. The blood-thirsty Indians kept breaking in upon the guard and killing them all the way.

[The printed numbers "[17]21" and "27" are obvious errors.]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCSolomon Mack's Verse

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCSolomon Mack did not claim to write poetry, but did express his love for God in what he titles "hymns, composed and selected on different occasions." Presumably those "selected" are the two long expressions of faith of his sisters, and the remaining ones are his own composition. The first two and last two are printed here, all but the second untitled. The seven compositions not reproduced tend to restate the themes of these four, chosen partly for brevity and partly for biographical interest.

My friends, I am on the ocean, So sweetly do I sail. Jesus he is my portion; He's given me a pleasant gale. The bruises sore; In harbour soon I'll be, And see my redeemer there That died for you and me.

Psalm for Deliverance from Great Distress

I waited patient on the Lord; He bowed to hear my cry. He saw me resting on his word And brought salvation nigh. He rais'd me from a horrid pit Where mourning long I lay, And from my bonds releas'd my feet, Deep bonds of mirey clay. Firm on a rock he made me stand, And taught my cheerful tongue To praise the wonders of his hand, In a new thankful song. I'll spread his works of grace abroad; The saints with joy shall hear, And sinners learn to make my God Their only hope and fear. How many are thy thoughts of love! Thy mercies, Lord, how great! We have not words nor hours enough Their numbers to repeat. When I'm afflicted, poor and low, And light and peace depart; My God beholds my heavy woe, And bears me on his heart. Jesus is mine, and I am his; In union we are joined. Oh how sweet to me it is, To feel my Saviour mine. My friends, for you I long, That you might happy be; I long to hear you sing the song, Jesus has died for me. How short and fleeting are my days, And chiefly spent in sinful ways; O may those few which now remain Be spent eternal life to gain. I'm passing through this vale of tears Beneath the weight of numerous years, My body maimed; what have I done Beneath the light of yonder sun. The bloom of life I spent in vain Some earthly treasures to obtain; But earthly treasures took their flight, For which I laboured day and night. I've ranged the fields of battle o'er Midst dying groans and cannon's roar; Whilst death surrounded all the plain, I'm spared amidst the thousands slain. I've been preserved by sea and land By the Almighty's gracious hand, For causes then unknown to me, Which since I trust I'm brought to see. I hope through grace that God has given I'm led to seek a place in heaven; Where sin and pain shall never come, I hope to find a peaceful home.

Grandsons of Solomon Mack, Chilion Mack (left) and Solomon Mack III (right).
