Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

CHAPTER 4

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCLovisa Mack's Healing

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCSolomon Mack added the noteworthy healing of his daughter Lovisa at the end of his Narrative. Not strictly pertinent to his autobiography, it remarkably illustrates the Christian faith of his home when he was middle-aged. As mentioned, Solomon paid earnest tribute to his wife for schooling their children in "love towards each other, as well as devotional feelings towards him who made them." Such teaching effectively motivated all their children, and intensely the daughters, the youngest of which was Lucy, the mother of Joseph Smith, Jr. She also made a record of the interrelated deaths of her sisters, Lovisa Mack Tuttle and Lovina Mack.

The personalities of Solomon and his daughter Lucy come alive in their individual accounts of Lovisa's last days. As elsewhere in her history, Lucy is photographic in detail, but Solomon underplays the event. With skepticism, one could say that Lucy adorns the incident with dramatic license, but that is not likely. The sudden healing was miraculous, and even Solomon says that it was preceded by a prophetic dream, details of which are obviously lacking in his spare summary. Moreover, careful research has shown Lucy to be highly accurate in her names and episodes of New England and western New York. [^1] Her greater detail simply shows her talent for graphic narrative, and reflects intimacy with Lovisa in visits in the Mack and Tuttle homes, when these sisters shared close companionship. Thus Solomon Mack's writing is far short of exaggeration, factual to the fault of terseness. He evidently would not overstate his own exploits or spiritual experiences.

Without contrivance it is nearly impossible for two observers to tell an identical story. In outline Lucy and her father agree completely; in most details they supplement each other—occasionally discrepancies appear, proving independent information or recollection. As a sister Lucy would obviously pay more attention to particulars of the sickness. In the case of the proprietor of the Montague inn where Lovisa died, Solomon remembered the name as beginning with "S", whereas Lucy is specific on "Taff." Solomon was there, and Lucy was not; yet she committed an accurate error, for in 1794 one innkeeper was Severance and another Taft. The two inns were about two miles apart, both probably run by friends of Solomon, since he had lived years in Montague before that. [^2] Possibly he mentioned both individuals as helping him in the personal tragedy of his daughter's dying on her journey home. By contrast Lucy Smith seems more concerned with time than her father and is likely to be more accurate in her estimates, with one qualification. Whereas Solomon's terse record sets no date, the daughter measures events from the marriage of her oldest sister, an event of 1780, when Lucy was but four. [^3] One cannot demand precision so early, but Lucy's dates work back well from her own marriage, and her memory is demonstrably accurate in mid-adolescence.

Two youthful recollections of Lucy Smith prove this point. Her preliminary manuscript mentions birth in New Hampshire and moving to western Massachusetts:

From Gilsum father moved to Montague. Here I became acquainted with the family of Captain Gun: Thankful, Unice, Abel, and Martin—also the Harvys' children. I mention these as I shall also others as I pass along in hopes that this may reach them, and by this means I shall be able to make myself known to them.

Lucy was about four when her father first moved to Montague, around 1779, and the Macks remained in that vicinity until Lucy was about thirteen. Her friends all appear in Montague records. Two Harvey families had children who were likely her playmates, and the birth years of the Gunn children are as follows: Thankful, 1754; Eunice, 1762; Abel, 1766; Martin, 1769. These children ranged from ten to twenty-five when Lucy moved there as a child. And their father Asahel is titled "Capt." on his gravestone, exactly as Lucy refers to him. [^4] Her memory of early personal relationships is excellent.

A second recollection concerns Lucy's adolescent visit to her married sister, an immediate continuation of the indented quotation above:

Two years before sister Lovina's death I visited sister Tuttle, who was then sick at South Hadley. Here lived one Colonel Woodbridge, who bought a large church bell about this time, which was hung while I was there, and I understand remains till this day. A company of young folks went to see it when it was first hung. I was one of the number and was the first who ever rang the bell. This Colonel W[oodbridge] afterwards built a large establishment for the education of poor children. Before I returned home my father moved back to Gilsum, where I continued with my parents until my youngest sister's death.

Lucy gives the right name, title, and locality for "Ruggles Woodbridge, Esqr.," as he is called in the 1790 census at South Hadley. He is titled "Colonel" in the town records and by the early historian Judd, who claimed that Woodbridge had "commanded a regiment in the Revolutionary War." [^5] As Lucy indicates, this well-to-do philanthropist operated a school, [^6] but his donation of the bell rung by Lucy furnishes a firm date in her life. In 1791 the town voted thanks "to Col. R. Woodbridge for his liberal offer to them respecting his giving a bell to the town." That year the town agreed to build a steeple and belfry, which were evidently finished by June 18, 1792; a "second recasting" of the cracked bell in the following year proves that Lucy visited Lovisa ("when it was first hung") in 1791-92. [^7] Although Lucy recalled these events a half century later, she constantly impresses the local historian, who rates her good to precise in ability to furnish specific facts.

The bell episode is crucial in Lovisa's story, for she would be alive in 1792, though "then sick." Memory from a surprising source confirms this picture. Solomon Mack says that his daughter married Joseph Tuttle, an event of early 1780 in town records. [^8] After Lovisa died, Joseph (1756-1816) remarried, and his eldest son Joseph (1796-1884) was unschooled but a successful farmer with an alert mind. He wrote with unusual detail about his grandfather John Tuttle and father Joseph Tuttle, who died when the younger Joseph was twenty and well aware of the earlier life of his father. [^9] His reference to "Capt. Mack" has already been quoted, but Tuttle also described Lovisa:

My father was twice married. His first wife was Lovice Mack, a daughter of old Capt. Mack, of Sunderland, Mass. Her father was an old sea captain and was well known in that vicinity. Another of his daughters married Joseph Smith and became the mother of the celebrated Mormon Prophet of the same name. By his first wife my father raised no children, she being an invalid most of her life, and dying childless, fourteen years after her marriage. [^10]

This indicates 1794 as the year of the death of Lovisa—and also the interrelated death of her younger sister Lovina. [^11] The chronology chart on pages 68-69 simplifies these events and shows how Lucy Smith's recollections fit both the bell episode and the Joseph Tuttle history. The deaths of her sisters have sometimes been set at 1788, based on one of Lucy's statements; [^12] however, her total writings give a different result. [^13] Lucy remembers the following time sequence for Lovisa: marriage, two years of health, two years of sickness before healing, and three final years of life. Adding these intervals to Lovisa's marriage (1780) is not satisfactory either in result or the method of trusting Lucy's measurements in early childhood. But when one works the same intervals back from Lovisa's death (1794), a surprising coincidence appears. Lucy's chronology ties into sister Lydia's marriage. The wedding festivity when she was four could easily have been confused with the similar celebration when she was ten. This appears to be an error of some logic, a wedding correctly remembered but two sisters confused because of Lucy's early age.

Documents regarding Lovisa mention Montague, Sunderland, Hadley, and South Hadley, all adjoining towns of western Massachusetts on a north-south line from each other. Lovisa was married in Montague, where her father's family appears on the 1790 census. [^14] Some two years later (as discussed in his biography), Solomon Mack moved back to Gilsum, New Hampshire, from which he later made his sixty-mile trip to bring Lovisa home in her last sickness (1794). Lucy remembers her then at South Hadley, where Lucy had visited her two years earlier. [^15] But in 1790 Joseph Tuttle is enumerated in Hadley, with one male and two females in the household. Lovisa was childless, so the second female is possibly Lovina, who nursed her older sister some two years. [^16] Despite Lovisa's residence in South Hadley-Hadley, her healing (Solomon says) took place in Sunderland, where Lovisa afterward walked across the street to her father-in-law's. In 1790 John Tuttle lived in Sunderland. [^17] Furthermore, the Tuttle tradition fixed that as a continuous residence where his sons lived about him:

When my father was three years old, my grandfather removed from Lebanon, Conn., to Sunderland, Mass., where he afterwards died. He was lifting a stick of timber with another man, who threw down his end, which jarred grandfather and broke a blood vessel. . . . My grandfather's name was John, and he was also a mechanic, having the trades of wheelwright, carpenter, and stone mason. . . . My grandfather Tuttle was a soldier in the old French and Indian War. He died with his son, in Sunderland, Mass. I have heard my father relate that according to the custom of the times, he and his brother John presented the remains of their father at the door of the house for burial. [^18]

A Chronology for the Mack Sisters

This list of dates summarizes events surrounding Lovisa Mack's death, as explained in the introduction to this chapter. Estimates carry c., abbreviation for Latin circa, "about." Lucy Smith's preliminary manuscript and published Biographical Sketches are given without author. Her memory of relationships is nearly exact for events after adolescence. This is checked by the definite dates of the bell episode, her own marriage, and the Joseph Tuttle manuscript.

Date Event Evidence for Dating 1759 (Jan. 4) Solomon's Vital Records, Lyme, Conn. Marriage c. 1761 Lovisa's Birth "My oldest sister's faith" (preliminary ms.). c. 1762 Lovina's Birth "My youngest sister's death" (preliminary ms.). c. 1764 Lydia's Birth Gravestone inscription (see n. 86). 1775 (July 8) Lucy's Birth Vital Records, Gilsum, N. H. 1780 (Jan. 31) Lovisa's Vital Records, Montague, Mass. Marriage 1786 (Jan. 26) Lydia's Vital Records, Gilsum, N. H. Marriage c. 1789 Lovisa's "Her illness lasted two years" Early Sickness (Biographical Sketches; pre- liminary ms. agrees); "about one year" (Solomon Mack, Narrative). c. 1791 Lovisa's See four entries following. Healing 1792 Lucy's Visit "Two years before sister Lo to Lovisa vina's death I visited sister Tuttle, who was then sick . . . . [A] large church bell . . . was hung while I was there" (pre- liminary ms.). 1792 Bell Hanging Money then appropriated for belfry at South Hadley (Town Record Book). 1794 Lovina's Sickness "a short time" before Death Lovisa's healing, with "three years" affliction (Biographical Sketches and preliminary ms). 1794 Lovisa's Lovisa died "a few months" Death after Lovina's death (Bio- graphical Sketches); "fourteen years after her marriage" ("Nar- rative . . . of Joseph Tuttle"). 1794-95 Lucy's First "Shortly after" Lovina's death, Tunbridge Stay Lucy went to Stephen Mack's and stayed one year (Biographical Sketches and preliminary ms.). 1795 Lucy's Gilsum Lucy "was home but a short Return time" before returning to Tun- bridge, where she was married "the next January" (Biographical Sketches; preliminary ms. agrees). 1796 (Jan. 24) Lucy's Vital Records, Tunbridge, Vt. Marriage

———————————————————————————————

Lovisa might be near John Tuttle at her healing about 1791 at Sunderland, though she was at Hadley in 1790 (census), and South Hadley in 1792 and in 1794 (Lucy's recollections). She and Joseph Tuttle were childless and could easily move. Her needs evidently forced the husband to bring his critically ill wife near his father's household. Upon Lovisa's recovery perhaps she and Joseph moved to South Hadley, where Lucy visited them. Another possibility is that Lucy remembered the social activity of neighboring South Hadley, though the Tuttles' actual residence may have been Hadley.

Lucy's story about Lovisa is compelling narrative, but is somewhat diminished in parallel study. The harmony also artificially shortens the drama of Lovina's similar illness, though that is available in Lucy Smith's published history. Yet parallel presentation is an excellent tool for understanding all the events that Solomon briefly summarizes, since it adds Lucy Smith's preliminary version and her more polished account, plus historical information integrating with family recollections. For purposes of comparison, minor liberties are taken with the order of Lucy's two narratives, though the sequence of Solomon's brief account is unmodified. Generally there is little difference between Lucy's preliminary manuscript and the 1853 printing, though early personal details were sometimes passed over in revision. For instance, only Lucy's preliminary manuscript mentions the relative ages of Lovisa and Lovina, incidental to beginning their record: "Lovisa, my oldest sister, was a woman [of] peculiar faith, as well as . . . her sister next to her, Lovina." This defines what Lucy means by her inexact reference to Lovina as her "youngest sister" (n. 105). Everything that Solomon and Lucy narrate about Lovisa is included in the following presentation, with the exception of the preliminary manuscript's closing lines of Lovisa's final poem: "Farewell, farewell; in heaven I shall I hope in to meet you all." The line is not completely coherent with itself or the preceding lines. The poetry at the end of Lucy's two accounts is obviously interrelated, but not necessarily two versions of the same poem. According to Lucy's strict language, one was composed "a few days previous" to Lovisa's death, while the broken lines were made "just before she started" for Gilsum the day of her death.

Montague, Massachusetts, about 1838

These details introduce the family history of Lovisa's healing. [^19] What is its significance? Although belief in miracles is superstition to some, the spectacular change in this dying woman requires serious reflection. Her vision preceded a supernatural recovery; she also made constructive use of the experience—encouraging others to a better life and drawing attention to God, not herself. Her profound faith is reflected in the psalms she sang in church, no doubt in the versification popularly used in New England. Watts' psalmody was then standard and was divided into the sections cited in Solomon Mack's Narrative. Sample stanzas sung publicly by Lovisa disclose her inner feelings then:

I love the Lord: he heard my cries And pity'd every groan. Long as I live, when troubles rise, I'll hasten to his throne. The Lord beheld me sore distress't; He bid my pains remove. Return, my soul, to God thy rest, For thou hast known his love. [^20]

Both father and sister justly viewed Lovisa as a model of Christian piety, rewarded for her faith by the revelation and intervention of God. Evidently the majority of her friends and neighbors agreed. This raises basic questions about the early revelations of Joseph Smith. Genuine spirituality is a family characteristic. Their sincerity throws great doubt on any theory of deception by him.

The Healing of Lovisa Mack Tuttle

Lucy Smith, Solomon Mack, Historical Lucy Smith, Biographical Narrative Correlations Preliminary Sketches Manuscript ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ The history of Quite a miracle of Vital Records of Lovisa, my oldest Lovisa and Lovina, my daughter, in Montague, sister, was a my two oldest the town of Massachusetts woman [of] sisters, is so Sunderland, in the (Salem, Mass., peculiar faith, as connected and state of 1934), "Montague well as my oldest interwoven that I Massachusetts, the Marriages," p. 91: brother and her shall not attempt wife of Joseph "Lovisa Mack and sister next to to separate it. Tuttle. Joseph Tuttle, her, Lovina. These They were one in Jan. 31, 1780." two were singular faith, in love, in for their devoted action, and in attachment for hope of eternal each other, which life. They were continued always together, steadfast till and when they were death. And of old enough to their death one understand the might well say as duties of a did one of old, Christian, they let me die the united their death of the voices in prayer righteous and let and songs of my last end be praise to God. like theirs. I This sisterly shall not weary my affection reader with increased with recitals of early their years, and life, which though strengthened with they are engraved the strength of upon my heart with their minds. The a pen of iron, pathway of their never to be lives was never obliterated, might clouded with a not touch the gloomy shadow feelings of others until Lovisa's with that interest marriage and with which I removal from home. contemplate the which left Lovina same. very lonely. I shall here I shall here relate a relate a circumstance that circumstance may tax the connected with her credulity of such sickness, which as do not bear may try the witness of the credulity of some fact as I douwho of my readers. Yet are not a few. But hundreds were eye what I say here I witnesses, and say with reference doubtless many of to eternity and them are now the judgment seat living, who, if of the Almighty, they would, could where I shall testify to the again meet my fact which I am readers as a about to mention. testator of the same. In about two years She was sick about "My father was But to my tale. An after Lovisa's one year. At the twice married. His example of my marriage she was expiration of her first wife was oldest sister's taken very sick, first sickness, Lovice Mack . . . , faith, which I and sent for the doctor had she being an shall here give, Lovina. Lovina, as given her over, invalid most of was exhibited might be expected, and the nurses her life." years subsequent went immediately, removed her by the "Narrative of . . to her marriage. and remained with use of sheets to . Joseph Tuttle." She was taken her sister during make her bed for violently sick her illness, which some days before with a disease so lasted two years, her recovery. singular in its baffling the skill nature that her of the most attendant experienced physicians not physicians. But at being furnished the expiration of with any this time she precedent, could revived a little. give no name to. and showed some Suffice it to say, symptoms of she was nigh unto recovery. death and sorely afflicted for the space of two years. She revived a little about this time and showed some symptoms of recovery.

Lucy Smith, Solomon Mack, Historical Lucy Smith, Biographical Narrative Correlations Preliminary Sketches Manuscript ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ As before stated, For three days she But a malignant after the space of [ate] only the reattack soon two years she yoke of one brought her back began to manifest egg—she was an in intense agony signs of anatomy to upon a bed of pain convalescence, but appearance. Her and languor. She soon a violent friends were often grew worse and reattack brought weeping around her worse until she her down again, bed, expecting became utterly and she grew worse every moment to be speechless, and and worse, until her last. The day was so for several she became before her days. Those who entirely recovery, the attended her were speechless and so doctor said it was not allowed to reduced that her as much impossible move here. She ate attendants were to raise her, as not; she drank not allowed to it would one from not, with the even turn her in the dead. exception of a bed. She took no mere morsel of nourishment except rice water, which a very little rice they were enabled water. She lay in to pour into her this situation mouth with a three days and two teaspoon by prying nights. her teeth apart. On the third The night 1790 Census, Thus she lay until night, about two following she Hadley, the night of the o'clock, she dreamed a dream; Massachusetts: third day at about feebly pronounced it was that a sort Joseph Tuttle two o'clock. She the name of of wine would cure household feebly pronounced Lovina, who had her. It was enumerated with 1 the name of her all the while immediately male over 16 and 2 sister Lovina, who watched over her brought to her, females. had hovered pillow like an and she drank it. indefatigably all attendant angel, The next morning the while around observing every she awoke and her pillow night change and symp- called to her and day like an tom with the deep- husband to get up attendant angel, estemotion. Startled and make a fire. watching every at hearing the He arose change with sound of Lovisa's immediately, but thrilling anxiety. voice, Lovina now thought she was She now bent with bent over the out of her head. deep emotion over emaciated form of But soon he found the emaciated form her sister with to the contrary. of the invalid and thrilling interest Quickly she arose said, "My and said, "My up on end in the sister!"—but no sister! My sister! bed, said the Lord more; her feelings What will you?" has helped both choked her Lovisa then said body and soul, and utterance. Lovisa emphatically, "The dressed herself. said emphati Lord has healed She then asked for cally, "The Lord me, both soul and the Psalm Book and has healed me, body—raise me up turned to the 30th soul and and give me my Psalm, second part bodyuraise me up, clothes; I wish to (readers look for and give me my get up." Her yourselves), and clothes. I want to husband told those again she get up." Her who were watching mentioned the husband told those with her to 116th, first part. present to gratify gratify her, as in her, as this was all probability it probably a revival was a revival before death, and before death, and he would not have he would not have her crossed in her her crossed in her last moments. They last moments. They raised her in bed did so, though and handed her with reluctance, clothing to her as they supposed and assisted her she might live a to dress. But when few moments longer she was lifted to if she did not her feet, both of exhaust her her ankles were strength too much instantly by exerting dislocated by her herself in this weight resting manner. Having upon them. She raised her in bed, said, "Put me in a they assisted her chair soon be to dress. And sound again." She although when they then ordered raised her to her feet, her weight dislocated both of her husband to her ankles, she bring her would not consent nourishment. to return to her bed, but insisted upon being set in a chair and having her feet drawn gently in order to have her ankle joints replaced. She then requested her husband to bring her some wine, saying if he would do so, she would do quite well for the present.

Lucy Smith, Solomon Mack, Historical Lucy Smith, Biographical Narrative Correlations Preliminary Sketches Manuscript ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Soon after this, Soon after, the "My grandfather When she had taken by her own request same morning, she Tuttle . . . died some stimulance she was assisted went to the house with his son, in she desired them to cross the of her Sunderland, to assist her to street to her father-in-law Massachusetts." cross the street father-in-law's, (which was about Narrative of . . . to her who was at that ten rods) and back Joseph Tuttle." father-in-law's, time prostrated again on her feet. who was then sick. upon a bed of Her eyes and 1790 census, They did so. When sickness. When she countenance Sunderland, she entered, he entered the house appeared lively Massachusetts, cried out in he cried out in and bright as ever enumerates John amazement, "Lovisa amazement, "Lovisa it was in her past Tuttle and is dead, and her is dead, and her life. household. spirit has come to spirit is now come admonish me of my to warn me of my final exit." "No, sudden departure father, no," she from this world." said; "God has " No, father," she raised me up, and exclaimed, "God I come to tell you has raised me up, to prepare for and death." She then I have come to sat down, tell you to conversed with him prepare for some time, and death." She afterwards conversed an hour returned home by or so with him; this help of her then, with the husband and three assistance of her watchers that had husband and those been sitting up who attended upon with her—for she her that night, had not been she crossed the without two extra street back again attendants one to her own night for one apartment. whole year. When this was By this time so noised abroad a great an great multitude of excitement was people came raised that the together, both to inhabitants began hear and see to gather from all concerning the quarters. She told strange and them she would marvelous meet them at the circumstance which village church on had taken place. Thursday, the next She talked to them day, and tell them a short time and all they wished to then sang a hymn, know, after which she dis missed them, promising to meet them the next day at the village church, where she would tell them all about the strange manner in which she had been healed.

Lucy Smith, Solomon Mack, Historical Lucy Smith, Biographical Narrative Correlations Preliminary Sketches Manuscript ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ The following day, It was on Thursday which she according to following, she accordingly did by promise, she went to meeting, walking one mile proceeded to the which was a mile with the church, and when and a half. assistance of her she arrived there husband and her a large sister. [The] congregation had minister opened collected. Soon the meeting and after she entered, gave it into her the minister arose hands. and remarked that as many of the congregation had doubtless come to hear a recital of the strange circumstance which had taken place in the neighborhood, and as he himself felt more interested in it than in hearing a gos pel discourse, he would open the meeting and then give place to Mrs. Tuttle. The minister then On the first Stanza of the She then sang them requested her to singing she Watts' 116th a hymn with sing a hymn. She offered them the Psalm: angelic harmony. accordingly did 116th Psalm, first My God hath sav'd She sang a so, and her voice part. The minister my soul from death splendid strain of was as high and preached an And dry'd my music. She clear as it had excellent sermon, falling tears. occupied the whole ever been. Having but her Now to his praise day. [She] had her sung, she arose exhortation was I'll spend my two nurses with and addressed the said to exceed the breath, [her]. [She] told audience as minister's sermon, And my remaining them when she lay follows: "I seemed and on the last years. sick she was to be borne away singing she turned carried away. to the world of to the 116th There was nothing spirits, where I Psalm, second more than a saw the part. spider's web Savior, as through between her and a veil, which Christ—that Christ appeered to me bid her return and about as thick as warn the people. a spider's web. She testified with And he told me boldness to the that I must return power of God in again to warn the her behalf and people to prepare continued so to do for death; that I till her death, must exhort them which was three to be watchful as years after. well as prayerful; that I must declare faith fully unto them their accountability before God, and the certainty of their being called to stand before the judgment seat of Christ; and that if I would do this, my life should be pro- longed." After which she spoke much to the people upon the uncertainty of life. When she sat down her husband and sister, also those who were with her during the last night of her sickness, arose and testified to her appearance just before her sudden recovery.

Lucy Smith, Solomon Mack, Historical Lucy Smith, Biographical Narrative Correlations Preliminary Sketches Manuscript ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Of these things After meeting She preached to a she continued to [she] returned crowded house. speak boldly for home. And after After this her the space of three she regained her house was always years, at the end strength she went crowded for three of which time she about her usual years. was seized with labor, which she the consumption, moderately which terminated followed one or her earthly two years, when existence. she was taken down again. She grew un- easy and went to her father's in Gilsum, in New Hampshire, and there stayed some months. A short time At the same time I Lovina's character before Lovisa was had another was that of a true healed in the daughter sick with follower of miraculous manner the consumption, Christ, and she before stated. and died. lived Lovina was taken contemplating her with a severe final change with cough, which ended that peaceful in consumption. serenity which She lingered three characterizes years, during those who fear God which time she and walk spoke with much uprightly. She was calm ness of her taken with the approaching consumption at dissolution. sixteen and contemplating languished three death with all years with this that serenity fatal disease. She which is spoke calmly of characteristic of her approaching the last moments dissolution and of those who fear conjured her young God and walk friends to uprightly before remember that life him. She conjured upon this earth her young friends could not be to remember that eternal; therefore life upon this the necessity of earth cannot be looking beyond eternal. Hence the this vale of tears necessity of look to a far more ing beyond this glorious vale of tears to a inheritance laid glorious up, where moth inheritance, where doth not corrupt moths do not nor thieves break corrupt nor through nor thieves break steal.... through and steal. . . . Having led my My other daughter After she took readers to the grew uneasy, and I sick [she] sent close of Lovina's carried her back for father to come life, I shall again, where she and see her. She return to staid part of one was afraid she Lovisa, of whom summer, and she should die before there only remains was discontented. he got there. the closing scene of her earthly career. In the course of a few months subsequent to the death of sister Lovina, my father received a letter from South Hadley, stating that Lovisa was very low of the consumption, and that she earnestly desired him to come and see her as soon as possible, as she expected to live but a short time.

Lucy Smith, Solomon Mack, Historical Lucy Smith, Biographical Narrative Correlations Preliminary Sketches Manuscript ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ My father set out And I went after He went in a immediately, and her, carriage. She when he arrived would go back with there, he found him. He prepared a her in rather bed, laid her better health than thereon. She then he expected. In a told him, Now, few days after he father, if I die got there, she before I get home, resolved in her I wish you to bury heart to return me in Gilsum with him at all beside my sister hazards. To this Lovina." her father unwillingly consented, and after making the requisite preparations they started for Gilsum. They traveled and got her to 1794 map of [He] traveled four about four miles Montague to Montague lists miles, put up at and came to an inn landlord S_____ . "Taft's Tavern" Mr. Taffe's. [He] kept by a man by I took her out of and asked her if she the name of Taff. the carriage and "Severance's would be placed in Here her father set her in a Tavern" (see a chair and rest a halted and asked chair, and she discussion). 1790 little. She said her if she did not instantly died. Census, she would, and wish to tarry a Montague, after she was short time to rest Massachusetts, taken into the herself. She enumerates Lyman parlor, while replied in the Taft and father went to the affirmative. By Moses Severance. bar for some the assistance of spirits she the landlord she expired in her was presently chair. seated in an easy chair. My father then stepped into the next room to procure a little water and wine for her. He was absent but a moment; however when he returned it was too late. Her spirit had fled from its earthly tabernacle to return no more until recalled by the trump of the Archangel. My father I immediately got "By his first wife Father then did immediately a coffin made and my father raised all that could be addressed a letter then carried her no children, she . done by way of to mother, home. . . dying decent dress and informing her of childless fourteen suitable equipage Lovisa's death, years after her of every kind. It lest the shock of marriage." was fifty miles seeing the corpse "Narrative of . . from there to unexpectedly . Joseph Tuttle." Gilsum. [He] kept should overcome her three days, her. And as soon then buried her as as he could get a her request was. coffin, he Father took the proceeded on his precaution of journey for writing to Gilsum, a distance mother—almost of fifty miles. She was buried by overcome. [He] the side of her went fifteen miles sister Lovina, for a minister to according to her preach. I was then own request. in Tunbridge with brother S[tephen] Mack.

Lucy Smith, Solomon Mack, Historical Lucy Smith, Biographical Narrative Correlations Preliminary Sketches Manuscript ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ The following is She made some part of a hymn verses just before composed by she started: herself a few days previous to her O Lord, wilt thou decease: return to me Lord, may my In mercy, Lord, thoughts be turned before I to thee; die. Lift thou my heavy Oh, may I now soul on high; return to Wilt thou, O Lord, thee return to me And lift my heavy In mercy, Father, soul on ere I die! high. My soaring thoughts now rise Oh, for mercy I above— implore, Oh, fill my soul (And never sin no with heavenly more); love. And lift my heavy soul Father and mother, above. now farewell; And fill my soul And husband, with partner of my heavenly love. life, Go to my father's Farewell, my children, tell father and my That lives no more mother dear, on earth thy wife; Farewell, my That while she husband of dwelt in cumbrous my life, clay, Farewell, my For them she brothers and prayed both night sisters here, and day. And farewell, all the joys of My friends, I bid life. you all adieu; The Lord hath (For whilst with called, and I must you on gou earth I stay, And all the joys I beg your prayers of this vain earth both Are now to me of night and day.) little worth; Twill be the same Farewell, oh with you as me, world, I bid When brought as adieu; near The Lord he calls, eternity. and I must go. For I must, and Thus closes this soon be mournful recital. gone— And when I pass My time on earth with my readers will not into the next be long. chapter, with them probably may end the sympathy aroused by this rehearsalubut with me it must last while life endures.
