Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

CHAPTER 5

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCLives of Asael and Mary Duty Smith

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCAsael Smith could look to illustrious Massachusetts ancestry, but just being the youngest child of prominent Samuel Smith was an education in public service. [^1] Samuel would be better known had he lived in an urban center, for he repeatedly held the most responsible positions in Topsfield, north of Boston. His record of offices is remarkable: a half-dozen terms in the state legislature, a dozen terms as a governing selectman of his town, and sometime town clerk. [^2] The full story of community prominence is too voluminous to mention here. [^3] Captain in the militia and a grass-roots leader in committees that successfully promoted the Revolution, Samuel Smith was a solid representative of the local aristocracies that had the most to lose by pledging lives, fortunes, and sacred honor for the cause of American independence. [^4] Samuel affirmed his faith in the preamble of his will; though using a common formula, he subscribed to the Christian conviction that by "the mighty power of God" he would stand again at "the general resurrection." [^5] A highly religious man who took his Congregational covenant seriously, he was active in public worship. His five children were all baptized in the Topsfield church, including youngest Asael four days after birth. [^6]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCThe various strands of an admirable life are summed up in the father's 1785 obituary:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCDIED—At Topsfield, on Monday the 14th instant, Samuel Smith, Esq., aged 72. So amiable and worthy a character as he evidently appeared, both in publick and private, will render the memory of him ever precious. For a number of years he represented the town in the General Court, where he was esteemed a man of integrity and uprightness. His usefulness among those with whom he was more immediately conversant, was eminent. He was a sincere friend to the liberties of his country, and a strenuous advocate for the doctrines of Christianity. "The memory of the just is blessed." [^7]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCAt his father's passing, Asael Smith was a married man with ten children, living in Derryfield (now Manchester), New Hampshire, where he was serving his seventh term as town clerk. Born in 1744, he had earlier shared the work of his father's farms at Topsfield, Massachusetts. [^8] At age nineteen Asael signed as a witness in Samuel's sale of 120 acres on the northern border of Topsfield. His father soon purchased a somewhat smaller acreage a mile or more north of the Topsfield common. [^9] On Pye Brook, the farm included "tillage land" and orchard, but was managed more for hay and meadow and the livestock it supported. [^10] Asael was only the second son, so economic custom dictated his learning a trade and leaving the family homestead, allowing his older brother, Samuel Smith, Jr., to farm on shares with his father. But life would strangely reverse this situation years later.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCWhen Asael turned twenty-one, he was added to the tax list after "Captain Samuel Smith" and Samuel Smith, Jr. [^11] At twenty-three Asael wedded Mary Duty, though the couple continued to live on the family farm during early marriage. [^12] Mary also came from a religious family and had been baptized as an infant in the Congregational pattern. [^13] Their first three children were born in Topsfield; the third was Joseph, born July 12, 1771, whose birth entry was later annotated in the town records: "This Joseph was father of Joseph the Mormon." [^14] The home of Asael and Mary Smith was Christian, witnessed by the baptisms of these children in Topsfield March 8, 1772. On that day the church minutes record their own profession of faith: "Asael Smith and Mary his wife . . . owned the covenant." [^15] Their children of 1773 and 1775 were born in Windham, New Hampshire, Mary's former home. [^16] The move to New Hampshire and the stay in nearby communities there were summarized in a bare historical note on the inside cover of a pamphlet:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCAsael Smith, his book. May the first, 1772 we removed from Topsfield and dwelt at Windham in New Hampshire. And April the 15th, 1774 we removed from Windham, and now we dwell at Dunbarton, New Hampshire. [^17]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCJoseph Smith claimed the "love of liberty" from both grandfathers. [^18] While Samuel Smith served in the political councils of the Revolution, his son Asael enlisted as a soldier. In the summer of 1776 he mustered under Captain John Nesmith in "a company raised for Canada service," an act of obvious hardship for a family head with six dependents. His regiment was enrolled to defend New York's northern frontier. [^19] Possibly exertion and disease took their toll in 1776—a decade later Asael was "in a low state of health, entirely unable to labor for three years." [^20] His heartfelt approval of the American Revolution is clear—at the crest of life he stated his political credo for his family:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCBless God that you live in a land of liberty, and bear yourselves dutifully and conscionably towards the authority under which you live. See God's providence in the appointment of the Federal Constitution, and hold union and order as a precious jewel. [^21]

The Common, Topsfield, Massachusetts

These convictions were taught to Asael's sons and grandsons (the Prophet clearly included), a process symbolized by the continuation of Asael's trade to Joseph Smith, Sr. From age thirty-four to forty-seven, both New Hampshire and Massachusetts deeds refer to "Asael Smith . . . cooper," which identify him by his craftsmanship at barrel-making. [^22] Asael evidently set the precedent for his son Silas, later described as "engaged in farming during the summer, and in winter he worked at the cooper trade, making full-bound barrels, his sons assisting him on the farm and in the shop." [^23] Post-Revolutionary land records prove a local move to Derryfield, the area of Manchester, New Hampshire, where Asael purchased a 100-acre farm on the Merrimack River May 27, 1778. [^24] There he was most prominent in civic affairs, elected as Derryfield town clerk from 1779 through 1786, an office that Asael resigned after his father's death. [^25] Seven years on the Merrimack land saw births of four more children, and Asael personally recorded the birthdates of most of his large family in the first Derryfield town book. [^26] Here his older sons arrived at early manhood, and he heavily depended on them in operating his farm. The second was the Prophet's father, Joseph Smith, Sr.

Asael's father willed him his "silver shoe buckles," but Samuel's sterling character was a greater inheritance. An unusual sense of responsibility looms in John Smith's history of the death of Asael's father—based on childhood recollection and later intimacy with his own father, Asael. These personal details fit squarely into known facts and constitute a significant episode of moral heroism in Asael Smith's life. John reminisced:

My grandfather died when I [was] quite young. I remember my father's returning home from Massachusetts, where he had been to visit his father in his last sickness. I well remember how melancholy he appeared when he called his children round him and told us that our grandfather was dead. [^27]

Earlier Asael sat with semi-delirious Samuel, whose powerful drive to provide asserted itself in imagining himself able to care for his family. John Smith's account carries an eloquence of event:

He jumped out of his bed and said he must go to mill, for my family will suffer. My father replied, "I will go to mill; I will take care of the family. Dear sir, do go to bed." "Asael said he will take care of my wife." Says he, "I will." To use my father's own words: "He lay down quietly, knowing that I always did as I agreed, and soon after fell asleep and was gathered to his people. This promise cost me much money and trouble, but I never regretted it. I have done as I promised." [^28]

The dramatic tension of this obligation comes from both circumstances and personalities. Partly from extensive public service, Samuel "left his own affairs in a condition very difficult to settle by anyone but himself." [^29] Furthermore, Asael (now father of eleven) was himself recovering from economic setbacks and poor health. He was youngest of his own family, and his brother and three sisters were self-sufficient. So his promise concerned Samuel's seventy-one-year-old widow, his stepmother, for his mother died in the year of his birth. [^30] Asael confided that his stepmother "did not treat him so kindly as some mothers treat their children." [^31] Nevertheless he had a strong sense of honor and shouldered duty as few men would. Asael's son preserved the particulars:

My uncle Samuel, who lived with my grandfather at the time of hits death, after finding the condition his estate was in, came to New Hampshire to counsel with my father on the subject. He said it was not possible to pay the debts with the property that was left under the then existing circumstances. My father not being so well acquainted with the state of affairs as his elder brother Samuel, thought that it might be done. "For," said he, "I am not willing that my father, who has done so much business, should have it said of him that he died insolvent." And [he] urged hard to have my uncle go on and settle the business, and he felt that the Lord would prosper him in the undertaking. But my uncle said that he had a large family and but very little property, and he could not undertake such a work without the means to do with.

My father was then in low circumstances, had been in a low state of health, entirely unable to, labor for three years. during which time he was only able to keep the town record, as he had held the office of town clerk for many years. He owned a small farm in Derryfield, on Merrimack River, a large and growing family, and in consequence of his late sickness [they were] in very destitute condition "Notwithstanding all my embarrassments." said my father "I will undertake to settle my father's estate and save his name from going down to posterity as an insolvent debtor. . . ." After considerable conversation with my uncle, [they] agreed to change places. Accordingly, my father moved his family to Topsfield, Massachusetts and attend[ed] to the business above mentioned. [^32]

The home of Samuel and Asael Smith, Topsfield, Massachusetts

Records prove that Asael deeded his New Hampshire farm to his brother Samuel and exchanged places. [^33] Prior to the father's death the Massachusetts family estate had been taxed in the names of "Samuel Smith, Esq., and his son Samuel"; afterward Asael is taxed at Topsfield. [^34] His promise was kept by mental and physical blisters. He managed about 100 acres, raising hay, livestock, and a variety of minor crops. [^35]

Here my father struggled hard for about five years and made out to support his family comfortably. His stepmother was on his hands during this time, who was sometimes rather childish. However, by prudence and industry he had paid some part of his father's debts. . . . [H]is old mother received her third, [and] after supporting a large family with the scanty means which was at his command, he could not pay the old debts which were crowding upon him. People showed no lenity, notwithstanding they knew that if he had not have come forward to pay them, they never could have got one-eighth part of what they [were] now determined to have. [^36]

In these years Asael was struggling against impossible odds. He was always industrious and a good manager, but sickness and hard times took away every surplus. Describing coming to Massachusetts in 1786, his son says that Asael "had lost considerable in the downfall of Continental paper," a grim condition that had also affected Samuel's estate. This paper dollar lost value during the Revolution, only to reach its low worth below a cent prior to Samuel's death. The decade after the Revolution saw much else that was "not worth a Continental." Debts incurred by the father during heavy inflation had to be repaid by the son during depression, when falling farm prices decreased the cash value of Asael's labors. [^37] At the time he sought to pay off his father's obligations, thousands of debtors in rural Massachusetts supported armed revolution (materializing in Shay's Rebellion) rather than face compulsory collection and foreclosure proceedings. [^38] But if a failing economy bequeathed impossibility, Asael was generous with his resources. The widow's right was met (perhaps on her demand) by renting a third of the land for her support, but the stepson voluntarily promised to pay necessities that she lacked. [^39] By entering the picture, Asael shouldered the burden of paying the widow plus the creditors; the latter obligation came largely out of his pocket, so he correctly said that honoring his father "cost me much money and trouble." Overall, he traded his own land for Samuel's farm; while running it he devoted excess profits to Samuel's creditors; when sold, he distributed virtually the entire return to settle his father's affairs. He might have walked away and let the creditors divide up the estate, with the widow assured of her dower. [^40] Instead, with his own labor he paid off all debts in full, by family tradition a net cost of $700 to him. Asael sold the farm hut did not keep the proceeds: "He then paid all the debts . . . against the estate and left himself almost destitute of means to support his family." [^41] Five years of labor added little to his pocketbook but much to his moral stature.

But Asael could still laugh in adversity, another quality transmitted to Joseph Smith. The grandfather listed his taxable property in a humorous poem, and it was later recovered "among the scraps found on file" in the town archives:

To the Selectmen of Topsfield:

I have two polls, the one is poor, I have three cows and want five more, I have no horse, but fifteen sheep— No more than these this year I keep; Steers that's two years old, one pair, Two calves I have, all over hair, Three heifers two years old I own, One heifer calf that's poorly grown. My land is acres eighty-two, Which search the records, you'll find true. And this is all I have in store— I'll thank you if you'll tax no more. fn Asael Smith

The author of these lines was a confident member of his community, a fact contradicting dubious tradition of Asael's move from Massachusetts because of hostility after befriending a Quaker. [^42] Far from being ostracized in Topsfield, he moved to Vermont secure in the many close associations left behind. There he answered a letter of friendship from young but respected Jacob Towne, Jr., prominent farmer who served constantly as selectman, town clerk, or legislator from 1799 to his death in 1836. [^43] Towne had an acute mind and was well read. Asael's letter (reproduced in chapter 6) shows a warm relationship with Jacob Towne's parents and other Topsfield families. [^44] Mutual regard is obvious with Dr. John Merriam, a practicing physician of high standards, well educated for his day. [^45] Joseph Cree had sent respects to Asael, which were returned with the invitation to "set up his trade" in Vermont. Cree was only a small landholder, since he was a craftsman, reportedly a taiIor. [^46] Asael also greeted Joseph Dorman, who with Ephraim operated the substantial farm that had adjoined his own in Topsfield. [^47] Finally, Asael Smith returned "hearty thanks to Mr. Charles Rogers for his respect shown in writing me a few lines"; Rogers was evidently a day laborer and had perhaps worked on Asael's farm. [^48] In his 1796 letter, Asael planned to return to friends and neighbors at Topsfield to "pay you a visit." George A. Smith later talked to oldsters with dim memories that Asael did return "and visited his relatives and acquaintances." [^49] He was clearly respected in Topsfield, though the sanctimonious could cluck about his religious independence. Fifteen years after Asael left, one Topsfield investor loaned the Smiths $700 in return for their interest-bearing note. [^50]

Asael left Topsfield in early 1791, right after he and his stepmother (the widow Priscilla Smith) are enumerated side by side on the 1790 census. Asael was then a vigorous forty-six, and enterprise filled his mind. Temporarily he leased land at Ipswich "with considerable of a stock of cows," and "moved his family on to his hired farm" in the spring of 1791. But Asael did not intend to remain a renter. He let his competent wife supervise the dairy operation, gave "his boys to understand what they must do," and set off for Vermont with his oldest son, Jesse, in quest of inexpensive (and uncleared) land. Events of the move reveal the warmth of Asael's personality. On returning from Vermont, the father made plans to send the two oldest sons to Vermont and make the new place ready. John remembered:

"Jesse [then twenty-three] returned with Joseph, my next oldest brother [then twenty], to Vermont to cut away the timber and make preparation for the family to move on—as they then expected—the next spring." Although Jesse and the future father of the Prophet were obviously self-reliant, Asael was too affectionate to carry out the plan: "My father changed his mind, as he could not bear to have his boys so far from him, as he always loved to have his children close by." [^51] A personal episode of the move gives another glimpse of Asael's ready wit. Grandson George A. Smith got the story from his father John:

My grandfather had paid a Mr. Averell for making a chest, which it seems Averell was a long time completing, causing a little impatience. At last, however, it was finished. My father said he was walking behind the cart in which they moved into the new state with his father, who on noticing the name of Elijah Averell painted on the box, exclaimed, "In seventeen hundred and ninety-one, Elijah Averell got it done." [^52]

For a century memory preserved accurately this moving date, proved by the county and town records of two states and Asael's 1796 letter from Vermont. [^53]

The Asael Smiths were hardy pioneers. Their journey from Massachusetts to Vermont is best told in John's memories about the labors of his father and older brothers:

He sold his crops on the ground and settled his affairs, and set off with family for the new state in the month of October, a journey of 140 miles, thought to be in those days a monstrous long tour.

. . . It is through a new country and the roads very bad, the loads heavy. Of course [we] got along very slow—[were] on the road I think 14 days passing through New Hampshire, my native state. . . . During the time we were on the road, but little transpired worthy of note. My brother Asael drove my father's team. He had hired a man by the name of Webster with three yoke of oxen and wagon.

The second or third day we meet with my brother Joseph, who by some accident had partly fractured the bone of his leg and was on the way home, expecting the family to stay at Ipswich through the approaching winter. However, he turned back with us to Vermont. Here my father took his family, went into the woods some distance from any settlement, cut his road and made bridges, and came to the little cabin that my brothers had built for their own accommodation while to work on the land. It was loosely built after the mode of building log huts, say 14 feet by 10. The covering was the bark of the elm, which was very plenty in that part. [^54]

Thus "Asael Smith of Ipswich, in the province of Massachusetts Bay," came to Vermont, the deed so describing him also confirming 1791 as the year Asael took title to eighty-three acres lying in the "Tunbridge gore." [^55] Although prominent and successful in his two decades in Tunbridge, he did not lose perspective on the meaning of life. After four years of pioneering in Vermont, he expressed pleasure in both his increasing property and also the close-knit family around him, in a letter to a Topsfield friend:

My family is all, through the goodness of the divine benediction, in a tolerable good state of health. . . . I have set me up a new house . . . and expect to remove into it next spring and to begin again on an entire new farm. And my son Joseph will live on the old farm (if this that has been but four years occupied can be called old) . . . whilst I with my four youngest sons shall endeavor to bring to another farm, etc. [^56]

This is also the picture of the Tunbridge records. In 1794 and 1795, more farms of about 100 acres each were purchased by Asael, and further conveyances hint at partnerships with his sons. [^57] The oldest son had been married soon after arrival in Vermont, and he owned adjoining property. [^58]

The Smiths soon became substantial townsmen of Tunbridge. In 1799 the town clerk noted the creation of a new school district (No. 13) made of "the inhabitants in the neighborhood of Jesse, Joseph and Asael Smith's Jr." [^59] Asael, Sr., was at the peak of his powers during his first decade in Tunbridge and became a respected community leader. During 1793 through 1795 he was selectman, one of three elected to manage town affairs. He was on occasion moderator of the town meeting, member of important public committees, highway surveyor in his neighborhood, and grand and petit juror. These were all elective offices that show the trust of his neighbors, and their continuity from 1793 to 1802 is clear evidence of Asael Smith's capacity as a person. [^60] Also mentioned in town affairs, his sons continued the tradition of public service.

In this period eligible Lucy Mack was living with her able brother Stephen. Prominent in Tunbridge (as later in Detroit) for his extensive farming and business operations, Stephen Mack is an impressive individual. His friendship with Asael Smith resulted in Lucy's marriage to Asael's son. The Prophet's mother later turned the clock back to Asael Smith's standing in Tunbridge about 1794:

My brother frequently spoke to me of one Mr. Asael Smith, an intimate acquaintance of his, . . . a worthy, respectable, amiable, and intelligent family. [^61]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCAsael's personality profile can be accurately reconstructed from his writings. He possessed an admirable New England combination of self-reliance and sense of his own limitations. In his active Tunbridge years he told a Topsfield friend, "I have taken up with the eleventh commandment," referring to an anecdote inventing an additional injunction: "mind your own business." And Asael drew his personal moral: "So I choose to do, and give myself but little concerns about what passes in the political world." [^62] No excuse for withdrawal from community leadership, this was an expression of humility about national affairs. There is continuity of this motto through three generations, since the Prophet's brother published it in 1842 as the "Mormon Creed." [^63]

Minding one's own business included genuine concern for fellowmen. One of Asael's valued possessions was a pamphlet denouncing the slave trade, given personally to his grandson George A. Smith. "Asael Smith, his hand," several times attested family information entered in the booklet like a treasured family Bible. Grandson George A. observed: "The care with which he preserved this pamphlet and transmitted it to me, makes me think he was a strong anti-slavery man." [^64] This work was Benezet's indignant attack on African enslavement, A Caution and Warning to Great Britain and Her Colonies. Starting with a premise dear to Asael, the tract insisted that liberty was equally the right of all continents and all races:

At a time when the general rights and liberties of mankind . . . are become so much the subjects of universal consideration . . . how many . . . advocates of liberty remain insensible and inattentive to the treatment of thousands and tens of thousands of our fellowmen, who from motives of avarice and the inexorable decree of tyrant custom, are at this very time kept in the most deplorable state of slavery in many parts of the British Dominions. [^65]

Asael's letter to Topsfield shows how specifically he agreed with these views. His own "little stock of knowledge" was nothing compared to the wisdom of "the Supreme Ruler of universal nature," whose controversy was only beginning with political or clerical oppressors:

He has conducted us through a glorious revolution and has brought us into the promised land of peace and liberty. And I believe that he is about to bring all the world into the same beatitude in his own time and way, which, altho his ways may appear [ever] so inconsistent to our blind reason, yet may be perfectly consistent with his designs. And I believe that the stone is now cut out of the mountain without hands, spoken of by Daniel, and has smitten the image upon his feet, by which . . . all monarchial and ecclesiastical tyranny will be broken to pieces . . . that there shall be no place found for them. [^66]

Did God inspire liberty in this life only to enslave men perpetually in the hereafter? Joseph Smith's grandfather resolutely opposed an eternal hell. Such dissenting opinions earned the Topsfield memory that his opinions were more crooked than his neck, a sarcastic reference probably to a damaged tendon. [^67] But the comment is more quotable than accurate. Asael was a pewholder in Topsfield—and as Christian as his critics. Whatever Asael's physical flaw, astute grandson George A. Smith knew a well-informed and committed individual:

I remember him as an exceedingly intelligent and cheerful old gentleman with his neck awry, too liberal in his views to please his children, who were convenanters, Congregationalists and Presbyterians, with I think the single exception of his son Joseph [Sr.]. Not long before his death he wrote many quires of paper on the doctrine of universal restoration. [^68]

Asael advocated the basic belief of the Universalists of his day, expressed formally by an 1803 New Hampshire convention:

We believe there is one God, whose nature is love, revealed in one Lord Jesus Christ, by one Holy Spirit of grace, who will finally restore the whole family of mankind to holiness and happiness. [^69]

Six years before that declaration, a Universalist society was formed in Tunbridge, Vermont, and its members filed formal notice of exemption from "any tax towards the support of any teacher of any different denomination whatever," a reference to the normal town tax for Congregational worship. The moderator of this meeting was Asael Smith, and three of sixteen signers were Asael Smith, together with Jesse and Joseph Smith, his oldest sons. [^70]

Universalism sees God as more loving than punishing, and a warm faith in God's personal concern radiates from Asael Smith's most remarkable writing. After his oldest children had married, Asael penned his operating convictions in the form of a will to his family, addressing them in the quaint but endearing term "My Dear Selfs." His "few words of advice" were written and signed April 10, 1799, "for my dearly beloved wife and children to view after my decease." [^71] Asael's mature convictions merit careful examination because they throw great light on the personalities of Joseph Smith, Sr., and his son and namesake, Joseph Smith, Jr. This reality of human environment coincided with the wish of the grandfather-testator, who bequeathed to his family "everything that I have in this world but my faults, and them I take with me to the grave . . . leaving my virtues, if ever I had any, to revive and live in you."

Solomon Mack and Asael Smith may have differed on the "universal principle," but they agreed profoundly on the providence of God and the atoning power of the Savior. [^72] No responsible biographer can call Asael irreligious, for he held deeply personal convictions about God. "Put your whole trust solely in him," he counseled his wife: "He never did nor never will forsake any that trusted in him." To his children he stressed daily reverence:

Do all to God in a serious manner. When you think of him, speak of him, pray to him, or in any way make your addresses to his great majesty, be in good earnest. Trifle not with his name nor with his attributes, nor call him to witness to anything but is absolute truth.

If Asael were not doctrinally orthodox, the orthodox of his day were often near-sighted Christians. His records in the family Bible show that he honored it, and his quotations prove that he read and believed it. Saturated with passages on Christ's mission, Asael wrote to "pour out my heart" in witness that "the soul is immortal" and that all "stand in need of a Savior," who, in the words of Asael's text, is the "mediator between God and men," giving himself "a ransom for all" (1 Timothy 2:5-6). In fact, Asael devoted about one-fifth of his "will" to scriptural proof that no salvation comes through self-righteousness, but that "sinners must be saved by the righteousness of Christ alone."

Since Asael felt that no amount of "outward forms, rites, and ordinances" could substitute for the experience of Christ's love, he did not point out a "particular form" of religion to his children. But he did counsel them to try every doctrine by tested methods: "admit no others as evidences but the two that God hath appointed, viz., scripture and sound reason." His practical morality stemmed from his relationship with God as a father: "his love is ten thousand times greater towards you than ever any earthly father's could [be] to his offspring." If the author of such views was criticized for his theology, the depth of his Christian devotion is beyond question. Moreover, he promoted organized worship, urging that his family show "honor, obedience, and respect" to the "Church of Christ," the common name then for the Congregational society.

Asael's "will" reveals a man of practiced integrity and unswerving honesty in his thinking about himself. Undoubtedly mirroring his own life, he rated action above words and satisfaction of "your own consciences" above popularity: "[D]o the thing, and do it in a way that is fair and honest, which you can live and die by and rise and reign by." If honesty was Asael's guide, industry was a form of being honest. Perseverance would succeed in ordinary or eternal affairs. His main enemies had been "discouragement and unbelief" in his own abilities. Yet Asael Smith met life's challenges with firm resolve and effective action—and lost none of his idealism in adversity. He knew self-pity as the opposite of faith and generosity: "But above everything avoid a melancholy disposition. . . . Shun as death this humor, which will work you to all unthankfulness against God, unlovingness to men, and unnaturalness to yourselves and one another."

A profoundly affectionate man, Asael spelled out a program for family unity after he was gone, leaving his "last request and charge . . . that you will live together in an undivided bond of love." This included both personal and economic relationships, since the resources of all could insure that any "need not want anything." Asael had practiced a plan of sharing his land with his sons. Yet individuality was encouraged in his family. Following his creed of minding one's own business, he advised simply that a vocation should follow one's abilities: "Any honest calling will honor you if you honor that." Many a parent has sought to manipulate the right match for his child, but wise Asael was beyond that:

As to Your Marriages: I do not think it worthwhile to say much about them, for I believe God hath created the persons for each other and that nature will find its own. [^73]

Asael had earlier "found his own" in Mary Duty Smith, whom he addressed as "my dearly beloved wife" after thirty years of marriage. [^74] If her biography is finespun, her husband tells what kind of home environment she created. The Family Address significantly begins: "And first to you, my dear wife, I do with all the strength and powers that is in me, thank you for your kindness and faithfulness to me." No doubt Asael stated their joint ideal in his advice on parenthood for his own children: "Make it your chiefest work to bring them up in the ways of virtue that they may be useful in their generation." [^75] From a family of courageous Revolutionary soldiers, Mary Duty distinguished herself in rearing eleven children. [^76] She was an example of industry to her family, for John remembered his mother as "a first-rate dairy woman." [^77]

No doubt Mary was also a first-rate mother. Her physical record is impressive enough, for children came annually in the first two years after marriage, then every other year until the move from New Hampshire to Massachusetts in 1786; four years later the eleventh and last arrived. [^78] Her family had superior care or health for its time, since all children lived to maturity. Certain other patterns appear in this group. Educational exposure was marginal in New Hampshire and Vermont, but native intelligence is plain. Eldest Jesse took his father's place in Tunbridge as a civic leader, holding most offices, including selectman and town clerk. [^79] Next son Joseph Smith, Sr., was less outgoing, but he taught school as well as farmed in his New England years. [^80] Asael, Jr., Silas, and John became Mormons and were known as able people. Asael, Jr., had been a Vermont militia lieutenant, and after conversion served on two high councils before ordination as patriarch—he died in Iowa during the Mormon exodus. [^81] Silas had been a Vermont militia captain, and after conversion became a high priest before his untimely death in Illinois. [^82] Younger brother John made his mark as a church leader—in the First Presidency in Ohio, in local and regional presidencies in Missouri and Illinois, and in Utah as the first Salt Lake stake president. He was also an articulate patriarch, whose letters and journals (including the extract reproduced in chapter 7) show good literacy and intellectual capacity. [^83] The "will" of Asael Smith, Sr., proves that the parents valued excellence, even though substantial education was denied their children until the maturity of youngest brother Stephen. Then death intervened. Asael and Mary's own ambitions, in some measure transmitted to each child, are clearly stated in Stephen's unusual obituary of 1802:

Died, at Royalton, on the 25th ult., Mr. Stephen Smith, aged 17, the seventh son of Mr. Asael Smith, of Tunbridge; he was designed for a public education and had made some proficiency in his study. By this stroke of providence, his parents are deprived of a very promising son, cut down in the bloom of his youth like the tender grass, in whom they anticipated great comfort. He has left 6 brothers and 4 sisters to mourn the loss of a pleasing brother, whose amiable disposition had united their most tender affections towards him. He was the ornament of his parents, the pride of his brethren, and the admiration of all his acquaintance. But alas, he is no more! The virtuous are not exempt from the destroyer. [^84]

Had he lived, Stephen probably would have enrolled in the Royalton Academy, which six months before his death had sought to locate on the "meeting house green." [^85] A happier event came earlier that year—the marriage of Asael, Jr., to a Royalton girl. In fact, Stephen's loss in 1802 was tempered by satisfaction in about a dozen grandchildren. Eldest son Jesse had married a Tunbridge girl in 1792, followed by Joseph, Sr., in 1796. That was the year of three marriages, when eldest daughters Priscilla and Mary wedded men of prominent Royalton families. Later years brought additional marriages of Asael and Mary's children, including the joining of John Smith and Clarissa Lyman, from a notable New England family. [^86] In his Family Address Asael had reason to state that "nature will find its own."

Where evidence exists, the children of Asael and Mary were generally church members, and the men of the family could handle the Bible as skillfully as an axe. George A. recalled early family discussion about the Book of Mormon and evaluated the scriptural knowledge of Asael Smith, Jr.:

[He] was a man of extraordinary retentive memory, and possessed a great knowledge of the Bible, so much so that he could read it as well without the book as with it. And after he embraced "Mormonism," nobody could oppose him successfully, for all their objections were answered from the Bible immediately, giving chapter and verse. [^87]

Such careful study was a family pattern. George A. Smith also remembered the first preaching of his father, John, after conversion to Mormonism: "Our neighbors were astonished at his knowledge of the Bible." [^88]

The Smiths were religiously committed but open-minded. The notable exception was Jesse, entrenched in Calvinistic theology; in 1836 two brothers were ordered not to talk "about the Bible at all in his house unless it was upon limited election." [^89] However, the family tended more toward the position of second son, Joseph Smith, Sr.—devoted to scripture but consciously seeking something more satisfying than formal creeds. His intense search for God set him apart from his brothers and sisters, for he was too religious to commit himself to any church. [^90] Asael, Mary, and eight of their children were still alive when the Book of Mormon was first brought to their areas. Only Jesse and two sisters failed to believe. [^91]

Life's sunset for Asael and Mary Duty Smith was west of Vermont. [^92] Census takers found them in Tunbridge, Vermont, in 1800 and 1810, but they appear in Stockholm, St. Lawrence County, New York, on the 1820 and 1830 censuses. [^93] Their son Joseph Smith, Sr., and his family had moved to western New York about 1816, but at this period Asael and his other sons ventured to new lands in northern New York. [^94] There the aged parents and families of six children gradually gathered, again successful on their farms and in maintaining family unity. [^95] But severe conflict came when Joseph Smith, Sr., wrote in the fall of 1828, sharing "several remarkable visions" of Joseph Smith, Jr. Though pressing ninety, Asael firmly withstood the opposition of his sons, who at first "ridiculed Joseph's visions": "The old gentleman said that he always knew that God was going to raise up some branch of his family to be a great benefit to mankind." [^96] George A. Smith remembered such words. He was then a studious teenager who paid strict attention to his grandfather, and later recalled Asael's belief "that something would turn up in his family that would revolutionize the world." [^97] Asael had long held that kind of conviction, for his 1796 letter had portrayed God's program to obliterate all "ecclesiastical tyranny."

Eldest Jesse fiercely sought to shield his father from news of the revelations of Joseph Smith, Jr. However, he bitterly conceded the ineffectiveness of his ridicule, complaining in a letter to Hyrum Smith: "your good, pious, and Methodistical Uncle Asael induced his father to give credit to your tale of nonsense." [^98]Asael, Sr., died in 1830, but not until his son Joseph Smith, Sr., had visited him personally with the newly published Book of Mormon. Like the elder brother of the prodigal son, Jesse was enraged. In fact, he openly threatened the Prophet's father if he continued to mention "such blasphemous stuff." Other brothers were cordial, though cautious. However, John's early account pictures aged Asael warmly responding to the message of his second son:

After the usual salutations, inquiries, and explanations, the subject of the Book of Mormon was introduced. Father received with gladness that which Joseph [Sr.] communicated and remarked that he had always expected that something would appear to make known the true gospel. [^99]

Asael Smith's sons took time to weigh carefully this new message. Their father led out in accepting it, though he "had been for many years a Universalist and exceedingly set in his way." [^100] Grandson George A. Smith left a glimpse of Asael's final months: "My grandfather Asael fully believed the Book of Mormon, which he read nearly through, although in his eighty-eighth year, without the aid of glasses." [^101] He died that fall, confident that a new religious age was upon the world. [^102]

In his "will" Asael Smith spoke comfort to his widow, and his intuition of preceding her in death proved correct. She lived to see three of four surviving sons accept the new faith, beginning with the dramatic baptism of John Smith in an iced-over stream in early January 1832. John returned to northern New York as a missionary in 1833 and visited surviving Mary Duty Smith: "Went to see my old mother, who is in the ninetieth year of her age. Found her in health, much pleased to see us." [^103]

Vitality, affection, and spirituality are the closing impressions of her life. Her son Silas remained in St. Lawrence County until 1836, and her grandson Hyrum wrote to insist:

It is the will of God that Uncle Silas should fetch grandmother in spite of all the devils there are out of hades. And God will bless him in so doing and give her strength to endure the journey. And we will help him take care of her whenever he arrives here. [^104]

The nearly ninety-three-year-old matriarch willingly endured a 500-mile journey, for "she had asked the Lord that she might live to see her children and grandchildren once more." [^105] She migrated to Kirtland in May 1836 with the northern New York saints, families of Asael Smith, Jr., Silas Smith, and other converts. Elias Smith, son of Asael, Jr., particularly cared for his grandmother in the second half of her journey. His contemporary journal gives geographical details of the week-long voyage down the St. Lawrence River and Lake Ontario to Rochester, where Mary Duty Smith went on by Erie Canal boat to Buffalo, transferring to the steamboat Sandusky for the final cruise across Lake Erie to Fairport, a dozen miles from her destination of Kirtland. They landed "about 5 p.m.," and soon fair skies turned to rain. Although Elias' journal outlines these events, he later gave details of Mary Smith's reunion with her grandsons Joseph and Hyrum:

During the landing of the company, he sat her on the wharf to give her fresh air. But a shower coming on, he sought a public house nearby for a room for her during the night, but was refused; whereupon he went to a hotel on the same block and was cordially treated. While he was taking his grandmother to the hotel, Joseph the Prophet, his brother Hyrum, and [F.] G. Williams from Kirtland came down to the wharf to meet them. They followed to the hotel, and Joseph and Hyrum went into the room to see their grandmother, but would not make themselves known that night. They left their grandmother there for the night in comfortable quarters, and with their cousin Elias returned to Kirtland in the midst of the storm, arriving very late. Next morning they took carriage and drove down for their grandmother, while Elias hired teams and went down to the emigrants, whom he had sheltered for the night in a warehouse. The meeting between the grandmother and her prophet-descendant and his brother was most touching. Joseph blessed her and said she was the most honored woman on earth. She had desired to see all her children and grandchildren before she died, which with one exception was providentially granted her. [^106]

Attention focused on Mary Duty Smith in the family reunions at Kirtland, and she glowed with enthusiasm. Writing at the time, conservative Elias Smith captured the happiness of that May 17:

[W]ent to Fairport with Joseph and Hyrum after grandmother. Found her well and as smart as I have ever seen her for ten years. The day was fine after the rain of the preceding evening, and everything seemed to welcome her to this country. Joseph brought her in his carriage from Fairport, and Hyrum and some other brethren from Kirtland moved the brethren to Kirtland, where they all arrived safe toward evening. Grandmother was overjoyed at meeting her children, grandchildren, etc., in this place, whom she had not seen for many years, and many of them she had never had the satisfaction of beholding. [^107]

Lucy Smith remembered her mother-in-law's "good health and excellent spirits" on arrival, when "she rejoiced to meet so many of her children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren." [^108] Beyond kinship, there was the religious meaning of her pilgrimage, for Mary Duty Smith completely accepted the testimony of her grandson-prophet. She told Lucy Smith, "I am going to have your Joseph [Jr.] baptize me, and my Joseph [the patriarch] bless me," [^109]

Young Eliza R. Snow watched Asael Smith's widow closely and felt that she looked twenty years younger, "in appearance not over seventy-five." Eliza was near Mary Smith in her last few days in Ohio and penned the final pictures of the Prophet's grandmother. After years apart, the Smith family gathered, and Mary was the life of the party:

The next day after her arrival at the house of the Prophet, where she was welcomed with every manifestation of kindness and affection, her children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren—all who were residents of Kirtland, and two of her sons, who arrived with her—came together to enjoy with her a social family meeting. And a happy one it was—a season of pure reciprocal conviviality, in which her buoyancy of spirit greatly augmented the general joy. Let the reader imagine for a moment this aged matron, surrounded by her four sons, Joseph, Asael, Silas and John, all of them, as well as several of her grandsons, upwards of six feet in height, with a score of great-grandchildren of various sizes intermixed. [^110]

"I wish she had set the time longer" was Joseph Smith's earlier reaction to news of his grandmother's arrival, a premonition fulfilled within two weeks. [^111] About sunset on May 27, 1836, she died, and Eliza R. Snow "was with her, and saw her calmly fall asleep." About ten minutes before death, Mary Duty Smith identified a group of supernatural beings visible to her: "pointing towards them she exclaimed, 'O, how beautiful! But they do not speak!'" [^112] Thus both grandmothers of the Prophet passed from mortality with firm convictions of the world to come. They had walked with God in life and trusted him in death. One cannot doubt that their homes had contained the virtues that Solomon Mack thanked his wife for instilling into his children: "piety, gentleness, and reflection."
