Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

CHAPTER 6

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCWritings of Asael Smith

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCBoth of the major known writings of Asael Smith are printed in full here in chronological order. The personal letter of 1796 reveals Asael as a God-fearing, hard-working entrepreneur, with a warm relationship with his family and friends plus a streak of purposeful humor. The Family Address of 1799 shows the depth of his idealism, Christian conviction, and practical religion. Both the man in society and his personal values are seen in the two holographs, which capture him as a mature man in his fifties. In addition to these documents, the biographical chapter and notes print in full all known minor writings, with the exception of his genealogical annotations. Facsimiles of the original documents are reproduced after the transcription of each, the letter by courtesy of Essex Institute, Salem, Massachusetts—and the Family Address by courtesy of the LDS Church Historian Howard W. Hunter. In printing these two sources, misspellings have been corrected, though period spellings are largely retained. Punctuation and capitalization have been altered for clarity, though such changes are imposed conservatively. Brackets indicate either editorial additions or editorial reconstruction of a reading where the paper is broken off or aged. In making such judgments, President Joseph Fielding Smith's printing in 1902 (listed in the bibliography) has been persuasive, since he read and transcribed the address almost seventy years before its present condition. For identification of the personalities of the letter, see the biographical chapter on Asael Smith, including notes 158 to 163. Personal names follow spelling in the letter, though variants occur regularly in this period; Jacob Towne's name follows the spelling preferred in family documents.

Asael Smith's Letter to Jacob Towne

Tunbridge, Jan. 14th, 1796

Respected Sir:

Having a favorable opportunity, altho on very short notice, I with joy and gratitude embrace it, returning herewith my most hearty thanks for your respect shown in your favor of the 30th of November by Mr. Wildes, which I view as a singular specimen of friendship which has very little been practiced by any of my friends in Topsfield, altho often requested.

My family is all, through the goodness of the divine benediction, in a tolerable good state of health, and desire to be remembered to you and to all inquiring friends.

I have set me up a new house since Mr. Wildes was here, and expect to remove into it next spring and to begin again on an entire new farm. And my son Joseph will live on the old farm (if this that has been but four years occupied can be called old) and carry it on at the halves, which half I hope will nearly furnish my family with food, whilst I with my four youngest sons shall endeavor to bring to another farm, etc.

As to news, I have nothing, as I know of, worth noticing, except that grain has taken a sudden rise amongst us, about one-third.

As to the Jacobin party, they are not very numerous here, or if they are, they are pretty still. There is some in this state, viz., in Bennington, who, like other children crying for a rattle, have blared out against their rulers in hopes to wrest from them if possible what they esteem, the plaything of power and trust. But they have been pretty well whip't and have become tolerably quiet again. And I am in hopes, if they live to arrive to the years of discretion, when the empire of reason shall take place that they will then become good members of society, notwithstanding their noisy, nauseous behavior in their childhood, for which they was neither capable of hearing or giving any reason.

For my part, I am so willing to trust the government of the world in the hands of the Supreme Ruler of universal nature, that I do not at present wish to try to wrest it out of his hands. And I have so much confidence in his abilities to teach our senators wisdom that I do not think it worthwhile for me to interpose, from the little stock of knowledge that he has favored me with, in the affair, either one way or the other. He has conducted us through a glorious revolution and has brought us into the promised land of peace and liberty. And I believe that he is about to bring all the world into the same beatitude in his own time and way, which, altho his ways may appear [ever] so inconsistent to our blind reason, yet may be perfectly consistent with his designs. And I believe that the stone is now cut out of the mountain without hands, spoken of by Daniel, and has smitten the image upon his feet, by which the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver and the gold—viz., all monarchial and ecclesiastical tyranny—will be broken to pieces an[d] become as the chaff of the summer thrashing floor. The wind shall carry them all away that there shall be no place found for them.

Give my best regards to your parents, and tell them that I have taken up with the eleventh commandment, that the Negro taught to the minister, which was thus:

The minister asked the Negro how many commandments there was; his answer was, "Eleben, sir." "Aye," replied the other: "What is the eleventh? That is one I never heard of." "The elebenth commandment, sir, is mind your own business."

So I choose to do, and give myself but little concerns about what passes in the political world.

Give my best regards to Dr. Meriam, Mr. Wildes, Joseph Dorman, and Mr. Cree, and tell Mr. Cree I thank him for his respects and hope he will accept of mine. Write to me as often and as large as you can and oblige your sincere friend and well wisher,

Asael Smith

Mr. Jacob Towne, Jr.

[Back of the first page of the letter:]

Give my hearty thanks to Mr. Charles Rogers for his respect shown in writing me a few lines, and tell him that I should a wrote to him now, had I had time, but now waive it for the present, as I have considerable part of what I intend to a writ to you.

If I should live and do well, I expect to come to Topsfield myself next winter, which, if I do, I shall come and pay you a visit. Farewell.

Tell Mr. Joseph Cree that if he will come here and set up his trade, I will warrant him as much work as he can do, and good pay.

[Margin of the second page of the letter:]

I expect my son Joseph will be married in a few days.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCAsael Smith's Address to His Family

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCA few words of advice, which I leave to you, my dear

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCwife and children, whom I expect ere long to leave:

My Dear Selfs,

I know not what leisure I shall have at the hour of my death to speak unto you, and as you all know that I am not free in speech, especially when sick or sad; and therefore now [d]o speak my heart to you, and would wish you to hear me speaking to you as long as you live (when my tongue shall be mouldered to dust in the silent tomb) in this my writing, which I divide among you all.

And first to you, my dear wife, I do with all the strength and powers that is in me, thank you for your kindness and faithfulness to me, beseeching God, who is the husband of the widow, to take care of you and not to leave you nor forsake you, nor never suffer you to leave nor forsake him nor his [way]s. Put your whole trust solely [in him. He neve]r did nor never will forsake any that trusted in him. One thing, however, I would add, if you should marry again. Remember what I have undergone by a stepmother, and do not estrange your husband from his own children or kindred, lest you draw on him and on yourself a great sin. So I do resign you into the everlasting arms of the great husband of husbands, the Lord Jesus Christ.

And now my dear children, let me pour out my heart to you and speak first to you of immortality in your souls. Trifle not in this point: the soul is immortal. You have to deal with an infinite majesty; you go upon life and death. Therefore, in this point be serious. Do all to God in a serious manner. When you think of him, speak of him, pray to him, or in any way make your addresses to his great majesty, be in good earnest. Trifle not with his name nor with his attributes, nor call him to witness to anything but is absolute truth; nor then, but when sound reason on serious consideration requires it. And as to religion, I would not wish to point out any particular form to you; but first I would wish you to search the scriptures and consult sound [reas]on, and see if they (which I take to [be] two witnesses that stand by the God of the whole earth) are not sufficient to evince to you that religion is a necessary theme. Then I would wish you to study the nature of religion, and see whether it consists in outward formalities, or in the hidden man of the heart; whether you can by outward forms, rites and ordinances save yourselves, or whether there is a necessity of your having help from any other hand than your own. If' you find that you stand in need of' a Savior, Christ saith: "Look unto me and be ye saved all ye ends of the earth." Then look to him, and if you find from scripture and sound reason that Christ hath come into the world to save sinners, then examine what it was that caused him to leave the center of consummate happiness to suffer as he did—whether it was to save mankind because they were sinners and could not save themselves or whether he [came] to save mankind because they had repented of their sins, so as to be forgiven on the score of their repentance. If you find that he came to save sinners merely because they were such, then try if there is any other so great that he cannot save him. But mind that you admit no others as evidences but the two that God hath appointed, viz., scripture and sound reason. And if these two witness that you are one whit better by nature than the worst heathen in the darkest corner of the deserts of Arabia, then conclude that God hath been partial towards you and hath furnished you with a better nature than others; and that consequently, he is not just to all mankind. But if these two witnesses testify to you that God is just to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works; then believe them. And if you can believe that Christ [came] to save sinners and not the righteous Pharisees or self-righteous; that sinners must be saved by the righteousness of Christ alone, without mixing any of their own righteousness with his, then you will see that he can as well save all as any. And there is no respect of persons with God, who will have all mankind to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, viz., that "there is one God and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." And when you believe this you will enter into his rest, and when you enter into his rest you will know what that rest is, and not before. And having gotten this evidence that God is true, be still adding to your evidence and enjoy your present assurance. Do all to God as to your father, for his love is ten thousand times greater towards you than ever any earthly father's could [be] to his offspring.

In the next place strive for these graces most which concern your places and conditions, and strive most against those failings which most threaten you. But above everything avoid a melancholy disposition. That is a humor that admits of any temptation and is capable of any impression and distemper. Shun as death this humor, which will work you to all unthankfulness against God, unlovingness to men, and unnaturalness to yourselves and one another.

Do not talk and make a noise to get the name of forward men, but do the thing and do it in a way that is fair and honest, which you can live and die by and rise and reign by. Therefore, my children, do more than you talk of, in point of religion. Satisfy your own consciences in what you do. All men you shall never satisfy; nay, some will not be satisfied though they be convinced.

As for Your Callings: Any honest calling will honor you if you honor that. It is better to be a rich cobbler than a poor merchant; a rich farmer than a poor preacher.

And never be discouraged, though sometimes your schemes should not succeed according to your wishes.

Persevere in the way of well-doing, and you may hope for success. For myself, I (who had never your parts nor helps)—I never found anything too hard for me in my calling but discouragement and unbelief. If I was discouraged and did not believe I could do a thing, I never could. Therefore, when you think anything is too hard for you, do not undertake it.

As to Your Company: Abandon all infectious, flattering, self-serving companions. When once you have found them false, trust them no more. Sort with such as are able to do or receive good. Solomon gives you the best counsel for this in many places. Read the Proverbs and remember him in this. Forsake not an old friend; be friendly and faithful to your friends. Never trouble nor trust friends unless there be a necessity; and lastly, be long in closing with friends and loath to loose them upon experience of them.

As to Your Marriages: I do not think it worthwhile to say much about them, for I believe God hath created the persons for each other, and that nature will find its own.

But for Your Children: Make it your chiefest work to bring them up in the ways of virtue that they may be useful in their generation. Give them if possible a good education. If nature hath made no difference, do you make none in your affections, countenances nor portions; partiality this way begets envy, hatred, strife and contention.

And as for Yourselves Within Yourselves: My desire hath been to carry an even hand towards you all, and I have labored to reduce you as near as I could (all circumstances considered) to an equality. And therefore, my last request and charge is that you will live together in an undivided bond of love. You are many of you, and if you join together as one man, you need not want anything. What counsel, what comfort, what money, what friends may you not help yourselves unto, if you will all as one contribute your aids.

Wherefore my dear children, I pray, beseech, and adjure you by all the relations and dearness that hath ever been betwixt us and by the heart-rending pangs of a dying father, whose soul hath been ever bound in the bundle of life with yours, that you know one another. Visit as you may each other. Comfort, counsel, relieve, succor, help and admonish one another. And while your mother lives, meet here if possible once every year. When she is dead, pitch on some other place, if it may be, your elder brother's house; or if you cannot meet, send to and hear from each other yearly and oftener if you can. And when you have neither father nor mother left, be so many fathers and mothers to each other, so you shall understand the blessing mentioned in the 133 Psalm.

As to Your Estates: Be not troubled that you are below your kindred. Get more wisdom, humility and virtue, and you are above them—only do this. Deal with your hearts to make them less. Begin low, join together to help one another. Rest upon the promises which are many and precious this way. Love mercy, and have mercy on yourselves and on on[e] another, and I know —I know, I say, and I am confident in it, that if you will trust God in his own way, he will make comfortable provisions for you. Make no more objections, but trust him.

For the Public: Bless God that you live in a land of liberty, and bear yourselves dutifully and conscionably towards the authority under which you live. See God's providence in the appointment of the Federal Constitution, and hold union and order as a precious jewel. And for the Church of Christ: neither set her above her husband nor below her children; give her that honor, obedience and respect that is her due. And if you will be my children and heirs of my comfort in my dying age, be neither another's nor factious of any party or faction or novelty. It is true, this is not a rising way, but it is a free, fair, comfortable way for a man to follow his own judgment without wavering to either hand.

I make no doubt but you will hear divers opinions concerning me, both before and after I shall sleep in silence; but do not be troubled at that. I did what in my circumstances seemed best for me for the present; however, the event hath not in some points answered my expectation. Yet I have learned to measure things by another rule than events and satisfy myself in this, that I did all for the best as I thought. And if I had not so much foresight as some others, I cannot help it.

Sure I am my Savior, Christ, is perfect, and never will fail in one circumstance. To him I commit your souls, bodies, estates, names, characters, lives, deaths and all—and myself, waiting when he shall change my vile body and make it like his own most glorious body. And [I] wish to leave to you everything that I have in this world but my faults, and them I take with me to the grave, there to be buried in everlasting oblivion; but leaving my virtues, if ever I had any, to revive and live in you. Amen. So come, Lord Jesus; come quickly. Amen.

The above was written April the 10th, 1799 and left for my dearly beloved wife and children to view after my decease.

Asael Smith
