Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith ( 1971)

CHAPTER 8

Epilogue

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCGood history goes beyond dates, places, and external events. These are flesh and bones, but the historian also explores the world within his personalities to understand their thinking. This can be done with accuracy for both of Joseph Smith's grandfathers, since they recorded their inner convictions. Their children also wrote about the ideals of their homes, and these writings of parents and children furnish a consistent and convincing picture of an environment where honesty counted for everything. Joseph Smith's grandparents weighed their words and kept their promises in the practical world. Nor did they lightly claim religious conviction. They paid the price of intense inquiry, and candidly reported the result as they experienced it. One would not expect anything different from their prophet-grandson.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCThe last family gathering with a grandparent is symbolic—Mary Duty Smith "surrounded by her four sons . . . as well as several of her grandsons, upwards of six feet in height." This photograph of several generations illustrates a heritage, for striking physical resemblances imply continuities of character. Joseph Smith was like both grandfathers in patriotism, social concern, industry, personal initiative, physical courage, indomitable will, loyalty to parents, tenderness to family, reliance on the Bible, and religious convictions so deep that he was impelled to share them with others.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCJoseph Smith's traits are found among New Englanders of his time, but investigation shows that his family had Yankee roots of a specific type. The Prophet's grandparents quite avoided the narrow prejudices that Parkman associated with the rural New England of the eighteenth century, but they display admirably "its combative energy, and rugged, unconquerable strength." [^1]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCIf Joseph Smith's heritage included the commendable qualities just named, did the Smiths and Macks instill in their youth the moral capacity represented by the John Adams family? The strengths and weaknesses of that legacy have been pointedly described:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCAs true New Englanders, they believed firmly in a positive life, in the full exercise of their mental powers, and the full control of their "appetites". . . . Duty, determination, integrity, self-examination—these were their guides to conduct. And if this vigorous code occasionally produced unpleasant by-products—if, for example, they were accused of being intractable, ill-mannered, irascible—it did not matter; they were true to their God, their country and themselves, and no man, they felt, could demand of them more. In short, they were earnest, certain men, capable for better or worse, of instilling in a child firm beliefs and positive standards. [^2]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCIn a social class less on display, the grandfathers of Joseph Smith lived lives equally dedicated to uncompromising principle. Their deepest wishes concerned transmitting this to their grandchildren. Solomon Mack wrote with sincere concern that "the rising generation" be given Godly instruction: "Parents, a little caution how to train up your children in the sight of the Lord. . . . Set good examples in word, deed, and action." Similarly, Asael Smith insisted that "absolute truth" should govern his children, who should then lead their children: "Make it your chiefest work to bring them up in the ways of virtue." Joseph Smith was unquestionably exposed to an enduring moral heritage.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCVictor Hugo reportedly said, "If you would civilize a man, begin with his grandmother." Both Mary Duty and Lydia Gates combined practical industry with deep spirituality. Personally loving, both were convinced, as were their husbands, that immortality was certain. These individuals are one identifiable source of the seeking faith and outgoing love that characterized Joseph Smith's parents. Love is awareness, the quality that keeps commitment from becoming fanaticism. Another safeguard on belief is humility. Asael Smith stated crisply what Solomon Mack says indirectly—hoping that death would obliterate his faults but leave "my virtues, if ever I had any, to revive and live in you." Humanity might be perfected in a few generations if that were possible. Yet Asael's hope shows his sincere desire to morally upgrade his family, though he was acutely aware of his own imperfections.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCBiography, like history, has many dimensions. Is the story of a man his political offices, his bank account, or his personal growth? In the last regard Asael Smith and Solomon Mack were significant individuals. Both were energetically progressive in their own convictions and actions. Solomon's conversion came in 1810-11, but that really climaxed a lifetime of seeking. Regretting that he was not taught "common morality" by his exploiting master, Solomon exhibited uncommon morality in the ultimate relationships of loyalty and integrity. One remembers that his grandson preferred a just man who "swears a stream as long as my arm" rather than the "long, smooth-faced hypocrite." [^3] Solomon confessed to Sabbath-breaking, ignoring the scriptures, swearing, and experimenting with drinking. But he is not a very convincing sinner, for he early "reflected a little on such conduct, resolving to amend from such practices." Despite his disclaimer of lapsing into worldly ways, he long had his eye on heaven. "Through the early part of my life," he had accepted the "universal principle"—that God loved all and would save all. Thus he worked within the framework of his Christian culture and Lydia Gates Mack's Christian home. If Solomon did not know chapter and verse, he well knew the message of the Lord when he later sought reassurance. But long before, he was "almost a Christian," even administering comfort to "a sick man on his death bed." [^4] In his fashion Solomon was a man of faith, a faith defined clearly in the perspective of elderly years. Just as Solomon stood for principle in a worldly environment, so did Asael Smith stand for a broader Christianity in the society of narrow Calvinism. He thought secular and religious history would culminate in bursting the shackles from every form of enslavement. Two generations later a New England minister found Asael Smith's correspondence and concluded:

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHC "It is quite evident that these Smiths were possessed of a good share of respectability, intelligence, and energy of character." [^5]

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCGlaring faults are absent from the Prophet's heritage. The most apparent defect would be an excess of generosity—which brought Solomon Mack to financial grief in signing as surety for others, or which plunged Asael Smith into years of labor for his unbreakable promise to his father. Yet true concern for others is an awesome quality, whatever its form. Asael's firm loyalty to his family is close to Solomon's dangerous pause in battle to save another's life. Selflessness is the foundation of honesty, a form of concern for the effect of one's conduct on others. Dishonesty in religious matters is hypocrisy, and both Asael Smith and Solomon Mack stood far above that. Asael's independence and skepticism of orthodoxy evidently influenced his grandson more than a little. Solomon also stood outside religious conformity for a lifetime, only to be spiritually converted to Christ after applying Asael's double tools, scripture and reason. Both had experienced spiritual promptings; yet both were too practical to be categorized as mystics. Just as they stood for fair dealing in everyday affairs, their religious sincerity cannot be challenged. And the wives are as spiritually genuine as their husbands. This is the critical relevance of the grandparents for understanding Joseph Smith, Jr.

Joseph Smith's ProgenitorsHCHistory hardly possesses tools to prove or disprove any revelation from God, but it can assess the character of those who claim visions. Three generations of Smiths emerge: capable grandparents who valued "virtue" above all else; parents whose home life maintained this moral inheritance; [^6] and a prophet-grandson whose youth was marked by the honesty of his heritage—years are compressed into his brother's simple verdict, "Joseph was a truthful boy." [^7] Yet he had a quick mind, including the ready wit of Asael Smith, and a healthy mistrust of mere religious posing. Knowing that Joseph Smith was both truthful and astute will not convince many that he received revelation, since they will not accept the possibility. But that does not excuse historical mudslinging which mislabels family members to more easily explain away Joseph Smith. The record shows a birthright of honor and idealism. Settled family patterns are not easily altered, particularly in pioneer generations demanding close cooperation for survival. Joseph Smith's parents matured under intense exposure to moral responsibility, unselfishness, personal tenacity, intellectual awareness, and intelligent sincerity. These are not the raw materials for shaping an imposter or fanatic.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. "History of Joseph Smith," Times and Seasons, vol. 3 (1842), p. 727: the later prologue quote on rumor is found ibid., p. 772. The more convenient reprint is Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City, 1902), vol. 1, p. 1, with the later prologue quote on p. 19.
[^2] 2. Journal of Joseph Smith, kept by Willard Richards, July 9, 1843. also cit. Joseph Smith, History, vol. 5, p. 498. The full quotation is the epigraph of this book on p. xix.
[^3] 3. Solomon Mack, A Narrative of the Life of Solomon Mack (Windsor, Vt. [1811]), p. 3. Citation will not follow the erroneous Narrative, which is incorrectly spelled on all known copies, modifying Marcus A. McCorison, Vermont imprints, 1778-1820 (Worcester, Mass., 1963), p. 252. Although Mack's pamphlet is regularly dated 1810, he gave no time of publication, and it apparently was printed after the winter of 1810-11, since it describes conversion at that time. He was converted "in my seventy-sixth year" (p. 25), which by his understanding of his birthdate would run from Sept. 26, 1810, to Sept. 26, 1811 (p. 3). The sickness that precipitated his conversion came in the fall of 1810, but the conversion was toward spring of 1811: "In the fall of the year 1810, in the 76th year of my age, I was taken with the rheumatism, and confined me all winter" (p. 18). "All the winter I was laid up with the rheumatism . . . but in the spring the Lord appeared to be with me" (p. 23). "I called upon the Lord the greatest part of the winter, and towards spring . . . light shined into my soul" (ibid.).
[^4] 4. For an abstract of land transactions in the years 1729 to 1731, see Archibald F. Bennett, "Solomon Mack and His Family," Improvement Era, vol. 58 (Sept. 1955), p. 631. The will of John Mack is copied by Sophia Martin, Mack Genealogy: The Descendants of John Mack of Lyme, Conn. (Rutland, Vt., 1903), vol. 1, pp. 18-21. John gave Ebenezer "my house and barn and orchard and all my lands in Lyme . . . not already disposed of," together with "the remainder of my movable estate."
[^5] 5. Lucy Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith (Liverpool, 1853), p. 15.
[^6] 6. Mack, Narrative, p. 3.
[^7] 7. Ibid., Solomon gives his age of being bound out as four, but he was possibly seven, since he dates his birth three years late, as discussed in n. 10.
