Adriana was bored. She wanted to play with her twin sister, Diana. But Diana had gone to buy food at the market with Mamá. Adriana sighed. The house felt very empty. She wished she’d gone with them.

Adriana decided to visit her neighbor Margarita. Margarita’s kids were all grown up, and she was like a grandma to Adriana. They always had lots of fun together.

Adriana went outside. The hot sun shone down on her as she walked to Margarita’s house. She poked her head inside the door. “Margarita, are you home?”

“Sí, I am in the kitchen,” Margarita called. Adriana found her sitting at the kitchen table with her head down. She looked up when Adriana came in.

“Hello, Adriana,” said Margarita. She gave a small smile. But it seemed sad.

“Is something wrong?” asked Adriana.

Margarita sighed. “Nothing you need to worry about.”

“How can I help her feel better?” Adriana thought. Margarita always seemed happy when they cooked together. “May I help you make tortillas?”

“I just finished making some,” said Margarita. She lifted a cloth napkin to show a stack of tortillas.

“Then may I help you eat tortillas?” Adriana asked with a grin.

Margarita laughed. “Of course. Let me just heat up some beans to go with them.”

Adriana stood by Margarita at the stove and stirred black refried beans in a pot. When the beans were done, she carried them to the table. Margarita brought the tortillas and the cheese.

Adriana took a warm tortilla and spread beans over it. Then she sprinkled the cheese on top. It looked delicious! Adriana couldn’t wait to take a bite. But there was something she wanted to do first.

“May I please say a prayer?” Adriana asked Margarita.

“Sure.”

Adriana closed her eyes and folded her arms. “Heavenly Father, we thank Thee for this food. Please bless it to make us healthy and strong. And please help Margarita with whatever she needs. I’m glad she’s my friend. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.”

Adriana opened her eyes. Margarita had a big smile—a real one this time. While they ate, they talked about school and sports and books. Adriana loved talking with Margarita.

When they finished eating, Adriana gave Margarita a big hug. “Thank you for the snack. I had a great time!”

Margarita hugged Adriana back. “Thank you, Adriana. I needed a friend today.”

Adriana beamed. “I’m glad we’re amigas.”

“I’m glad we’re friends too,” Margarita said. “Why don’t you take the rest of these tortillas home? I’m so full.”

Adriana skipped all the way back to her house. She felt full too—and not just from the tortillas! She was full of friendship from head to toe.

These easy corn tortillas are perfect for making and sharing with friends! Be sure to get an adult’s help.

2 cups masa farina (corn flour)

1 1/2 cups hot water

1.  Mix the masa farina and hot water. Knead the dough until soft.

2.  Roll the dough into small balls. Place one ball between two sheets of waxed paper.

3.  With a plate or skillet, press down on the ball firmly several times.

4.  Cook the tortilla in a frying pan over medium heat. When the top side gets darker, flip to cook the other side.

5.  Top with beans and cheese, and enjoy!
