In 2019 my husband Doug and I returned home after serving as mission leaders in Arequipa, Peru. Doug’s back had been bothering him the last few months we were there, pain we attributed to long trips in the mission van to be with our missionaries.

So, when we got back to Utah, Doug saw an orthopedist, who ordered physical therapy and then injections. As neither helped him, it was suggested that Doug have surgery. But the surgery didn’t relieve his pain; it got worse. So a second and then a third surgery were performed.

After three surgical tries, various treatments, and nearly four years, Doug was worse and never without pain.

I spent more than a week with Doug in St. Louis, Missouri, where he had a fourth surgery performed by an expert on spinal reconstruction. Doug’s spine now has all the right curves. It’s vertically straight—less than one centimeter to the left. And he has curvature in the lumbar spine so that he can stand up straight. He’s aligned again.

Doug did not get into alignment alone. He needed the help of a surgeon. If Doug had tried to carry this burden on his own, he would have remained misaligned. He couldn’t fix it alone.

Shouldn’t things have been easier for us, a future free of these kinds of burdens because we had devoted ourselves with full purpose of heart and mind to serving the Lord? I thought we were aligned with His will. But we, nonetheless, have had the burdens of mortality befall us.

Alignment of our heart and mind with the Savior isn’t a free pass to a life of ease. Instead, it is a conduit to His relief. Bound to the Savior through the covenants we have made with God, we stay aligned with Him and “can do all things through Christ [who strengthens us]” (Philippians 4:13).

To be aligned with the Savior, we need to give ourselves over to Him. We must avoid clinging tenaciously to our burdens and trying to carry them alone. Rather, we must make our burdens accessible to the Savior and allow Him to provide His relief.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="158975098" id="aside1_p1">To be aligned with the Savior, we need to give ourselves over to Him.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

The last few years have been a journey for Doug and for me. I wouldn’t wish it upon anyone, but the experience of watching someone I love battle pain has smoothed down some of my rough edges and improved my still imperfect patience.

More than ever, Doug and I have relied on the Savior’s healing, comfort, and enabling power made possible through His atoning sacrifice. Doug wasn’t immediately provided with physical relief; what we got was a more sustained and deeper relationship with Jesus Christ. His covenantal promises have never felt more significant to us. In a way we hadn’t before, we tested His promise that we could “always have his Spirit to be with [us]” (Doctrine and Covenants 20:77). That promise is real and fulfilled even in the midst of suffering.

The Savior provided us with spiritual and temporal relief, through the Comforter and through the acts of other people. As covenant keepers have aligned themselves with Jesus Christ, they have brought us closer to Him and have been instruments in His hands to help us experience His relief.

The Savior asks you to serve because in doing so, you align your heart and mind with Him. That alignment brings His relief and the ability to carry your mortal load. Jesus Christ not only asks you to serve but also asks you to be served—to graciously receive the ministering sisters and brothers, friends, and even strangers who are doing their part. Would you deprive them of the blessings associated with their covenant keeping?

I am, admittedly, not very good at this. The “I’ve got this” mentality overtakes me sometimes.

Shortly before general conference last year, when they knew I was extra busy, the sister and brother who minister to our family offered to bring some soup. They sent a kind text to my husband and me. True to form, I quickly responded to say we were good and no soup was needed. My gracious husband, on the other hand, responded with a message that soup would be great, inviting them to minister to us in that way. I should have done better.

In anticipation of Doug’s surgery in St. Louis, I asked for the name of a stake Relief Society president I could call there, just in case I had some extraordinary need for help. That was way out of my comfort zone, but I asked and received the number for Sister Diana Taylor, who is a stake Relief Society president in the area.

I called Sister Taylor and explained why we were coming to St. Louis and assured her I would let her know if and how I needed her help.

The next day, she sent me this text: “Sister Johnson, 10 hours is a long time to be waiting alone while Brother Johnson is in surgery. I would be happy to come to the hospital to be with you if that would help. I could come the whole time or part of the time. We could share the Spirit of Christ as we pray and remember the blessings of a loving Father in Heaven, the blessings of sisterhood, the blessing of families and of service.”

Perhaps you’ve guessed my first reaction: “I’m good. I’ve got this alone. I’ll wallow in my sadness by myself!” And I was just about ready to send a response that declined her invitation—until I remembered what I had preached in the April 2023 general conference and thought that I ought to practice it:

“How does the Savior relieve us of the burdens of living in a fallen world with mortal bodies subject to grief and pain?

“Often, He performs that kind of relief through us! …

“… We are a conduit through which He provides relief.”

I responded with this text message: “I don’t want to trouble you at all. Perhaps you and I could have lunch together. That would be a nice break from the talks that I am writing.”

Sister Taylor and I walked to a restaurant. We sat outside because it was a sunny day and enjoyed lunch together. And in the end, I trust that both of us found needed relief.

I was alone in St. Louis. Doug was in a surgery lasting more than 10 hours. How was the Savior going to help me, to relieve me of loneliness and frustration and worry? He sent someone to minister to me, someone who was magnifying her calling and keeping her baptismal covenant by comforting someone who stood in need of comfort (see Mosiah 18:9–10). If I had failed to receive her, I would have failed to receive Him.

President Russell M. Nelson has taught that the three most important designations that could be applied to us are “child of God,” “child of the covenant,” and “disciple of Jesus Christ.”

We are all sons and daughters of God. We chose to be children of the covenant by making covenants with God at baptism and in the house of the Lord and then keeping them.

As we keep those covenants, we exercise our agency as disciples of Jesus Christ, bringing the Savior and His relief to others.

Whenever we do anything to bring relief to others—temporal or spiritual—we are bringing them to Jesus Christ and will be blessed to find our own relief in Him. In doing so, we align our hearts and minds and goals with God’s. President Nelson has taught, “Now is the time to align our goals with God’s goals. His work and His glory—‘to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man’ [Moses 1:39]—can become ours.”

With the conviction of both my heart and mind, I testify that our Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, love us. Their work and glory are salvation and exaltation for all of us. They want us to return home. As covenant keepers, aligned with Jesus Christ, we can be instruments in His hands to help others experience His relief. As we do, we will come to know the Savior, be like the Savior, and find for ourselves His everlasting relief.

From a Brigham Young University Women’s Conference address, “Aligning with the Lord,” delivered on May 5, 2023.
