Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 1

Love Is a Verb

I first learned about verbs from my third-grade teacher, Nellie Higbee. Verbs, she said, were action words like kick, run, hit, jump, bite, scream, and fly. The word love seemed more like a noun to me in those days. But gradually I began to realize that love is a verb as well. Love is doing. It's action.

Love without service, like faith without works, is dead.

You can serve without love, I suppose, but I don't think you can have genuine love without serving—you cannot feel compassion without feeling compelled to help in some way, to do what you can. Love is thus a powerful, peaceful force for good.

We all know the commandments telling us to "Love thy neighbor as thyself" and "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you." Remember, though, that a new commandment was given: The Savior taught that we should "Love one another as I have loved you." And He loves us constantly, patiently, and unconditionally. Maybe the commandment should be, "Do unto others as they want you to do unto them, as they need you to do, as Christ prompts you to do." Or it might even be, "Do unto others even if they never ever do unto you."

Many times, in many ways, our Heavenly Father gives us specific opportunities to develop and practice that depth of love. We are allowed to share with each other, to serve each other, to develop more of the godliness that is within us—the mercy, the patience, the cheerfulness, the genuine kindness.

God invites us to serve those who are far away and those who are close, those we know and those we don't know—yet. He teaches us that we need each other. We're interdependent. No one knows it all or has it all. There are gaps and needs in each life, in each soul. We all reach out for help sometimes, when we encounter things we can't do or understand alone.

Pure love and service with compassion often involve sacrifice or, at the very least, inconvenience. People seldom begin relating a sweet story of extraordinary service with "It was on a day when I didn't have anything at all to do. I was just kind of 'hanging out.' I was about to call everyone I knew to see if they wanted me to do something." Usually such stories start out more like this: "It was a dark and stormy night," or, "I was so busy that day. I had a headache, the basement had just flooded, I forgot daylight saving time had started, my baby had swallowed a roll of film . . ."

We're usually cheerful about helping when we don't have anything else to do. But what if we do have something else to do? Something important. A marble tournament . . . or a TV show to watch . . . or what if I just got to bed . . . or I'm not in the mood . . . or it's for someone I don't like . . . or someone I don't know . . . or I have a test tomorrow . . . or if I wait three days, I can get credit for next month's visiting teaching assignment . . .

You're late for something? As some of my friends in other lands would say, "Don't be anxiety." It may be that you're late because someone needs you. Have you ever thought that someone somewhere may be pleading with Heavenly Father for help and you may be the one chosen to help answer that prayer? The Good Samaritan may have been on his way to a prayer meeting or some other important appointment, but he was willing to stop and fill a need. If we're willing, God will use us.

Love requires courage. To share in Christ's way is a courageous undertaking. Do it. Do it now. Respond to promptings that come.

We must not ever ignore an impulse to serve when there's something we could do. When it's within our power to give love, we should never withhold it. If we feel compassion or empathy without doing something, we may diminish our power to act, to respond.

I find that I think of kind things more often than I do kind things. I'll get an idea, a prompting, but then too many times I chicken out. When I do respond, I have great adventures.

Once I was in a store standing in line to check out. (I have lots of experiences with that particular activity, and I almost always get in the slowest line; I don't know if it's a gift or a talent.) Anyway, I noticed that the woman behind the checkout counter seemed to be in a less-than-pleasant mood. She kind of locked horns with a person ahead of me in line. I couldn't really hear or tell exactly what happened, but the clerk was not happy. A little prompting came inside of me: "Say something nice to her." "I don't want to." "She needs it." (Do you ever have conversations like this with the still small voice?) "She'll bite my head off." Back and forth it went. I was getting closer. My heart was pounding the way it does when you sit in a testimony meeting and you know you're going to get up and you also know you're going to die at the pulpit.

And then I was there, right up close to her. She was punching the keys and all. And this is what came out of my mouth: "Are you having a bad day?" It came out kindly and gently and seemed to catch her way off guard. She looked at me, getting ready to bite, and then said, "Does it show?" "Kind of." She then told me that yes, she was having a very hard, bad, ugly day, and she told me some of the reasons why.

I didn't know what to do. I was screaming at the still small voice in my mind, "Now what? You didn't tell me what to do next!" But it came out: "Can I do anything to help you?" She looked at me with this what-in-the-world kind of look. It was an awkward moment. Then I said, "I know how to take out the trash." And we both laughed.

We continued talking to each other as she finished ringing up my purchases. She thanked me as I left, and I felt so happy I was grinning—not just smiling, but grinning. I felt good all over. I'm not sure if that little exchange did much for the woman at the checkout, but it made a huge difference in my day and is a sweet memory even now, years later.

Love as a verb is often spontaneous. It consists of things we think of on the spur of the moment, promptings to reach out and have the courage to be kind. It can be as simple as helping someone lift groceries into a car or picking up a little child who has fallen down. Let's not make spontaneous acts of love and kindness the exception to the rule. As my friend George Durrant says, "When it comes to giving, some people stop at nothing." I hope that will never be true of me.

Sometimes love is also by assignment. Visiting teachers or home teachers, Primary or Sunday School teachers, neighbors, big sisters or brothers—we can learn from everything we do to watch out for and show love to each other. As we find out by virtue of an assignment or some other relationship what's going on in homes and hearts, we'll have a better idea of what people need and want. That way we'll probably have a better idea of what we can do to make a difference.

We have many opportunities and assignments to offer our love in person, but some of the most interesting reactions occur when we share it anonymously. One night I returned home exhausted from a long shift at the hospital. My shift as evening nursing supervisor was to have ended around 11:30 P.M., but so much had happened and was still happening that I didn't get home until well after midnight. My white Clinic shoes weighed a hundred pounds each as I started up the stairs. And then I saw them: the flowers. A beautiful collection of colors wrapped in cellophane, waiting for me at the top of the stairs by my door.

It's hard to describe the happy feeling that came into my heart as I looked at the flowers and wondered why someone had given them to me. There was a little card with my name on the envelope. As I reached for it I was already thinking, "Oh, what can I do for them?" (As if we need to get even when someone does something kind for us.)

I got the flowers into my apartment and sat down to look at the card, wondering, "Who is it? Who did this kind thing for me?" The card said something like this: "Thank you, Mary Ellen, for being such a good friend. I appreciate your kindness and help. I love you." And it wasn't signed! Anonymous! Now what? How can you thank people if they don't tell you who they are?

Some interesting things happened to me. First, I went to bed thinking that someone loved me. Someone cared about me. Can we ever get too much of that? Second, I was going a little crazy. Who had done this? How could I say thanks and get it over with? Now I'd have to be nice to everyone—at least until the flowers died.

Finally, I began trying to decide who had done such a nice thing. Who would have given me such a wonderful surprise? Interestingly, virtually everyone I knew and some I didn't know got onto my list of possibilities. Everyone in my family was on that list, and everyone at the hospital. When I arrived at work the next day and was making my rounds, I realized I was being very friendly, smiling a lot, greeting everyone with an extra effort to be genuinely interested. I'm sure some thought, "What's with Edmunds?"

As a result of that anonymous gift of love, I looked at everyone differently. Each person I saw might have been the one who had done such a nice thing for me. It was as if I took a new look at everyone I knew and found in them a kindness that I hadn't thought about or acknowledged nearly often enough.

As you think about your life, aren't the times that really stand out those when you've done things in the spirit of love? Not necessarily big things, right? More often it's the little things that make the real difference.

How about some low-tech love for those times when we don't have a lot of extra time, energy, money, food, ideas, clothing, or whatever. There are things anyone can do—even busy, busy worldlings. Don't wait for the big deal. Just serve here and now. Love is a lot of little rescues and burdens lifted and people genuinely served.

Give compliments. Find one, even if it's hard some days. "Uh, son . . . uh, I like the way you breathe! Yes! It's wonderful the way you breathe in and out, in and out, all the time! Faithfully! You're such a faithful son! So dependable in your breathing!"

Select someone you've been having a hard time with—a sister-in-law, a neighbor, whoever—and go to that person and make up. He or she will be so surprised. So happy. So amazed. So thankful. Say something like, "I set a goal not to talk to you for a whole year. I've now reached that goal, and I'm tired of being miserable. Can we talk?" Or how about this opener: "I've been appointed chairman of the Neighborhood Ash Wednesday celebration, and we wonder if you could please donate a pickle and two paper plates?" Find something you'd be comfortable saying or doing. But even if it's a little uncomfortable, mending a relationship is worth it.

Many gifts we give are little but make a big difference for someone—and for us too. One moment can make a difference in a whole hour or a whole day. I love the story of the woman at one of the busy tollbooths on a bridge near San Francisco who decided one morning to pay for herself and the ten cars behind her. Imagine! To be truthful, I can almost picture myself back in line thinking, "What's she doing? What's taking her so long? Why do I always get in such slow lines?"

Then I get up to the booth and the person in charge acts different than usual—more cheerful. And I receive the message: A woman who is long gone (so I can't thank her specifically) has paid my toll. Then I feel bad for being so impatient, and she has changed my day, and I even look for things I might be able to do that would have such a powerful effect on someone else.

Love doesn't need to cost something; it's not always a matter of money. The major components of love are an awareness and a willingness to act.

That awareness, that willingness, can take a lot of energy and a lot of work. And we have to remember that sometimes we can help and sometimes we just can't. We do the best we can. Some days are better than others. Some seasons of life provide more time and energy and other resources to help. If we all do what we can, according to what we have, to the extent of our ability in our particular season, it will be enough.

But we could love more if we sinned less, because sin drains our batteries. Things like hate, jealousy, contention, and anger use up a lot of energy. The sweeter our relationship with God, the more we will long to serve and love Him and to make ourselves ready for anything He needs us to do. Maybe if we did some repenting, some returning to the Source of love, we would be able to discern promptings faster and better.

Another thing that runs down our love-and-service battery is trying to be a "topper" or a "bottomer." Sometimes moms do that without realizing it. You'd come home and say you'd had a hard day in junior high, and she'd say, "Well, when I was your age, I had to roller-skate fifty miles to baby-sit for five cents an hour." That's a bottomer.

And what's a topper? Someone says to you, "My son got an A on a chemistry paper," and you respond with, "Well, my son has been invited to open a yogurt shop on the moon." That's a topper. Neither a topper nor a bottomer be. It's too big a drain on your battery. If we could cut way down on competition and comparing, we'd have more time, energy, and love to share.

We'll have more time to love if we're not hooked on things that waste our time or strength or keep our hearts and minds unwisely occupied. Television, books, magazines, money (spending it or making it), entertainment, and many other things will take up all the time and energy we will give them. We can work to spend less time, energy, money, and other resources on things we don't really need, things that don't give us a good return on the investment.

Many of us want to help but suffer from serv-o-phobia: a fear of serving. We wonder what people will think or say. "Should I or shouldn't I?" we agonize within ourselves. If we will listen, we will hear that sweet answer, "Yes. Go ahead." And when the happy, peaceful feelings come, we wonder why we ever hesitated.

Not everyone will respond to our love in the way we would choose, of course. Sometimes when I get a less-than-positive response to something kind I've tried to say or do, I find myself thinking, "Later today when they look back on this they'll realize I was only trying to help. Then they'll smile and say, 'That was really nice.'" Anyway, if we give love to someone who does not seem to deserve or appreciate it, God will not be mad at us. Let's let Him be the judge—we can just love everyone.

If you have children, include them in your efforts to serve. Let them participate with you and learn firsthand the joys of performing meaningful service. Let them experience love in action. Remember the night from your childhood when your family put some bags of groceries on the front porch of someone in desperate need? You chose the fastest runner in the family to knock on the door and then join the rest of you in hiding down the block a bit. Remember how you felt when someone in that needy family came to the door and burst into tears and called everyone else to come and see? It's a blessed family that provides memories like that for the children.

Love is not only your sacks of groceries, your words, your clothing, your time, your loaf of bread—it's you. You have no idea how often you may rescue someone just by your countenance, the love that shines from your eyes. Maybe people can come close to you and feel safe—you provide a refuge.

In this world there is too much loneliness and sorrow. There are too many people who are overwhelmed and discouraged. There are too many terribly heavy burdens and tears and unanswered whys. But in this world of friends and neighbors and fellowcitizens, there is plenty of love for you and me and all of us. And there is enough joy for all the world, enough laughter and optimism and hugs and time and listening and reaching out. There's enough hope to give us a perfect brightness of hope, because we have a Savior and Redeemer. Jesus Christ is real. He lives. He will help us have enough time and energy for all He prompts us to do as we make love a verb. He loves us as we are and shows us how we can come to love as He loves.

If we could really figure out how to love, we wouldn't need a whole lot of other commandments. Not only would we reach out as we were able, but we in turn would receive help and comfort and the lightening of a burden when we needed it. Imagine—we would fill the world with love, until finally there simply wasn't room for unkindness, hate, contention, anger, impatience, envy, and other things that make us sick and sad. No one would be hungry or thirsty, physically or spiritually, for lack of attention and care. Wouldn't that be worth giving our time and our lives to?

I have come to know that the gospel of Jesus Christ is full of verbs, all related to the word love, verbs such as feed, hug, mourn, serve, forgive, lift, succor, comfort, share, visit . . . If we make love a verb, then peace becomes a noun, and Zion can be a reality. Let's allow love and service with compassion to become our need, our want, and our source of joy.
