Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 2

Love at Home

The thought occurred to me sometime before I became a Beehive girl that I'd been spending a lot of time with the Edmunds family at 218 South First West. And I wondered why. Sometimes I would climb a tree and get in a comfortable position before facing questions this important and huge. Why was I a member of my family and not another? When I went to neighbors' homes they usually seemed happy to see me and treated me very kindly. That certainly wasn't always true in my own home with my own family. Why couldn't I just switch to the Palmers when things got rough? Just make a trade from 218 to 259—no big deal. Why didn't I live in a family who had a horse or bigger trees? Why not a family where I was the only child?

Why did I have to share a room and clothes and toys with Charlotte, my younger sister? Why did she have to go everywhere with me—to birthday parties and school activities, parades and vacations, swimming and sledding? Why did we always have to take turns at things, like going with Dad on a house call or practicing the piano or doing the dishes? Okay, I admit that on some things I would rather not have had a turn at all, but it all seemed to be part of this family thing.

Charlotte and I spent many nights wondering why our older brother, Paul, had been put in our family. It was one of few issues that found us on the same side. It seemed to us that his main purpose in life was either to torment us or to get us into trouble.

As exasperating as he could be, though, I always wanted desperately to play with Paul and his friends. They had lots more fun than the girls in the neighborhood did. The unwritten but obvious rule was that if they let me play I couldn't act like a girl. Whether I was crawling into the caves that the Lombardi brothers were digging out behind the hospital (which of course would one day reach China) or helping to light firecrackers in anthills, I had to be brave and not act like a girl, or I couldn't keep playing with them.

Once when Mom and Dad were leaving for the evening, the last thing they said to me was something like, "And Mary Ellen, don't get on the garage!" I loved getting up on the roofs of things to see how far I could go in the neighborhood without touching land. Anything was fair game—garages, trees, sheds, chicken coops, homes, fences—just so I didn't touch the ground.

That particular night Paul and his friends were going to play chase, and oh, how I wanted to play. As usual, they said I could, if . . . and of course that meant "if you don't act like a girl." I promised I would play hard.

At one point Paul was "it" and he was chasing me. I climbed a tree that was right by the garage. Paul was right after me. There was no alternative—I had to jump onto the garage to keep from being caught by Paul. But of course then he jumped on the garage right after me. This garage didn't have a flat roof; the sides were pretty steep. It took skill and amazing balance to keep your footing. I'd had years of practice, even though I was only twelve, and I was good, but Paul was bigger and older and faster, and he was "it." I had no choice: I had to jump off the garage. The landing was not pretty. I knew immediately that something in my right ankle had gone very wrong.

Oh, it was awful! I wanted to scream and cry—but I wanted even more to retain my privileged, "not like a girl" standing. Paul jumped after me and tagged me, but he could tell that I wasn't up to being "it" right at the moment. I was a very wounded "it." Someone would have to be a proxy "it." Paul didn't seem to know what to do, so he just left me on the battlefield and ran after other players. Somehow I dragged myself into the house, through the sunporch, through the dining room, and into the living room where I got behind the couch and then let it all out. I sobbed in pain. I couldn't stand it any longer. I didn't care if I was a girl, I was a terribly wounded chase player, likely to die any moment. I cried as hard as I could.

And then Paul came in. He was very concerned. He took a look at my ankle and realized something was wrong; I could tell he felt bad about it. He said he knew what to do. He got a bucket, filled it with hot water, and stuck my ankle into it. The ankle ballooned before our eyes; I thought (and felt like) it was going to explode! We both realized that wasn't the best course of action, Paul's scouting experience notwithstanding, so he took my foot out of the bucket and called Dr. Farnsworth, our neighbor who was one of Dad's partners at the office. He came right away, took one look, and said my ankle was broken. Oh, the pain and agony! He suggested that Paul get some ice to put on it, which he did, trying not to hurt me.

And then we waited for Mom and Dad to come home. Paul kept assuring me that I was going to live and everything would be all right. He even told his friends he was through playing for that night, and they went home. It was kind of late when Mom and Dad came home, and I admitted right away that I'd been on the garage. I didn't want that to come out later from Paul or Charlotte. I wanted to be the one to confess, right in the beginning—face up to the truth.

I kept watching to see what kind of reaction Mom and Dad would have to my disobedience. They were disappointed, but they weren't mad. Amazing! They seemed sorry that I was hurting so much. Dad asked me to try to stand on my ankle, and I can still remember the extreme pain I felt as I tried to do so. There was no way. He agreed with Dr. Farnsworth that I had probably broken my ankle and would have to have a cast put on the next morning. I don't remember how I made it through that Saturday night.

I do remember that the next day was Father's Day, and my father and I celebrated part of it together, just the two of us, at his office on Main Street. It was quite literally a bonding experience. He took an X-ray—sure enough, my ankle was broken. He put a cast on, with me helping a little bit here and there as I could. I remember watching his hands, glad that he knew what to do as he wrapped the plaster stuff around and around in just the right way. I remember how amazed and grateful I was that instead of being angry and trying to punish me, he was helping me to heal.

My ankle healed eventually. The memories remain: of Paul's tenderness and attention to me when I needed him, and of my parents' patience and willingness to let me say I was sorry and let it go at that. And in some small way I was receiving the answers to some of my wonderings: Maybe we were put into families to give us the chance to learn about the love of our Heavenly Parents through the love we receive from earthly parents. Maybe instead of getting angry and punishing us when we willfully break the commandments, Heavenly Father and Jesus do all They can to help us heal. Maybe on occasion a big brother can teach us a little about the role of and our need for our Elder Brother.

I had many opportunities to learn about my parents' unconditional love for me. One such chance came in the 1950s when we got the first Volkswagen microbus in our town. It was fantastic! The front was flat, so you could pull it up right behind the car ahead of you and scare the heck out of people. The very first day we got it, Paul decided to drive it over to visit Larry a couple of blocks away and asked if I wanted to come. Sure! I loved the feeling, the smell, sitting up a little higher than usual, and having people look as we drove by.

Paul pulled up in front of Larry's house and said, "Why don't you take it for a spin around the block while I'm talking to Larry?" Now, I was only sixteen and had barely received my driver's license, so my first reaction was, Absolutely no way. I froze. It wasn't that I didn't want to, but I hadn't had a whole lot of driving experience and had never driven anything like this VW bus. It was tempting, though. "Just go around the block and come right back," Paul said, holding out the keys. He never did say "chicken," but perhaps I was thinking that. So I agreed. He headed up to Larry's front porch, and I got the bus into first gear and slowly rolled up the street. I think I may have gone to second gear, but not beyond that. I got to the corner and turned right—slowly, slowly. What a thrill! I turned right again. Everything was okay.

And then it happened. The sound, the terror, the shock, the disbelief! I miscalculated the clearance necessary and took out the door of our dentist's pickup truck, ruining the whole passenger side of our brand-new VW microbus! It couldn't be true! Oh, why had I said yes to going around the block? Why had the dentist parked his pickup truck in my way? Why?

Mom, of course, wasn't too thrilled to hear the news, and she told me to wait in my room until Dad got home from his office. I was as upset as I'd ever been in my life to that point. It seemed like a very long afternoon, but eventually I heard Dad come home. I could hardly bear the pain of anticipation. I'd gone over and over all the possibilities in my mind as I waited in the bedroom.

Mom called me down to talk to Dad. He was sitting in the living room near the fireplace in the big red chair. I walked in feeling absolutely terrible but wanting to get it over with. As I remember it, I went over to him, knelt down by the chair, and started bawling immediately as I sobbed out my tragic story.

I wish I had a video of what happened next; I'd like to be able to remember it in much more detail. It went something like this: My father took me in his arms and told me it would be all right. He told me he knew I didn't mean to wreck the bus, and that he already had insurance, so we could get it fixed up. He said he was so thankful that I wasn't hurt (and he made sure that was true—that I wasn't hurt other than "internally").

Oh, the wonder of it! I cried so hard for relief—much harder than I'd cried out of fear and terror. I am convinced that I have learned more than I can accurately measure about Heavenly Father's ability to show unconditional love for me, and to freely forgive me, from my parents and my brothers and sisters.

Some of the best lessons came from sharing "everything" with Charlotte. I love this wonderful younger sister of mine more than I can say, but I didn't always know it or act like it. It took some time for me to realize how much I loved and needed her and how much it meant to me that she was always there for me. I guess I pick on her more than on my other sisters and brothers because we are closest in age and grew up doing so many things together with our very different personalities and styles.

The galling thing was, I mostly thought of her as being perfect, never doing anything wrong, and it bugged the heck out of me. I got lots more spankings than Charlotte did—and I deserved them. I know that now, and I knew that then, but it didn't make it pleasant. You see, we really were different, this sister Charlotte and I. If she was a princess, then I was the wicked witch of the west. If she was a carrot, then I was a rutabaga. If she was a rose, then I was a weed—a noxious weed. I was the one who tested everything, and she was the one who would say, "Don't you just love the commandments? Don't you wish we had more?" Oh my.

One of the wonders of my upbringing is that our parents allowed us children—each of the eight of us—to be who we were, even encouraging us in our diversity, in our pursuit of the unusual. They let us learn by our experience and didn't always step in to interrupt consequences. Over and over again they let us work out our differences ourselves, even when we ran to them to help us with our "revenge." (Who was the first parent who thought of having two quarreling children wash windows facing each other?) I now feel grateful for having learned all the lessons I did through being so close to Charlotte. But the road was not always an easy one.

Lots of the problems we had happened at night. Charlotte and I shared a bedroom until we went away to college, and often after we'd been sent to bed but before we fell asleep I would get ideas. Then I'd have Charlotte carry out my dangerous plans. How did Mom and Dad always seem to know that I was the one who'd thought up the schemes?

I remember one night when all I wanted Charlotte to do was to jump out our second-story bedroom window and bend her legs just as she landed on the ground below, checking out a theory I had (based on what I'd seen in the Saturday matinee) that if she bent her legs on impact they wouldn't break. We were kind of going back and forth on this experiment—she didn't want to be the jumper, so she was making some noise, and I suppose I was too. We had received two warnings from Mom, but that was no big deal; she never came down the hall on Warning #1 or Warning #2. But then came Warning #3, and we knew her arrival was imminent. She was on her way, and she was not coming to tell us our allowance had been increased. Oh what to do, what to do. I suggested in a frantic whisper, "Hey, Charlotte! Let's see if we can fool Mommy. Let's trade beds!" She agreed. We traded—just in the nick of time.

I was hoping hard that Charlotte and I looked enough alike. Sure enough, Mom came in, went right over to Charlotte on my side of the room, flipped her over and spanked her, and walked back out with the typical, "Now you girls go to sleep!" Charlotte was crying, but I whispered in joy and amazement, "Charlotte! We did it. We did it! We fooled Mommy!" She was as proud as I was even though she was sobbing. What a brave and wonderful sister! She never did try that jump out our bedroom window.

How is it that through the years and experiences Charlotte could give me another chance, and another, and more and more? How could she be so forgiving? How is it that she believed in me over and over, even when I got her in so much hot water?

It's amazing—and touching—to me that the time I made big plans to run away from home, Charlotte didn't want me to go. I was off to California because my parents wouldn't get me a horse; I figured I'd try my luck with Uncle Joe or Uncle Chuck. After all the rotten things I'd done to Charlotte, she wasn't excited that I was leaving even though it meant she could have her own room. It didn't pan out anyway; I hadn't dragged my wagon full of hoarded cinnamon rolls and funny books very far in the summer heat before I was found by my friend Betsy's parents and accepted their offer of a ride home. I'm not sure Mom saw me returning—I had them let me out a little ways up the street—but I was welcomed back warmly. No fatted calf was killed and no celebration was held, but I knew I was part of that home and that family. I was accepted. Maybe we were put in families for our journey through this life because we can't run away, really—we stay and sort things out and learn some of our biggest, hardest, best lessons about unconditional love: theirs for us, and ours for them.

I still wanted a horse, but when it was clear that it was not going to materialize, I turned my thoughts to something else—something close at hand—that I could ride. Uncle Wilford kept a few sheep in a small pen out behind his house, and I started thinking that maybe we could ride them. It was worth a try. We had access to the pens from the back lots, so the idea was that we would go up the back lots, get in the pen, and have fun. We would do this only when Uncle Wilford's car wasn't there.

Oh, what fun! We had several sheep rodeos in the pen with happy, encouraging outcomes. Then, late one afternoon when we were having the time of our life, Uncle Wilford drove into the driveway and saw us. Stark terror! To make matters worse, at the very moment when Uncle Wilford drove in, one of the sheep jumped the fence. Oh no! A rodeo gone awry! Uncle Wilford had seen us, I knew, but he had his hands full trying to catch that sheep. We had to make an immediate escape. Abort the rodeo! Scatter! Run for your life!

The next day I saw Uncle Wilford walking down the street to our house, and I was convinced he was coming to tell my parents that he had contacted the police. But nothing happened. I couldn't believe it! I didn't go to prison or anything. It was a narrow escape, but it was a real escape. What did Uncle Wilford and my mom and dad talk about? Did they decide I had learned a lesson without further public punishment? Did Uncle Wilford understand us the way Mom and Dad seemed to? Were most adults actually willing to be patient and forgiving? Were they thinking of their own childhood and perhaps laughing at our experiences? Maybe we need more Uncle Wilfords in the world of children growing up.

It so happened that we moved from our hometown, something we never thought would happen, when I was seventeen and Charlotte fifteen. It was a hard adjustment, but in a way it was wonderful. We suddenly realized that we no longer had any friends—we had left behind everyone and everything familiar except for us. Our family. That was when Charlotte and I quit scratching, hitting, punching, and arguing so much and became best friends. There's no one—no one—like your very own sister. We went on to become nurses, Charlotte at Ricks for two years and me at BYU for four years. We graduated within a couple of weeks of each other and had the chance to be roommates and to work together at the hospital in Provo. There's no way to express adequately what it means to me to have a best friend who is also my sister.

And who would have guessed that Paul, the big brother who did his best to scare the heck out of us when he tended us, who acted as if he didn't even like us, whose every energy seemed bent on making our lives miserable, would end up loving us the way he did. He and I both worked at Zion National Park one year, and he always made sure to warn me about raids on the girls' dorm, slipped me an extra "just-in-case" five dollars from time to time, and took care to see that I was all right.

Thank goodness for families and for home, for a chance to learn some of life's hardest but most important lessons in a safe place. My heart aches for children who are born in situations where there is no safety and little unconditional love. Thank goodness for parents who have learned how to allow their children to become who they are. I look at the eight of us now, all living relatively close to each other, and I rejoice in our friendship and our unconditional love for each other as we continue to grow. All of my brothers and sisters have children, and I watch the cycle continue as those children go through similar lessons and opportunities. Thank goodness for the chance to experience life and learn the big and little lessons of relationships, choices, and what it means to head for Home with the kind help of those closest to us.
