Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 3

Carrots

Carrot seeds don't look at all like carrots. They look to me like little specks of dirt. They're not orange. They're not shaped like carrots. You couldn't take them to a picnic. Well, I guess you could, but there's no way to make carrot sticks out of them, and those little seeds can sure get stuck in your teeth. I've tried eating carrots that way. Not satisfying. Those little specks aren't full of vitamins and good stuff yet.

I look at those little seeds and wonder, How do they know? How do they know they're carrots and not squash or apple trees or petunias or some exotic, noxious weed? To me it is a miracle that this tiny, dirtlike speck is a carrot, sitting in that little package and waiting for someone to help the next step happen.

The next step is for someone who has faith that a carrot is waiting in that little, tiny, non-orange, non-carrot-shaped seed to plant it and then to provide the water and sunshine and time, the weeding and waiting. And what do you know! Eventually little green tops begin to appear, and a carrot is forming in the ground, the seed having broken apart to allow a miraculous process to take place.

Personally, I've always been somewhat nervous about planting carrot seeds. There's no arrow on the seeds: "This side down" or "This side up." What if I were to plant them upside down? People would drive through the neighborhood pointing and laughing. "Ha! Look at Edmunds! She planted her carrot seeds upside down! The orange is coming out of the ground first!" Even this, then, is a miracle—how does it happen that the orange goes down and the green comes up out of the ground to help provide nourishment and growth to the orange? All this is beyond my comprehension.

And there's another thing. The seeds look alike. They really do. They're tiny, but if you look at them closely, you see that they're pretty much the same size, shape, and color. And yet even in the pictures on packages of seeds, where they've lined up a few of the best carrots they can find for a family photo, those carrots are just not exactly the same. Each one is unique—different from every other carrot.

You might try this (I did, and I must warn you that I've lost my privileges at a certain grocery store): Go to the produce section at the store and find where the carrots with the green tops still on them are stacked up, waiting for someone to come who needs them for a dinner or a picnic. There they are, looking very nice. Put all of them on the floor, spread them out, and try to match up the ones that are identical twins.

You know, don't you, even as you read this, that you won't find any two that are exactly alike. That's not the way it happens. Even when they're tiny seeds, carrots know they're unique. Somehow they know.

Now of course, if I keep the seeds in the package (which I've done with a few hundred of them, and I feel bad about it, except that it helps me to make this point from time to time), they'll never become carrots. They've got to be planted. They've got to be given a chance to release the power that is in them, and there are certain conditions that have to be met for that to happen. I can't just put them on the sidewalk, or in a drawer, or even on top of pretty good dirt, and say, "Go to it!" They need to be planted. They need to have water and sunshine and time and care. And oh—the miracle as the green comes up and the orange goes down and another unique carrot is born!

Maybe people are like that—waiting for the miracle that will help them become who they are. My sister Charlotte and I used to work together in the nursery at the hospital, and we were convinced that each baby was absolutely unique. Sometimes we even gave them code names, especially the newborns who stayed for a few days or weeks. They seemed to have arrived with personalities and unique characteristics already in place.

It is a sobering and tender experience to look at a newborn baby and wonder about who he or she is. Do those children know who they are? Do their parents know? Maybe they're like little seeds, with the potential in them to become unique, special, wonderful children of God.

Some of the same questions we asked about carrots come into this wondering about children. How do they know? How do they know they're Charlotte and not Mary Ellen? Frank and not John? What kind of care is needed for the miracle to happen? How do we "plant" a person? How do we help provide the sunshine and water, the weeding and care and time? We can't just put the baby on the sidewalk or in a drawer and expect that something miraculous will happen.

Yet here they are, millions born every day, and their potential is part of their heritage: Each one is a child of God. Their Heavenly Father is a King. They are born with the potential to become as He is! Pondering that is even more wonderful than looking at a tiny carrot seed and being awed that the little speck can become an orange carrot with a green top.

And yes, each little baby is definitely different from all the rest. Even those born into the same family, with the same parents, who eat all the same things for breakfast and lunch as the years go by, and hear the same stories and music, and ride in the same car or bus, and play with the same toys—they still turn out different. When we sing a phrase like "You're not a clone" we really mean it—no two are exactly alike. Each comes with a unique soul and perhaps with a unique mission and purpose. Maybe each little person-seed might even need special, unique care to reach its full potential, to become perfect: whole, complete, and pure. Finished. Godly.

Author Timothy Gallwey draws a similar analogy: "When we plant a rose seed in the earth, we notice that it is small, but we do not criticize it as 'rootless and stemless.' We treat it as a seed, giving it the water and nourishment required of a seed. When it first shoots up out of the earth, we don't condemn it as immature and underdeveloped; nor do we criticize the buds for not being open when they appear. We stand in wonder at the process taking place and give the plant the care it needs at each stage of its development. The rose is a rose from the time it is a seed to the time it dies. Within it, at all times, it contains its whole potential. . . . At each stage, at each moment, it is perfectly all right as it is" (The Inner Game of Tennis [New York: Bantam Books, 1974], 29).

Roses and carrots and people. They don't look (or behave) up to their potential in all circumstances, in all stages of their growth and development, but they always have the power in them to become, especially if careful attention is given to helping this process happen. And I do feel that it is a process, this becoming who or what we really are.

President Gordon B. Hinckley said something that seems to me to apply: "We are far from being a perfect society as we travel along the road to immortality and eternal life. The great work of the Church in furthering this process is to help men and women move toward the perfection exemplified by the Savior of mankind. We are not likely to reach that goal in a day or a year or a lifetime. But as we strive in this direction, we shall become better men and women, sons and daughters of God" (Church News, 6 Mar. 1982). That thought helps me to remember that perfection is a process, and we need to continue to strive to be who we really are: more like our Heavenly Father, more like our Savior and Brother.

When I was first called as a missionary, people told me I was going to a place where everyone looked the same. Having not had much experience in my life up to that point, I didn't know what they meant. Then, in August of 1962, I arrived in Hong Kong. Wow! Because I lacked experience, all the people did look alike to me.

I found myself wondering, "How do they know they're them?" (not worrying at all about the grammar in such a question). They looked so much alike that I wondered, "How do they know if it's their children coming home for dinner?" I could almost picture a wife asking, "Are these ours?" and the husband responding, "I'm not sure." She: "How many are there?" He: "Six." She: "Well, we have six. Let's feed them. They might be ours."

Then people began to have names. Mickey Chang. President Hu. Sister Lin. And I looked back and laughed at myself for ever thinking that they looked alike. Each was so wonderfully individual. How could I ever have thought all the people looked alike, any more than I could go to a market and think all the carrots were exactly alike? I loved getting to know and love and appreciate my friends in Asia one by one. In fact, when I returned home it seemed that people here reminded me of people there.

While I was serving in the Philippines as a health missionary, my companion and I went about once a month to the city of Baguio, an eight-hour bus ride from Manila. There we taught lessons to the members of the branch and helped in any way that was needed. Each time we got to the bus station in Baguio, a certain little girl would meet the bus. We got to be buddies even though we didn't speak each other's languages. She knew very little English beyond "Hey, Joe. Where are you going, Joe?" And we didn't know much Tagalog. Still we communicated and became friends. She was there each time, selling her peanuts and newspapers.

On one of our visits I took a picture of that little girl. She looked with some interest and curiosity at my camera. I remember thinking that perhaps she hadn't seen too many of these "aim-and-shoot" varieties. We took the film back to Manila and got it developed. On our next trip to Baguio we had a picture to give her—a picture of herself, there at the bus station with her peanuts and papers.

I guess it's not uncommon to have something go through your mind before it actually happens. I do that quite a lot—think ahead of things I might say and even of things people might say back to me. As we approached Baguio I had it in my mind that we'd get off the bus, hug our little friend as usual, and then I'd give her the picture. She'd smile and squeal and say something about not having many pictures of herself, and thank you very much, things like that.

We arrived, and there was our little friend. We hugged each other and exchanged enthusiastic greetings as usual. Then I handed her the picture. She took it and looked intently. Then she looked up and asked, "Sino?" ("Who's this?") That hit me right in the heart. It had not even crossed my mind that she wouldn't know what she looked like—that she wouldn't recognize a picture of herself.

I admit that sometimes when I see myself in a mirror I'm caught off guard—frightened or something. But I know what I look like. I can recognize myself. Here was a little child who didn't know who she was, even what she looked like. It made the tears come. I responded, "Ikau." ("It's you.") "Ako?" ("It's me?") "Yes." So she looked harder at the picture but still couldn't seem to realize that it was a picture of her.

Then I got an idea. She always had on the same shirt, and it had a hole in it. I pointed to the hole and made a kind of "see this?" look on my face. She nodded. I then pointed to the hole in her shirt in the picture. Again, "See this?" She did. I touched her face and then her face in the picture. "It's you." And then her little countenance changed. She understood. "Ako! Ako!" ("It's me! It's me!")

How does Heavenly Father help us to know who we are, to be able to shout with joy, "It's me! It's me!" I think He gives us a variety of experiences that help us to know more about our real selves. He shows us to ourselves in many interesting ways.

Several years ago my parents celebrated their fiftieth wedding anniversary. We kids didn't know if they would make it that long or that far—we thought we might wear them out. The eight of us are so active and so different. But they did it. As part of the celebration they put their vast collection of old 16mm home movies on video. In about 1937, before they were married, someone gave them a 16mm movie camera, the kind that looks like a black box. Dad wound it up and "shot us" many times over those fifty years.

So as we gathered for the anniversary celebration we sat together in the living room to watch the videos of the perfect family growing up. Oh yes. So perfect. Here we are going to church, scriptures in hand, thrilled to wear our Sunday clothes and be reverent for quite a while. (No way.) Here we are starting out on a vacation, and I'm saying, "Oh no, Mommy, I don't want to sit by the window. It's Charlotte's turn. No, I had a turn last time. I love Charlotte. I want her to sit by the window." (Ha. Fat chance. I was probably actually screaming, "She touched me!" or something like that.)

It's all there on the films—samples of our hopefully normal growing up together. Paul K. Jr., Mary Ellen, Charlotte Norine, Susan, Franklin Middleton, John M., Ann M., and Richard M. (all the M's for Middleton, my mother's maiden name). It's quite a feeling to see yourself at a point where you can no longer remember having been. But there you are. You know it's you by the pictures and because Mom and Dad point you out and say how cute and clever you were. "That's you, Mary Ellen—you were always bending over and putting your head between your legs!" I can't do that anymore.

Well, I got to thinking about all of this. Did Heavenly Father take movies of us? Are there videos of what we were like and who we really are? Will we see those heavenly home movies one day? Will we have that wonderful feeling of knowing that we did all we could to find the real us inside all our lessons and experiences?

Part of what helps us know who we are is how others treat us. We're asked to esteem our brothers and sisters as ourselves—to be one. The invitation seems to refer not only to those who are like us but to all who come within our sphere, our influence. In other words, carrots need to be kind to turnips and not look down on them just because they're not carrots.

I have in my possession a record that I won as a prize in a fifth-grade art contest. It's pretty much scratched to death by now, but I still have it. It's called "The Churkendoose," and it tells the story of an egg that everyone took turns sitting on—the chicken, turkey, duck, and goose. And so when the baby thing hatched it was a combo—part chicken, part turkey, part duck, and part goose—a Churkendoose.

Because this Churkendoose was a strange and different kind of beast, others made fun of it. It got very lonely. It sang some songs about how it felt, how painful it was not to be treated kindly: "Does the pear tree say to the apple tree, 'I hate you 'cuz you're not like me'?" In the end the Churkendoose saved the others from a fox—chased it away—and then everyone was nice to him.

Sometimes I've felt like a Churkendoose—looking different because of my braces or feeling left out at a party or whatever. All my life I've been grateful for friends who have treated me kindly and helped me through my awkwardness.

Once a group of Relief Society presidents in a training session were asked to think of the names of as many young women in their ward as they could. Not "Ethel's daughter" or "the Mason girl," but the girls' front names, their very own names. Some of the presidents expressed embarrassment that they didn't know very many names. We are asked to pay attention to each other and not just to those who are like us in age, in experience, or in any other category that might isolate us from others. Do you know the names of the Sunbeams and deacons and Beehive girls in your ward? Do you know something about them?

Years ago I heard a story about a large family that went on a vacation. Mostly they bought food in grocery stores and ate in parks to save money, but once in a while they went into a restaurant. They always caused quite a stir, as there were so many of them. Tables and chairs generally had to be rearranged to accommodate them.

On one such adventure they finally got seated and the waitress was taking their orders. She took a few orders and then got to a little boy around eleven years old. "And what would you like?" she asked. He looked over at his mother. After all, she usually chose for him. It was an awkward moment, but the mother didn't say anything, so he looked at the waitress and said, "I'll have a hot dog!"

At that moment his mother regained her voice and said, "Oh, no, he'll have what the rest of us are having." The waitress didn't seem to hear that comment and continued looking at the little boy. "What would you like on the hot dog?" He squirmed a bit and looked again at his mother. She once again seemed to lose her voice. So the little boy excitedly told the waitress what he wanted on the hot dog: mustard, pickles, onions, ketchup. She wrote it down, took the rest of the orders, and left.

The little boy was amazed. He couldn't believe it. He turned to everyone else at the table and said, "She thinks I'm real!"

Is there someone in your life whom you treat as real who needs that more than you may realize? Is it someone older? Younger? Taller? Shorter? A longer carrot? A different-colored rose? Oh, if we could only enjoy our diversity, our differences! It seems that God must have made us different on purpose. Is it so we can find help for our needs? Is it so we can find others who need us? Is it so we need to team up with others to find our wholeness and completeness?

Carrot seeds are all around us waiting to be planted or watered or weeded or tended in some other important way. May we watch over and care for each other, helping the miracle of our uniqueness to happen.
