Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 4

Instruments

One day many years ago a friend and I were driving in the Avenues in Salt Lake City on our way somewhere when we noticed a young mother standing out by her truck looking very frustrated and unhappy. We were prompted to stop, and we did so. The woman had several children watching and waiting. She had run out of gas on her way to pick up a daughter from a dancing lesson and couldn't believe her bad luck. We said we'd go get some gas for her. Although she was grateful for the help, she also seemed to feel uncomfortable being on the receiving end. But what could she do?

We drove till we found a gas station, pumped a couple of gallons into a borrowed container, and then returned to the woman and put the gas in the truck. The woman was thankful but still a little embarrassed to accept our help. She wanted to know how much she owed us. We told her that it just so happened that the gas station was having a super deal that day and the one-hundredth customer would receive two gallons of gas free and we just happened to be the hundredth customer. Can you imagine, she doubted that was true! We've probably all felt what she was feeling—that awkward moment when we're not quite sure how to say thank you, and we think we'd feel better if we could pay for kindness.

Then an idea came to me, and I said to her, "You'd do the same for us." That stopped her—she thought about it, then broke into a smile, and said, "You're right. I would." All of us would, wouldn't we . . . if we just knew. We'd all say Yes! to the promptings that come to us if we weren't in such a hurry, or if we weren't so shy or so worried that we wouldn't know what to do or say if we offered to help.

One interesting thing about that experience is that I can't remember anything about where I was going that day, but I'll never forget the brief, eternal experience of helping someone—of heeding the prompting that she needed help and there was some little thing we could do that would make a big difference for her and for us. Was it planned? Were we directed to the spot where she was? Were we instruments?

The feeling that comes into our hearts and motivates us to say yes to the Spirit's promptings is compassion. I'm sure it's tied to love, to charity. I have always been convinced that when you're filled with compassion you have to do something. Some experiences I've had have felt like a hands-on seminar about taking action. That was the way it was that day in the Avenues, and it's been like that quite a few times in my life.

It's as if I'm being tested to see not only if I'll listen to the still small voice but if I'll respond—if I'll "just say yes." Not maybe, not no, not "I'm not in the mood to be an instrument right now," not "Get someone else," but "Yes! I'll do what I can. Please give me some good ideas. Please give me courage and energy. Here we go!"

There seem to be quite a few books on the market about how to say no, how to take care of yourself ("number one"). Some almost seem to teach us how to be separate and protected from other people. And we do have only so much energy, so much time, so many resources. But I have noticed that there are also some very important books on how to say yes, how to respond to and care for others in a Christlike way. There are more than 3,728 pages of examples and instructions in the scriptures.

There is no substitute for the scriptures and the Spirit in helping us strive to love and serve and become more like our Savior. They will teach us to be better instruments in His hands, more willing and more able to say yes.

I had an unforgettable experience a few years ago on a hot August evening. I stopped at the post office in Springville to get my mail. Mapleton, where I live, doesn't have a post office, and Springville's is the closest one. It's always after hours when I go there, so usually there's no one around. But that evening as I walked in I noticed a man standing at the automatic stamp dispenser looking frustrated. He looked as if he might have come from Mexico; many come from there to help us harvest our crops.

This man was trying to get the stamp machine to take his money and give him some stamps but was apparently having problems. I took all of this in as I turned and walked to my box. A strong, deep feeling came into my heart that I wanted to help the man get his stamps. And I had a distinct impression: "This is compassion you're feeling."

I got my mail, sorted it, and then walked over to the man. "Isn't it working, sir?" "No," he replied, looking at me helplessly. I had never used one of those machines, but I wanted so much to help that I said, "Let me try." I took his extremely worn five-dollar bill and tried to get the machine to take it. I tried several times. All kinds of approaches. It wouldn't work.

I handed the bill back to the man and mumbled something like, "It won't work." He looked back at me as if to say, "That's what I said." I said, "Hold on a sec." He obviously had no idea what I meant. I went to my car (thinking he probably thought I had left and wouldn't be back) and returned with my purse. I took out my three newest one-dollar bills and approached the machine.

The man was watching with what seemed to be a whole lot of curiosity. I put a dollar bill in, and the machine took it. I shouted, "Yippee!" The machine took the other two one-dollar bills, too, and with a sense of accomplishment and joy I said, "Sir! It's working!" We got a book of stamps and a dime for change. That was my first experience with such a machine, and I wanted the man to be as excited as I was.

This was happiness. I handed the book and the dime to the man and said, "Sir, we got it! Here you go!" He started shaking his head no. I said, "Yes—these are yours." He backed away a bit saying, "No, no—you don't do this . . ." I said, "Yes I do—I just did! These are your stamps."

He wouldn't take them. I didn't know what to do. Then I got an idea. I said the first thing that came into my mind on that very hot August day: "Merry Christmas, sir!" He had to smile. He couldn't help it. He took the stamps and the dime.

Then he looked at his worn five-dollar bill, and I sensed it was all he had. He asked hesitantly, with an accent, "How much I owe you?" I said, "Nothing. Nada." He seemed confused. "No," he said and tried to give the stamps back to me. I wouldn't take them, but I didn't want him to feel bad. So I said, "Sir, you would do the same for me." He kind of smiled at that and nodded yes, he would. I told him I knew that.

I walked out of the post office on Cloud 10. I felt so wonderful. It hit me: three minutes, three bucks—cheap! I treasured that genuine feeling of joy and shouted happily all the rest of the way home. It was the real thing, all natural ingredients. I'll never forget it.

Then I had another thought that added even more meaning to the experience. I imagined Them Up There somewhere in a meeting. Yes, in a meeting. (It's hard for me not to imagine Heavenly Father and those who work with Him having lots of meetings. After all, it's been said that the fourteenth article of faith is "We believe in meetings—all that have been scheduled, all that are now scheduled, and we believe that there will yet be scheduled many great and important meetings. We have endured many meetings and hope to be able to endure all meetings. Indeed we may say that if there is a meeting, or anything that resembles a meeting, or anything that we might possibly turn into a meeting, we seek after these things.")

So I pictured Them Up There in a meeting. I could imagine someone interrupting the meeting with an important message: "Excuse me. I hate to interrupt, but there's a man down there in the Springville Post Office, and he's trying to get some stamps and can't make the machine work."

Wouldn't it be something if someone in the meeting had said, "It's okay. Edmunds is on her way. She'll help him. We can go back to the agenda." Wouldn't it be a wonderful thing if God could count on MEE? (I've been an acronym all my life.) Wouldn't it be wonderful if we could just say Yes! when He invites us to participate in kindness?

Many have prayed for the chance to be instruments in God's hands. I had an unforgettable learning experience about that when I was a student nurse. I was about to witness my first "grand opening"—I was going to watch a surgeon perform an operation. I was all suited up: I had on the green gown and cap, the white mask, and the gloves, and my hands were pointed upward and in front of me. Don't touch anything that isn't sterile. Clean on clean, dirty on dirty.

I was getting warm. Very, very warm. I began to think I might faint and hit the floor and embarrass myself and my instructor and possibly do damage to my nose. So I said to myself, "Self, you've got to focus on something else. Think about something different." I looked around the room, fascinated by all that is involved in surgery. Then my eyes landed on the tray that was set up near the operating table. It had instruments on it. All the instruments looked shiny and new. Sparkling. Ready. And there were the scalpels, all sharp and poised.

The surgeon came in. He was a masked man, but I knew who he was, and I knew something about what he was going to do. I started worrying for the woman who was being wheeled into the room. Hey! This is going to hurt! Should I do something? Should I save her? This was real. Fortunately I decided that the surgeon and everyone else on the team had a desire to help and the knowledge and skill to do so. So I tried just to watch and not be worried about how much this was going to hurt.

They gave the woman some anesthetic and she went to sleep and the team went to work. The surgeon would hold his hand at his side, almost behind him, and ask for something. The nurse by the tray would snap it on his gloved hand so he knew he had it, and he'd work on without having to look around much. Soon it was time for the scalpel. It was snapped into his hand, and he made the incision on the woman's abdomen. (Ouch!)

The doctor continued working, going deeper and asking for different instruments. The scalpels came into the scene quite often, it seemed. And I began thinking about them. What if they had minds of their own? That scalpel he was using right then—what if it suddenly decided it didn't want to do what the surgeon was directing it to do, and it started just chopping around, exploring and slicing and . . . well, you get the idea.

And then the lesson began to come. Scalpels don't do that. They don't go off on their own. They're instruments in the hands of the surgeon, and he knows what he's doing. They're part of the team, but they do what they're directed to do. I thought about the perspective the surgeon had that the scalpel didn't—a perspective that no one else on the team had. That was why they had put that particular instrument in his hands. Amazing. He knew what he was doing.

It seemed to me at first that he was going to hurt the patient, but really he intended to help heal her. Maybe he was part of an even bigger team. Perhaps her family was praying for her. Maybe someone she loved and trusted had given her a blessing. There were likely lots of members of the team, lots of instruments in the hands of God, being led by His knowledge and perfect perspective and His wonderful, healing hands.

I want God to be able to use me as an instrument. I want Him to be able to count on me to do what I can to help.

One evening a couple of years ago I left work a little bit late. As I was going down 9th East I saw Matt, one of the fellows I work with, evidently waiting for the bus. So I pulled over, rolled down the window, and said, "Hey, sailor, can I give you a ride?" He laughed but hesitated, saying he lived quite a distance away. I said, "It's right on my way!" He said he knew it wasn't, but I insisted that I could go anywhere I wanted, and if it was on my way, it was on my way. So he got in, and off we went toward his home.

He lived in an apartment right across from a discount bakery place, which he pointed out. As I dropped him off I said I'd go over there and check it out. It was getting close to closing time, and there were only two or three cars in the parking lot. I parked a couple of spots away from one of them and glanced at it as I went in the store. Someone was just sitting in it—probably waiting for someone who'd gone in to do some shopping. I went into the store and wandered around looking at all the good stuff. Got a few loaves of bread, and when I came out I noticed that the car was still in the parking lot. A young woman and two children were sitting inside; I could tell they were having some trouble.

I decided to stop and see if I could help, but I would put my bread in my car first. As I walked past the car with the woman and the children, I was touched with a very strong feeling of compassion. I heard myself say something, but it was as if the words were put into my mind: "I will not leave you alone." It was a very strong, tender feeling. I smiled. I had intended to go over and see if I could help, but that feeling and those words let me know that Someone was watching out for that woman and wanted me to try to help.

I walked over to her and asked if she was having trouble. Yes—she couldn't seem to get her car started. I told her I had jumper cables, but I wasn't sure how to use them. I am not a genius with cars. I'm not an anything with cars besides just knowing how to get them started and how to steer. I asked her to try it again, but when she turned the key there wasn't any noise, so it didn't seem like jumper cables would have helped. I asked if I could call someone for her. Her husband was at work and couldn't be reached. She thought of the number of a neighbor, and I called there but got an answering machine.

She was frustrated, and I didn't know what to do, how to help. I said I would go look in the store for someone who looked nice and smart. A man in there with his wife and son was just checking out. I made myself brave and asked, "Do you know anything about cars?" He kind of shrugged and said he knew a little bit. I asked if he could come and look at a car and see if he could help get it started. He looked at his wife, and she said she and the son would wait.

We went outside, and he looked under the hood. I held the hood up; the latch was broken, so I was the hood holder for the next part of the adventure. He fussed around and had the woman try to start the motor a few times. Meanwhile his wife and son got into their car to wait. I asked how far away he lived, and he said "Price," which was quite a way to go. I was worried that he was going to be late starting back to Price, but he kept trying to find solutions to the problem.

A man watching us from the other side of the fence around the store called out, "Do you need some tools?" The Price Man said he thought maybe that would help, so the Fence Man drove his truck and dog around and into the parking lot and got out a bunch of tools. An interesting character, with long, thinning, straggly hair, some of which was in a ponytail, and a long beard. And a can of beer. And a very kind heart. He propped up the hood with a ski pole, which took away one of my responsibilities. But I still held it anyway—afraid it would fall and kill them both.

The Fence Man got in and helped, and they did lots of stuff, including putting a hole in the radiator hose, which they then had to fix. Finally, after about an hour and a half, they had done what they could and asked her to try again. The car almost started . . . but didn't. I suggested she just lock it up, and I would take her home. I gave the Price Man some wipes for his hands. The Fence Man wore gloves. Both were kind, and we thanked them sincerely, and then they left.

The woman during all this time was trying to keep the kids quiet and calm. At some point she came around and stood near me, looked at me, and said, "You're Sister Edmunds, aren't you." It caught me off guard, because we'd been there for quite a while by that time. I said, "Yes, I am." Then she said, "I heard you speak at the MTC and at Ricks." We talked about her experiences there a little bit. And from that point on I was thinking, "What if I hadn't helped? What if I had left her alone?" Probably she had heard me share these great, glorious ideas about helping each other and serving and doing things even if they're inconvenient and blah blah blah. But would I practice, or just preach?

It's exactly what I try so hard not to do—give talks but not live what I say. I try to "walk my talk," as I've heard some express it. So that got to me. It was a big lesson. That woman knew who I was. She knew when I walked past her into the store, and she knew when I came out and headed for my car—and when I came back to try to help. I had no idea that she knew. And I wasn't able to do much—I couldn't get her car fixed—but I did what I could. I bundled her, her two children, a car seat, and her purchases into my car and took them home, not too many blocks away. I helped her carry things in. She was grateful. I was, too, more than I could adequately tell her or Heavenly Father. "I will not leave you alone."

I want my Heavenly Father to see me near a bread store or a post office or in a grocery store or walking down a street and be able to whisper to me through the still small voice that someone needs help and He needs an instrument. "Can I borrow you for a few minutes?" I can almost hear Him say. "Someone's having a problem, and I think your approach will be just right for this adventure. What do you say?" What can I say except yes? Although He has asked me to do some very hard things, He's never ever asked me to do something that He wouldn't help me accomplish.

And I've noticed another thing, something that's hard to explain. It's like the feeling we get that nine pennies go further than ten when we begin to realize that paying a full tithing and a generous fast offering can open the windows of heaven. For me it has turned out to be that way with time. Nine minutes go further than ten. The Lord won't ask me to help without making it up to me.

Now, certainly the post office isn't the only place where we can have wonderful experiences as instruments, but for some reason it has been such a place many times for me. One evening when I walked in I noticed a very pregnant woman standing near the change machine. She seemed frustrated. I started to smile as I walked toward my box. I knew something wonderful was about to happen.

I got my mail and then walked back over to her and asked, "Isn't it working?" She sighed and shook her head. "I tried so hard to get here before the post office closed," she said, "but I didn't make it. And now it says that the machine is out of change." I looked at the blinking sign and said, "Well, that seems weird, that they'd be out of change so soon after closing time. You'd think they'd check those things." Then I told her to wait a second, and I headed out to my car.

I returned with my purse, and we put all the coins we had together on the counter. Between us we had enough for her to get the stamps she needed. Then she tried to give me a dollar bill. I backed away in amazement, protesting, "I don't take money from strangers! Who do you think I am?" We both laughed. She said, "Well, tell me your name, then, so I can thank you." I said the first thing that came into my mind: "I'm Elsie the Borden Cow." I have no idea why I said that, but we both laughed again.

The woman thanked me and seemed to feel a little awkward, so I said, "You'd do the same thing for me." She laughed and seemed touched and responded with feeling, "Yes, I would." I said, "I knew that—didn't you know that?" I started toward the door and she said, "Elsie?" I turned. "Yes?" "Whenever I come to the post office I'm going to see if there is anyone I can help." I smiled out loud. Yes! There's you, there's me, there's the man at the stamp machine and the woman at the discount bakery—we're all in this together! We all want to be instruments in God's hands. Oh, what a wonderful feeling.

Another time when I was in the post office (has this become one of my favorite places or what?) I was pulling the stuff out of my box and noticed one of those small cards with a picture of a child and the question, "Have you seen me?" I started thinking that I had thrown away thousands of those, but then I remembered that my parents have told me a million times not to exaggerate. But I have thrown away a whole bunch of those cards. I never knew anyone who was pictured on them. They'd never be in Mapleton anyway; they'd most likely be in a big city a long ways away.

On this particular day, though, something about the question grabbed my attention and touched my heart. "Have you seen me?" I didn't know the child on the card, although I wished I had seen her and could help her get home. But the question was broad enough to include all of Heavenly Father's children who might be feeling lonely and lost and far from home. "Have you seen me? I'm lost. I want to go home, and I don't know how. Can you help me?" Just say yes. Yes, I can help, and I will. I'll do what I can. Use me, Father in Heaven. Help me know what to say and how to say it. Help me know what to do and how to do it.

It occurs to me that we are never invited to participate in acts of kindness without the promise that we'll receive ideas to help in our response. It's as if with the invitation, the feeling of compassion, comes an increase in our ability to respond in a helpful, kind, Christlike way. We become more whole and complete ourselves as we reach out to lift and bless others, to comfort them and mourn with them, to do what we can to make their burdens bearable.

President Ezra Taft Benson taught that God can help us increase our abilities if we will just give ourselves to him. "Men and women who turn their lives over to God will find out that he can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He will deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends and pour out peace. Whoever will lose his life to God will find he has eternal life" ("Jesus Christ—Gifts and Expectations," Christmas Devotional, Salt Lake City, Utah, December 7, 1986). That's remarkable. Our Father will help us be able to do things we never thought we could do. He'll provide for us the very things we search for.

We probably have no idea how many reach out to us for help. Sometimes, if you're like me, you'll have a memory pop into your mind of a kindness someone has shown and you wonder where that person is now and what he or she is doing. And you wonder if the person knows how grateful you feel for the service given at a time when you needed it. President Spencer W. Kimball explained that when God answers our prayers he often sends another mortal to respond to our need. (See The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], p. 252.)

Does Zonie know what it meant to me to have a best friend during my growing-up years? Her folks were Uncle Leo and Aunt Irene to me, and we spent fourteen years side by side, making popcorn and reading Gone with the Wind together, sleeping out under the stars and then telling ghost stories and getting so scared that we had to go into her house and sleep on the floor.

Does Mr. Halversen know the wonderful things he awakened in my soul by patiently teaching me to play the violin and letting me participate in Handel's Messiah each year? He could have given up so many times. He weathered our marshmallow fights in the brand-new orchestra pit and trips on the bus to Beaver and Delta and other places to put on La Traviata and Il Trovatore. How did he do it?

Does Mr. Wynn know what a difference he made in my life in sixth grade by treating me as if I had some potential? In fifth grade I'd been branded as a child who had too many ideas and too little attention span. I got restless. I would finish my work and then get to the fun things: making little briefcases out of paper, inventing families with official documents for each member, like the records the ward clerk read at the pulpit when new families moved into the ward (I think I secretly always wanted to do that). My fifth-grade teacher told my parents that yes, my work was okay, but he just couldn't seem to keep me busy. Then how did Mr. Wynn do it? He had me write what I'd done last summer, prepare messages about safety to be read over the school PA system, work on extra spelling words, practice my printing, write about my family and friends. He encouraged me in some poems I wrote, and a few of them were published. He let me be on the boxing and tumbling teams when I didn't want to dance and braid the Maypole with the other girls. His style was encouragement and praise.

Many people have been instruments in God's hands along the way to help me find myself and stretch and grow. I'm grateful. I'm thankful God sometimes uses MEE as an instrument in His hands, too. They are safe hands. They know what they're doing. They know what I can do and what I can't. They know what this day, this season, is like for me. I like the way Alma expressed it in his "O that I were an angel" wish, recorded in Alma 29. In verse 9 he said: "I know that which the Lord hath commanded me, and I glory in it. I do not glory of myself, but I glory in that which the Lord hath commanded me; yea, and this is my glory, that perhaps I may be an instrument in the hands of God to bring some soul to repentance; and this is my joy." May it be our joy as well.
