Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 5

The Magic Wand

I had a gloriously happy childhood. I grew up (well, it didn't actually "take," and I changed my mind, deciding it was better not to grow up) in a wonderful small town that was just right for someone like me. There were lots of kids, lots of fields, lots of hills nearby, and lots of trees and bugs and stuff. Moms wore aprons, and houses had front porches. Winters brought lots of snow, and we could go all the way down our street on our sleds and sometimes "biz" cars (latch on to them and slide for a ways). In the summer we had lots of sunshine and water in the ditch for our boat races. They were just sticks, really, but we could imagine them into huge, beautiful pirate and trading ships. In our neighborhood the only ones I couldn't beat up on were the parents and the older boys. Life was good.

Then Sharon moved in up the street. She was a year older and a lot bigger than I was, and she started causing problems right away. One day she wouldn't let me use the swing when I was ready to. Another day she made fun of my braces. It was always something. She single-handedly disrupted my happy childhood.

I had to do something. So I decided to kill Sharon. I wasn't sure how to do that—we didn't have TV yet—but I did know that you don't want to leave evidence when you kill someone. If "they" find evidence, you could go to jail. I didn't want to go to jail. I liked Tony, our policeman, but I didn't want to spend all my time with him at the jail. I just wanted Sharon out of the way.

I began plotting how to kill Sharon without leaving evidence. I couldn't ask Charlotte or Paul; they'd tell. And I certainly couldn't ask my parents. They wouldn't understand. They wouldn't help. I had to do this one alone. But how?

Then one day I was reading a fairy tale in a big, beautifully illustrated book. On one page there was a fairy godmother who had a magic wand, and she waved it and POOF! Stars flew every direction, and magical things happened. And on the next page there were major changes—and no evidence. That was it! A magic wand! I would get a magic wand, kill Sharon (and who knows who else), and there would be no evidence.

But how was I going to get a magic wand? I began glancing around in the stores in town whenever I was there. No wands. I couldn't ask. Someone would surely remember that I had inquired about a magic wand shortly before Sharon's mysterious and untimely death. I had to do this on my own. It was the most major project I had ever undertaken, but I had to do it without help.

With my warped sense of faith I finally came to the conclusion that the way to get a magic wand was to pray for it. I was aware that it was a big request and felt I ought to do some special preparations in order to get ready to ask. So for a whole day I tried to be good and kind to everyone, including my mother and father and all my brothers and sisters. No small task. I could almost feel heaven smiling down on me and being thrilled that I was finally making some progress.

At last the moment seemed right for me to kneel down by my bed. I didn't come right out and ask for a wand. First I kind of hinted about how good I'd been, pointing out some specific things I'd done that I felt were above and beyond what could reasonably be expected. Things that would have been normal procedure for others were second miles for me—big time.

And then I did it. I asked for a wand. I didn't tell Him what it was for. I finished my prayer and thought about the wand and Sharon as I drifted off to sleep that night. I came so close to telling Charlotte . . .

I gave Them a few days to make the wand before I started looking for it. I hadn't specified in my prayer where it should be delivered, so I didn't know where They'd drop it off. I began looking in all the wonderful places where I used to hide things throughout the neighborhood, but I couldn't find the wand. After a couple of days the thought struck me that maybe Charlotte had found the wand and was plotting something against me. So I looked in her stuff. Still couldn't find it.

Eventually I realized that I wasn't going to get the magic wand. I was so disappointed and frustrated. Sharon continued living in the neighborhood, and we eventually learned to get along. A few times I came close to telling her how lucky she was to still be alive.

Sometimes I still pray for magic wands. Not literally, of course, but I do desire some things that never get delivered in quite the way I had anticipated. Sometimes I'm so convinced of the absolute rightness of an idea that I forget one critical step: "Thy will be done." It's like my friend Dick has said: We sometimes present so many wonderful, ideal possibilities or recommendations to the Lord and then wait to see if he chooses A, or B, or even C or D. And the Lord chooses N or Q, and that makes all the difference, even when we don't immediately understand why.

One thing I didn't take into account in those years long ago was a verse from the Book of Mormon: "And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you" (3 Nephi 18:20). I hadn't yet learned the part about "which is right."

The same thing is taught in other verses, too. The Savior said: "Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you" (Moroni 7:26). King Benjamin reminds us: "And now, if God, who has created you, on whom you are dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another" (Mosiah 4:21).

It's not always easy to know what is right and good, to honestly say to Heavenly Father in our prayers, "Thy will be done." We get the feeling that a certain magic wand would be just what we need, and we pray earnestly, only to realize at some point that perhaps God knew all along that it wasn't best for us.

I went through an interesting exercise in understanding the Lord's will when I lost my scriptures on February 7, 1991. I wasn't too concerned right at first. When I realized at my office that they were missing, I knew they must be at home, or in the car, or in Salt Lake City at the Relief Society Building. I knew I would get them back. My name was in them. When I said to someone, "I lost my scriptures," they'd ask, "Well, where did you put them?" If I knew where I had put them they wouldn't be lost, but people still asked that question.

The last time I remembered having them was after a meeting at the Relief Society Building. My hands were full, and I stuck the scriptures, in their plastic holder-with-a-handle, on the top of the car. So I got thinking perhaps I had left them there. Agh! It was like the story of a family cruising down the freeway on their vacation. The wife looks over at the husband and asks, "Where's little Ralphie?" Oh no! He's on top of the car in his little holder, loving this vacation, his hair sticking straight out and drool going fifty-five miles an hour for miles behind him!

Anyway, it was a few days before I became concerned. Then I slowly realized that my scriptures weren't in any of the places where I thought they might be. Still I remained somewhat calm. Surely they would come back. Someone would find them and see my name and address and get in touch. Each time I drove to or from the Relief Society Building I looked carefully, going the same way I always went. I didn't want them to be in a ditch or alongside the road somewhere.

My next step was to imagine that, yes, someone had found my scriptures, and they were reading them, and they were in the process of conversion, and when they were ready to be baptized, they would get in touch, and it would be a fabulous story with an incredibly happy ending. Yes, that was what was happening. My scriptures were busy doing their thing.

But I missed them. I hadn't realized how much I liked them, that one particular set. I had gone through the trauma of switching to the new editions, giving up the Bible and the triple combination that my parents had given me long years before and that I had taken with me on my first mission. These new ones had been on a couple of missions with me. They had been to Asia and Africa. They smelled like mold, and it made me homesick and nostalgic whenever I caught their scent. I missed all the things I had written in the margins. I missed the way they seemed to pop open to just what I needed.

Of course I prayed for those scriptures. I'd had the magic-wand experience already, so I wasn't demanding or anything. I just let Heavenly Father know that I missed my scriptures and would sure love to get them back. And although I probably didn't exactly say, "Thy will be done," I did say, "If it's possible" or "If it's a good idea" or "If it would be okay." Of course, I couldn't imagine a single reason why it wouldn't be a wonderful idea for me to get them back.

Days passed and then weeks. I remembered a lot of things about scriptures in my life. Like when I was little and people used to get up in church meetings and say how much they loved the scriptures and I used to think things like, "That's a big, fat lie." I would try to read them. I don't think we were encouraged then as much as we are now to study our scriptures. People used to joke that if all the Mormons took their copies of the Book of Mormon off their shelves at the same time and blew off the dust, there would be an eclipse.

Sometimes I would start reading and get Lehi and his family out in the desert and then get bored with all they were doing. I got impatient with their having to send the boys back for plates and people. Why didn't they think of those things in the first place? Didn't Jerusalem sell day planners?

When I got a little older, I got some encouragement from seminary. I set a goal to have my black, paperback copy of the Book of Mormon all red. (That's red, not read.) My desire was to have other people look over when I opened the book and be impressed out of their minds because I had colored the whole thing red. I didn't particularly care at the time what was in it, but I sure wanted to impress others. I used my ruler and a whole bunch of red marking pens, and wow! It was impressive, all right. I kept it as a reminder, and when I look at it now I realize that the only parts that stand out are the parts I left white. Ha.

Well, general conference was getting closer, and I still had not found my scriptures. Eventually it was as if the still small voice said something to me like, "Edmunds, get a grip. They're gone. You've got to get some more." And so I did. Shortly before conference I bought a whole set. I tried to like them—not very hard, but I did try. They weren't user friendly. They wouldn't pop open to the right place. They didn't smell like mold. Nothing was written in the margins. And for some reason I didn't write my name in them. Not yet. I did take them to conference and other places with me. I tried to bond with them. It wasn't working.

A few days after conference, when my real scriptures had been gone two months, I had a feeling that I wanted to pray about them again. I hadn't mentioned them in several weeks because I didn't want to be too pushy. But on an evening in April when I knelt to pray I included something about my scriptures. I said to Heavenly Father, "I know You can see them." I knew He knew where they were. I didn't say it like, "So why haven't You brought them back?" It was just something I knew. And I asked for the last time about getting them back. He knew it was the last time. I mentioned how much I had missed them and how I hadn't realized how much that particular set meant to me. I thanked Him for not being mad at me for bringing it up again and told Him I would let go if for some reason they couldn't come back. I wouldn't bother Him again about that particular subject.

The next morning I got to the Missionary Training Center early. Since the door near my office was locked, I walked through the lobby. I decided to check my mailbox while I was so near the front desk. In it was a green slip, one of those forms that says "An item for you that would not fit in your mailbox has been placed above the mailboxes. The item is . . ." The blank was filled in with red pen: "your scriptures." What?

I looked up, and sure enough, there they were. No plastic cover, but I recognized them instantly. I grabbed them and ran down the hall to my office. I hardly had time to shut and lock the door before I started crying—hard. I knelt and thanked Heavenly Father for answering my prayers. Imagine how Heavenly Father can look down on all His billions of children and pick us out, one by one, knowing our names and our needs, and responding in such unusual (sometimes we say "mysterious" when we don't comprehend the particulars), specific, remarkable, miraculous ways. I keep the green slip inside my scriptures (it now smells a little like mold too) and it reminds me of many things but mostly of how loving and patient and merciful God is with us and how well He knows each of us.

Heavenly Father didn't give me a magic wand, but He has been unfailingly generous in giving me many other things. He always answers me, even though sometimes He says no, or later, or we'll see. I have come to the realization that too many times in my life when He has said no, as with the magic wand, I've been convinced that my prayers weren't answered. Not so. There are things I have prayed for with all my heart, as hard and earnestly as I knew how, and then I've had to trust that the prayer will be answered but maybe not with the answer I hoped for.

Incidentally, my dear friend Subandriyo (we call him Yoyo) from Indonesia happened to be at general conference that year. When I saw him after I had found my scriptures, I asked if he had a set in English. He said no, but he surely would like one someday. Not all the books have been translated into Indonesian, and he enjoys things like the Topical Guide. I told him about my experience and gave him my newly purchased scriptures, saying how nice it was that I would just happen to have an extra set. He smiled as only he can and said, "Oh, Sister, the Lord works in mysterious ways. He knew that Yoyo needed some English scriptures." Yes, He did.

Elder H. Burke Peterson has said, "I wonder sometimes if we are willing to pay the price for an answer from the Lord" (Ensign, January 1974, p. 19). He made me wonder what the price might be for an answer from the Lord. Listening? Obeying? Working hard to know what is right and good? Thanking Him more often and more genuinely? Elder Peterson also said that "prayer is the preparation for miracles." And indeed it is. I have experienced many miracles in my life—precious, small things and a few rather big things. Yet some things that I thought would happen haven't.

I worked through some concerns about all of this when I was serving as a missionary. I thought that if I worked hard enough, prayed with enough faith, and did the best I could, Big Miracles would happen. I think I wanted to be able to write a journal entry something like this:

"One day we got up, and we were prompted to eat rice for breakfast, and then we felt we should go tracting, and then we saw some clouds in the sky that formed a house number, and we went there, and a family was sitting in their living room dressed all in white, waiting for us, and they had their tithing in a powdered milk can, and they'd had a dream, and we were in the dream, and they recognized us immediately, and we started telling them about Joseph Smith, and the wife burst into tears because her great-great-great-grandmother had found a Joseph Smith tract in the Old Country as she was digging up her yams, and it was in her tribal language, which, incidentally, is not one of the ninety-eight languages in which the tract is currently printed . . ."

Well, that didn't happen to me. But before I became a missionary I thought it likely would. I had listened to many missionaries give their homecoming messages, and when two years' experiences are condensed into twenty minutes, you hear of some wonderful miracles. I found that missionary work is work—hard work, hour by hour, day by day—and that even though I prayed for people with all my heart, things didn't always work out the way I hoped. And yet I have seen many miracles, and I am awfully glad I kept journals on my missions, because you don't always know when you're at the beginning of, or in the middle of, or are some other part of a miracle. There's not always a loud announcement from heaven: "Here it comes! This is it!" Miracles are usually quiet, wonderful, and easily missed.

At the BYU Women's Conference on March 12, 1987, Sister Pat Holland shared some profound thoughts about prayer: "[Prayer] ought not to seem just a convenient and contrived miracle, for if we are to search for real light and eternal certainties, we have to pray as the ancients prayed. We are women now, not children, and are expected to pray with maturity. The words most often used to describe urgent, prayerful labor are wrestle, plead, cry, and hunger. In some sense, prayer may be the hardest work we will ever be engaged in, and perhaps it should be. It is pivotal protection against becoming so involved with worldly possessions and honors and status that we no longer desire to undertake the search for our soul" (On Earth as It Is in Heaven [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989], pp. 88-89).

Why don't we just talk and share more with our Heavenly Father? Do you think maybe sometimes we don't really believe that God does hear and understand us and that He will actually answer us? Are we nervous about talking to Him? I'm convinced that our Heavenly Father doesn't sit somewhere up there watching for us to make mistakes, watching for our imperfections—He's not trying to catch us doing something wrong. He wants to catch us doing things that are right and good, and then He says, "Way to go! You're all right!"

Too many of us seem to think of God as being disappointed or disgusted with us. We prayed for a magic wand. He said no. There can be no hope from now on. No, I don't think that's how it is. He allows us to learn and progress. He is pleased with our progress, our increase in awareness, our desire to truly communicate with Him.

It's unfair to imagine that God has anything but unconditional love for us, His children. He wants us to succeed. He does listen, understand, and respond to all the yearnings of our souls and each prayer we offer. There is nothing you or I could do that would cause God to stop loving us. Nothing. His love is unconditional, and we work to have that same kind of love for others.

It strikes me as pure genius that Heavenly Father asks us to pray for our enemies. Think of someone you've been mad at or feel far away from, and not just geographically. Include that individual in your prayers. Say his or her name. Pray to understand the person, to love him or her more, to think of just the right thing to do or say. What happens to you inside?

A headline in a news article from the Provo Daily Herald of January 13, 1994, caught my eye: "Try praying this year." Amazing. The article started out: "Looking for a happier New Year? A recent university study examining what contributes to a greater sense of well-being found a curious factor: certain types of prayer." Well, what do you know. A sociologist had surveyed over five hundred adults and had come up with the idea that prayer makes a difference. "Frequent prayer heightens happiness, general life satisfaction, and religious satisfaction." True. With or without a survey, it's true.

We have a living, real Heavenly Father who wants to hear from us—often. It would be wonderful if we could talk to Him now the way we'll talk to Him when we see Him again—if we could just be real and genuine, open and trusting. Listening. Thanking. Asking. Waiting. Knowing He'll never ask us to do anything stupid, anything we can't do, anything that doesn't matter. He asks that we ask, seek, and knock, and He promises to respond. And God has never broken a promise.
