Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 6

Beatrice

I went to sixth grade in the new East Elementary. We had to cross Main Street to get there, but other than that it was a great place. Many of my best friends had transferred there with me the year before when the school was first opened. I liked all the space around the school—there was plenty of room for games of war during recess.

One day when I came home from school my mother asked me an interesting question: "Is Beatrice in your class?" I answered yes in a tone like "Who wants to know?" She said, "Tell me about Beatrice," so I told her that Beatrice had a crooked back and heart trouble. Mom asked me to tell her more and then asked questions seemingly aimed at finding out whether or not I was a friend to Beatrice—if I was aware of her and kind to her.

Mom asked what I did at recess, and I answered with enthusiasm, "We play war!" She asked what Beatrice did at recess. "She watches us play war." "Doesn't she play with you?" "No, she just watches us. She has a crooked back and heart trouble so she can't play war." Mom said, "Does anyone spend time with her, or is she alone?" I explained (trying to be patient) that we were all busy playing war, and Beatrice just sat and watched us.

Mom said something like, "Well, that must get very lonely, just watching everyone else play. Don't you ever spend time with her?" I couldn't believe she didn't already know or guess the answer to that one. "Mom! I'm a general!" We took safety pins and wrapped different colors of yarn around them to indicate our rank. I had three or four of those safety pins, indicating that I was a general.

Mom didn't comprehend the significance of my being a general. "Well," she persisted, "I just think it would be kind if you spent some time with Beatrice. I don't think it's right that she should spend all her time alone at recess. I think she must get lonely sometimes." I guess Mom thought it was no great thing to be a general—that it didn't take much effort. I tried to explain to her that if I didn't play hard every recess there was no way I could continue being a general. It was a Big Deal.

But her words stayed with me. I began to notice Beatrice watching us at recess, mostly sitting alone quietly. Once I even went and sat down beside her and talked for a few minutes. She was nice. But then I had to get back to the war; generals might be needed at any moment.

Some time went by, and then one day Mom asked, "Was Beatrice in class today?" I said that she wasn't and that she hadn't been at school for several days. Mom asked, "Do you know where she is?" I didn't know that Mom knew where she was and just wanted to find out if I knew. I answered something like, "Maybe she died." Mom said, "No, no, she hasn't died. But she's very sick, and she's home, and they're going to have to take her to the Primary Children's Hospital to have surgery." I didn't know that.

Then Mom said she was going to go visit Beatrice and wondered if I wanted to go along. I responded, "But Mom—she lives in Dog Town!" We probably called that part of the city Dog Town for several reasons: Some of the roads weren't paved yet, and not all the families had indoor plumbing. I was wondering what would happen if any of my soldiers saw their general in Dog Town. Mom finally said, "I'll just go alone then."

Well, I couldn't let my mother go to Dog Town alone. I thought about it for a while and then said, "Mom, I'll go with you." She said, "Why don't you take some of your toys to Beatrice. They have a lot of children and not much money, and I'm sure she'd appreciate getting something from you that she could play with and maybe take to the hospital with her." Oh my. Giving up toys. This was a big request.

Then I remembered that my younger sister Charlotte wasn't home. I gathered a few of her toys in a sack and called downstairs to let Mom know I was ready. She wasn't finished with me, though. "Mary Ellen, why don't you take Beatrice one of your favorite toys. If it's one of your favorite toys I'm sure she'd enjoy it too." Oh, yikes. Now what would I do?

I couldn't imagine taking Beatrice my very favorite toy, my Grasshopper Hospital. Oh, what a fun, fun toy! Mom didn't want it at our place, and we didn't have a very good front porch for it anyway. But Uncle Leo and Aunt Irene had the perfect porch for my hospital, so I had set it up there.

I would capture grasshoppers and throw them on the ground, usually on cement. Splunk! Of course they'd be injured and need hospitalization. I had made some little beds from cardboard, and I would put each grasshopper on a bed. I used toilet paper for blankies and covered them up. Then, because I had learned lots of words from my dad, a doctor, I knew exactly what to write on the chart by each 'hopper: "Critical," "Coma," "Stroke," "Serious," and so on. And I watched over the grasshoppers.

Sometimes they would start to get better and act like they didn't want to remain in bed! So down they'd go again: "Kaplunk!" And back to bed. Some of them quit participating. They died. So I had to open up a little cemetery in Grandma Chamberlain's backyard. I buried a lot of grasshoppers and other critters in that cemetery as the years went by.

Anyway, I knew I couldn't transport this favorite toy, my Grasshopper Hospital, over to Beatrice's house. And who knows if her mother would have let her keep it anyway. I didn't want to put those 'hoppers in any kind of danger, after all.

My next-favorite toy at the time may not seem significant to those who didn't grow up BTV (Before Television). It was a numbers game, the kind where you have numbers from one to fifteen in a little plastic case, and the object of the game is to shift the numbers around so you get them in order either horizontally or vertically. I loved setting world records, although no one ever knew about the records I set.

It was not with a burning sense of charity that I put my numbers game in the sack with Charlotte's toys. But at the same time, I know it didn't occur to me that I could get another numbers game if I gave this one to Beatrice. I was really giving it away; this was a true sacrifice if not exactly a charitable one.

I was ready now, so I went down and got in the car with Mom, and we drove over to Dog Town. I hadn't ever been to Beatrice's house before, and it caught me off guard when we pulled up in front. "This is where she lives?" "Yes." "Mom, it's so small!" "I know." "How many live here?" "They have nine children, I think." "Eleven people live in this small place?" "Yes." "Mom, that would be worse than sharing a room with Charlotte!" "Almost."

We went in, and it seemed like there were beds everywhere. There were no more than three rooms. I was looking around in amazement, probably with my mouth wide open and a stupid look on my face. This was a brand-new experience for me. I saw Beatrice in one of the beds, looking quite small and rather pale.

Finally my mother rescued me from my shock. "Beatrice, Mary Ellen brought you some toys." "Oh, yes!" I recovered somewhat and went over to the bed and handed her the sack. She looked inside and saw the numbers game right there on top. She was excited. "Oh, I've always wanted one of these," she said, and she pulled it out and began to experiment with it.

Something happened inside of me at that moment—something significant. I was too tough to let it show on the outside, but in my heart something very important and good was happening. I felt happy. I felt I'd done something that mattered. I felt close to Beatrice and close to my mom. The general was having a softening-of-the-heart experience.

I don't remember much else about the visit to Beatrice. I don't remember the ride home or anything that my mother might have said to me or that I might have said to her. I do remember that Beatrice went to the Primary Children's Hospital. Her picture was on the cover of the Church News as one of the first patients in the new facility.

My mother had me write to Beatrice. I didn't know what to say. "Hi. How's the food? Are they nice to you? Is it fun to have so many operations?" I'd write things like that, and she would answer. Sometimes when she had a break from the hospital her mother would bring her to visit us. She never came back to our school, though, and gradually we lost track of each other.

Many years later, KSL Radio advertised a contest they were running as some kind of promotion for a bank. It was called Citizen of the Week. You nominated someone as the Citizen of the Week, and if that person won, you and your nominee each received fifty dollars in a savings account at the bank.

"Hey, this is great," I thought. "I'll nominate my mother!" So I wrote up some things about her, like how she was a Silver Beaver and a nurse and all. I thought of a lot of excellent things to include. And she won! For a whole week on KSL Radio they said things like, "Ella M. Edmunds of Mapleton, Utah, is our Citizen of the Week. She was nominated by her lovely and talented . . ." Okay, they didn't really say those things about me, but they did mention my name.

It just so happened that our friend Beatrice was living in Salt Lake at the time, and she heard the announcement on the radio. She sent a letter to my mother and me, thanking us for the kindness we had shown to her those many years ago when she was a sometimes lonely sixth grader at East Elementary. I remember sitting in the living room with Mom, reading the letter and remembering. And it was one time when I honestly had to say, "My mother made me do it."

Beatrice and I have kept in touch since. I feel such gratitude for what she helped me learn when I was a general and CEO of the Grasshopper Hospital and hadn't yet had much of a taste of compassion. She seems to have forgiven me for all the times when I ignored her, when I was more concerned about being a general than being a Christian.

A few years ago I felt that I wanted to thank Beatrice specifically for the help she had given me. I had her address but not a phone number. So I wrote and asked her for her phone number. She sent it, and I called her. I said, "I want to come and go to church with you on Sunday." She seemed surprised. I explained that I had something I wanted to tell her.

She picked me up at the place where I was staying, and we drove to the chapel together. It's not possible to adequately explain my feelings as I sat visiting with her and having so many memories come flooding back. She still had a somewhat crooked back and said she still had some problems with her heart. In fact, just a couple of years before that she had had some valves replaced with mechanical devices. I could hear them clicking during the silent times at church as I sat next to her.

I loved watching her interact with her friends. Many years had gone by since I'd been with her, so we had a lot of catching up to do. She had married and had two sons. Her husband had passed away from a brain tumor. She had lived in the same small home for more than twenty-five years. Most of those years she had served as the meetinghouse librarian in her ward. Everyone knew her. I enjoyed watching and listening as she responded to questions and greeted different ward members.

We sat together in sacrament meeting, Sunday School, and Relief Society. My feelings were very tender and deep. I knew what I wanted to tell her, but I didn't know quite how to make it come out right.

When the meetings finished, we went back to her car. She drove me back to where I was staying, and then we began to share. I felt weepy. This was an important experience for me. I told her I wanted to bring back a memory from sixth grade and see if she remembered anything about it. I told her the whole story, including every detail I could think of. I told her about what my mom had said, and how I had started noticing her more but hadn't been as good a friend as I had since wished I had been. I told her about visiting in her home with my mom and about the numbers game.

I thanked her as honestly as I knew how for the effect she'd had in my life at a time when I so much needed to feel what I felt. I asked if she remembered that. She said she didn't, although she did remember that we had written to each other while she was in the Primary Children's Hospital. She asked, "Do you want me to tell you the first thing I remember about you?" I didn't know if I wanted her to or not; I had been such a wild, tough kid. But I decided to risk. "Yes. What do you remember about me?"

She said it was on one of our field days at school. Those were such fun days—girls got to wear pants! And we got to play outside the whole day. Beatrice remembered that we were sitting around a fire roasting marshmallows. She said, "I didn't have any. We were too poor even to buy marshmallows. And you shared yours with me."

Well, the tears came. I felt so thankful that her first memory of me wasn't something like, "You were a general, and I watched you play, day after day, wishing I could come and join you." I had shared my marshmallows. Oh, thank goodness.

Thank you, Beatrice, for the ways in which you have blessed and enriched me. Your friendship means a lot to me. You made a difference in my life. I'm glad for times when mothers and fathers and others seem to know just what we need. I'm grateful that they encourage us to do what is right and good. I'm thankful for friends and neighbors who somehow are able to be patient with us while we learn, often very slowly, how to be kinder and more aware.
