Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 7

The Wait-a-While Club

A long time ago, I figured out that my sister Charlotte generally got a lot more out of meetings than I did. She noticed things—and people—I missed. She was paying attention. I wanted to be more like her in that regard.

A related observation was that people seemed really to thrive on compliments, even (or perhaps especially) if those compliments came sometime after the fact, rather than simply on the spur of the moment. I've talked to lots of people who have treasured notes of encouragement and thanks they have received. I have several such notes myself. They arrived after a while, when someone remembered something specific about a talk or an experience and took the time to mention it.

From those two observations was born the idea of the Wait-a-While Club. It's a great club, because there are no meetings or dues. There are, however, some responsibilities. People who join the Wait-a-While Club have got to pay attention as the days go by. Members are always on the lookout for ways to lift someone—to say thanks, to give encouragement, to express love.

Several years ago I was in northern California speaking at a fireside during which I had decided to invite people to join the Wait-a-While Club. I had picked out someone sitting right on the front row to help me in a little role-playing situation. When I went to pick on her, though, some invisible hand had pushed her head down. Ooops! So I gazed down the bench a little farther and was strongly prompted to ask another woman sitting there if I could pick on her. I had noticed her before the meeting began—I was sitting in the foyer when she came in, and for some reason I watched her and wondered who she was.

I asked if I could use her for a kind of example. She nodded. I asked her what her first name was, and she answered, "Betty." I asked, "Betty, do you get nervous when you give a talk or teach a lesson or something like that?"

She hesitated momentarily and then responded, "I'm not sure—I've never done anything like that." Wow, I thought. How has she lived this long without ever giving a talk or teaching a lesson? I've gotta talk to her!

But I went on. "Let's suppose you would be nervous," I suggested, and she said it would be easy to suppose that.

My next question is usually something like, "How could I tell you were nervous?" People often give such answers as "My mouth gets dry," "My neck goes red," "I fiddle with my necklace," "My voice sounds shaky," or whatever. I mentioned that some of those things might happen to Betty, and we could then tell that she was nervous.

I said, "Let's suppose, Betty, that you have given a talk about faith. We'll pretend that I said something nice after the meeting, but we'll also pretend that I come up to you after a while. Maybe it's been a week. I ask if you have a moment to talk, and you say yes. Then I offer a specific compliment about your talk, something like this: 'Betty, thank you for your talk on faith last week. It meant a lot to me. I especially appreciated the experience you shared about you and your father and what you learned about faith. I hope you don't mind, but I wrote that in my journal.'"

I asked Betty what that might mean to her. She responded very positively, saying it would mean everything to know that someone had remembered and was helped by something specific she had said.

Then I invited everyone at the fireside to join the club. I encouraged them all to watch for opportunities to give praise and positive comments and thanks to others, particularly those who might have a special need for a lift.

After the meeting Betty waited until most of the people had left, and then she came up to say something. I hugged her (it being National Hug Day—as it is every day for me) and she whispered, "I've been out of the Church for fifty years." "Fifty years!" "Yes." "Oh, Betty, welcome back! Welcome home!" I hugged her hard.

She said with emotion, "Think of all I've missed! I have so much to learn and so much to do." I said, "That's true for all of us, Betty." I kept hugging her and saying, "Welcome back, Betty. Welcome home." I couldn't believe it; I was overcome by my feelings. She'd been away for almost as long as I had been alive. And now she had come back. She asked if I would pray for her, and I promised I would.

After I returned home I kept thinking about Betty. I had a strong desire to keep in touch with her, to let her know that I was praying for her, and to find out how she was. But I didn't even know her last name. I contacted the stake Relief Society president in California, and she helped me get Betty's address. I wrote her a letter, sharing some of my feelings and asking how she was.

I heard from Betty in August 1991. I laughed when she said she saw the Missionary Training Center envelope and thought she had been called on a mission! She wrote in her letter: "How can that be? I've only been back in the Church two months!" She told me a lot about her life, and it sure hadn't been an easy one.

She said, "I'm happy I have been on your mind. Your willingness to pray for me has put me there. As I begin my walk down that 'narrow way,' now is when I feel I most need the strength of others' prayers. So, please remember me. . . . I'm the one who was wandering in the wilderness, in absolute misery, for so many, many years."

She told me how it happened that she came back. "Every Easter I watch the TV religious programs. This past Easter was different. While watching, I felt uncomfortable, restless, and terribly sad. I cried during the Crucifixion. I had never cried before, and I'd been watching these programs for decades.

"May 31, 1991, was a Friday like any other (I thought). No one could have been more surprised than I to come home from work, walk right to the telephone directory, and call the first ward number I saw."

She said that several weeks later her cousin Dorothy mailed some baptismal information she had kept through all the years. "It was then that I saw my baptismal date of May 31, 1941!" Imagine! It's as if Someone decided that after exactly fifty years it was time to help Betty come back.

"I am currently studying my beginner and transitional lessons," Betty wrote. "My visiting teachers come every Wednesday evening." One thing that struck me was that those visiting teachers were focused on Betty, not on what "counted" or what they might get credit for. Betty mattered more than the fact that they were visiting her more often than might have been recommended in some guidelines somewhere. She needed them; so, they came.

"I have read the Book of Mormon," she continued, "and I am really learning. I am aware of that 'other' Betty disappearing and the 'new' Betty emerging." She asked me to please continue to keep her in my thoughts and prayers and "remember me especially when you hear my favorite hymn, 'I Stand All Amazed.'"

I've kept in touch with Betty. She lives in Utah now, and we've had the privilege of going to the temple together. She attends the temple each week and is working in family history. She has shared her testimony and experiences in many settings. She expresses great joy at each new thing she discovers. She read Jesus the Christ and was absolutely thrilled at what she learned about the Savior. A friend of hers, her visiting teaching companion, lends her books.

I'm grateful to Betty for helping me to have so much joy and so many interesting adventures because of my membership in the Wait-a-While Club.

In 1992 during BYU Education Week I met Robert and Alan, two buddies almost seventeen years old who came to all my classes. That surprised me. I couldn't imagine that anyone would be that interested, especially someone aged sixteen. We became friends right away. Something about them impressed me very much. I knew, for example, that they were Wait-a-While Club members. They had joined much earlier in their lives than I had. One day they gave a note to the hostess who was helping in the room. They thanked her for her efforts, telling her they noticed that everyone thanked the speaker but forgot about the help she had given. Unusual. Who were these young men?

We've kept in touch. Once they both borrowed suits and I showed them around the Missionary Training Center. They came back to Education Week in 1993 as hosts and brought some of their friends. They invited me to be present when they were ordained elders, which I was thrilled to do. Alan became an elder first, and then a few days later he helped ordain Robert. Robert is serving a mission in California now, and Alan's in Brazil. Before leaving they were team teachers for a class in family history work in their singles ward. They helped one sister submit five hundred names to the temple. I'm keeping my eyes on these club members; they're extraordinary!

I've met many lifers—people who have been in the club for their whole lives and didn't even know it. One of these is Nancy, whom I met in January 1992 when she was in the MTC preparing to go on a mission. We were talking about the club, and she said, "I think I'm a member." One of the things she does whenever she visits a ward is to look for the one who is playing the prelude music and give that person a positive comment before leaving the chapel. One time she realized that the woman who was playing the prelude music was just kind of propped up on the bench. After Nancy mentioned how much she appreciated the prelude music, the woman sat up and put her whole heart into the playing!

Nancy also told of a young man in her ward who one week had to try four times before he got the sacrament prayer right. He was extremely embarrassed. She went up to him when she got a chance and thanked him for blessing the sacrament four times. She said to him, "I wasn't ready the first three times . . . thank you for doing it four times so that I could prepare myself to partake of the sacrament with the right spirit." She told him he had helped her to have one of the most significant experiences she'd ever had in participating in that sacred ordinance. That made a big difference for him and for her. Hooray for all the members of the Wait-a-While Club!

Have you ever saved a note you've received? Maybe it was a note thanking you for something you did, or for your influence, or for some specific experience or event. Perhaps you have a memory of a phone call or a visit with someone who thanked you or remembered you in a specific way.

Can you think of people you have meant to thank? Have you waited quite a while? Are there letters you've meant to write, visits you've meant to make, phone calls on a list somewhere? Even if it's been a long, long while, it's never too late to thank someone.

Think of the people who have had a significant influence in your life. Here's a little exercise to try: sit down and give it some careful thought and then make a list of everyone you can think of who has made a difference in your life. Of course, each time we do that, we'll probably leave out someone who deserves to be on our list. Hundreds of people influence us. But it's a sweet feeling when we start to name names and remember.

Besides your family and your Heavenly Father and the Savior and the Holy Ghost, who has had the greatest influence on your life? As you write down each name, consider why you included that person on your list. Has it been a while since you made an effort to thank the people you've thought of?

Are there people in your life who have helped you whom you have never thanked? It's not like they're waiting—keeping a list and checking it off when the thank-you's pour in. But I wonder what it would mean to them to receive a note, a phone call, even a visit where that's possible. You won't be able to get in touch with some of them, certainly. Maybe they've gone Home (died). Maybe they've moved, and you've just lost track of them. Write a thank-you note anyway, even if you can't send it. It just might turn out to be one of the sweetest experiences you've had in a long time. And then try another thing: Write a letter from them to you. What would they say? What would they remember about you? What would they want you to know? What counsel might they give you?

Years ago I wrote my mother a letter as if it came from her mother, who died in 1942 when my mother was just twenty-seven years old. Mother had mentioned to me many times how much she missed her mother. I don't know where the idea came from, but I wrote her a letter as if it were from her mother, telling her how well she had done as a wife and mother as well as a daughter.

Another time I wrote a long letter to my brother Richard's first child, "little Richard," telling him all about his father. It probably meant more to me than it did to that little newborn baby (or his parents) to have had the sweet experience of writing that letter.

My list of those to whom I owe much includes my parents, of course, and I've never been able to thank them adequately for their remarkable wisdom, their patience and love, their endless second and third miles. Each brother and sister has influenced me in specific, wonderful ways. Friends, teachers, companions—people I've known almost my whole life and people who came and went in a few minutes—all have left unforgettable impressions and powerful lessons.

People I've never met have influenced me in significant ways, like Gandhi, Mother Teresa, Helen Keller and her teacher Anne Sullivan, Albert Schweitzer, and others who are quite famous. Many people know their names and feel their influence. But my list also contains many names that wouldn't be so easily recognized.

Will someone name your name some day? "She was my Primary teacher." "He was my next-door neighbor." "This is the family that welcomed me and made me feel so comfortable and safe." "She was my high school English teacher." "He wasn't just my brother; he was my friend." "It all started the day I had a flat tire on my way to school." "It might have seemed to her like a little thing, but it has made all the difference for me."

If you've been a member of the Wait-a-While Club for a while, carry on. If you're just joining, welcome. You're going to love this. And if you're still thinking about becoming a member, realizing it does take some effort, you can't imagine how much fun this is. Join us! All it takes is caring and doing, feeling and then acting upon those feelings, watching for the chance to give someone genuine praise and encouragement. The blessings will come back to you; they always, always do.
