Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 8

Aunt Florence

We learn from watching others, and often they don't even know they're providing a learning experience for us. Some of the most wonderful examples of love I have seen have come from people who didn't know I was watching.

One day when I was coming out of the BYU Creamery I witnessed a scene I'll remember forever. I saw a father and mother with their children. The father was holding one small child in his arms and had the hand of another, a little girl about three years old. The mother was headed back toward the car with a child a little older, maybe four or five, who was not a happy camper. She had apparently misbehaved and was evidently not going to be allowed to participate in the creamery experience with the rest of them.

The little one holding her dad's hand was visibly upset. "Don't! Don't make her go back!" she cried, looking up at her father and then back at her mother and sister. "She won't do it again! She's sorry!" So far she wasn't getting any results (except she had me almost in tears and the father and mother seemed to be reconsidering). Then came the clincher: "Please! She's sorry! She won't do it again! I pwomise! I pwomise!" That did it. The mother brought the sister back, and the whole team went into the creamery. I was deeply touched. Saved by a Sunbeam!

One of the most powerful seminars on love I ever attended was the funeral service for Sharmayn Ferguson several years ago. Sharmayn had cystic fibrosis and died at age eleven. She had put an amazing amount of living into those eleven years, with the extraordinary help and encouragement of her parents, Ike and Gloria, and the rest of her family, neighbors, and friends. I learned a great deal about love from Sharmayn's life. I had seen her many times. Often she went with her dad to ward dinners and other functions. She loved life. She packed the hours and days as full as she could. She roller-skated with an IV in her arm and played softball hooked up to a portable oxygen unit. She was unusually sensitive to others of all ages and kind and compassionate in wonderful ways. She had a hope of someday discovering a cure for something.

I sensed in the years I knew Sharmayn that she knew she wouldn't live long but had chosen not to sit around and be upset about it. She wanted to experience as much as she could, and she almost ignored her physical challenges. I loved watching the relationship between Sharmayn and her parents, her older brother, Shawn, and her little sister, Kiera. She was there when Shawn got his Eagle Scout award. That was one of her important goals. A tender account of her life, entitled "Sharmayn's Farewell," was written by her dad, Isaac Ferguson, and published in the January 1982 Ensign, page 54. Reading it will enrich you and bless you and help you understand more about love as a verb.

The same is true of an article written by my dear friend and missionary companion, Mary Jane Hawkes, about her precious little Sarah, who was able to stay with her family for only a few years. Her story is told in "Sharing Sarah: Our Down's Syndrome Baby," Ensign, June 1981, page 32. I met sweet Sarah just a couple of times, but she had a way of making it right to your heart and leaving a lasting impression of love, of a bright spirit, and of a wonderful future awaiting.

When I think about loving life, I often think of my Aunt Florence. What a happy, wonderful soul. She wasn't really my aunt but my father's second cousin, Florence Sperry. She was born in Manti, Sanpete County, Utah, on September 1, 1892. My first memories of her were in small number 29 at the Kimball Apartments on north Main Street in Salt Lake City.

Occasionally we traveled all the way from Mapleton to that big city to visit. For a while Aunt Florence cared for her father, Harry Sperry, who occupied a bed near the window. She also cared for her mother, but I have no memory of that. Florence lived alone in number 29 for about thirty-five years. She was quite a fixture in the neighborhood, and everyone in the Kimball and the Jensen apartments knew her. She was an election judge for many years and could call most of her neighbors by name (and tell more about them than they probably would have wished).

Aunt Florence was a schoolteacher. She taught music in places like the Jordan School District, Ogden, and Price. She played the violin and sang baritone—yes, baritone!—with her deep, rich voice. I loved seeing her pictures from when she sang in a male chorus and when she played the leading man in an opera.

In 1965, several months after returning from a mission, I began teaching at the Missionary Home in Salt Lake City. It was located in the old Ute Hotel, right across the street from the Kimball Apartments where Aunt Florence lived. Twice a week I went to teach at the Missionary Home and visited with Aunt Florence in number 29. Sometimes she needed me to run some errands, such as shopping for a few groceries at the store on the northwest corner of North Temple and Main.

On Tuesday evenings I went to Aunt Florence's before I taught, because it was late by the time I finished, and I was teaching nursing at BYU at the time and had to be at the hospital with students by 6:15 A.M. on Wednesdays. So I visited Aunt Florence before teaching and then headed straight home when I finished at the Missionary Home. One Tuesday when I finished teaching at about 9:15 P.M., I had a strong impression that I should go back across the street to Aunt Florence's. I resisted it at first because I'd already had a good visit with her, I was tired, and it was a long drive back to Provo.

The impression became stronger, and finally I obeyed. When I knocked on her door she called out, "Oh, Mary Ellen! Is that you?" She had fallen and couldn't get up. She'd been praying that I would come back, even though I usually didn't. She needed me to go to the office, get a key to her apartment, and come back and help her. I did so immediately and stayed with her a little while. We both cried about that answer to her prayer.

Aunt Florence and I grew very close during the years I taught at the Missionary Home and visited her each week. We had such fun during our visits. Sometimes when I knocked she made extra sure it was me before she would open the door because, she would protest, "I don't have my eyebrows on yet!" She was a large woman who looked terrific when she dressed up.

Often I found Aunt Florence sitting near the window, writing something in one of her many notebooks. She kept track of the weather each day, among many other things. And she had some soap operas that she followed for years. She couldn't stand to miss them. When she stayed with us in Mapleton she had to plan everything around those programs. That was before VCRs, and she couldn't skip one episode for fear she would miss something critical or get behind on the story. She talked about the people in the soaps as if she knew them personally.

Another thing Aunt Florence kept track of was the Utah Stars, then our state's professional basketball team. They were born in Salt Lake City in about 1970, and she became an instant fan. She listened to every single game on her radio and soon was crazy (her word) about Bill Howard, the announcer, and "Z," Zelmo Beatty, one of the players. Even hospitalization didn't break her regular "attendance" at the Stars' games; in 1971 when she had surgery on her eye, she tuned in. One nurse remarked that Florence knew more about the team than the coach did.

Aunt Florence had a personal interest in each of the Stars' players. She talked about them as if they were her sons. She was genuinely upset when one of her favorites was traded or got injured or had an off night. In one of her small notebooks she carefully recorded the score each quarter during every game. She cut out and saved every newspaper article about the Stars. During their games she took her phone off the hook and shut out everyone and everything except the Stars and Bill Howard. She had a Stars bumper sticker plastered on the inside of her apartment door.

We suggested a few times that Aunt Florence should really go to a game in person, but by then she'd had a slight stroke and felt it was out of the question to "stumble over to the Salt Palace." Yet I could tell whenever we talked about it that she wished she could go.

Then along came Mark, a high-school senior looking for a service project for himself and some buddies in his priests quorum. It had been suggested to them that they might take Aunt Florence to see the Stars—and somehow we talked her into it. It was a long, involved process to convince her it would work. One of her stipulations in saying yes was that I would go along. We got someone to go to her place and fix her hair (she couldn't walk down to ZCMI to her favorite hairdresser anymore) and help her decide what to wear.

On Tuesday, February 26, 1974, Mark, John, Bruce, and Jeff, Aunt Florence's dates, picked her up. A night to be remembered was under way. All the effort of the planning was worth it just for the look on Aunt Florence's face when she first met Bill Howard and Zelmo Beatty, both of whom made quite a fuss over her. Later she said, "When I found out who Bill Howard was, I nearly ate him up!" Bill was extremely kind and gracious to his loyal fan. He even interviewed her at halftime on the radio.

When the team came out to warm up, big Zelmo came running right over to Aunt Florence, shook her hand, and signed her program. "I just couldn't believe my eyes when I saw that big tall handsome 'Z' coming toward me!" she exclaimed.

I kept notes during the game, wanting to capture some of this magical evening forever. "Oh, aren't they geniuses?" "Isn't he quick!" "On some of the road trips Willie hasn't played his regular game, but just look at him tonight. Isn't he a whiz?" "Oh boy, this is fun!" "Oh no! They called a foul on our Johnny, didn't they!" "Zelmo has trouble with his knees. They take him out to let him rest. He's the oldest one on the team. Bill calls him 'the old man.'"

Even though she was thrilled at being there, she missed her radio. "Oh, how I wish I could hear Bill," she lamented. "This is the first broadcast I've missed. He just guides me all the way through the game." "I'm wondering who the refs are tonight. There are a couple I resent like the devil." "I can't wait to get the paper tomorrow!" "Wait till I call Sis tomorrow!" "When people find out I was here, they'll say, 'Well, she's still kicking!' Who ever dreamed . . ."

Her four handsome dates seemed to enjoy Aunt Florence as much as the game. When she told them how much fun she was having, one of them remarked, "I'll bet we're having a better time than you are, Florence." She just couldn't imagine why four young men would want to dress up "fit to kill," as she put it, and take an old lady to a game.

Too soon it was over, and one young man got on either side of Aunt Florence and started the long walk back to the car. Aunt Florence was flying high as she told them of her youth and her teaching days. They couldn't believe it when she told them how she had sung the tenor lead, Thaddeus, in Bohemian Girl, but she described the opera and even sang parts of her two favorite arias. They laughed at her description of the homemade tuxedo she wore when she sang tenor in the Ogden male chorus.

Mark pulled the car as close as possible to the apartment so Florence wouldn't have to walk as far. Then suddenly John asked if she'd like to go get a Big Mac, and her eyes lit up. As we headed that direction, Jeff asked her if she had liked the game. Florence answered, "I'll never forget this night!" As we got close to our destination, Florence said, "I'll get a Big Mac if you'll let me pay for it." Jeff quickly responded, "Now, Florence, we don't wanna hear any more talk like that out of you. You're on a date!"

The food was purchased, and we all sat down around the same table. Florence took a look at her Big Mac and root beer and laughed. "Great big pig me—here I am with a great big Big Mac. Here's for my health! You boys help me eat it; I can never finish this whole thing." But she did, and she ate the whole order of fries besides.

Aunt Florence told the young men a few of her favorite jokes; she was famous for the jokes she knew and the way she told them. She had the boys laughing constantly. I marveled at the collapse of any generation gap between those high-school seniors and an eighty-one-year-old woman. She told them, "I have a friend who had a stroke, and she can't talk. It'd kill me if I couldn't talk!" They got a kick out of that. She had been talking nonstop the whole evening, and they were loving it.

When the boys took her back to number 29 at the Kimball, Florence couldn't seem to find the right words to tell them thank you. Bruce told her they would be back to have family home evening with her, and John said, "Florence, we're going to remember this night for the rest of our lives." She could hardly speak, but she managed to say that she'd never forget it, either.

After they left she sank in her chair and shook her head. She kept wondering aloud, "Who did all this magic?" She reviewed all that had happened, hardly able to believe that it had happened. She had to take a sleeping pill so she could settle down after it was all over. I suppose the only thing that could have made it a more perfect evening would have been for the Stars to win the game. In the months that followed she kept reliving that one wonderful, magical night.

Aunt Florence had a wonderful sense of humor. I can still hear her laugh. She got a big kick out of life, herself, and her surroundings. After she'd had one of her strokes and had a little trouble speaking and getting around, she received a letter calling her to jury duty. She was not pleased. Jury duty was something she had always thought she would enjoy, and she was upset that they had waited to invite her until she was unable to do it. I helped her write her letter of response. She explained her disappointment, for after preparing her whole life for just such an opportunity, watching Perry Mason and all the other courtroom shows, by the time they invited her she was no longer able to speak clearly or get around well, so she had to decline.

Finally Florence had to go to a nursing home. It was a very hard thing to do, but there just wasn't any way to avoid it. She could no longer take care of herself in her little apartment. We kept the apartment for her for a long time, hoping she might rally and be able to return. I stayed there alone several times and missed her so much. It was touching to look around that small, small space and think about all her adventures—about the long and fascinating life of Florence Sperry.

When she was eighty-four, she received a letter inviting her to a sales presentation about condominiums and offering her a free gift: her choice of either a beautiful, twenty-piece set of china or an extra-deluxe chain saw. This was her response (with help from my mother and me):

"Dear Mr. Johnston:

"I just received your marvelous letter about the unique condominiums that you have in Park City and Hawaii. Living as I do in a nursing home, you can imagine how delighted I'd be to live in Park City or Hawaii instead. I don't know how I was lucky enough to get on your mailing list, but what a thrill!

"One thing I'm very excited about is the chain saw. It's just what I need here at the nursing home when we work on crafts. Maybe they'll let me start coming again when they realize I've got such a nice saw; I had to quit going because I wasn't participating. I've missed it.

"Another thing I need to mention is that when you fly me over to Hawaii, I'll have to go first class. I've had several strokes, and I just can't seem to hold my legs together anymore, so I'll need the extra space.

"Thanks again for thinking of me here in the nursing home. I think that's great! Owning something for 'the rest of my life,' as you put it, sounds terrific since I'm only 84!"

We can only imagine what it was like for those who received that letter from Aunt Florence.

Some months after Florence passed away, a letter from the IRS arrived saying she hadn't paid her taxes for 1979. Unless she had reasonable cause for delay, she might be liable for penalties. The letter said, "If you believe you had reasonable cause for filing late and for paying late, please explain. We have enclosed an envelope for your use. Thank you for your cooperation."

There was no way we were not going to respond to that letter. My mother called me the minute she got it. As we worked on the reply, we could almost hear Florence's distinctive, infectious laugh mingled with ours. Under 'I did not file the form because,' we checked the 'Business was closed' box. In the remarks section we wrote:

"Yes, business was closed permanently on June 9, 1980. I'd not had an income for quite some years prior to that because I was in a nursing home. I know it is unusual to be getting a letter from me now that I'm dead, but I didn't want to mess up your records. I know how important they are to you. It was only with very special permission that I was able to send this note from the Other Side. I must say it's a lot more fun here where there aren't any taxes, but despite that I do wish you well in your work. I know a lot of people don't fully appreciate what you do, but now that I've got a new perspective (as they say) I know you work hard. By the way, in case anyone there is interested, everything they say is true—you've got to work there for what you get here, if you know what I mean. Tell the guys in the office to get with it. Thanks again for your inquiry and for providing the envelope." I wish we could have watched and listened when the team at the IRS received that letter.

I can hardly wait to see Aunt Florence again; what a happy reunion that will be. It's hard to estimate the influence of that great soul on my life and the life of our family. I spoke at her funeral, trying to capture some of the essence of a unique and wonderful woman—trying, if inadequately, to pay tribute to dear Aunt Florence. For her life, and Sharmayn's and the little Sunbeam's at the creamery and for the lives of all those who touch us every day, I give thanks. As we sing in hymn number 293, each life that touches ours for good reflects the Lord's love for us.
