Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 9

On the Way to a Miracle

I was on Interstate 15 heading for Salt Lake City to teach at the Missionary Home early on a Sunday morning when something went wrong with my car. I couldn't steer it properly. I pulled over to the side of the road and got out to inspect. Sure enough, a flat tire. Yikes! I knew how to change tires but wasn't much in the mood to do so in my Sunday clothes and in a hurry to get to my meeting.

Lots of people passed without stopping. Many looked as if they were on their way to important meetings too. Some of them seemed to feel bad for me. The looks on their faces indicated they hoped someone would stop—someone who wasn't on the way to a meeting or an appointment.

And then they came toward me—three men in an old truck. They weren't in a hurry. They pulled right over and hopped out to see if they could help. What's more, they made it seem as if they were glad I had a flat tire so they could stop and help. They didn't make me feel stupid or unskilled or any such thing.

As I watched and listened and visited with the men I decided to tell them about all the cars that had passed. One of the men laughed and said, "Oh, those are the church people. They're all on their way to a meeting. It's Sunday. They don't have time to stop and help."

I thought, And we're usually on our way to a meeting where we'll discuss the importance of loving our neighbors as ourselves and doing good to others, and how much we need to serve and help one another. I found myself wondering, hard, how many times I had been too busy to stop and help.

I thanked the men sincerely for their help. I know they weren't the Three Nephites, but they were three very kind and helpful neighbors who not only fixed my tire but helped me learn an important lesson. I'd like to be more like them.

One day the Savior was on his way to a miracle. He was responding to a request from Jairus, the ruler of a synagogue, whose only daughter was dying. The people thronged about Jesus as He went along, and a woman who was ill touched the hem of His garment. He stopped. He responded kindly and lovingly to that needy, seeking soul. He comforted her and healed her, and then He continued to Jairus's home. Someone came toward Him from there to let him know that the daughter had already died. Jesus went to the home anyway and restored her to life (see Luke 8:41-56).

The Savior stopped on his way to a miracle to give attention and help to another in need. He did that many times in His ministry.

In 3 Nephi 17 we read about the visit of the Savior to the Nephites. He had been instructing them and asked that they return to their homes to ponder upon what He had said, ask the Father in His name for understanding, and prepare their minds for His return. He then said, "But now I go unto the Father, and also to show myself unto the lost tribes of Israel" (3 Nephi 17:4).

After Jesus said that, He looked on the people and saw that they were weeping and looking "steadfastly upon him as if they would ask him to tarry a little longer with them" (3 Nephi 17:5). And He did. He stopped, with deep compassion and mercy, and remained with them. He had them bring their sick to Him to be healed. He called their little children to Him; He prayed in such a marvelous way that His words could not be written; He wept with them; He blessed their little children one by one and prayed for them; He instituted the sacrament among them. Marvelous things happened because the Savior stopped and remained with them.

How often have you stopped in the hall at school or church, in the parking lot, on your way to a nap, on a busy day—stopped to answer the phone, to visit a neighbor, to listen to a friend in need, to respond to a prompting of the Spirit? Parents do that over and over and over. So do aunts, uncles, neighbors, big and little sisters and brothers, strangers, bus drivers, store clerks, crossing guards, sports heroes, and many others.

Oh, how we need more Christians like those: people who are willing to stop. We all have so many more opportunities to do good and to be good than we respond to. My parents used to say to me in many situations, "What would Jesus do?" That wasn't always what I wanted to hear (I remember thinking, "I want to know what Porter Rockwell would do!"), but it was a lasting lesson for me. What would Jesus do? He would stop. On His way to a miracle, a meeting, an appointment, He would—and did—stop.

Once we have an opportunity to stop, it's too late to try to find some instruction book or to attend a seminar on how to respond. What and who we are is what is needed. No manual or handbook can tell us how to respond in those moments when one individual needs us and we have a chance to help. We need to get ready ahead of time. We can prepare spiritually by learning what's in the Lord's "handbook" and practicing working with the Spirit. We can all become better at responding to those sweet, still, small promptings.

During 1993, a wonderful companion with whom I served in Indonesia came to America to attend the temple and visit some people she had known in Indonesia. Her name is Endang (rhymes with song rather than sang). She had saved and waited for a long, long time—nearly twenty years—for this chance to come to the temple. It was her first trip away from her own country, and almost everything was new to her.

Endang first went to Arizona to stay with the Wadsworths, a couple she had helped by interpreting for them when they were serving in Indonesia. She went to the Mesa Temple again and again. She did work for her mother and others in her family in addition to receiving her own endowment. She said that when she was able to go through the ceremony without any help, the temple workers cried. They had become accustomed to seeing her there day after day.

She came to Provo by way of other places and other temples, and I had the privilege of spending some time with her. We went to the Provo Temple, the eighth one she had been in during her time in America. We sat in the celestial room and cried, both of us wanting so much to live so that we can sit down together in the celestial kingdom together someday. Lucy Mack Smith said something tender about that at an early Relief Society meeting in Nauvoo: "We must cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another, and give instructions that we may all sit down in heaven together."

Endang went with me to sisters' meeting one Sunday at the Missionary Training Center, and I invited her to offer the opening prayer (in Indonesian) and then share her testimony. How tender and wonderful her words were. She spoke of this being her first time in America and what a big decision it was to come. She explained that she didn't even know how to use a telephone or get water from a tap. Yet she felt Heavenly Father helping her. What a blessing it was to be with her and to relive so many memories of our time together. She is currently teaching seminary and institute classes in Solo, Central Java.

Endang and I had an extraordinary experience while we were touring the Relief Society building with Nan and Joy, two other friends who had also served as missionaries in Indonesia. I knew that the Primary presidency and general board were having a meeting, and I hesitated for a moment to interrupt them. But I kept thinking what a blessing it would be for Endang to meet them and for them to meet her. So I took courage and tapped on the door.

They welcomed us instantly, and President Michaelene P. Grassli got up immediately and hugged Endang tight. When Endang realized this was the president of the Primary for the whole Church she just kept gasping and exclaiming, "Oh my! Oh my goodness!" They all sang the "Hello" song to her and then "I Love to See the Temple."

I learned a great, important lesson from that experience. Those women weren't just talking about being kind and reaching the one—they did it. They stopped what they were doing and showed that people really do matter more than meetings. Later it occurred to me that they could easily have said something like, "I'm sorry, we just don't have time right now. We're having this important meeting on how important it is to help Heavenly Father's children. Sorry." I'm grateful for the lesson they taught through their example of stopping and focusing on what and who mattered most—in this instance, Endang.

When I think of people stopping, I often think of parents and others who stop to help little children. They often deny themselves quiet time, privacy, and personal projects because a child needs them. They'll read the same story, watch the same video, look at the same cloud, examine the same grasshopper, over and over again. Some of those stops create more precious memories than the quiet, private time would have. Seldom have I heard an "if only" like "If only I had cleaned the bathroom that day" or "If only I had finished that book I was reading." I have heard and felt the sorrow of "If only I had listened to him" and "If only I'd taken time to go with her." Relationships, people, are what matter most.

Several years ago I received a prompting to visit my neighbor Val. She had cancer and wasn't doing very well. I resisted. I let the still small voice know how busy I was. Thank goodness the prompting continued until I finally responded and stopped on my way home one evening. I told Val honestly that I came by because I was in the neighborhood—she and Mac lived just up the street from me. What a great time we had talking and laughing. I came away feeling renewed and wondering why I hadn't stopped sooner.

As the weeks and months went by, I visited Val regularly and we became good friends. She worked for a while at the MTC, where I also was working. She was in the bookstore and became a good friend to many missionaries. She did extra things for them and helped them overcome their homesickness and get adjusted to life in the MTC. She had a wonderful combination of kindness and humor.

When Val was told that her cancer had invaded her liver and she had only about three more months to live, she decided she was not ready for such news—she had a few more things to accomplish with her family. She decided that doctors were doctors, but Val was Val. And she made it. She lived many months longer than predicted and accomplished some wonderful things. I remember the day we talked about her making a tape for her husband and children. My cousin Ida had died of cancer, leaving six children, and had made a taped message for each of them. Val did something similar and told me it was a very tender, meaningful experience.

She had extraordinary help and support from her husband, Mac, and the rest of her family, as well as from several neighbors who gave much time and care. Her last months were not easy. They were filled with pain and suffering and many unanswered questions.

On the Wednesday before she died, I made my last visit to Val. She asked me an interesting question: "How do I get There from here?" We had talked many times about death and the life afterward, so the question didn't surprise me. I felt happy for having had some experience with death during the years I worked as a nurse. I was able to answer her honestly with what I felt was one of the most comforting, kind things God provides for us: "Someone will come to meet you—someone you love and trust. That person will show you what to do and where to go. You won't be afraid." She told me she didn't know it would be so hard to die—so hard to get from here to There.

Several days later Val passed away, and I was asked to speak at her funeral. I had a hard time expressing how much she had helped me learn and understand about life and death. I thought of a verse from the Doctrine and Covenants: "And there shall be silence in heaven for the space of half an hour; and immediately after shall the curtain of heaven be unfolded, as a scroll is unfolded after it is rolled up, and the face of the Lord shall be unveiled" (D&C 88:95). I wondered what I would think about in that last half hour when it would be all finished—no more chance to work, to serve, to repent, to put first things first.

I thought about Val as she got ready to go Home. She was thinking about her family: her husband, her children, her mother, her sister. She was thinking about Heavenly Father and the Savior and those waiting for her in another place. She was bringing back happy memories of time she had spent doing things that mattered most. I can't adequately express my thanks to Heavenly Father for the prompting to stop and learn from Val.

As we strive to become more like the Savior, we will feel closer to Him and more aware of His influence in our lives and the lives of others. For a few months of my life I lived in Nigeria, West Africa. In our branch was a precious little child whom I called Broomstick; she was seven years old and weighed all of twenty-three pounds. Often when I entered the small place we had rented to use as our chapel she would be sitting on the back bench. I loved to pick her up and take her to the front with me and hold her during the meetings. She would soak up all the love that I had in me and more—but it was always replaced and increased.

Once at Easter time I was holding my little friend when it was announced that we would sing hymn number 136, "I Know That My Redeemer Lives." I felt prompted to sing it to her. It was a powerful, sweet, unforgettable experience for me, and maybe for her as well. Those words were so meaningful and touching: "I know that your Redeemer lives. What comfort this sweet sentence gives! He lives to bless you with His love. He lives to plead for you above. He lives, your hungry soul to feed. He lives to bless in time of need. . . . He lives to comfort you when faint. He lives to hear your soul's complaint. He lives to silence all your fears. He lives to wipe away your tears. He lives to calm your troubled heart. He lives all blessings to impart. He lives, your kind, wise, heav'nly Friend. He lives and loves you to the end. . . . He lives and grants you daily breath. He lives, and you shall conquer death. He lives your mansion to prepare. He lives to bring you safely there."

That experience had an enormous effect on me. I realized that Christ does for each one of us all the things mentioned in that hymn and that He needs us to participate in the stopping and the doing.

At one point in my life, a certain phrase I included in my prayers had become so familiar that it came out rapidly and with almost no meaning. It went something like this: "Bless the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted, and those that have cause to mourn." I would almost add, "And good luck!" It didn't occur to me that perhaps I should offer to be on the team, willing to participate in the miracle of serving, comforting, and healing. Was I becoming a "minimal Mormon," a "not-quite Christian"?

I came to recognize that many of my own prayers and pleadings had been answered through other people. That's a wise plan—a plan in which we need each other, in which we are interdependent. Both those who give and those who receive are thereby blessed and come closer to their divine potential.

As President Marion G. Romney said, "There is an interdependence between those who have and those who have not. The process of giving exalts the poor and humbles the rich. In the process, both are sanctified" (Ensign, Nov. 1982, p. 93).

Leo Tolstoy put it this way: "I know that God does not desire men to live apart from each other, and therefore has not revealed to them what is needful for each of them to live by himself. He wishes them to live together, united, and therefore has revealed to them that they are needful to each other's happiness. I know now that people only seem to live when they care only for themselves, and that it is by love for others that they really live. He who has love has God in him, and is in God—because God is love."

And that great soul Helen Keller said: "I believe that love will finally establish the kingdom of God on earth, and that cornerstones of that kingdom will be liberty, truth, brotherhood, and service. I believe that we can live on earth according to the fulfillment of God's will, and that when the will of God is done on earth as it is in heaven, every man will love his fellow men and act toward them as he desires they should act toward him. I believe that the welfare of each is bound up in the welfare of all" (The Faith of Helen Keller [Kansas City, Missouri: Hallmark, 1967], p. 32).

A greeting used in Africa impresses me. One person will ask of another, "Are you well?" The response is, "I am well if you are well." It is as if they have a deep, sweet understanding of the apostle Paul's teachings in the twelfth chapter of 1 Corinthians. He teaches that we are one body with many members and that we have great and continuing need for each other—with all our variety, our strengths, our needs, our love, and our experience. And we do have great need of those "which seem to be more feeble"; they are necessary to our wholeness and our progression. "And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it" (1 Corinthians 12:26). The Savior has taught us to be one and to consider each one. We are to esteem others as ourselves (see D&C 38:24-27) and to love others as He does. Is there a better way to become more like Him?

We are needed to help prepare for the Savior to come again; we need to be prepared individually and also as a people, as a society. What are we willing to do? That's where we start: we are willing. Willing to stop on our way to a miracle, a movie, a meeting. Willing to bear one another's burdens that they may be light, to mourn with those that mourn and comfort those who stand in need of comfort. Willing to take upon us the name of Christ—to be known by and called by and worthy of such a holy, sacred name (see Mosiah 18:8-11). We are covenant people.

There are so many big and little things we can do that will increase our love, compassion, and responsiveness to the Spirit. Some of the following suggestions may be helpful:

—Visit someone who can't come to see you. The Savior used the word visit many times and also taught that great principle by example.

—Think of reasons why people do and say the things they do, especially if there are things you don't readily understand.

—Strive to avoid reacting to others in negative, angry ways.

—Practice becoming a better listener; pay attention and go beyond hearing the words to gaining understanding.

—Once a week, speak to someone whom you don't know (yet).

—Work to develop a countenance of love; strive to look at others in such a way that they know they are loved even if they have no idea who you are.

—Remember that your own sorrows and challenges can deepen your compassion and patience.

—Minimize any competition you feel toward anyone else; cooperation rather than competition will accomplish much good.

—Rejoice in the success and accomplishments of others rather than feeling envy or jealousy.

—Make it a point to relate to and associate with children and older friends often; they can share important lessons about how to be childlike and genuine.

—Seek promptings to contact someone in need; exercise the capacity to be responsive to the Spirit and to become a more effective instrument in God's hands.

—Cheerfully and willingly respond to opportunities for service even when it's inconvenient and may require sacrifice.

—Sit in a busy place once or twice a year and watch the people: their faces, their nonverbal messages, their interaction with others. Try to imagine what their challenges and burdens might be, along with their happiness.

—See if you can find someone who has a need to give, and think of something that person can do for you or teach you.

—Live more fully the law of the fast as explained so beautifully in Isaiah 58:5-12.

—Appreciate more than you expect; gratitude is an attitude.

—Think of someone specific whom you need to telephone or write a note to; decide when you will do it—within the week, on Sunday, whatever. Then stick to your decision: do it!

—Be specific in your prayers; pray about individuals who come into your heart and mind as you are communicating with your Heavenly Father. Ask Him if there is anything He needs to have you do. "Feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do" (2 Nephi 32:3).

Can we comprehend what it might be like to be invited to sit on the right hand of God at some future day because we truly fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited the sick, and administered to their relief, "both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants"? (see Matthew 25:34-40; Mosiah 4:26). May our awareness of the Savior and those for whom He suffered and died cause us to be willing to serve Him by serving others. May we come unto Jesus with broken hearts and contrite spirits, ready to participate in the needed miracles. May we ever be ready to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees" (D&C 81:5). May those who are strong be willing to help those who are weak (see Romans 15:1). May we be willing to stop and do what we can to help, even when we're on the way to a miracle.
