Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 10

Magnifying Our Talents

Sure, I took piano lessons. Didn't everyone? I hated practicing; I wanted just to play. But Mrs. Jones was quite insistent about all the scales and arpeggios, and my parents backed her up—she was, after all, one of the best piano teachers in town. So I practiced, but not often with great, swelling feelings of joy.

I always thought that magnifying talents meant you practiced and practiced until you got really good at something—so good you could show off. If you magnified your piano talent, you would soon play so well that people would be jealous of you, and your mother could leave the door open when you practiced—not the door of the living room where the piano was, but the front door. Then everyone in the neighborhood would be able to hear, and they'd be amazed and thrilled. Probably they'd come and crowd onto the front lawn just to listen to your practicing because you were so good.

Mom and Dad never were able to leave the front door open when I practiced. Alan Seegmiller's parents could and did, and I remember hearing him play and wondering how in the world he could make his fingers do all that stuff. My parents weren't able to leave the front door open until my brother Richard came along. He was the last of the eight of us, and for some reason it "took" for him. He was playing Big Stuff—the fourteen-page, hubba-hubba things—and playing it well. I used to ask him to play for my friends whenever they came over. He could play without even looking at the book. And Mom left the front door open.

Anyway, I thought magnifying talents was a very focused-on-yourself kind of thing. You got better and better and people began to notice and they asked you to play at funerals and weddings and the openings of new stores. You would accompany people who sang or played the violin, but you could also do solo numbers. Maybe you'd even get to a point where you'd charge someone two dollars to have you come and play for an event.

Sometimes I imagined myself as a person who had magnified her talents and was now approaching The Judgment Bar, having passed away in the prime of life. At some check-in point I am asked if I have magnified my talents. "Of course!" I reply. "Surely you've heard of me." Then they ask if I would like to show them. Certainly. This is no big deal. I've been showing off my whole life. They roll out the golden heavenly grand piano. I ask all the angels or whoever is there to please be quiet and respectful. And away I go. A concert for the ages. I bring everyone to tears! They welcome me in with great enthusiasm.

I have since learned that magnifying talents means something quite different. It is illustrated by a woman I met once who had taught more than two hundred piano students. Maybe that's not a record, but it's extremely impressive and in itself should assure her sainthood. Now, think of her at some check-in point in a few years. "Did you magnify your talents?" they ask, and she replies in a genuine, humble way, "I really worked at it." "Would you like to show us?" "You mean here and now?" "Yes, please." "All right." So they roll out two hundred golden heavenly grand pianos, and all those whom she has taught and helped are playing, and she's just sitting on a lawn chair eating grapes.

Part of magnifying talents is giving them away, investing in others and allowing them to be successful. It includes not being threatened by the fact that eventually someone you have taught will play the piano or do something else better than you can.

The Doctrine and Covenants teaches this wonderful truth about magnifying talents: "And you are to be equal, or in other words, you are to have equal claims on the properties, for the benefit of managing the concerns of your stewardships, every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants are just—and all this for the benefit of the church of the living God, that every man may improve upon his talent, that every man may gain other talents, yea, even an hundred fold, to be cast into the Lord's storehouse, to become the common property of the whole church—every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God" (D&C 82:17-19).

We gain talents and magnify them in order that we might be of use to God's children. When I read those verses I think of the "yea" as a "yippee yea," a celebration of the willingness of those who have to share with those in need. There's a feeling of hooray about the idea of every person being willing to share with others, to help with an eye single to the glory of God, which is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (see Moses 1:39).

The idea of magnifying talents takes me back to my childhood, when I would sit on the back porch with my little plastic magnifying glass. I could see things through that glass that I couldn't see with my naked eye. I loved looking at my hands and dirt and leaves and grasshoppers—anything that would hold still long enough—and seeing them in a different way than usual. That makes me wonder: Can God see in us things we can't see with our naked, natural eye? When He speaks of magnifying us, is part of that His ability to find talents in us that we don't know we have? Does He give us experiences that help us increase and magnify our talents so that we have more to share?

Many of our most important talents, which we seek to magnify in order to be of greater service, have nothing to do with pianos and violins and needles (those that sew or those that deliver medicine, depending on the need). The hymn "More Holiness Give Me" lists some of those greater talents, things like humility and empathy, meekness and patience, trust and joy, praise and purpose (see Hymns, no. 131). The phrases in the hymn are like a menu of ingredients in our quest to come closer to Christ and become more like Him.

As Moroni was finishing his record he invited us to seek for more holiness. "Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God" (Moroni 10:32). What does it mean to deny ourselves of all ungodliness? That could take a while. It feels like it could take forever when I think of my weaknesses and all the ways in which I want to become holier.

I've long believed that the closer we come to Christ, the more aware we are of what we yet lack in becoming like Him. At the same time, the closer we are, the more we can allow Him to help us become more perfect—more whole and complete, healed and pure. We become more able to have tears for His sorrows and pain at His grief—and to feel what causes Him sorrow and grief. We have more meekness in suffering and more praise for relief. We are increasingly aware of what He notices, what He feels, what He would have us do.

As we come closer to Christ, we respond better to the Spirit, the still small voice. We become more receptive to promptings from a Source who has an eternal view of things and knows how we can fit in and help. For we can help in significant ways, and in little, quiet ways, to rescue each other. The fact of our interdependence—our need for each other—is to me one of the most compelling realities in life.

Galatians 5:22-23 offers some descriptions of how the Spirit works, what kind of feelings come to us: "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance."

I also appreciate the description in Doctrine and Covenants 11:10-14: "Behold, thou hast a gift, or thou shalt have a gift if thou wilt desire of me in faith, with an honest heart, believing in the power of Jesus Christ, or in my power which speaketh unto thee;

"For, behold, it is I that speak; behold, I am the light which shineth in darkness, and by my power I give these words unto thee.

"And now, verily, verily, I say unto thee, put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy;

"And then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive."

How often have we felt like this: More promptings from the Spirit, yes—when it's a little more convenient. More holiness, yes—but not if I have to make major changes in my life. More patience in suffering, yes—but not too much suffering, and not until I indicate that I'm ready for it, please. I have asked many times in my life, "Why me?" And I ask it usually when I'm having a hard time—not nearly often enough when I've been blessed with relief. I want to have more faith in my Savior, yes, and more trust in the Lord, but do I really have to trust him with everything? It's a fact of life that we can't have more Y without more X. There are prices for everything, laws upon which all blessings are based (see D&C 130:20-21.)

Do I want an abundance of roses without more thorns? Leisure without work? Dessert without vegetables? More strawberries without more weeds? The ability to magnify talents, from piano to patience, from violin to virtue, without expending any effort? Do I count the cost? Am I willing to pay the price? Athletes don't seem to be able to decide a week ahead that they're going to participate in the Olympics. They spend a lifetime of hard work preparing, and the practices are seldom carried out with cheering crowds all around.

In nursing classes we learned about the "disuse phenomenon": That which we don't use diminishes in size and usefulness. One powerful example of that was when I wore a cast on my leg for a couple of months. When the cast came off, I was shocked at the skinny, hairy leg that dangled from my body. I wasn't able just to jump up and run and leap tall buildings in a single bound. The muscles had visibly diminished in size, and it was quickly apparent that they had also diminished in usefulness. It took time, exercise, and a lot of patience to get my leg back to where it had been.

Maybe if we don't exercise virtue and holiness and faith and trust and love, those talents shrink in size or usefulness. The other side of the disuse phenomenon is also true; maybe we could call it the "use phenomenon": That which we use increases in size and usefulness. Wear your muscles out with strenuous exercise and they will grow big and hard. Go barefooted for a few months over rough terrain, and the soles of your feet will become tough and durable. I'm convinced that this law is operative not just with muscles but with our ability to serve, to love, to have purpose in prayer and more sense of His care.

Someone once shared with me a fascinating story of an ancient Roman aqueduct in Spain. For eighteen hundred years this aqueduct had carried the cool waters of the Rio Frio down from the high mountains to the thirsty city. Nearly sixty generations of men drank from it. Then came another generation, which said, "This aqueduct is so great a marvel that it should be preserved for our children. We will relieve it of its centuries-old labors." So they laid modern pipelines to give it a reverent rest. Soon the aqueduct began to fall apart. Built originally of rough-hewn granite blocks, without lime or cement, the sediment of centuries had formed a natural mortar. Now the sun dried it out, and it began to crumble and fall apart. What centuries of service could not destroy, idleness disintegrated.

That story illustrates powerfully why we should be anxiously engaged in good causes and seeking to increase our ability to work with and respond to spiritual promptings. Truly our lives are prolonged and saved through service. I remember hearing Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone repeat a profound thought: "In the days of service, all things are founded; in the days of privilege, all things deteriorate; in the days of vanity, all things are lost."

Gifts and talents that we don't use and share seem to diminish. It seems true that the more we serve, the more we are able to serve. Our service muscles increase in size and usefulness. The use phenomenon is a lot like the law of the harvest: We reap what we sow. We can't pick a tomato or a carrot if we never planted and cared for a seed. We can't expect to become more holy if we never plant the seeds of spirituality.

In some ways, the search for more holiness is an invitation to become more peculiar. Many of the qualities and talents that are magnified in us cause us to be increasingly unworldly. We're different in good and happy ways. We stand out. The dictionary defines peculiar as "that which pertains to or characterizes an individual person, place or thing, or group of persons or things, as distinct from others; set apart; distinguished in nature, character, or attributes from others; unlike others, singular, uncommon, unusual." Try applying that definition to Deuteronomy 14:2, "For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself." The apostle Peter said it this way: "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Peter 2:9). The Lord's people are holy and peculiar, set apart, magnified in doing good and being good.

Suppose I don't know you but I want to. What would I learn about you if I visited your home? What is hanging on the walls? What books and magazines would I notice? What's playing on the TV set? Is there anything "peculiar" about the way you dress or the way you talk? What would I learn about you if I knew how you spent your money and your time? What if I observed your relationships with others? What is being magnified in your life? What is peculiar about you?

Does it make us uncomfortable to be peculiar? Some people struggle to their last minute and penny and breath to look like, behave like, talk like, and become like everyone else. They want to blend in, not to stand out or stand up. They seek to magnify talents not to help bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of God's children but to increase their own magnificence.

It seems, doesn't it, that the gulf between being peculiar (righteous and holy and good) and being like everyone else is getting wider. There is an increasing gulf between good and bad and even between good and better. There are many shades of gray, yes, but there's also still white. Alma 5:57 advises us to "come ye out from the wicked, and be ye separate."

We are a peculiar, covenant people, and almost every week we say amen to the following phrase: "That [we] may always have his Spirit to be with [us]." Does it happen? What does the Spirit do? How does the still small voice communicate with us? Are there things we can do to increase our sensitivity to that voice? The Spirit can help us to know what Jesus would do in any situation as well as what He would have us do.

The effects of the Spirit and the Lord's guidance are beautifully expressed in another of my favorite hymns, "Let the Holy Spirit Guide" (Hymns, no. 143):

Let the Holy Spirit guide; Let him teach us what is true. He will testify of Christ, Light our minds with heaven's view. Let the Holy Spirit guard; Let his whisper govern choice. He will lead us safely home If we listen to his voice. Let the Spirit heal our hearts Thru his quiet, gentle pow'r. May we purify our lives To receive him hour by hour.

I'm convinced that no power on earth can separate us from God's love and light if we choose to come unto Christ and stay. God's gifts are constant. So is the price. There is never a sale, nor does the price ever go up. He will help us magnify what we can do to help Him in his holy, critical work of saving and rescuing God's children and helping them to go back Home. God helps those who help themselves—but He also helps those who can't help themselves (and sometimes that's me, and sometimes that's you).

Part of God's will for us is that we help to bring to the world peace and hope and rest—rest from suffering, from fear, from doubt and ignorance, from hopelessness and helplessness. The scriptures are full of tender promises regarding that rest:

"They that sow in tears shall reap in joy" (Psalm 126:5).

"And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation" (Isaiah 25:9).

"And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away" (Revelation 21:4).

"Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh" (Luke 6:21).

Jesus has more than enough power and love and experience to understand, succor, comfort, sanctify, rescue, heal, bless, and save. He is our Brother, our Everlasting Friend, our Savior, King, and Redeemer, our Prince of Peace and Good Shepherd. And He is kind and patient and merciful enough to let us help, even in our weakness and despite our feelings of inadequacy. He will help us turn our weaknesses into strengths and magnify the talents and gifts He has so kindly shared with us, in order that we might be more useful in His work.
