Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 11

Are We Not All Refugees?

Sometimes I accidentally watch the news, and it makes me sad and sick to know of the suffering and struggling of so many of Heavenly Father's children. I'm dismayed and troubled by all the millions who don't have anyone to let them know they have a Savior and Redeemer and where and how to make contact with Him. The world is an unsafe place for many.

The concept of safety, of refuge, of sanctuary has become increasingly important to me through the years and experiences of my life. We sing about it in "How Firm a Foundation" (Hymns, no. 85): "Who unto the Savior for refuge have fled." I suppose in some sense everyone who seeks a refuge is a refugee. There have been many in history—individuals and families and whole groups of people. Jesus went with His parents to Egypt. Abraham left Ur of the Chaldees. Lehi took his family into the wilderness and eventually across the ocean. Jared and his brother did the same. The pioneers left their homes and walked across the plains. All around us are examples of the search for a refuge, a safe place.

Early in 1994 I stopped by the visitors center in Mesa, Arizona, early on a Sunday morning to see the sister missionaries I had met in the Missionary Training Center. We had a joyous reunion, and I enjoyed finding out how they were and what their work was like. As we were visiting, a man came through the front door. No one else was around on that quiet Sunday morning, so he really stood out. He looked as if he hadn't had a chance to bathe, eat, shave, or rest for a while.

I watched as one of the young sister missionaries went over to him. She smiled and greeted him with genuine good feelings. "Good morning!" she said, shaking his hand. "May we help you?" He said somewhat hesitantly that he was new in the area and wondered where a man might get a bite to eat and some kind of help. Instantly she responded with kindness and sincerity, "You've come to the right place!" She went on to tell him where he could get some help; apparently there was a shelter nearby. I'll always remember her wonderful response to someone in need, "You've come to the right place!"

So many of Heavenly Father's children are in need of rescue—in need of a shelter, a safe place, a refuge. They need some haven where they can rest and be free from the trouble that has seemed to surround them. If we as Saints do not provide that refuge, where will such people go?

It seems to me that much of what we do to serve and help others is connected to instruction from the Savior in Matthew 25:34-40. He explained that He was hungry, thirsty, sick, imprisoned, a stranger, naked, and so on, and those called to be on His right hand had responded; they had done what they could to help. And inasmuch as they had served the "least of these" it was as if the service had been given to Him. What a tender, holy, awesome thought.

I looked up the definitions of the words Jesus chose to describe His distress and found that they have broad meaning. In fact, there are chances all around us every day to rescue and save and provide refuge for others. We don't have to travel to another country or be part of a project to respond to the Savior's admonition. Here are some of the meanings I discovered:

Hungry: Any degree of needing or wanting; any strong desire. To crave something eagerly, including such things as attention, love, caring, hope, comfort.

Thirsty: The distressful feeling caused by a desire or need for water or other drink. A strong desire, craving, longing.

Stranger: Outsider, newcomer, foreigner; a person unknown or unfamiliar to one.

Naked: Uncovered, exposed, lacking clothing or means of support; destitute. Without protection or defense. Lacking a necessary condition.

Sick: In poor health, weak, not having well-being, deeply disturbed or distressed. Extremely upset, as by grief, disappointment, failure, and so on. Having a great longing for.

Imprisoned: Restricted, limited, or confined in any way.

To be deprived of love, attention, hope, comfort, and caring is perhaps the worst kind of hunger or thirst. Our rescuing response may not always be to provide food or drink but perhaps to offer time and watch-care, to bear one another's burdens, to comfort each other, to mourn together (see Mosiah 18:8-11.) For the naked, for those who are vulnerable and without protection, we might clothe them not just with a shirt or shoes but with friendship and kindness, with unconditional love. For those who are new, whom we don't know, we can help them to become fellowcitizens so they no longer need to feel like strangers and foreigners (see Ephesians 2:19). We can respond as Christ would—or as we would respond to Christ—to those who are sick, weakened and helpless and distressed, without family or food, home or country, rest or peace.

In 1981 I was in a place called Phanatnikom, a refugee camp in Thailand where survivors of the terrors in other Southeast Asian countries had fled for safety. I was visiting a group of outstanding sister missionaries who were serving the people of the camp. We celebrated the Fourth of July on Saturday by going to a nearby park and playing all kinds of games with little children. We couldn't speak to each other in words, but we did communicate and have a very happy time.

We then visited the places where the sisters were living: the pig farm and the duck farm, about two miles apart. At the pig farm we had an American lunch of chicken, fruit salad, potato salad, and some cookies with genuine chocolate chips that had recently arrived through the mail. Then we began our fast in preparation for fast Sunday, July 5. I recognized that in an extremely minor way I would be experiencing something most of these people had gone through day after day—the feeling of being hungry and thirsty. It also occurred to me that the next day was the Fourth of July in America, and here I was surrounded by people who had been through tremendous terror and sacrifice in their search for freedom, for refuge, for safety.

Sunday morning as we got close to the camp I felt a deep, tangible feeling of anticipation. It's hard to describe, but I knew that I would be there only once for the first time; only once would I feel that first impression of this refugee camp. I also felt that after I visited the camp I would never feel or be the same. That turned out to be more true than I could have imagined.

There were two camps in Phanatnikom. One was a holding camp, a huge area crammed with buildings where the refugees were stashed. They had no idea when they would go to a new country and begin to make a home and a life again. They lived each day trying to keep up their hope, but trying not to hope too much, and working to be patient in their difficult circumstances. On the other side of the road was a transit camp, whose inhabitants were just waiting for their sponsorship or their name to be called to go to their third country. Some of them would go to Bataan in the Philippines to wait to go to their fourth country.

Our first stop as we entered the camp was the office of WSURT, Welfare Services Unit for Refugees in Thailand. That was what the Latter-day Saint group was called. The office was not very big, but it was extremely important. It contained the materials and visual aids the missionaries used to help the people get ready for life in another culture, another land. Because many of the refugees would be going to the United States, many of the lessons were based on the culture and living conditions there.

The missionaries had also done things in the camp to give it more feeling of community. All the buildings and areas had been numbered, but on the recommendation of the missionaries the "streets" had also been named. Signs proclaimed "Main Street" and the like.

The homes in which the people lived were built in quad fashion of four buildings facing each other. Each building had three sections, and each section housed a family. The sections were about eight by sixteen feet, if that big. None of the sections had four walls; each family was given twenty pieces of bamboo to finish off the fourth. Loudspeakers in the camp blasted announcements and information almost constantly. The sisters had to teach above that noise.

A water truck came around every few days and pumped water into receptacles from which the people would draw their own water supply. Water was a precious commodity, as it is in most of the world. The people used buckets or whatever they had to haul the amount they were allowed back to their homes. With this small allowance of water they cooked, bathed, washed their clothing, and so on. No wonder when the rain came and poured off the roofs they ran to bathe and wash their hair.

I loved watching the smiles and enthusiasm with which the people greeted our great missionaries as they mingled with them in the camp. These remarkable women accomplished miracles every day. As they shared their experiences I became increasingly aware of their devotion, their love for the refugees, their personal sacrifices, their willingness to give and give and give, day after day. I watched them with the people and with each other, serving with a marvelous unity in their diversity. I observed many unselfish, spontaneous acts of service and kindness in my time with them. I came away with a deep respect and admiration for them and what they had accomplished. In no way do I pretend to have experienced even a small part of what they went through in the months they served and worked in the camps. But what little I experienced personally has permanently changed my life.

One of the first people I met, besides the remarkable women and one couple who were serving there as missionaries, was Trach Khuong, one of the translators for the sisters. He held a book on which was printed on the outside: "This book belongs to Trach Khuong, a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." He had been baptized about ten years earlier in the United States but had returned to Vietnam and hadn't had much contact with the Church until he ended up in the camp in Thailand and met the sister missionaries. He spoke Vietnamese, English, and Khmer, and he was a great help to the work of the WSURT team. I was told that without him it would have been impossible to hold church services in the camp, because the refugees had to be the ones to lead any religious services.

We had our church service in what was called the "Model Home." This place was a dream come true for the sisters, who had wanted to fix up a place where they could show the people what a house was like in other parts of the world. They were told they could fix up the Model Home as long as they didn't use any of the money from the WSURT program. So they scrounged around for whatever they could find. One day they received twenty-five dollars from a woman in Provo who said she had extra and wanted to share it. She had sent the check to the camp through Elder Marion D. Hanks, who was responsible for getting that wonderful work started in Southeast Asia.

The sisters cashed the check and used it for paint for the walls in the three or four sections they had designated as different rooms in this one building. They found pictures to hang on the walls. The missionary couple, the Andersons, delivered an old, wrecked refrigerator, and the sisters found an old stove and counter. They had a sink propped up on some boards, and a toilet. None of the appliances was hooked up, but at least the sisters were able to show the people what different rooms in a home might look like.

This, then, was where we had our sacrament meeting, in the Model Home, sitting in a circle on little stools. Twenty-two people attended, including the missionaries, the Andersons, Khuong, and several refugees who were not members of the Church. There was no piano or organ or pulpit or anything, but oh! there was a spirit of peace and a closeness to each other.

We hummed and sang the prelude music, "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief." The words had particular power and meaning in that setting. For our opening hymn we sang "Dearest Children, God Is Near You," and as I observed the many who were outside looking in, I felt that the words were certainly for them. God is near you. He knows what you've been through, little boy wearing a Pizza Hut hat. He knows where you are. Please know that somehow.

We sang a sacrament hymn and then Khuong blessed the bread and Elder Anderson passed it. Then Elder Anderson blessed the water and Khuong passed it. We sang "How Firm a Foundation" (the words were still "You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled"), and I was deeply touched as we sang those words in those circumstances. The refugees had indeed come to Jesus for refuge, for a haven and a protection from the terrible experiences they had suffered, for a perfect brightness of hope. All the words from that hymn seemed to have greater meaning in such a place:

In ev'ry condition—in sickness, in health, In poverty's vale or abounding in wealth At home or abroad, on the land or the sea— . . . As thy days may demand, so thy succor shall be.

When I sing hymn number 85 now, I think of Phanatnikom.

Khuong began the testimony meeting by sharing his own testimony. He started, "We have a lot in common." What a good shepherd this group leader was. He spoke first in English and then switched to Vietnamese so others could understand what he was saying. Some of the sisters shared their testimonies, including Rita, the director of the program in the camp, who had been there from the beginning and had served for nearly ten months. This was her last Sunday there. Elder Anderson shared his feelings, mentioning that many Southeast Asians who had joined the Church in other lands had done so because of the influence of the welfare missionaries who had to teach by who they were—by their example—because they were not allowed to preach.

For our closing hymn we sang "Come unto Jesus" (Hymns, no. 117). I was very emotional about that hymn. Not only is it one of my favorite hymns but it seemed perfect to sing in that particular time and place. Here we were, from several different lands, joining our hearts and our voices and our feelings about coming to Christ:

His love will find you and gently lead you From darkest night into day. . . . From ev'ry land and isle of the sea. Unto the high and lowly in station, Ever he calls, "Come to me."

It seemed to me that we were all refugees together—all of us trying to flee from the world to the gospel of Jesus Christ, from error to truth. I felt so powerfully that unity in our need to come unto Jesus.

After the meeting I went over to Khanh, Rita's secretary, and began to talk to her. As soon as she began to talk, I began to cry, and I did so throughout our whole conversation, which lasted about half an hour. I felt sure the same would happen with every single person in the camp if I could speak to those people and hear their stories and think about who they really were and what they had been through. I found myself asking a question in my heart as I watched the refugees and tried to look into their faces: "Who are you?"

On Monday I returned to the camp and was once again immersed in the feelings of hope, ingenuity, and patience that surrounded me. I'd read many of the stories the missionaries had collected, and I was able to meet some of the people who had had those experiences. How was it, I wondered, that they could have so much peace when they had been treated with such terrible iniquity?

I had anticipated that the people in the camps would be angry and bitter, restless, anxious to get out and get going with their lives. There were so many thousands of them, with no privacy or personal space—things that seemed so important to me. Instead they were peaceful, respectful of each other, disciplined, and helpful. It was as if they were so close to freedom that they didn't want to do anything that might delay it, that might postpone or even destroy their dream.

Children gathered around us at every point and seemed very interested in trying to speak a little English to us. I loved watching the way they ran to the sisters, whom they saw every day. I was impressed with the bond of love that had developed, even though the sisters didn't know many words of the languages of the camp, and most of the people didn't speak or understand English.

One family we visited had used some of their twenty pieces of bamboo to build one bed off the floor so some things could be stored underneath, and then with the rest they had built a wall to help keep the rain out and give them a little privacy from the family right next to them. They had taken pictures and pages from magazines and put them on the walls. We took our shoes off and sat on the floor to visit with that family. The father had built a small bookshelf; on it was one old copy of the National Geographic.

As we were visiting, a little girl accidentally bumped into a small bag of rice, spilling it all over. Immediately, without any anger, the adults and children stopped what they were doing and helped to pick up every single piece of rice. I learned much from that simple act demonstrating the value of one precious kernel of rice. I thought of how much I must have wasted during my life that might have been of great worth to someone else.

I walked around the camp, watching the sisters teach the people. One of them let me take a few minutes in her class, which turned out to be a group of people who spoke Mandarin. I remembered a few words of that language and had a happy experience. At one point a young boy looked up at me and said, "You beautiful." I smiled and said, "You're beautiful too." He said, "How are you?" "Fine, how are you?" "I fine." He grinned and then said, "I Vietnam." I said, "I America." He asked, "Are you teacher?" I said, "Yes." Then he said, "You teacher, me student," and smiled. Oh no, I thought, You are my teacher. I recognized even before I arrived in the camp that I had much to learn and that I was surrounded by thousands of teachers. Those people had been through things I would never experience, and I wanted to know something of what they had learned and what they were feeling. I felt a sense of profound respect.

One little girl in an oversized pink shirt seemed to watch me constantly. I have no idea how old she was or who she was. Every time I looked directly at her to smile or communicate in some way, she ran away. She began to represent everyone to me—especially all the little children and what they'd been through. I wondered about her, who she was, and what she had experienced at her tender age.

Toward the end of the day we went back to the place where the missionaries had their office, and I sat leaning on the window with my back to the outside. My arms were stretched out, and my hand was on the edge of the window.

After a while I noticed the little girl in the pink shirt approaching me, walking very quietly, watching to see if I would turn around. I didn't. I just sat quietly, waiting to see what would happen. She got closer and closer. When she was right next to me she stopped. We were both very quiet. I didn't turn. Then she reached up, touched me, and ran. It was like electricity—that quick touch from a tiny finger. I felt it deep in my soul and was moved to tears.

I was still sitting there trying to handle that experience when I noticed that she was coming back. I still didn't turn; I once more waited to see what would happen. Again she approached carefully and quietly, and again she stood waiting. Once again she touched me and ran, and I felt a deep and powerful response.

She did that another time and I still didn't turn, so I think she decided I was dead or something. The last time she came and stood as before, but then she reached up and put her whole small hand on top of mine and pressed it hard. I wept; no, I sobbed. I was filled with love for that child and kept thinking, Oh, little child, who are you? Where are you from? Are your parents alive? Do you have any brothers and sisters? Are there people who care about you and are helping you? Where will you go? Where will you live? Will people be nice to you? Will they ever understand what you've gone through?

I wonder where she is now, that little girl in the pink shirt who affected me in such a permanent, significant way. Will I see her again someday?

On that day in Phanatnikom I thought about times when I had been frustrated about something or other, and those frustrations seemed rather insignificant and minimal at that moment in that place. I recognized that I had been blessed constantly and abundantly in my life, and there was so much good I could do if I would be willing. Every single soul on the earth has needs, but we also all have things to share. Those needs and those resources will likely vary at different times, in the different seasons of our lives.

I think of the phrase in "How Firm a Foundation": "As thy days may demand, so thy succor shall be." And it is. I have felt that strongly in my own life. God knows me—every single day. He knows my needs. I would like to be more that way with others. I'd like to help provide that succor, that refuge, that sense of safety and peace. I'd also like the very last words of that hymn to be true of me: "The soul that on Jesus hath leaned for repose . . . I'll never, no never, no never forsake!"

May we find those who are hungry, thirsty, sick, naked, strangers, or in any needy circumstance, and may we kindly, gently, honestly say to them: "You have come to the right place. You're safe now. This is a place where you can cry, ask, share feelings, and be understood." As we serve the least of these His children, may we know in our hearts that we have done it unto Him.
