Mary Ellen Edmunds, Love Is a Verb ( 1993)

Chapter 12

Charity Never Faileth

I remember hearing as a young child the phrase "charity never faileth." I knew it was somehow associated with Relief Society, and there was a time when I thought it meant, "Don't start a quilt unless you plan to finish it." I have since learned that it means much, much more than that. It is an important part of Relief Society and has been for many years. And as my own years and experiences have gone by, I have learned a lot more about what charity means and why it never fails.

Charity is a gift we can cultivate and pray for: the ability to love everyone everywhere in a Christlike, tender way. Charity—the pure love of Christ—is the greatest force on this earth, and the only thing powerful enough to change all the trouble in the world.

We find examples of charity in the scriptures. In Moroni 7, Mormon teaches what charity means to him. He defines it as pure love and points out that "if ye have not charity, ye are nothing, for charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto charity, which is the greatest of all, for all things must fail—but charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him" (Moroni 7:46-47). What a promise! What a declaration about the importance of this quality, this depth of love that helps us to be good and to do good.

It was instructive for me to explore definitions of the words used in Moroni 7 and 1 Corinthians 13 to better understand charity. Let's look more closely at the list of qualities or characteristics of charity:

Charity suffereth long. To suffer is to endure, bear, allow, permit, tolerate. Job suffered long. So did Christ. So have countless others.

Charity is kind, friendly, gentle, tenderhearted, and generous.

Charity envieth not. There is no discontent or ill will because of another's advantages or possessions, no desire to get something that belongs to someone else.

Charity vaunteth not itself, does not brag or boast or seek to be above another. Was Christ teaching us of charity when He said, "He that is greatest among you shall be your servant"? (Matthew 23:11). Was He helping us know how to develop and exercise charity when He reminded us that serving others was as if we had done it unto Him? (Mosiah 2:17-22; Matthew 25:40). What about the Savior's message that every man should esteem his brother as himself (D&C 38:24-27) and that we should remember in all things the poor and the needy? (D&C 52:40). In deed as well as in word He pointed out that those who had should share with those who had not (Mosiah 18:27-28) and that those who were strong should help those who were weak (Romans 15:1). He asked us to feed His sheep—to act toward others as He, the Good Shepherd, would.

Charity is not puffed up. If we have charity, we do not want praise unduly. Trying to put ourselves above one another can make us tired and sick. We can't afford to separate ourselves from others. We need them as much as they need us.

Charity does not behave itself unseemly. We avoid that which is indecent or unbecoming.

Charity seeketh not her own. There are no exclusive groups—one possessed of the pure love of Christ reaches out to everyone. We visit those who can't come to visit us. We practice becoming better listeners. We speak to people we don't know yet, be the first to be friendly and to get acquainted. We work to have a countenance that shows love to everyone.

Charity is not easily provoked. If we have charity, we are patient and not easily angered or irritated. No small thing! This is one I have to work on continually. The real Christian is not touchy, doesn't have a quick temper, and is not impatient. Even when he or she is driving in traffic . . .

Charity thinketh no evil. Charitable people are always looking for the good in people, situations, experiences. We need to forgive each other. That is critical if we are to receive forgiveness and to have peace of mind ourselves.

Charity rejoices not in iniquity. We strive to purge wickedness from our lives and close the gap between our righteous desires and our actual behavior. We want to have the harmony and inner peace that come from forsaking evil.

Charity rejoiceth in the truth, in that which is established as fact, as principle. Those with charity strive to be true, sincere, genuine, honest, and in agreement with established standards.

Charity beareth all things. To bear means to undergo successfully, to be capable of withstanding, to permit, to sustain the burden of. It includes the lightening of others' burdens, helping to make their burdens bearable.

Charity believeth all things, having confidence in a statement or promise of another person, especially God.

Charity hopeth all things—a desire accompanied by anticipation, trust, or reliance.

Charity endureth all things—to last, continue, remain; to bear.

And finally, charity never faileth. Charity never lacks or falls short, never deceives or disappoints. It is never insufficient or negligent, never loses strength or power, is never useless or ineffectual, never abandons, leaves, or omits.

No wonder this pure love never fails! What a marvelous thing, to have something in our lives that will never fail, that will endure forever. So much in life does fail: our brakes, our teeth, our phones, our furnaces—even our hearts, and sometimes our relationships. Food spoils and treasures break and batteries wear out and something that was a great invention a few years ago has been replaced with something fancier, faster, and finer, but love—charity—never fails. It is and always will be constant and powerful.

How do we develop charity? It doesn't just happen after a certain number of years go by. We are commanded to pray for this gift, but then what are we willing to do? That's where we start: with our willingness. We are willing to bear one another's burdens, to mourn with them and comfort them, to take upon us the name of Jesus, to be Christians: Christlike, covenant people.

When we are willing to do loving, kind things, ideas come to us about when and why and how and to whom to do them. Where there's a will, there's a way. Christ has said, "I am the way," and we follow His example. He needs our help to show others the way to come unto Him.

Charity is not only the act, the doing, but that which compels us to act and to do—the tender, compassionate feeling in our soul that won't let us ignore someone who needs us. Charity is a condition of the heart and a conditioning of the heart. There are many ways we can develop and recognize charity in ourselves and others. We can consciously do things that bring more compassion and gentleness into our hearts and our actions. We learn about charity through our own experiences with sorrow as well as with joy. We can spend time with children who can help us to be more childlike, more charitable. After all, we're supposed to become as little children. And as we spend time with senior Saints, who many times feel neglected and forgotten, they can be tenderizers in our hearts and lives. They have much to teach us.

A few years ago I was doing a lot of thinking about becoming as a child. I decided that one way to help that happen would be to associate with little children as much as possible. I noticed a small boy about four or five years old playing in some sand across the street. I put on my grubbies and collected some of my toys and walked over there. "Can I play?" I asked. He looked up at me with a kind of squinting scrutiny. "Do you know how?" he wanted to know. I said, "I think so." So he let me play, and I remembered everything—what noises to make, how to build roads and bridges and ponds . . . it was a wonderful couple of hours.

We can respond cheerfully and willingly to opportunities for service. We can respond to those who have a need to give by accepting their help and kindness with gratitude and joy. Without gracious, grateful receivers, how will those who need and want to share have a chance to do so?

Charity is cooperation, teamwork, unselfish sharing of responsibilities and of the spotlight. It is love at home and kind words to one another. A woman who is a successful attorney said, "Charity just means that people love each other. And if people did love each other the way they should, it might not be good for my practice, but it would be good for the world."

We develop charity as we try to live more fully the law of the fast. This important law of God involves more than going without food and paying a minimum amount for meals missed. It means an offering of ourselves, not just of things or money. It is an act of genuine worship, a way to give thanks. It links responding to those who are hungry, thirsty, and needy with keeping our baptismal and other covenants. And oh, the promises! As we reach out to others, we will always find God there. Isaiah 58:6-12 explains it beautifully:

"Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

"Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?

"Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward.

"Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;

"And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday:

"And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

"And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in."

Some of the tenderest words in all of scripture are in those verses. As we seek to live the law of the fast, the Lord will guide us continually. Our darkness shall be as the noonday. We will call to God, and He will answer. We will cry, and He will say, "Here I am."

The deeper our relationship with God, the more we will long to serve and love Him and to make ourselves ready for anything He needs us to do. As we come unto Christ we can turn and help others come to Him too. That is the mission and purpose of the Church and the gospel. The scriptures are the handbook of instructions for those who wish to love and serve the way the Savior did (and does), to become filled with charity.

Charity helps us become more tenderhearted toward each other, more willing to forgive freely and completely. It's an important way to lighten our own burdens as well as the burdens of others. We are often too hard on ourselves and others. If we spend time comparing, criticizing, competing, or condemning, we might miss opportunities for intimacy and forgiving and service and unity that would add a great deal to our lives.

It's a challenge to grow close when the world is so big and so many things seem to pull us apart. As one of my friends said, "Before we had an icebox, we went to the market more often and we visited there. Even with an icebox we visited when we went outside to get the ice. Now we don't even have to go outside: not only does our refrigerator keep things cold but it makes its own ice."

In many cultures the women still carry their clothing to a stream and visit while they wash. That is their daily newspaper, their chance to remain close to each other. Most of us don't go to the stream anymore. We don't go out into the backyard to hang the clothes on the line and visit with a neighbor while we work. We have fences and bushes and dryers—some of us don't even have backyards—and we don't seem as close to our neighbors as we once were.

We have lights that turn on and off automatically, microwave ovens, cruise control, videos and computers, automatic dishwashers . . . and what have we done with all the extra time that we've saved? Have we invested any of it in relationships? Even many games and activities tempt us to play alone, to be alone.

There may be someone today, right now, who is desperate for friendship, for kindness, for someone just to take time for them. Maybe that someone is you. Maybe you are one who has cried hard this past week, who is going through a difficult transition, who has felt desperately lonely, who has lost someone you loved, who has reached out only to feel that hearts and hugs have been withheld. Maybe you are one who hurt someone's feelings unintentionally, or maybe you're working hard on forgiving someone yourself.

What would happen if you called up a person you hadn't seen or talked to in a long time (maybe because you had some little misunderstanding, or your ward got divided, or the book club was disbanded, or you moved to a new neighborhood) and you said, "Let's go to the park! I've got the picnic if you've got the time. Wear grubbies, because they've got great teeter-totters and a sandpile."

I'm convinced there are ways we can open up to each other. It's a risk, yes, but oh, it's worth it. Why not forgive someone this week? (Perhaps even yourself.) Why not include this in your next fast: to ask the Lord to help you to reach out to someone, to be the first to say you're sorry, even if you feel something was not your fault. Is there someone who needs your forgiveness?

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland said: "We [accept Christ's gift] by joining in the work of forgiving sins. . . . 'My brother's burden which I must bear is not only his outward lot . . . but quite literally his sin. And the only way to bear that sin is by forgiving it. . . . Thus the call to follow Christ always means a call to share [in] the work of forgiving [others] their sins. Forgiveness is the Christlike suffering which it is the Christian's duty to bear.' (Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship, 2d ed., New York: Macmillan, 1959, p. 100.) . . .

" . . . Anyone can be pleasant and patient and forgiving on a good day. A Christian has to be pleasant and patient and forgiving on all days. . . .

"Is there someone in your life who perhaps needs forgiveness? . . . All of us are guilty of . . . transgressions, so there surely must be someone who yet needs your forgiveness.

"And please don't ask if that's fair. . . . You and I know that what we plead for is mercy—and that is what we must be willing to give.

"Can we see the tragic and ultimate irony of not granting to others what we need so badly ourselves? . . . That is the demanding pathway of perfection" (Ensign, August 1986, p. 72).

In the greatest example we have of forgiveness, our Savior and Redeemer asked his Father to "forgive them; for they know not what they do." That was an act of charity, of pure love, like no other I can think of.

Can you think honestly that someone who has hurt or offended you might not have known what he or she was doing? Wouldn't it be wonderful to lift that burden—both from the offender and from you? "Blessed are the merciful: for they [you] shall obtain mercy" (Matthew 5:7).

Many of us wish others would forgive. Maybe we have suffered and struggled with trying to seek forgiveness and it just hasn't come. If that is the case for you, please don't give up. But please also don't fail to forgive yourself, even though at this time you don't seem to be receiving forgiveness from someone else. I am instructed by the reminder in Ephesians 4:32, "And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." I am also heartened by the words of Thomas Erskine: "I believe that love reigns, and that love will prevail. I believe that He said to me every morning, 'Begin again thy journey and thy life: thy sins, which are many, are not only forgiven, but they shall be made, by the wisdom of God, the basis on which He will build blessings.'"

Charity will bring us together to work, to give thanks, to rejoice in the promise of living—our perfect brightness of hope. Charity will help qualify us to be with our heavenly family once again. Our Savior will help us. He understands when we can't do what we wish we could. God can heal all our wounds and help us with all our struggling. God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ can say, "I know just how you feel." They can help others feel Their love through us. They can help knit our hearts together in unity and love one toward another.

May God bless us with His Spirit and with the gift of charity, that it may be well with us when we see Him again. Charity never faileth. It never fails to move one soul to reach out to another. It never fails to come back and comfort and bless the one who has given. It never fails to give us the assurance that God lives and Christ is our Savior and that Their love for us is unconditional. No matter what, They will always love us. That pure love—charity—truly never fails.
