Alma 7:11–14 reminds us that because of Jesus Christ’s Atonement, we can be cleansed from our sins as we repent, and we can receive strength from Jesus Christ to help us endure our pains and sicknesses.

President Russell M. Nelson has reminded us that it is through Jesus Christ Himself that this deliverance comes: “It is doctrinally incomplete,” he said, “to speak of the Lord’s atoning sacrifice by shortcut phrases, such as ‘the Atonement’ or ‘the enabling power of the Atonement’ or ‘applying the Atonement’ or ‘being strengthened by the Atonement.’ These expressions present a real risk of misdirecting faith by treating the event as if it had living existence and capabilities independent of our Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ.

“Under the Father’s great eternal plan, it is the Savior who suffered. It is the Savior who broke the bands of death. It is the Savior who paid the price for our sins and transgressions and blots them out on condition of our repentance. It is the Savior who delivers us from physical and spiritual death.

“There is no amorphous entity called ‘the Atonement’ upon which we may call for succor, healing, forgiveness, or power. Jesus Christ is the source. Sacred terms such as Atonement and Resurrection describe what the Savior did, according to the Father’s plan, so that we may live with hope in this life and gain eternal life in the world to come. The Savior’s atoning sacrifice—the central act of all human history—is best understood and appreciated when we expressly and clearly connect it to Him.”

How else can we be blessed by Jesus Christ and His atoning sacrifice? See what Church leaders have shared about this topic on social media in the quotes below. You can also read more in general conference talks about the Atonement of Jesus Christ.

“I was recently asked by a young member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints what the Savior thinks of us when we continue to commit the same sins.

“I shared that I believe that the Savior considers us typical of all the children of our Heavenly Father, and that doesn’t diminish the love He and our Heavenly Father have for us.

“We can be cleansed from our sins through repentance, and it is a joy, not a burden. When we repent, our loving Savior opens His arms to receive all men and women to enjoy the greatest blessings God has for His children.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, Facebook, July 20, 2023, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“To follow Jesus Christ means to have our natures changed through the Atonement of Jesus Christ. That is the only way we can build on His sure foundation and stand firm during the storms of temptations and trials ahead.

“In order to experience this change, we must become as a child—a little child.

“For some, this will not be easy to accept. Most of us want to be strong. We may see being like a child as being weak. But to be like a child is not to be childish.

“It is to be like the Savior, who prayed to His Father for strength to be able to do His Father’s will and atone for the sins of all of His Father’s children and then did it. Our natures must be changed to become as a child to gain the strength we need to stand steady in times of peril.

“This change will qualify us to enjoy the gifts that come through the Holy Ghost. Having the Spirit’s companionship will comfort, guide, and strengthen us.”

President Henry B. Eyring, Facebook, June 14, 2022, facebook.com/henry.b.eyring.

“Never lose sight of Gethsemane. If you’re having a hard day—and you probably will—sit down for a moment and think of Gethsemane. Think of the Savior and what He was willing to do for you and for me. I promise as you do that, your burdens will be lifted, and you will feel the influence and power of the Lord Jesus Christ in your life. He has promised to help you.”

President M. Russell Ballard (1928–2023), Facebook, May 3, 2023, facebook.com/mrussell.ballard.

“This is a video of my great-granddaughter learning to walk. Those of us who were once in her position occasionally stumbled and fell before we completely figured things out too.

“However, for many of us, when we fell, loving parents were there to encourage us to keep learning because they wanted us to grow and become the people they know we could become. In the same way, our merciful Father in Heaven knows we will fail more than once.

“Our mistakes and shortcomings will sometimes cause us regret or pain. This is part of our mortal experience—often the consequences of our choices. But if we refuse to let our shortcomings discourage us, these mistakes can be a great teacher. Failing to always live up to the best version of ourselves is not a sign of being defective—it’s a sign of being part of the human family. Failure is the price we have to pay to get better.

“Yes, we will make mistakes. But when we fall, we can get up again, because we know that God is there to help us, wherever and whenever that may be. He is our mentor, our teacher, our healer, our strength, our Savior.

“So, wherever you are in life, do not give up. Never lose hope! Be assured, you are never alone. God is with you. Jesus Christ is your strength. I learned in my life that there are many new beginnings, even daily new beginnings. The gospel of Jesus Christ, the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and our willingness to go the path of repentance and forgiveness open up the doors to these new beginnings.

“Because of the Atonement of Jesus Christ, our mistakes will help us learn and grow into better versions of ourselves.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Feb. 27, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“As a disciple of Jesus Christ, I bear witness of Him. He is my Lord and Savior. He has overcome sin and death. Through Him, each of us can do the same.

“Feelings of gratitude for the Savior overwhelmed me today as we considered His sacrifice in two special locations. We visited the Garden Tomb—an ancient tomb comparable to the location where the body of Christ would have been laid following His crucifixion.

“We also visited the area considered by some to be the Garden of Gethsemane. As we walked among centuries-old olive trees, we listened to scripture verses describing the Savior’s solemn sacrifice on our behalf in the garden and on the cross.

“Jesus Christ’s agonizing experience in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross deserve our complete respect and total reverence. Similarly, the wonderful events that occurred on the third day following His crucifixion deserve to occupy a place of awe and eternal gratitude within our hearts and minds.

“As a disciple of Christ, I am blessed to proclaim my testimony that He lives!

“The words of the hymn ‘He Is Risen’ come to mind:

“‘He is risen! He is risen!

“‘Tell it out with joyful voice.

“‘He has burst his three days’ prison;

“‘Let the whole wide earth rejoice.

“‘Death is conquered; man is free.

“‘Christ has won the victory.’”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Apr. 23, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Our recent visit to Gethsemane caused me to ponder on the Savior’s sacrifice for each of us. You may already know that in Hebrew, ‘geth’ means ‘press’ and ‘shemen’ means ‘oil.’ Gethsemane is literally the place of the oil press.

“This description became very real to me as I had the opportunity to witness and operate an ancient olive press at the BYU Jerusalem Center.

“During the Savior’s life, oil was made by first rolling a large stone on top of olives. The mashed olives then were stressed with heavy beams to produce a fine oil. To ensure that every possible drop of oil was expressed, large stones were then placed on top of the beams, crushing the remains.

“Consider the symbolism of this process as you consider Jesus Christ’s experience in Gethsemane, where ‘blood [came] from every pore’ (Mosiah 3:7) as the Savior suffered in incomprehensible ways as He knelt in intense prayer and offered Himself a ransom for our sins.

“Out of perfect love, He gave all that we might receive all. His supernal sacrifice reminds us of the universal debt of gratitude we owe Christ for His divine gift.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Apr. 24, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Perhaps you have already fallen short of the goals and resolutions you set for the new year. Please remember, you do not need to wait until January 1 [of next year] to try again. Because of Jesus Christ, you can start again today and every day.

“How grateful I am for the gift of repentance extended to us through the Atonement of Jesus Christ.

“The sequence of discipleship is simple and straightforward: exercise faith in the Savior, repent, receive essential covenants and ordinances, change, strive to always retain a remission of sins, and press forward faithfully on the covenant path.”

Elder David A. Bednar, Facebook, Jan. 19, 2023, facebook.com/davida.bednar.

“Repentance requires the Redeemer. Turning away from evil does not bring spiritual healing without turning to Him.

“Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994), president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, taught that repentance indeed produces changes in attitudes and behavior, but simply changing attitudes and behavior is not repentance.

“President Benson said, ‘Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is the foundation upon which sincere and meaningful repentance must be built. If we truly seek to put away sin, we must first look to Him who is the Author of our salvation.’”

Elder David A. Bednar, Facebook, Sept. 8, 2023, facebook.com/davida.bednar.

“The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ teaches, ‘Believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you; and now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them’ (Mosiah 4:10).

“From this scripture and others, we learn that the words ‘intent’ and ‘heart’ are linked to the repentance process. As we depend on and turn to the Lord, we must be honest with ourselves. And we must have real intent and be honest with Him whose forgiveness we seek. Genuine confession to God, and when necessary to priesthood leaders, must be full and complete.”

Elder David A. Bednar, Facebook, Sept. 9, 2023, facebook.com/davida.bednar.

“During our visit to the Pacific Area, Kathy and I spent time in the Australian state of Tasmania. While there, we visited a former penal colony in Port Arthur, a settlement used to house prisoners in the 19th Century (many from the U.K.). Today, Port Arthur is a historic site with many visitors. The former prison compound features manicured gardens, lush forests, and some impressive architecture.

“Various forms of punishment and rehabilitation were attempted at Port Arthur with greater or lesser success during its nearly 50-year history. By contrast, I couldn’t help but think of the infinite and comprehensive reach of the Atonement of Jesus Christ. The grace of Christ can transform us. With His help, we can overcome any obstacle or mistake. We don’t have to be a prisoner of death or sin—rather, we can become perfected in Him.”

Elder D. Todd Christofferson, Facebook, June 11, 2023, facebook.com/dtodd.christofferson.

“I testify that Jesus Christ lives and that His perfect love, expressed through His atoning sacrifice, is extended to all who desire to walk with Him and enjoy His peace in this world and in the world to come.”

Elder Ulisses Soares, Facebook, Apr. 8, 2023, facebook.com/soares.u.

“We all experience the burdens of mortality. We experience sickness, loss, heartache, disappointment, and difficulty—but as we align our hearts and minds with Jesus Christ, He will support us. He will offer relief.”

President Camille N. Johnson, Facebook, June 2, 2023, facebook.com/RSGeneralPresident.

“One of my favorite scripture stories is the woman at the well. In John 4:5–30, we read the account of Jesus giving the first recorded public declaration of His Messiahship to a Samaritan woman who … was living in sin. Yet Jesus went to a well in Samaria and met this woman, knowing everything about her, and still declared His Messiahship to her, inviting her to drink from His living water. This woman had a personal experience with the Savior and became a witness of Him as she ran into the city, telling all who would listen to come and see the Christ, which many did.

“The Savior will also come to us, knowing everything about us. We sometimes think we must be ‘worthy’ to pray or to have the Savior’s love. But this story shows that He is willing to come to us as we are. He wants us to have a personal experience with Him and feel His love, for that love is a powerful force that can change our hearts so that we can turn to Him more fully. We can become a witness of His transforming power in our lives and invite others to ‘come and see’ the Christ, just as the Samaritan woman did.

“I think the fact that there are paintings in the temples depicting the story of the woman at the well is very instructive. Because of the Savior and His atoning sacrifice, no one is beyond His redeeming power. We should not put limits on who we think He can save or on who we should reach out to in His name. The next time you see a painting of the woman at the well, remember that because of Him, there is hope for us all.”

Sister J. Anette Dennis, Facebook, Feb. 28, 2023, facebook.com/RS1stCounselor.

“We have each gone through or are going through difficult life experiences. You may wonder how Jesus Christ can provide relief in your specific circumstances.

“… Jesus Christ does indeed provide relief to our souls. His atoning sacrifice covers and permeates all parts of our lives. He knows the details of all our feelings, concerns, heartaches, and happiness. And He knows how to intimately succor and heal.

“Beautifully, He often provides that relief through one another! That is why He has asked us to take care of each other, to ‘mourn with those that mourn’ and ‘comfort those that stand in need of comfort’ (Mosiah 18:9).

“When we say ‘Relief Society,’ we hope you can feel and see the Savior in ‘Relief”—because in Relief Society we point each other to the Savior, offer His love, and desire to be His hands in bringing the much-needed spiritual and temporal relief to all of God’s children.”

Sister Kristin M. Yee, Facebook, Apr. 2, 2023, facebook.com/RS2ndCounselor.

“After nearly three generations of living in different lands, the Nephites were once again one people. Limhi’s people, Alma’s people, and Mosiah’s people—even the people of Zarahemla. The first thing they did once they were gathered together was share their stories of deliverance. Specifically, teaching and testifying of the Deliverer Himself, Jesus Christ. We learn from these accounts that deliverance is not always immediate, but the goodness of God is! (see Mosiah 25:10)

“I know from experience that when I turn to Jesus Christ, He immediately becomes part of my story. Therefore, my focus should be less on how I am delivered from the challenges of our day and more on the Deliverer Himself. God is immediately good! Therefore, I can not only trust in His will but also in His timing.”

Sister Amy A. Wright, Facebook, Mar. 14, 2023, facebook.com/Primary1stCounselor.

“Repentance isn’t simply the action of stopping from doing something wrong but a turning, or returning, to that which is good, just, wholesome, and aligned with the teachings of Jesus Christ.

“The Bible Dictionary explains, ‘Repentance comes to mean a turning of the heart and will to God, [as well as] a renunciation of sin to which we are naturally inclined.’”

Sister Amy A. Wright, Facebook, Apr. 29, 2023, facebook.com/Primary1stCounselor.

“I had the wonderful opportunity to travel with Sister Becky Craven recently and be with the Saints in the Republic of Cabo Verde, an archipelago and island country situated between Africa and Portugal. After meeting with the First Lady of Cabo Verde, we walked through the courtyard of the presidential palace grounds and came upon this magnificent display of flowers. Our Cabo Verdean escort let our group know that this plant was commonly known as ‘Christ’s Crown’ on the island. What a remarkable symbol. This plant’s thorn-rich stems are reminiscent of the plaited crown of thorns placed on the Savior’s head in an attempt to mock Him in the lead-up to his Crucifixion at Calvary. But as with all things, Jesus Christ can transform thorns into glory. Just as atop the thorny stems is a glorious display of beautiful thick red blooms.

“Christ teaches us in the Book of Mormon, ‘And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me’ (3 Nephi 27:14).

“The Crucifixion of the Savior, meant by His enemies to put an end to His teachings, to His ministry, and to His followers, was part of His eternal Atonement. The great price Jesus Christ paid for our sins so that we could be crowned with eternal life if we would come unto Him.

“The Prophet Joseph Smith declared, ‘And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!’ (Doctrine and Covenants 76:22).

“Brothers and sisters, I add my testimony to that of a beloved prophet of God. That through the Resurrection, Jesus Christ lives! At Easter and every day, He lives and calls us to come and be bound to Him so that we may too be transformed. So that the thorns of our lives can, through His Atonement, become a symbol of His glory.”

Sister Tracy Y. Browning, Facebook, Apr. 9, 2023, facebook.com/Primary2ndCounselor.
