In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, youth testimony meetings are special. These gatherings provide an opportunity for young individuals to express their beliefs, share personal experiences, and strengthen their faith. The importance of these meetings cannot be overstated, as they serve as a platform for the youth to stand up and be heard. On 22 October 2023 youth in the Addis Ababa Ethiopia District participated in the Worldwide Day of Testimony. It was significant to these young Ethiopians and contributed to their spiritual growth.

Youth testimony meetings create a space where the voices of the young are amplified. In a world where their opinions can often be overlooked or undervalued, these gatherings provide an invaluable platform for the younger generation to express their thoughts, doubts, and beliefs. By sharing their personal experiences, the youth can inspire others, encourage empathy, and foster a sense of belonging within the community. All of this occurred on October 22 in Addis Ababa.

By participating in the Worldwide Day of Testimony confidence and self-expression was cultivated and strengthened in the youth. As they stood before their peers, family, and community members, they learned to articulate their thoughts and emotions effectively. Each young person grew as an individual by gaining confidence in expressing their unique perspectives, values, and understandings of their faith.

Youth testimony meetings, and certainly the Worldwide Day of Testimony, play a vital role in building stronger community among the youth and their leaders. By encouraging the young members to share their testimonies, the community of Saints gains a deeper understanding of their struggles, triumphs, and spiritual journeys. This shared experience fostered empathy, connection, and support among the Church members and nonmembers, and created an environment where everyone felt valued and understood.

As each of the youth shared his or her testimony, others were inspired to reflect on their own faith and beliefs. The power of personal stories touches hearts and minds and encourages individuals to renew and deepen their commitment to their spiritual path. The young individuals who spoke became beacons of hope and inspiration, guiding others towards a more profound understanding of their faith.

The youth testimony meeting provided a unique opportunity for the rising generation to express themselves, strengthen their voices, and contribute to the growth of their religious community. Self-confidence was fostered and self-expression improved for those bearing testimony. The Apostle Paul expressed to members of the Church that they are “no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints” (Ephesians 2:19). Such was the case among Latter-day Saint youth at the day of testimony. All were inspired and faith was deepened. The platform provided for the sharing of testimonies resulted in increasing inclusivity and belonging as voices were heard, valued, and celebrated. This special day was an important step toward uplifting and supporting our young members as they navigate their spiritual journey.
