Relief Society helps God’s children prepare to return to His presence. As daughters of heavenly parents, members of Relief Society “expound scriptures,” “exhort the church,” lift hearts, and “cleave unto the covenants [they have] made” (Doctrine and Covenants 25:7, 13).

Relief Society is a divinely instituted organization for all adult women in the Church. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the purpose of Relief Society is to save souls and relieve suffering. He stated that the Church of Jesus Christ was not fully organized until the sisters were so organized.

Members of Relief Society work together to help accomplish God’s work of salvation and exaltation. They serve others, fulfill covenant responsibilities, build unity, and learn and live doctrine.

The motto of Relief Society is “Charity never faileth” (1 Corinthians 13:8). This motto is reflected in the Relief Society’s seal.

Relief Society is a lifelong sisterhood. All adult sisters 18 and older are members of Relief Society. They are members even if they cannot attend Relief Society meetings.

A young woman may begin attending Relief Society when she turns 18. She counsels with her parents and bishop about the timing. By age 19 or when moving from home, such as to attend a university or serve a mission, she should participate in Relief Society.

Married women under 18 are also members of Relief Society.

God invites all to come unto Christ and participate in the work of salvation and exaltation by:

- Living the gospel of Jesus Christ.

- Caring for those in need.

- Inviting all to receive the gospel.

- Uniting families for eternity.

Relief Society leaders plan Sunday meetings, activities, ministering, service, and other interactions to help women participate in God’s work of salvation and exaltation. Members of the Relief Society and elders quorum work in unity to accomplish this work.

For more information about the work of salvation and exaltation, study chapter 1.

From General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
