I can’t thank you enough for the article “Thou Shalt Not Covet” by President Gordon B. Hinckley that was published in the February 1991 Der Stern (German).

When medicine in powerless, I know that the word of God can heal. Because of several health problems, I had been dismissed from work and had little money for rent and food. I wanted to go to school and do several other things my friends were able to do, but at times I was so sick that I didn’t have the strength to go to the grocery store across the street.

One day I received Der Stern earlier than usual. I had been praying for health and more faith in my Heavenly Father. The article “Thou Shalt Not Covet” gave me the strength to realize I was doing all I could.

A sister in the gospel
Germany

I’d like to express my congratulations for your excellent magazine. I enjoy reading the Liahona (Spanish) because its messages and counsel from the General Authorities and other members of the Church give me the spiritual strength I need. These important messages reflect the love that the Lord has for his children.

I also wish everyone would read this magazine and the Book of Mormon, since their purpose is to help us reach eternal life and be successful here on earth.

Leoncio Rupay
Perú

We are very happy with A Liahona (Portuguese), particularly with the general conference issue. It gives me great pleasure to give my friends such a sophisticated magazine as a Christmas present. Our family gave A Liahona to a renowned judge in our town. He is a person of the highest caliber, an excellent judge and father. He carefully studies A Liahona, along with the scriptures, every month for inspiration in his orders and judgments as a judge. We soon hope to share the gospel message with him in his home with the missionaries.

The Remor Family
Criciuma Branch, Florianopolis Brazil Stake

I was baptized in February 1991, and soon after I received the January 1991 issue of Der Stern (German), in which I read an article concerning baptism for the dead. I decided that I would have my mother baptized as soon as I could go to the temple. After that, my mother appeared to me by my bed and told me that she would accept her baptism.

I am eternally grateful to my Heavenly Father because I owe this wonderful experience to him and to Der Stern, which brought this message to me.

Erika Giesen
Gluckstadt Ward, Neumunster Germany Stake
