# Creating Christ-Centered, Learner-Focused Experiences

Thank you for accepting the call to be a Succeed in School leader. You will bless the lives of those you teach. The Lord will bless you because of your service to the youth.

The goal of Succeed in School is to help students learn and progress in their education and develop stronger testimonies of Jesus Christ. The activities in this book will help youth learn study and life skills as well as exam-taking strategies.

The following ideas can help you create Christ-centered, learner-focused experiences as you gather together:

1.  Focus on Conversion: Succeed in School classes should help students become more converted to Jesus Christ and His gospel. Find opportunities to bear your testimony about the gospel principles that are included in the activities. Encourage the students to pray to Heavenly Father for help and guidance in their schoolwork and in other areas of their lives. Invite them to share their testimonies in class and with friends and family members.

2.  Make Learning Relevant: The activities will help students develop the skills they need for school and future opportunities. Encourage them to apply the things they learn to their lives and to discuss them with their friends and family members. There may be words or ideas in the activities that they do not recognize. Use examples, phrases, or stories that are familiar to help them make connections and understand what they are learning.

3.  Create a Sense of Belonging: Each time you gather, encourage the students to be kind to each other as they work together to solve problems, ask questions, make mistakes, and think through challenges. This will help the students feel comfortable, safe, and welcomed. They will grow closer together and learn to rely on and help each other. As the students work in groups, ensure that every student participates and feels included.

4.  Help All Students Learn: The students may be at different levels of learning. Ask them to help each other as they work together in groups or pairs. If most of the students do not understand what is being taught, it is OK to review the activity or go more slowly. If the students continue to struggle, there may be others in your ward or branch who can also help your students learn. Each student should have their own workbook to use each day. Once they have finished their workbooks, they can take them home to share with their families and teach what they have learned.
