Open PDF

Ana chewed her last bite of tortilla. It was soft and yummy. Ana loved her grandmother’s tortillas. They were the best part of breakfast.

Ana watched her grandmother, Abuela, wash the dishes.

It was like any other morning. But one thing was not the same.

Abuela usually walked to the market to buy food. But not today. Today there was no money to buy food.

“What will we eat tomorrow?” Ana wondered.

Then Ana remembered. She knew where some money was! Last night she saw Abuela put a few pesos in a little white cloth.

“Abuela, did you forget? You have money to buy food.”

“What money?” Abuela asked.

Ana ran to get the money. She shook the little bag of coins. Clink! Clink!

Abuela smiled. “That is our tithing, Ana. That is His money.”

“But what will we eat tomorrow?” Ana asked.

“Do not worry,” Abuela said. “I have faith that Heavenly Father will help us.”

The next morning Abuela gave Ana the last corn tortilla. Then she sat down in her chair. She stitched red flowers onto a dress and told stories about when she was a little girl. She did not look worried.

Then Ana heard a knock. She ran to open the door.

“Uncle Pedro!”

“I had a feeling I should visit you two,” Uncle Pedro said. He put three sacks on the table. One had corn flour for tortillas. Another had meat. Another had fresh vegetables from the market.

“Oh, my sweet son,” Abuela said. “I’m going to make you my best meatball soup!”

“Your soup is the best in the world,” Uncle Pedro said.

Ana laughed and clapped her hands.

Then she stopped. There was one thing she wanted to know. “Abuela, did you know Uncle Pedro would come today? Is that why you weren’t worried?”

“No,” Abuela said. “When I pay my tithing, I have faith that Heavenly Father will bless me. And He did!”

Ana hugged Abuela. She felt like the happiest girl in Mexico. She and Abuela had faith in Heavenly Father. Now she couldn’t wait to eat Abuela’s yummy soup!
